Mr. Buckley, a novelist, was speechwriter to Vice President George H.W. Bush from 1981 until 1983.
Ouch. Boy, did that leave a welt. It took a while to heal, but I realized she was absolutely right, and thus learned two lessons: 1) Don’t be a Pollyanna, and 2) Mrs. Bush had a bull-detector like no one. She gave it to you with the bark off. But when you earned her affection, which I eventually did, it meant all the more. You knew it was real.
There was no falsity, no pretense, no guile, no spin, no art to Barbara Bush, who died on Tuesday at age 92. She was What-You-See-Is-What-You-Get avant la lettre (that is, before the concept of WYSIWYG had a name).
Americans are always clamoring about the virtues of “transparency.” Barbara Bush was as transparent as distilled water. Who but she would have said of her own (adored) son, as he weighed a campaign for the presidency, “There are other people out there that are very qualified, and we’ve had enough Bushes.” Thanks, Mom!
If she was Mrs. No-Nonsense, she also had a playful, even girlish, side to her. On one occasion, I was alone in a freight elevator with Mr. and Mrs. Bush and their Secret Service detail when it got stuck between floors. Stuck elevators are viewed grimly by the Secret Service. The atmosphere inside quickly elevated (as it were) to Condition Red, with hands reaching for the holstered Glock 9’s, orders barked into wrist-mics and all the rest.
The Bushes were blithe. I was standing behind them. Mr. Bush’s fingers reached for Mrs. Bush’s derrière and gave it a pinch. She turned to him and grinned like an 18-year-old. “Hi ya, fellah,” she said. So I can claim to have witnessed a primal scene between Mom and Dad Bush.
The last time we were together was a few years ago in Kennebunkport, Me. My doctor wife and I had dinner with them. Mr. Bush had been ill, and on a course of antibiotics. But he was feeling much better now. When the waitress arrived, he ordered a vodka martini.
“You can’t have a martini, George,” Mrs. Bush said sternly.
The poor college-age waitress didn’t know which to obey — the former leader of the free world, or Mrs. Bush. That she even hesitated speaks eloquently to the authoritative aura of Barbara Pierce Bush.
I caught the waitress’s eye and signaled her to, yeah, bring the former leader of the free world his martini. Message received, she returned and set his frosty see-through in front of him. Mrs. Bush stared at it in disbelief, eyes widening. 
My wife tried to run interference by asking Mr. Bush what kind of antibiotic he’d been on. Perhaps there were no contraindications between it and vodka martinis?
“You stay out of it!” Mrs. Bush barked.
By now, three out of four of us were laughing. The fourth was emphatically not. Acting from some suicidal impulse, I covertly ordered a second martini for Mr. Bush. When it arrived, his hand again did the mongoose thing.
As I reflect, it was the one time I ever detected falsity in Mrs. Bush, because it was inconceivable to me that she would cease, for one minute, caring for the man to whom she was wholly devoted throughout 73 years of marriage. What is conceivable, today, is the awful weight of Mr. Bush’s loss, and America’s.