We must act swiftly with a new plan to reverse the opioid epidemic: to trust science and educate the public. The science is clear: Treatment with approved medications (methadone, buprenorphine and extended-release naltrexone) must be a central component of treatment.
Inpatient detoxification not followed by medication typically leads to near-immediate return to opioid use, and longer inpatient stays carry a higher risk of death upon discharge unless patients receive continuing medication.
Still, like all other chronic diseases, opioid addiction can’t be cured, and patients with addiction often require other medical care and social support from families and peers to manage their disease.
The current approach is costing far too many lives, and far too much public and private money is being wasted on “treatment” that denies the science and is therefore ineffective. We must demand easy access to what we know works, and embrace science over stigma.
KELLY J. CLARK, ROCKVILLE, MD.
The writer is president of the American Society of Addiction Medicine.
It is all too easy to assign blame for the opioid crisis to either overprescribing physicians or overzealous drug manufacturers. Perhaps they do deserve a measure of blame for what is more a problem of human nature than it is of authority.
Forgetting that all the addictive conditions relate to a fundamental intolerance for unpleasant or dysphoric feeling states that are widely distributed among the populace results in an unnecessary lack of comprehension about the frequency of addictions to those substances that change the basic feeling state of an individual from one that is negative to one of euphoria or indifference.
Whatever amount of money or effort the government puts forward to fight the opioid crisis, we will fail to stop the overuse of opioids or other euphoria-inducing drugs until we understand the need to help people deal with their underlying intolerance of their emotional states. Addressing emotional dysphoria requires access to effective psychotherapy, which is hardly available on a widespread enough basis.
The writer is an associate clinical professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School.
Your editorial makes important points, including the need for substantial long-term funding for addiction treatment, with medicines that have been demonstrated as effective in stabilizing the lives of opioid-addicted people. But I take issue with your assertion that “we have seen this before” and the account of past opioid crises.
This one is different and unique: Never before was the supply of heroin and other opioids poisoned. The street supply is increasingly tainted with fentanyl, carfentanil and their analogues.
These deadly additions are one of the main reasons so many people are dying and why this epidemic is unlike any other we have experienced.
The writer is a professor of social work and psychiatry at Case Western Reserve University.
Ignoring the social determinants that drive drug use and minimizing the critical medical roles of pain assessment and opioids, as your editorial does, are a disservice to those struggling with opioid dependence and those suffering from pain.
A few scientific facts: Heroin is now the most frequent opioid of first illicit use, not legally prescribed opioids. Heroin and synthetic fentanyl account for most opioid-related deaths, and their use is rising.
Concurrently, 100 million Americans experience pain that impairs their ability to work, delays surgical recovery, causes depression and reduces life expectancy.
We do not minimize the contributions of drug advertising and inappropriate prescribing on the opioid epidemic. We do not disagree that we need better education in pain management, prescription monitoring systems and nonopioid treatments.
But unless we meaningfully address the complex problems of poverty and lack of gainful employment, mental illness and social isolation, we are creating a solution that is not only wrong but will also lead to unnecessary suffering for millions.
Dr. Morrison is chairman of the geriatrics and palliative medicine department at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York. Dr. Cleary is a palliative care physician at the University of Wisconsin Madison School of Medicine and Public Health.
As a practicing emergency physician, I would add that a contributing and sustaining factor in the epidemic is the government’s own role in including adequacy of pain control in the patient satisfaction survey administered by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Hospitals are highly accountable to these surveys, which are sent to patients after discharge from hospitals and emergency departments, since hospital reimbursement is tied to the survey.
The inclusion of these questions has also helped drive demand for opioid use, as providers feel beholden to the survey and not always to what is in the best interest of the patient.
One element of a successful health initiative that is consistently absent in all discussions of the opioid crisis is that of leadership.
We have heads of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Food and Drug Administration, the Health and Human Services Department, the surgeon general, the Office of National Drug Control Policy and the Drug Enforcement Administration, yet no single capable individual has been designated to be in the driver’s seat of a response to the opioid crisis.
All of the brilliant countermeasures discussed, like the plan set forth by Andrew Kolodny of Brandeis University to obtain sufficient funding for a national medication assistance intervention, will not succeed without designated leadership. Other countries have a health minister to lead such initiatives, but in the United States the need for a drug czar with the authority to coordinate health and enforcement initiatives is even greater because of the complexity of our health care system.
GERALD BUSCH, BELLAIRE, TEX.
The writer is an addiction psychiatrist and chairman of the Houston Harris County Office of Drug Policy.
Four years ago, my husband took a job in Wiesbaden, so we moved with our three young children to Germany. I was six months pregnant at the time.
I agree that the American medical community is “largely responsible for the epidemic” of opioid abuse. In my experience, German doctors regularly prescribe natural remedies instead of drugs.
After my son was born in Wiesbaden, the hospital nurses offered me only ibuprofen. I had to walk to the nurses’ station to ask for something stronger, and was offered hot tea and told to go back to bed, lie down and rest. As I recalled my experience in America, this was uncanny. There, I just had to press the call button and a nurse would come to my room with a strong narcotic.
Once I was released from the hospital in Wiesbaden and returned home to my daily routine, I developed continuous acute back pain. The fact that I was still overweight didn’t help. After complaining to my doctor about trying to cope with the pain and juggling my rigorous routine as a mom of four, she prescribed 10 weeks of physical therapy instead of Vicodin. Soon I was back into shape and my back pain disappeared.
