CAPE TOWN, South Africa — Her legacy contested in death as in life, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela — an antiapartheid activist and the former wife of Nelson Mandela who was known as “the Mother of the Nation” — was honored with an official funeral in Johannesburg on Saturday.
Ms. Madikizela-Mandela, who was 81 when she died this month, was to be laid to rest after the funeral, attended by more than 40,000 mourners at Orlando Stadium in the township of Soweto. The funeral was organized by the African National Congress, the governing party that for decades strove to keep her at arm’s length.
The funeral drew luminaries like the leaders of the Republic of Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, and of Namibia, Hage Geingob; as well as the British model Naomi Campbell and the American politician the Rev. Jesse Jackson.
Since her death on April 2 from a prolonged illness, the A.N.C., along with its political rivals, has set out to claim Ms. Madikizela-Mandela as one of its own, but it was clear for all to see at the funeral that her friends and supporters were not interested in forgiveness or a rapprochement.
A fiery leader with mass appeal, Ms. Madikizela-Mandela came to represent a more radical strain of liberation politics than her former husband’s conciliatory “Rainbow Nation” ethos, placing her beyond the orthodoxy of the A.N.C. during the final years of apartheid. But her message resonated with millions of dispossessed South Africans, commentators say.
Ms. Madikizela-Mandela’s reputation was seriously damaged by accusations that she had ordered the murder of a 14-year-old boy in the township of Soweto — a charge of which she was later acquitted, though she was convicted of kidnapping — and an acrimonious split in 1992 from Mr. Mandela amid accusations of infidelity.
In 2016 the A.N.C. had her presented with one of South Africa’s highest honors, the Order of Luthuli in Silver, for her “excellent contribution to the fight for the liberation of the people of South Africa,” but only since her death has the party made concerted efforts to be associated with her.
On the same day, the Economic Freedom Fighters, a rival party headed by former A.N.C. Youth League president Julius Malema, held a separate memorial in the town of Brandfort, where Ms. Madikizela-Mandela was exiled in 1977 after the Soweto uprisings.
“Winnie Mandela is better than the government of the A.N.C. combined,” said Mr. Malema, who is seen by many as an heir to Ms. Madikizela-Mandela’s combative tradition, while speaking at her former home.
At the request of Ms. Madikizela-Mandela’s family, and despite objections from the A.N.C., Mr. Malema also spoke at the funeral on Saturday.
Calling his party “the sons and daughters” of Ms. Madikizela-Mandela, he leveled stinging criticism at the governing party.
