BERLIN — After an attack on a young man wearing a kipa in a trendy Berlin neighborhood, the leader of Germany’s largest Jewish organization urged Jews to wear baseball caps instead. It was just too dangerous, he said, to walk around openly with a kipa or skullcap, a sign of devotion.
In a country that has spent 70 years fighting the legacy of the Holocaust, the backlash was swift: We are all kipa wearers. Berliners, including the mayor, and other Jewish groups participated in demonstrations on Wednesday in which people of all faiths donned skullcaps in solidarity.
The attack last week in Prenzlauer Berg by a 19-year-old Syrian refugee, who struck the victim with a belt, challenged the city’s recently won reputation for diversity. It also raised the painful question of whether, even today, Jews could feel truly safe in Germany.
“The fact that the head of the Central Council of Jews in Germany has advised against wearing a kipa in public must serve as a final wake up call for German and European society to take action,” said Moshe Kantor, president of the European Jewish Congress.
Despite the demonstrations on Wednesday, many among the more than 100,000 Jews who now call Berlin home worry that the outward display of solidarity will remain largely symbolic. They do not expect it to change the threats they face daily, in a political climate in which the far-right has been resurgent and incidents of anti-Semitism and racism have increased, even in a city that celebrates diversity as key to its modern identity.
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, Berlin has seen a flourishing of Jewish life. An Orthodox community was founded in 2013. Kosher stores and restaurants have sprouted, and young Jews and artists have arrived from Israel. But even as Berlin has welcomed the return of a culture the Nazis sought to eradicate, Jews living in Berlin say discrimination, both subtle and violent, is part of daily life.
Many point to the arrival of more than 1 million migrants and refugees, many of them from the conflict-ridden Middle East, who have been taught to hate Jews and seek Israel’s demise. However, police statistics from 2017 show that of 1,453 anti-Semitic crimes, nine out of 10 were attributed to members of far-right or neo-Nazi groups. Anti-Semitism has also become more prevalent in pop culture.
Numerous internationally recognized musicians, including the orchestra director Daniel Barenboim, have been handing back their prizes in protest in recent weeks, apparently prompting the organization to backtrack on its original assertion that the song lyrics, while problematic, were protected as artistic expression.
