Garett A. Holm took the Graduate Record Exam before attending the University of Arizona James E. Rogers School of Law in Tucson, instead of the traditional Law School Admission Test, or LSAT.
When Garett A. Holm began his first day of law school in Tucson he wasn’t especially concerned that people would ask his age, which was 41.
But he was braced for the possibility that someone might ask which admissions test he had taken — the traditional one law schools have used for more than half a century, or the test taken by students applying to almost all other graduate programs.
Why that matters speaks to an upheaval of sorts going on at most law schools around the country, which have faced plummeting enrollment for several years. Although they are beginning to recover, the fallow period led them to explore ways to find new pools of potential students.
One of the solutions, many decided, was to make a change in admission requirements. They would no longer rely solely on the Law School Admission Test, or LSAT, which has been considered the surest predictor of how a student will fare in coursework. As an alternative, they would consider performance on the Graduate Record Exam. Accepting it could allow many more students to get into law school, proponents of the change said.
One test versus another might seem like a less than radical reason for debate.
But some defenders of the traditional test say the change amounts to a dangerous lowering of standards and could allow too many students to enroll in law school who would be unable to pass the lawyer licensing exam.
Many deans, however, want to rid themselves of some constraints on their admissions policies. They seek more flexibility to admit candidates they think are promising but who do not necessarily fit a conventional profile.
A showdown of sorts is set for later this month when the American Bar Association’s accrediting body plans to hold a public hearing where both sides can air their views.
The University of Arizona James E. Rogers College of Law, in Tucson, where Mr. Holm is a student, was a leader in moving beyond the LSAT requirement. In 2016, the school said it would allow applicants to present results of the GRE, which is taken around the world by about six times more students than the 126,000 or so who take the LSAT annually.
Test scores are combined with other measures, including grade-point average, to admit students for the three-year juris doctoral degree.
Some schools value the LSAT’s record of predictability and will keep the test, but many law schools “are looking to innovate and experiment,” said Christopher P. Chapman, president and chief executive of AccessLex Institute, the nonprofit organization representing most of the more than 200 accredited law schools.
Supporters of the LSAT, administered since 1948, say they believe it already allows law schools to take into account a broad spectrum of education and experiences in deciding who can study to become a lawyer.
“It provides a common measure for all applicants,” said Christina B. Whitman, a professor at the University of Michigan Law School and chairman of the board of trustees of the Law School Admissions Council, which oversees the LSAT. “How else could admissions directors evaluate students, like me, who attended massive state universities,” she said. .
Nearly 20 law schools, including Harvard’s, have embraced the GRE as an alternative. More than 150 law school deans, including those from many elite schools that had no shortage of applicants, vigorously backed Arizona’s effort two years ago to introduce the alternative.
In March, the Education Testing Service, the Princeton, N.J., organization that administers the GRE and other standardized tests, unveiled a tool to help schools compare the results of the GRE and the LSAT.
Supporters of the GRE say fewer restrictions will make law school more readily available to people of more varied backgrounds as well as more races, ethnicities and income levels to offset the small percentages of minorities in law school. Black and African Americans make up only about 8.5 percent of law students; Asians and Hispanics make up an additional 20 percent of law students in 2017.
Arizona has admitted students with academic backgrounds in disciplines like math, engineering and science who had not typically considered law school as an educational path.
Many are older than their early to mid-20s, which was once a more traditional age to enter law school, and already have graduate degrees and skills from previous careers.
Students with such academic backgrounds often test well on the LSAT, where scores of 160 or higher are generally considered desirable for law school admissions. But they frequently choose the GRE because it can be used to apply to graduate and business schools as well as some law schools.
So far, Arizona has enrolled 25 students — 12 in the first year and 13 in the second year — who applied on the basis of their GRE scores. It is too early to tell how they will fare because the first group of students will not take their state licensing exams until next year — after they receive their degrees.
Mr. Holm, who has been a teacher, nonprofit executive and a budget official, said he was never asked about what test he took.
