Art & Design|She Won the Turner Prize. Now She’s Using Her Clout to Help Others.
She Won the Turner Prize. Now She’s Using Her Clout to Help Others.
In 2017, 30 years into her exhibiting career, Ms. Himid won the Turner Prize, Britain’s pre-eminent award for contemporary art. As the first black woman to take the prize and, at age 63, the oldest winner, she brought more press attention to the event than it has received in years.
This spring, Ms. Himid has four shows opening around Europe, starting with a retrospective at the MRAC museum for contemporary art in Sérignan, France. Others will take place in Glasgow, Berlin and Gateshead, England. All were programmed before the prize was announced, but Ms. Himid is now using her enhanced clout to request that galleries showing her work reach out to black artists living and working nearby and include them in events like talks and debates that run with the exhibitions.
If curators say there are no black artists working in their region, as Ms. Himid said they often do, she provides them with names drawn from an extensive network she has built up over many years. Ms. Himid wants to bring black audiences into galleries and local artists of color to the attention of curators.
The requests Ms. Himid now makes of the institutions showing her work are part of a long-running mission to make black histories available through archival research and to encourage arts institutions to value the work of women and people of color. Her personal archive laid the foundation for Making Histories Visible, a research project based at the University of Central Lancashire exploring the contribution of black visual art to the cultural landscape.
Whether painted on canvas, newspaper, dinnerware or the wooden panels of a piano, Ms. Himid’s work has an immediate, gripping appeal. Beyond her paintings’ alluring colors and engaging graphic qualities lie troubling questions: about the attitudes toward black creativity; about the stereotyping of minorities even in the liberal media; about British wealth derived from Caribbean sugar. And they set the scene for conversations about what art is shown by the world’s taste-making institutions, what art is overlooked, and why.
Ms. Himid has long championed the work of other artists. A leading figure in the British Black Art Movement of the 1980s, she organized important group exhibitions at public institutions in London.
The exhibition at Sérignan will present works from eight series Ms. Himid made since the ’80s: All are talking points connected to Europe’s colonial past and wealth derived from slavery. “Cotton.com,” a series of 85 painting from 2002, recalls an incident from the 1860s when mill workers in northern England refused to process cotton grown in the Confederate States. The patterned panels imagine coded communication between black slaves on American plantations and British textile workers.
Ms. Eyene, artistic director of the International Biennial of Casablanca, Morocco, said in an interview that public conversations like these were important, particularly in France, where it could be difficult to discuss issues of race and the country’s colonial legacy.
“Naming The Money” (2004), a throng of 100 life-size standing figures, was inspired by portraits of black slave servants who were given as gifts to the king of France by the king of Spain. Each figure bore a sash stating their name and occupation in the court: lute player, dog handler, dancer and so forth. Lavishly dressed, they were the glamorous face of exploited black labor and exotic status symbols.
