In the few days since the rapper Kanye West has doubled down on his public affinity for President Trump and other conservative figures on Twitter, his opinions — and the backlash they have wrought in some circles — have been hailed by those who have long seen the entertainment world as oppressively liberal.
That such praise was being bestowed upon an iconoclastic musician known for slamming George W. Bush on live television and rapping about the prison industrial complex may seem incongruous. But the sudden embrace of Mr. West, a longtime provocateur with contrarian impulses, by figures on the right stems from a potent cocktail of motivations.
For some, there is schadenfreude — the pure entertainment value in watching a onetime liberal hero, even a controversial one, be declared a heretic. For others, there is genuine intellectual agreement with Mr. West’s apparent disdain for “self victimization” and the “thought police.” And then there is the fact that A-list celebrities, from George Clooney to Beyoncé and beyond, have largely resisted embracing this administration — and even gained currency by speaking out against it.
“The left has so deprived the right of any feeling of solidarity in pop culture that when they’re granted crumbs, the right goes over the moon for them,” said Ben Shapiro, a conservative millennial thinker popular on social media. He compared the giddy reaction to the recent love-fest for Roseanne Barr, who, like Mr. West, was praised by the president for her allegiance following the ratings success of her rebooted show.
Still, he said, it was “refreshing” to see Mr. West stand up against what Mr. Shapiro called “enforced conformity” on the left. “Anybody who fights back against that is being treated as a fellow traveler,” he added.
However, risk in aligning with Mr. West, the son of a Black Panther father and a mother who taught at a historically black university, is that his ideological allegiances have typically been mercurial, and even apolitical. When he first declared his interest in Mr. Trump, during concerts right after the 2016 election, he praised the president-elect’s communication style and disdain for the mainstream media, but noted that he had not voted.
The journalist Alex Wagner, a host of the Showtime series “The Circus” and a former editor in chief of the culture magazine The Fader, said that the right latching on to Mr. West’s statements was no surprise given the dearth of options.
Mr. West, whose representatives declined to comment, began his latest foray into politics last weekend. He praised the thinking of the black conservative commentator Candace Owens, who has spoken out against the Black Lives Matter movement. He went on to compliment Peter Thiel, the Silicon Valley billionaire and Trump supporter, as well as the “Dilbert” cartoonist Scott Adams, who has rebranded himself as a conservative thinker.
About the president, he wrote admiringly that they both shared “dragon energy” and that “he is my brother.” He also posted a photo of his Trump-autographed “Make America Great Again” cap.
Mr. West, on the other hand, was defiant. “You don’t have to agree with trump but the mob can’t make me not love him,” he wrote on Twitter.
Mr. Shapiro warned that this moment could be fleeting. “Is this going to be a serious movement? I highly doubt it,” he said.
