Perhaps you know the jubilant feeling that comes from finding loose change under a couch cushion.
City officials in Boise, Idaho, recently made an unexpected discovery that was much more significant, unearthing thousands of dollars’ worth of drawings by a well-known artist hidden in the walls of his own home. They stumbled across 11 never-before-seen works by James Castle, a prolific figure best known for his creative use of soot, spit and other everyday materials to create a wide range of sophisticated landscapes and portraits.
This isn’t the first time Castle’s work has been found stashed on his property. To add to the mystery, no one seems to know why the drawings were concealed.
“I think we were kind of more in shock than anything,” said Rachel Reichert, the cultural sites manager for the Boise City Department of Arts and History.
The discovery happened because of a demolition. The city of Boise had acquired Castle’s house in 2015, intending to preserve the property, which also included a small shed where Castle worked. The goal was to convert it into a cultural center while paying tribute to the artist. Castle (1899-1977) was born deaf and never really learned how to read, write, speak or use sign language properly. But from a very young age, he had developed a love of drawing with sticks or other materials he found while rummaging through trash. Eventually, he became a renowned outsider artist — a term used for those who were self-taught and working outside mainstream institutions — who rose to prominence in the 1950s.
In late December, a team of four from the city arts and history department was working in Castle’s house in the midst of the restoration. They had begun a process called investigative demolition, taking off outer Sheetrock layers to assess the underlying structure and configuration of the 2,000-square-foot home. It wasn’t long before the team found wall cavities that hadn’t been seen for 75 years or more. Nestled in a small crevice at the bottom of a living room wall were tobacco bags, socks, drawing utensils, a lone marble and 10 drawings. Another work was found in a bedroom. All of the sketches were made with soot and spit.
The drawings included a strikingly detailed portrait of the exterior of the very house in which the hoard was discovered. There was also a series of smaller sketches on what appeared to be an envelope. At the top left, emblazoned in capital letters, was a return address for the Los Angeles-based Western Auto Supply Company.
“The work itself was really on point for the time period and the location,” Mr. Folwell said.
The Castle family moved into the house at the end of 1931, and Castle lived there until he died. It was originally a one-room farm structure, before several additions were made in the ensuing decades.
Ms. Reichert said that the 11 sketches were difficult to date because Castle would often hold onto materials for long periods, but that they were most likely made between 1930 and 1950.
The collection was sent to Castle’s estate, which authenticated it and immediately gave it back to the city as a gift, along with 50 other works. The estate valued the recently discovered drawings at a total of $75,000, and said that all 61 drawings included in the gift were worth $1.1 million.
All of the works will be on display when the restored Castle house opens to the public on April 28.
Although the discovery may have been unexpected for the city, it didn’t surprise Castle’s estate. His pieces have been found all over the property for years, according to Jacqueline Crist, the managing partner of the James Castle Collection and Archive, who added that news of the most recent find was met with a shrug by Castle’s family members.
The only question is why. No one is completely sure.
