BOULDER, Colo. — The world-record holder in the Ironman triathlon had what is known as a hangman’s fracture, a broken C2 vertebra, like that found in someone who has died by hanging.
His doctor laid out his options: A hard collar would let the bones mend on their own, but was inadvisable because of the fracture’s severity. Surgery would fuse the vertebrae, promising a quick fix and a comfortable recovery, but it would limit his neck’s range of motion, ending his athletic career. Or he could have a halo.
The Ironman athlete opted for the halo, and it was, indeed, pure torture. And it worked. Six months after the pins were screwed into his skull, he will compete on Monday in the Boston Marathon. He expects to finish in about 2 hours 50 minutes — about the same time he ran last May when he set the Ironman world record, 7:40:23, which included five hours of swimming and biking beforehand.
The story of Tim Don, the Ironman king and Boston Marathon runner, is in many ways the embodiment of elite endurance athletes. At age 40, Don has a finite window for his body to withstand peak performance. There is the looming need to support himself through sponsors, who tend to compensate wins, not effort. And aside from childhood jobs as a paperboy and a lifeguard, he has single-mindedly devoted his life to reaching the pinnacle of his sport.
In October, Don was preparing for the Ironman world championship in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii, and went out for his final prerace bike ride. He was warming up when a car smashed into him on the highway.
Instead of the career-defining medal he had sought, Don wound up with the halo. For three months, he passed much of his time motionless in an armchair as his vertebra healed at his home here. He could not dress, shave or shower. His forehead swelled, and the holes where the pins were screwed in began to ooze. When his wife tried to clean around the metal with a sponge, Don nearly passed out from the pain.
He recently said that a return to competition was his only option.
The accident interrupted a career of two decades. Don grew up in Teddington, England, a wellspring of top endurance athletes near London. (His father was the head of Premier League referees, and officiated the 1994 World Cup.) He loved swimming as a child and started running with local talent, including Mo Farah, the eventual British Olympic distance running champion.
By 2014, he had upgraded to the Ironman, a grueling race of a 2.4-mile swim, a 112-mile bike ride and a marathon on foot.
His big breakthrough finally came last year. He won five of six races, and on May 28, in ideal conditions at Ironman Brazil, he beat the world record for an Ironman-branded race by four minutes.
But on Oct. 11, as Don cycled two days before the Ironman world championship, a utility vehicle made a hasty turn into a gas station and struck him in the side.
Then the tests came back.
For three weeks, he was upright in a chair in a corner of his living room, unable to sleep for more than 90 minutes at a time. His entire right side was black from bruising and swelling. Blood drained to his ankles, swelling them through their compression socks.
But as he weaned himself off the painkillers, Don was determined to move beyond the confines of his metal halo to fight for a competitive comeback.
So he called his physical therapist.
John Dennis, an amateur triathlete who had treated Don as part of the British Olympic triathlon team and became a friend, flew over in November from Britain to supervise.
They improvised a plan. While Don was still in the halo, they worked on strengthening his lower body. Soon, he was painstakingly using an exercise bike, taking care not to lean forward and overload his neck. He wound up doing more overall core conditioning work than he’d ever done in his career.
Then Don began to push, in the gym every day, at one point in December fainting during a training session when the halo’s screws put too much pressure on his skull. He strained until his head swelled from friction. The halo’s screws needed frequent tightening. Technicians grew concerned that they were tightening them so much they might screw through the skull. 
Don forged on, on his own terms.
A week before the marathon, Don was up to 20 hours of training, compared with his typical 30 before the injury. He is planning to compete in an Ironman in July.
Swimming remains a challenge. Unable to consistently twist his neck to breathe amid strokes, he has used a snorkel.
The injury came at a difficult time, not only costing Don a chance at the world championship, but also leaving him inactive during the window for renegotiating precious contracts. Most of his sponsors re-signed him despite the injury — his shoe sponsor, On, for three years — but a professional future without elite athletic performance remains uncertain.
Is his drive to compete again — the same drive that enabled him to record the world’s fastest time in one of the world’s most grueling races — fueling an incredible comeback? Or is he risking his health in pursuit of athletic feats that may no longer be attainable?
Then he reflected.
