Sports|Is It Time to Rethink the Rules for N.F.L. Cheerleaders?
A number of teams will stage cheerleading auditions this weekend and many women will try out. But in a #MeToo world, rigid rules and meager pay may be coming under more scrutiny.
Forty years ago this month, a visitor at the Dallas Cowboys’ cheerleading tryouts described a scene that was “as tense as that at an open casting call for a Broadway production,” with 150 women — “the most envied, celebrated and sought‐after” in the country — shivering in an overly air-conditioned room.
The women spoke of starvation diets that had lasted for weeks. The visitor, a New York Times reporter, noted that the cheerleaders were paid next to nothing: $15 a game ($14.72 after taxes). They had stringent practice schedules — as much as five hours a night, five nights a week — and they could not appear where alcohol was served, attend parties of any sort or wear jewelry with their uniforms.
“A Cowboys cheerleader, above all else, is beautiful,” the article said, at a time when the squad was perhaps the most iconic sideline show in the N.F.L. A “large measure of bubbly or charm” was a must.
Four decades later, the world may have changed, but the rules of professional cheerleading appear to be essentially the same. And yet as the N.F.L. struggles with an ongoing crisis over domestic violence and sexual harassment charges — and legions of women proclaim #MeToo — a kind of feminist awakening may be emerging in the world of cheerleading, too, with some now questioning the rigid and seemingly sexist rules that accompany it at the professional level.
That questioning is happening even as hundreds of women head into cheerleading auditions this weekend for a number of N.F.L. teams. Per team guidelines, they will show up in mandated crop tops, skin-colored nylons and hot pants with “hair and makeup complete,” as handbooks like the one for the Arizona Cardinals advise.
They will be judged on their technique, showmanship and poise, but also their appearance, as many of the guidelines put it. They will know that “a lean figure is demanded by our uniform,” according to the audition pamphlet of the Cowboys.
If these women are lucky, they will join teams with names like the Ben-gals (that’s a play on Cincinnati’s Bengals), the Raiderettes (Oakland), the Falconettes (Atlanta) and the Saintsations (New Orleans). They will be issued a rule book that forbids them from fraternizing with players, and, in some cases, being too opinionated, or chewing gum.
Many of them will still relish the experience: the camaraderie, the fandom and the technical skill (yes, skill; many N.F.L. cheerleaders are trained dancers) that is required for the job.
“It was an instant sisterhood,” said Toni Washington, who was a cheerleader and tour secretary for the Cowboys in the 1980s.
Still, there is evidence of misgivings, beginning with the case of a 22-year-old ex-New Orleans Saints cheerleader named Bailey Davis, who was fired in January for posting a photo on Instagram that showed her in a lace body suit, which was a violation of the team’s social media rules. In response, she filed a gender discrimination complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission accusing the N.F.L. of having two sets of rules: one for cheerleaders, almost all of whom are female, and one for its players, who are male.
“I’m not making enough for them to control every aspect of my life outside of the Superdome,” Ms. Davis said. Many N.F.L. cheerleaders are paid as little as $75 a game, with additional money for appearances; had she remained on the team, Ms. Davis would have made $10.25 an hour, or $3 above the minimum wage in Louisiana.
Ms. Davis’s case is not the first to highlight the gender disparities of the N.F.L. As far back as the 1970s, the National Organization for Women picketed the Cowboys’ cheerleader tryouts and feminists denounced cheerleaders as “sexist tools,” as The Times once put it.
To make it in a man’s world, the saying goes, women must do everything men do — but backward and in high heels. For N.F.L. cheerleaders, there’s a further twist: They must stand on the sidelines, in high heels, cheering for the men for very little money in a world where players rake in millions and even the mascots make up to $65,000 a year.
As The Times and others have noted, the rules placed on cheerleaders today are reminiscent of a different era, with weigh-ins, mandatory manicures, advice on the proper use of tampons and suggestions for how to politely respond to fans who are prying or engaging in harassment. Were a person to sift through the 1960s-era rule books of Hugh Hefner’s Playboy clubs — rules created for the female servers called “bunnies” — they would find striking similarities: the bunnies were issued “demerits” for chewing gum, dirty fingernails or unkempt hair. But even they got a salary and benefits.
A 2012 Raiders etiquette handbook reviewed by The Times advised cheerleaders to “sit in a ladylike manner — cross your ankles or cross your legs but keep your legs together.” A rule book for the Bengals, submitted as part of a lawsuit in 2014, noted “you are given a 3 lb leniency weight,” “no gum chewing,” “no slouching breasts.” Both teams said this week that the rule books had been revised but would not provide specifics.
Cheerleading began as a sport for men — “one of the most valuable things a boy can take away from college,” as The Nation put it in 1911. At least five presidents — Dwight D. Eisenhower, Franklin Roosevelt, Ronald Reagan and the two Bushes — were college cheerleaders, as were other political figures such as Rick Perry, Tom DeLay and Mitt Romney.
It was after World War II young, perky women with pom-poms began to replace those men with megaphones, as the sociologist Lisa Wade has written. In part, it was because cheerleading was one of the few ways women could participate in college athletics before the passage of Title IX, the federal civil rights law enacted in 1972 that mandated equal access, said Laura Grindstaff, a professor at the University of California, Davis.
It was that kind of cheerleading, with the hot pants and the go-go boots, that owed its origins to the Cowboys of that 1970s era — and specifically to Suzanne Mitchell, who oversaw the squad for more than a decade. “She was sort of the godmother of modern cheerleading,” said the filmmaker Dana Adam Shapiro, whose documentary about the Cowboys cheerleaders, “Daughters of the Sexual Revolution,” premiered last month at South by Southwest.
The breakout moment for the Dallas squad came in 1976, during Super Bowl X, when a TV cameraman, looking for what was known as the “honey shot,” panned to the sideline and a cheerleader named Gwenda winked into the camera. Suddenly, the world “forgot there was a football game going on,” as Cowboys chronicler Joe Nick Patoski has put it — confirming what Tex Schramm, the Cowboys’ president and general manager, had suspected: that a bolder, sexier look would create enormous buzz.
But there was a darker side to it, too. In the documentary, former Cowboys cheerleaders described stalkers who sent letters, followed them and called them at home — ostensibly part of the reason many of today’s N.F.L. cheerleaders are forbidden from using their full names.
“Most fans are respectful, but there’s always the odd fan here and there who seems to think cheerleaders are there to be merely objects,” said Ms. Berys, the former Chargers cheerleader, speaking to her experience from 2000 to 2002.
In Philadelphia, a veteran Eagles cheerleader quit in 2002 — and later filed a lawsuit — after it was revealed that opposing teams had been spying on the cheerleaders in their locker room. Mr. Bradshaw, the lawyer involved in several fair-pay lawsuits, said two of his clients have described being groped while working at charity events.
Ms. Davis, for her part, does not believe that N.F.L. cheerleading should be done away with altogether — but that the N.F.L needs to adjust to the times.
For more coverage of women and gender issues, subscribe to Gender Letter, a new newsletter, or follow @nytgender on Instagram.
Sharon Attia and Doris Burke contributed research.