Style|Is Your Body Appropriate to Wear to School?
Is Your Body Appropriate to Wear to School?
“They hurt,” Lizzy said. “If you ever put Band-Aids on your nipples, those things are stiff. Any time you move around you can just feel it. It’s like an annoying, rubbing feeling, especially in a sensitive area.” She wore the bandages for 45 minutes before she began crying in class. Her best friend took her to the bathroom and Lizzy lifted her shirt to show her the bandages. Then she peeled them off and contacted her mother.
In the U.S., more than half of public schools have dress codes. Students are beginning to push back on ones they deem discriminatory, challenging rules against buzz cuts, shirt dresses and hair extensions. In 2014, a group of New Jersey high schoolers created #iammorethanadistraction to push back against their dress code and four years later, it continues to be an active hashtag. Change.org lists over 500 dress code petitions in their database.
Sometimes the rules are overturned.
In March 2017, for example, Mya and Deanna Cook, two 15-year-old students in the Boston area, were barred from the prom, taken out of extracurricular activities and threatened with suspension if they wouldn’t remove their braided hair extensions. The Massachusetts Attorney General ordered the school to reverse their policy. The A.C.L.U. is currently litigating a case against a North Carolina-based public charter school that requires girls to wear skirts to school.
Meredith Harbach, a University of Richmond law professor whose 2016 paper explored sexualization and public school dress codes, said the problem arises when schools impose gender-specific requirements based on sex stereotypes.
In the case of Lizzy, for example, the school is “foisting this notion that unrestrained breasts are sexual and likely to cause disruption and distract other students,” Ms. Harbach said. But this kind of messaging that targets young women — your skirt is too short, you look too sexy, you’re distracting the boys — “deflects any and all conversation about appropriate mutually respectful behavior in schools between boys and girls,” she said.
Victoria Schantz, 17, a senior at Indian Trail High School in Kenosha, Wis., has been battling her school dress code since she was in the third grade and a teacher told her that her running shorts were too short. “I didn’t see my body as a sexual thing at that age and they were making it into one,” Ms. Schantz said in a phone interview.
In the seventh grade, Ms. Schantz was sent to an administrator’s office for wearing a pair of leggings. In the tenth grade, a male teacher pulled Ms. Schantz out of class because her baggy shirt slipped off her shoulder.
This year, she had enough. Ms. Schantz and 10 other members of the school’s student-led Women’s Rights and Empowerment Club created an online petition which received 3,000 signatures, and then they took turns attending school board meetings and speaking about their experiences. Recently, the school board ruled in their favor: Leggings, tank tops and yoga pants will be allowed in the coming school year.
For more coverage of women and gender issues, subscribe to Gender Letter, a new newsletter, or follow @nytgender on Instagram.