Style|Is Stan Lee Being Held Prisoner by Real-Life Villains?
Is Stan Lee Being Held Prisoner by Real-Life Villains?
The Hollywood Reporter published an investigation saying that Mr. Lee, 95, was the victim of elder abuse. We visited the Marvel Comics creator at his home. “Nobody has more freedom,” he said.
LOS ANGELES — Stan Lee, the Marvel Comics maestro and co-creator of Spider-Man, X-Men and Black Panther, lives in a world of heroes and villains. But these days, it can be hard to tell which is which.
Yet at the summit of Mr. Lee’s career, storm clouds have gathered.
The last year has brought an unsettling mix of tragedy and scandal, including the death in July of Joan Lee, his wife of almost 70 years; suspicions that millions of dollars have been siphoned from his accounts; even gossip reports that a former business associate stole his blood to sell to fans.
But on a recent visit to Mr. Lee’s home in the Bird Streets, a celebrity enclave high in the hills of West Hollywood, Calif., the man himself said otherwise.
True, a 6-foot-4 security guard, with a pistol on his hip, opened the front gate. And Mr. Lee hasn’t been getting out as much, after a bout of pneumonia that has left him short of breath and looking frail. He also can no longer read because of macular degeneration.
Despite all that, Mr. Lee seemed relaxed and enthusiastic. Wearing a yellow shirt and beige polyester slacks in his poolside sitting room, its Sherwood-green carpet bleached by 40 years of California sunshine, he welcomed a reporter into his home.
So, is he a prisoner in his own house, surrounded by real-life supervillains?
For four decades, Mr. Lee has lived in a relatively modest two-story house in the middle of what has become some of Los Angeles’s most valuable real estate. Dr. Dre is a neighbor, and Leonardo DiCaprio lives down the block, on a street where houses can list for north of $30 million.
Inside the suburban-style home, a nurse and a maid bustled in the kitchen. Although Mr. Lee seemed at ease, the armed guard lent an air of surveillance that made it difficult to entirely relax.
The house is a time capsule of late 1970s Hollywood. Decorated by his late wife, it is dotted with ceramic animals, carved figures in African and Asian styles, and large gilt-framed mirrors hung on mirrored walls. Empty hooks surrounded by dusty outlines sit amid prints and original works by noted artists — Joan Miró, Pablo Picasso, Alexander Calder, Salvador Dalí and Roy Lichtenstein — suggesting a home being slowly eroded.
It’s the vagueness about what has “gone elsewhere” that has some of Mr. Lee’s friends so worried.
Since his wife died last year, Mr. Lee’s household has been thrown into disarray, with three factions of once-trusted aides vying for control. Mr. Lee’s current gatekeeper is Keya Morgan, who has ousted former staff.
A former memorabilia dealer from New York, Mr. Morgan moved to Los Angeles as the executive producer of the mobster biopic “Gotti,” and now describes himself as a “producing partner of John Travolta.” Sitting at Mr. Lee’s side, he was dressed in a black suit and tie, black bowler hat and dark sunglasses, which he lowered on his nose to see indoors.
In February, Mr. Morgan called police to the house to physically remove Mr. Lee’s longtime road manager, Mac Anderson, known as Max. Mr. Anderson was accused of, among other things, attempting to bribe a nurse to make statements that Mr. Lee was being held hostage. “He got into a big fight with Stan and Stan’s daughter,” and was fired soon afterward, Mr. Morgan said.
Reached by phone, Mr. Anderson declined to comment.
Also out was Jerry Olivarez, a Hollywood publicist who briefly obtained power of attorney over Mr. Lee’s affairs last year, during which time more than a million dollars left the Marvel creator’s accounts. That included a $300,000 check made out to Hands of Respect, a novelty company owned by Mr. Olivarez and Mr. Lee that makes a $10 lapel pin advocating racial harmony.
In unrelated matters, $1.4 million may have vanished in a series of wire transfers and a Chanel handbag full of cash may be missing from the house, according to Mr. Morgan. Also, a trove of Marvel memorabilia, including character sketches and figurines, is the subject of disputed ownership between Mr. Anderson and Mr. Lee, as reported by The Hollywood Reporter.
Mr. Lee may be a creative genius, but he isn’t a financial one. “I’ve been very careless with money,” he said.
“I had a partner or two who, since I’m not a money counter — I let them take care of keeping track of the money we made,” Mr. Lee said, as he sipped a bottle of mineral water to soothe his raspy voice. “Lately, I have found out that a lot of the money we made is no longer available for me. I don’t know where it is, but a guy, and maybe one or two others, have found a way to take it.
The child of Romanian Jewish immigrants, Stanley Lieber was born in New York City in 1922. He was hired in 1939 as an assistant at Timely Comics, the not-especially-promising division of a pulp magazine publisher that would eventually be renamed Marvel.
Following a staff exodus the next year, the newly rechristened Mr. Lee (an alias he adopted to save his real name for the great novels he aspired to write) was appointed its editor. The two great motifs of his life were established: a nagging feeling that his work in comics was cultural schlock, and the fact that he would be a lifelong corporate employee, never owning the rights to his creations.
His greatest streak of inspiration began in 1961, when Mr. Lee was almost 40 and thoroughly disenchanted with his career. With the artist Jack Kirby, he created the Fantastic Four, a hit he bested the next year by inventing Spider-Man with the artist Steve Ditko.
Among the enduring characters he created over the next decade with those artists, and others, are the X-Men, Iron Man, the Hulk, Thor, Doctor Strange and, in 1966, Black Panther: an African warrior-king whose recent film adventure has grossed more than $1.3 billion.
Yet Mr. Lee may have underestimated his own value in the marketplace. While he has made exponentially more money than any of his Marvel co-creators, he only ever collected a paycheck, and does not receive any continuing royalties from the films based on his characters.
And while his personal appearances (including charging fans $120 for an autograph) are a lucrative source of income, later-life attempts to create wholly owned superhero properties have foundered.
Stan Lee Media, a digital content start-up, crashed in 2000 and landed his business partner, Peter F. Paul, in prison for securities fraud. And Mr. Lee is embroiled in disputes with POW! Entertainment, the company he started in 2001 to create new shows, including “Stripperella,” a cartoon starring Pamela Anderson.
As part of the escalating fight, Mr. Morgan and Mr. Lee’s daughter entered the POW! offices on Santa Monica Boulevard on the night of March 14 and removed items that they say belong to Mr. Lee. They triggered a silent alarm, prompting POW! to file a police report.
An Oscar for Stan Lee?
Outside the bubble of legal drama and personal strife, however, Mr. Lee’s creative influence remains at an all-time high.
From the floral sofa in his sitting room, Mr. Lee is a font of highly entertaining stories from the glory days, even if some of them sound taller than his 1962 creation Giant-Man.
The thought of a biopic starring Mr. DiCaprio gave Mr. Lee pause. He looked out over the pool, to the canyon beyond, and pondered being portrayed by an Oscar-winning actor.
