“Milan is a very harsh and impenetrable city, but behind closed doors there are unbelievable creative things, which is the point of making a public place like this that brings that creativity into the light,” the architect Rem Koolhaas says of his zigzagging new tower at the Prada Foundation, which opens during Salone del Mobile this week. The nine-story tower completes Koolhaas’s plans for the 200,000-square-foot site, the city’s largest arts destination, after three years of construction. It vastly expands the foundation’s already-extensive exhibition spaces with new galleries reserved for Miuccia Prada’s private collection of contemporary art, and adds a new restaurant and roof-deck bar to the premises as well.
In a two-decade collaboration with Prada, Koolhaas and his Office for Metropolitan Architecture (OMA) firm have designed foreign headquarters, flagship stores, catwalks — and even backpacks, but in his vision, the Prada Foundation is unique as a socially-minded project. In a rundown southern precinct of Milan, the foundation, which was inaugurated in 2015, is a remarkable, OMA-designed oasis of the arts comprising of refurbished 1910 distillery warehouses along with a modern, mirrored cinema and a gallery paneled in foamed aluminum.
Koolhaas’s new, 200-foot-tall milk-white concrete tower — which broke ground when the other buildings were almost finished — rises up from the far corner of the campus, and soars over the low-lying surrounding neighborhood. Serrated from one point of view, but straight from another, the tower constantly shape-shifts according to the viewer’s perspective. It’s what Koolhaas calls an “unstable” form, a term he has used to describe many of his buildings. The interiors fluctuate as well. They are, as the OMA architect Federico Pompignoli put it, “white cube galleries in revolt against the monotony of the typical white cube.” The open-plan exhibition spaces alternate on each floor, with rooms that are either slim tapered wedges or wider rectangles constructed with cantilevered additions that offer vertiginous views over the street below.
Instead of the traditional stark-white walls typically found in galleries, the building features travertine stone floors that contrast against opaline concrete masonry and rough wood. Floor-to-ceiling windows switch directions on each floor, offering differing perspectives over the cityscape, and each level grows a few feet taller than the last — a changing plan designed to encourage changing exhibitions. At the opening, large-scale works by Carla Accardi, John Baldessari and Carsten Höller — as well as other artists who figure prominently in Prada’s collection — will be on view.
