About 160 law enforcement officials had been involved in the search for Travis Reinking, 29, who officials said used an AR-15 rifle to carry out a deadly shooting in Nashville on Sunday morning.
NASHVILLE — The police on Monday arrested the suspect in a rampage at a Waffle House restaurant that left four people dead in Nashville, after a tip from the public set them on the trail of the man who had evaded them for nearly 34 hours.
The authorities announced the arrest of the suspect, Travis Reinking, just after 1 p.m., in a wooded area that was within sight of the apartment complex where he lived.
Lt. Carlos Lara of the Metropolitan Nashville Police Department said Mr. Reinking was wearing a backpack that contained a loaded handgun and ammunition, but surrendered without incident.
The Tennessee Bureau of Investigation had added Mr. Reinking to its Top Ten Most Wanted list, and some of Nashville’s public schools imposed “lockout” rules on Monday in a bid to protect students and staff members from a suspect who was at large into the workweek.
By the time classes were dismissed on Monday, Mr. Reinking was in custody. But investigators said they were still working to piece together the attack that also left four others wounded.
Officials, from detectives to trauma surgeons at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, said there would have been greater bloodshed had a 29-year-old customer, James Shaw Jr., not wrested the rifle away from Mr. Reinking while he was reloading. Mr. Reinking then fled the restaurant, the police said, naked except for a green jacket.
The carnage stirred fears of a hate crime because Mr. Reinking is white and three of the people who were killed were black.
But in an interview on Monday, about an hour before Mr. Reinking’s arrest, the mayor said he had no reason to believe that the shooting was provoked by racial animus.
“Nobody has told me anything that would indicate that’s the motivating factor,” Mr. Briley said in his office.
Mr. Reinking has had other encounters with law enforcement, including an arrest near the White House last July when he crossed a security barrier as he sought a meeting with President Trump. And just last week, police officers near Nashville pursued Mr. Reinking after he was accused of stealing a B.M.W. from a dealership in Brentwood, said Don Aaron, a spokesman for the Nashville police.
After the car was reported stolen, officers spotted the vehicle, Mr. Aaron said, and began chasing it through rush-hour traffic. The police soon stopped the pursuit because of concerns for other motorists’ safety and because the car had tracking technology.
Mr. Reinking is believed to have moved to Nashville last fall, and police reports show family members expressed concern for his welfare after he exhibited delusional behavior for an extended time, including expressing a belief that the entertainer Taylor Swift was stalking him and hacking his phone and Netflix account.
After his arrest near the White House Mr. Reinking, who lived in Morton, Ill., was forced to surrender three rifles and a handgun to officials in August, just months before he moved to Nashville.
In the wake of the rampage in Nashville on Sunday, officials could not fully explain how Mr. Reinking regained possession of his weapons. The Tazewell County Sheriff’s Office in Illinois gave the weapons he owned — including the AR-15 he took to the Waffle House on Sunday — to his father, Jeffrey Reinking.
Sheriff Robert M. Huston of Tazewell County said in a news conference on Sunday that while Travis Reinking “voluntarily surrendered” the weapons on Aug. 24, his father had a firearm owner’s identification card and a legal right to take the weapons.
The police in Nashville indicated that Mr. Reinking’s father returned the weapons to his son. He could not be reached for comment on Monday.
On Monday, however, Special Agent Marcus Watson of the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives said Mr. Reinking’s father could face a prosecution of his own for violating weapons laws.