No offense to professional golfers, but Matt Parziale has a real job.
For most of the past five years, the 30-year-old from Brockton, Mass., one of six amateurs playing the Masters this week at Augusta National Golf Club, has been sneaking in amateur tournaments between shifts for the Brockton Fire Department.
It’s been a grind, Parziale said. All firefighters in Brockton’s Ladder Company 1 work 24-hour shifts: one day on, two days off, followed by another 24-hour shift, and then four days off.
Parziale has made it work using his days off to play amateur tournaments, often showing up to the first tee with little or no sleep. Sometimes he has had his shifts covered by co-workers. “It helps that he’s really likable” said his best friend and childhood golf buddy Greg Chalas.
There have been injuries fighting fires and all the indignities associated with an underfunded amateur playing on the road — namely being broke all of the time and away from home.
The often exhausting and sometimes dangerous grind finally paid off in October when he won the U.S. Mid-Amateur Championship, earning him a spot at the Masters. The win also secured a spot at the United States Open and in the U.S. Amateur Championship at Pebble Beach.
None of this makes Parziale nervous, he said. Not Augusta’s refined pageantry, the elite level of play or the intimidation factor of Amen Corner. “I approach each tournament the same way, whether it’s a club championship or the Masters. I’m just trying to be prepared and do the best I can each time,” he said.
Parziale started playing golf as a child, continued through high school and attended Southeastern University in Lakeland, Fla., where he led his team to a national championship in 2007.
After school he became a professional golfer but struggled with money. He quit in 2013 and a year later joined the Brockton Fire Department where his father, Vic Parziale, was captain. With the job he found more stability playing tournaments and finally had a steady paycheck.
At the U.S. Mid-Amateur in Atlanta in October, he played aggressively and was decisive, and thanks to a new belief in his driver, won with one of the widest margins of victory in the event’s history.
Shawn Hester, Parziale’s swing coach since 2011, had been pushing him to use a driver and challenged him to use it “like a weapon and be aggressive,” he said. “If he wanted to play at the highest level and compete against the best golfers in the world, then he had to start hitting the driver and figure this thing out,” Hester said.
To pay the bills, a group of benefactors, including the Massachusetts Amateur Golf Alliance, have made contributions to help with expenses.
He has no routine or grueling set schedule. There are no punishing workouts or motivational coaches. He also hasn’t exactly parlayed his physical demands as a firefighter into his golf game. He doesn’t overthink it and keeps it simple.
This low-key, no-nonsense approach might help him on the course, where he and his father, who is now retired from the fire department and caddies for his son, will talk about the latest emergency calls or sports. “We’ll talk about anything but golf right up until he’s at the ball. It keeps him loose,” his father said.
Along the way, there has been encouragement. His colleagues in the fire department celebrated his success. He also received a note from Tiger Woods congratulating him on the amateur title. “That was incredible. It was very special and kind of him. We might sneak a practice round together at Augusta,” Parziale said.
 “The best Christmas present ever,” he said.
All of this, of course, will ultimately be up to Parziale.
If he plays well — if he wins and delivers a true Cinderella story — would he quit fighting fires and turn pro once again?
