WASHINGTON — Thomas D. Homan, the acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said on Monday that he would retire from the deportation agency in June, after more than a year of pushing President Trump’s controversial plans to remove thousands of undocumented immigrants from the United States.
The Wall Street Journal first reported Mr. Homan’s decision to resign.
Mr. Homan, a holdover from the Obama administration, was nominated to head ICE by Mr. Trump and became one of the president’s most vocal surrogates against illegal immigration. His critics, including immigration rights groups and congressional Democrats, said Mr. Homan brought an aggressiveness to immigration policy that even some Republicans said went too far, including targeting people whose deportation was not a priority during the Obama administration.
At a congressional hearing late last year, Mr. Homan said that all undocumented migrants should be scared of being deported. This year, he doubled down on those statements.
Mr. Homan has also called for the Justice Department to prosecute elected officials in so-called sanctuary cities who do not help ICE round up undocumented immigrants.
One ICE official who spoke on the condition of anonymity said Mr. Homan initially planned to retire in January 2017. At the time, he had been serving as the agency’s executive associate director of enforcement and removal operations. But at the start of the Trump administration, Mr. Homan agreed to remain as acting director and was nominated to keep that job.
But his nomination has been stalled in the Senate. Other people familiar with Mr. Homan’s decision to resign said he did not want to undergo the expected partisan grilling by Democrats on the Senate Homeland Security Committee during a confirmation hearing.
Two Democratic committee members, Senators Kamala Harris of California and Cory A. Booker of New Jersey, have been harsh critics of ICE under Mr. Homan’s leadership. Both are considered potential presidential candidates in 2020, and have been critical of Mr. Homan’s statements against undocumented immigrants and his calls for legal action against local politicians who oppose the Trump administration’s immigration policies.
Mr. Homan has worked in law enforcement for more than 30 years. He was a police officer in New York, a United States Border Patrol agent and a special agent with the former Immigration and Naturalization Service, the agency that preceded ICE.