ALBANY — If you had blinked, you would have missed it.
A staffer for the Senate Democrats walked up the aisle, handed a stack of papers to the senator presiding over the Senate Chamber, and walked back down. The papers were reviewed.
Just like that, the Independent Democratic Conference was dissolved, liberal unity was re-established and a bizarre, seven-year New York political feud seemingly came to an end on Monday. The whole thing took less than 90 seconds.
Of course, as with everything in Albany, it’s not actually that simple.
For all that Democratic leaders have trumpeted the dissolution of the I.D.C. — a group of renegade Democrats who for years had collaborated with the Republicans, helping give them control of the Senate — as the start of a shining era of progressive solidarity, the reality has been far less celebratory.
On Monday, the first day of the legislative session since the reunification announcement, the mainline Democrats and the I.D.C. still convened for separate conferences one last time.
Senate Republicans, apparently miffed at the I.D.C.’s change of heart, trickled into the chamber long past the scheduled start of session, forcing it to kick off more than an hour late.
Senator Jeffrey D. Klein, the former leader of the I.D.C., spent the hour before the session rearranging décor in his new office on the sixth floor of the legislative office building, three floors beneath the spacious office from which the Republicans had wasted no time in ejecting him after his defection.
A stone-faced Mr. Klein, who represents the Bronx, declined to comment on his new office arrangements. “You’ll read about it,” he said as he entered the Senate chamber, in reference to interviews he had given to a select group of reporters earlier.
The only formal acknowledgment of the Democrats’ new arrangement was the 90-second “hand-up,” in which the Democrats announced that they had added eight new members to their conference. The Republicans announced their own hand-up, which included stripping four I.D.C. members of their committee chairmanships.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who announced the reunification on April 4, had framed the deal as a necessary step in the face of a hostile Republican federal government. Progressive activists critical of Mr. Cuomo said he had been spurred to action by an aggressive challenge on the left from the actress Cynthia Nixon.
Regardless of the reasons for the move, liberal kumbaya is still not at hand: The Democrats must still win two special elections on April 24, and also convince another rogue Democrat, Simcha Felder, of Brooklyn, to stop caucusing with the Republicans, before gaining true control of the Senate.
Then there are the optical challenges. Last week, the I.D.C. proceeded with a preplanned fund-raiser, which was also attended by Mr. Cuomo, to the outrage of progressive activists. Mr. Klein has said he would keep the I.D.C.’s campaign accounts to ward off any potential primary challengers.
There is also the issue of an unresolved sexual harassment complaint against Mr. Klein, whom a former staffer, Erica Vladimer, has accused of forcibly kissing her in 2015. As part of the reunification deal, Mr. Klein will become the deputy to Senator Andrea Stewart-Cousins, the Democratic minority leader — creating the odd couple of New York’s first female legislative leader, who in recent months has championed an aggressive crackdown on sexual harassment, and a man accused of committing it.
All told, the Republicans seemed most capable of putting their best face forward on Monday. As they filed slowly into the chamber long past the scheduled 3 p.m. start time, several Republican senators grinned when asked how they felt about the I.D.C.’s desertion.
“Great day today,” Martin J. Golden, a senator from Brooklyn, said.
John J. Bonacic, a senator from the Hudson Valley, was equally coy. “I love everybody,” he said as he strode away.