New York is the art world’s undeniable hub and certainly its commercial heart. London and Hong Kong rate partly because of strong auction scenes. For museums, we’ll always have Paris, and Italy has jaw-dropping art tucked away in seemingly every church.
But Berlin has artists.
No matter where they are from originally, they like to live and work in the German capital, producing art even if they don’t show it there. Having solid galleries and museums certainly helps, but it may be more a function of cheap space, the city’s embrace of offbeat behavior and a hard-to-quantify ability to channel the creative spirit.
Klaus Biesenbach, the director of MoMA PS1 and the chief curator at large for the Museum of Modern Art, lived there for some 15 years.
“Berlin is the most liberal, artist-friendly place I have ever been,” said Mr. Biesenbach, who grew up in West Germany and now lives in New York.
Friendly can mean a lot of different things, depending on the maker. For Ai Weiwei, the acclaimed Chinese multimedia artist and activist and one of the world’s most prominent dissidents, intellectual and moral support contributed to his decision to live in Berlin with his partner, the filmmaker Wang Fen, and their son.
For the American artist Trevor Paglen, who won a MacArthur Fellowship in 2017 for work that explores surveillance, privacy and technology, personal circumstances partly spurred his choice to move to Berlin.
Mr. Paglen’s Berlin-based artist friends took the opportunity to extend an invitation.
“They said, ‘Just come here, there’s a studio for like $1,200 a month,’ ” Mr. Paglen recalled. “So I moved over there.” What he found was “a really good community of artists with a very high level of commitment and intellectual curiosity,” he added.
Artists need room to work, and Berlin is an enormous city — the oft-cited statistic is that it’s nearly nine times the size of Paris. But perhaps more important is the type of spaces that are available.
The Irish painter Sean Scully, known for his colorful geometric abstractions, lives just outside of New York City. But he spends part of his summers in Berlin because he found a light-filled, 20,000-square-foot red brick studio in the Reinickendorf neighborhood, near Berlin Tegel Airport.
The city’s fabled past colors his time there, too.
History is never far away in Berlin. In the 1920s, the Weimar era fostered lasting achievements across disciplines.
It was a crucible for the buildings and products of the Bauhaus; the operas of Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill; the paintings of Ernst Ludwig Kirchner and George Grosz; and the films of Fritz Lang. Christopher Isherwood’s 1939 novel “Goodbye to Berlin,” which became the basis for the musical and movie “Cabaret,” helped burnish the mythology.
The cultural flowering was short lived, targeted by the Nazis as “degenerate art” as part of the horrors leading up to World War II. Then large parts of the city were destroyed during the war. And the Cold War gave the city its most famous single feature: the Berlin Wall, which stood from 1961 to 1989.
Mr. Biesenbach was there just after the wall fell, an event that precipitated a decade of artistic production perhaps not rivaling that of the 1920s, but significant nonetheless.
In the early 1990s, Mr. Biesenbach co-founded the arts organization Kunst-Werke Institute for Contemporary Art (KW), which later spawned the Berlin Biennale; both are still going strong. Part of their success was positioning Berlin as an international artist center, not just a German one.
The lineup of artists from around the world who lived or stayed in Berlin for long stretches, and who were affiliated with Kunst-Werke and the Biennale in the 1990s, is a formidable one: Rirkrit Tiravanija, Gabriel Orozco, Olafur Eliasson, Ugo Rondinone, Douglas Gordon, Andrea Zittel and many others.
Networking and socializing were central elements of those heady days — and plenty of artists are replicating that experience right now. But even for creative types, needs change with age.
Mr. Ai, 60, said he liked Berlin precisely because he could be a fish out of water.
His most prized routine does not consist of strolls in the Tiergarten and hoisting pilsners with fellow artists, but taking his son to school every day.
Perhaps one of Berlin’s biggest lures is something shared by other big cities: its ability to provide anything, up to and including indifference.
