Climate|A Trip to Morocco. A Condo Rental. Here’s Why Scott Pruitt Is Under Fire.
A Trip to Morocco. A Condo Rental. Here’s Why Scott Pruitt Is Under Fire.
This week, we’re tracking the ethics issues surrounding the chief of the Environmental Protection Agency. And we’re thanking our newsletter subscribers — all 100,000 of them.
What is happening at the E.P.A.?
Scott Pruitt, the head of the Environmental Protection Agency, made a big announcement this week: The E.P.A. will reconsider, and most likely roll back, Obama-era automobile standards for greenhouse gas emissions and fuel efficiency. The decision goes beyond what even the automakers had asked for, and sets up a showdown with California over air pollution rules.
But headlines in recent days have focused on Mr. Pruitt himself as he faces a growing list of potential ethics scandals. It can be hard to follow every development, so let us catch you up on some of the biggest ones dogging Mr. Pruitt this week.
Travel: Mr. Pruitt is still under fire for extensive first-class and business-class travel. Records obtained by the Environmental Integrity Project and reviewed by The New York Times showed that two weeks of travel in June for the administrator and his aides cost taxpayers more than $120,000. The House Oversight and Government Reform Committee is reviewing Mr. Pruitt’s travel, as is the E.P.A.’s inspector general. On Tuesday Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island, wrote to Mr. Pruitt asking him to explain a $40,000 five-day trip to Morocco with staff in December. Mr. Whitehouse cited the administrator’s calendar for the trip, which showed one full workday and two other days with one hourlong meeting each. The E.P.A. did not respond to a request for comment.
Housing: If you’re looking for a $50-per-night room near the United States Capitol, you’d better be ready to sleep in a bunk bed or on a floor mattress. That is, unless you’re Mr. Pruitt. That’s the price the E.P.A. chief paid during the first half of 2017 for a room in a Capitol Hill apartment that was owned in part by the wife of a top energy lobbyist. A chorus of lawmakers, mostly Democrats, are demanding an investigation of Mr. Pruitt’s living arrangements, and at least one Republican, Representative Carlos Curbelo of Florida, called for Mr. Pruitt to step down. The E.P.A. released a memo from the agency’s ethics counsel stating that the price Mr. Pruitt paid was reasonable market value, and in an interview with a columnist for The Washington Examiner, Mr. Pruitt said he was under attack because he was implementing President Trump’s agenda.
Raises: Amid all the scrutiny of Mr. Pruitt’s travel and personal finances, other issues are brewing inside the agency. The Atlantic broke a story Tuesday showing that the administrator bypassed the usual White House procedures to give political appointees substantial raises. The aides, Sarah Greenwalt and Millan Hupp, had both worked for Mr. Pruitt in Oklahoma, where he served as attorney general before coming to the E.P.A. Ms. Greenwalt’s salary was raised to $164,200 from $107,435, while Ms. Hupp’s was raised to $114,590 from $86,460. Citing anonymous sources, the article outlines how Mr. Pruitt reappointed the aides with higher salaries under a provision of the Safe Drinking Water Act after the White House did not approve the raises. The E.P.A. did not dispute the story.
Big news. The population of Climate Fwd: subscribers has grown to a size equal to that of Las Cruces, N.M. There are now 100,000 of you!
To celebrate this recent milestone, here are just a few comments we’ve gotten from you since launching last fall. Your questions and criticisms are important to us, so don’t be a stranger |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| — W.B. Wolf, Reidsville, N.C.
— Thomas A. Pritchard, Hartwick, N.Y.
