Sylvio Perlstein’s accumulations of avant-garde art from the past 50 years comes to Hauser & Wirth this month.
The collection of Sylvio Perlstein is a relic of a recent time that already feels remote. For more than five decades he has bought avant-garde 20th- and 21st-century art, comprising both iconic masterpieces and recondite curiosities. Mr. Perlstein’s assemblage of paintings, sculptures and photographs fills every wall, niche and corner of his large house on the outskirts of Paris.
A selection of 380 pieces from the Perlstein collection will fill all three floors of the Hauser & Wirth Chelsea gallery in New York from April 26 through July 27. (Nothing is for sale.) Unlike the leading collectors of our day, who hire professionals to track the market as assiduously as hedge fund managers, Mr. Perlstein follows his nose through the bewildering maze of modern art. He says that he pounces when he sees “something not normal.” His collection includes Dada and Surrealism (Max Ernst, Man Ray, Dora Maar, René Magritte, Jean Tinguely, Niki de Saint Phalle); American minimalism and post-minimalism (Donald Judd, Ad Reinhardt, Brice Marden, Fred Sandback); and land art (Richard Long, Robert Smithson, Michael Heizer, Gordon Matta-Clark).
Here are some of the best-known artists and themes, and how he came to collect them.
Like many collectors of contemporary art, Mr. Perlstein prizes his relationships with artists. He met the man whose work arguably forms the core of his collection at a gallery in Vence, in the south of France, in 1969, when he and a friend decided to salvage a rainy day by driving to an exhibition that bore the intriguing title “Les Invendables” (“The Unsellables”).
When they arrived, they saw a man leaning against the door. “What are you doing here?” he asked them. “What do you want?” He had such a strong American accent that Mr. Perlstein offered to switch to English, but the mysterious stranger insisted on French.
Among other things, Man Ray explained the process of making what he called “rayographs,” where he placed objects on photosensitive paper and produced a photographic image without the intervention of a camera. Mr. Perlstein acquired many of them. “No one wanted them,” he says. He also acquired a selection of Man Ray’s iconic images, such as a woman’s bare back decorated with the f-holes of a violin, and an arresting portrait of the iconoclastic (and psychologically tormented) theater artist Antonin Artaud.
When traveling on business, Mr. Perlstein would make detours to visit pioneers of Dada and Surrealism, who were now well advanced in years and not otherwise receiving much attention. “With Hannah Höch, I went to Berlin, and I didn’t have an appointment with her,” he said of the Dada artist known for photomontages she made during the Weimar period. “It was an old house, and she was a very old woman. She said, ‘What do you want?’ ” When Mr. Perlstein told her, she invited him inside. “She showed me everything she had. From the real Dada, there was not a lot left. I bought two works.” One is a crowing rooster cut from newspaper clippings. The other, like a Barbara Kruger print (she is another artist in the collection) more than half a century in advance, displays the words “looks beautiful” in German, in bold letters emblazoned across a fractured landscape.
As befits a devotee of Surrealism, Mr. Perlstein often seems to be guided by his subconscious. For example, he has a curiously large number of works that feature women’s hair (or hair look-alikes), by such artists as Tunga, Pierre Boucher, Harry Callahan, Magritte and Maar. Although Maar is best known these days for her relationship with Picasso, she was a highly original artist. Her photograph in the Perlstein collection of a three-sailed ship in a sea of hair, and another one of a tiny chair in a bare sunlit room, are memorably strange.
Mr. Perlstein likes to buy early work, before an artist’s fresh impulses have ossified into a reproducible style. He owns Cy Twombly, Roy Lichtenstein and Brice Marden from the mid-60s, and his youthful pieces by the downtown New York artist Keith Haring, notably a 1981 Mickey Mouse with a sexually suggestive snout, feel exploratory and vital.
The French Fluxus artist Ben Vautier, who goes by BEN, appealed to Mr. Perlstein because he produced paintings in the early ’60s that consisted of written words. “He was the first to write on canvas,” the collector said. Whether he was truly the first is arguable, but what is undeniable is that BEN never fulfilled the promise Mr. Perlstein saw in him. “Today he is repeating,” Mr. Perlstein said, somewhat sadly, because he still likes the man.
The Perlstein fortune — which is modest compared with the assets of prominent modern art collectors like Eli Broad, Mitchell and Emily Rales, Steven A. Cohen, Peter M. Brant and David Geffen — derives from gemstones. Mr. Perlstein is the third generation of his family to own a diamond-cutting firm in Antwerp, Belgium. In 1939, when he was a child, his Jewish family fled Belgium in the face of the Nazi menace, finding refuge in Brazil. There, Sylvain became Sylvio and learned Portuguese.
He loved growing up in Rio de Janeiro, spending much time playing soccer on the beach. In a flower store on the way to the ocean, he became smitten at age 15 or 16 with a painting that was “colorful and strange.” The proprietor didn’t want to sell it, but he persisted. It was his first art acquisition.
A few years later, Mr. Perlstein reluctantly followed his parents to Antwerp, where he eventually took over the family diamond business. Ronny Van de Velde, a venerable modern art dealer in that city, was an important adviser. His collection contains many Belgian modernists — Magritte, Marcel Broodthaers, Pol Bury, Leo Dohmen. Brazilians also have found their way into his holdings: Ernesto Neto, Vik Muniz, Miguel Rio Branco, Marepe.
His pace of acquisition has slowed in recent years. “Lately I find nothing interesting,” he said. “Maybe I’m getting old.” Although he has purchased some recent works — by Rudolf Stingel, Damien Hirst and others — he relinquished his warehouse spaces in Paris, New York and Belgium. He wants to see what he owns.
In an oval room in his Paris home, he has 100 black-and-white photographs by Man Ray, Henri Cartier-Bresson, Bill Brandt, Walker Evans, Edward Weston, Imogen Cunningham and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy on the walls.
Elsewhere, on “my Minimalist wall,” he displays drawings from the ’60s by Douglas Huebler, Mel Bochner, On Kawara and Agnes Martin. The house is a contemporary version of Ali Baba’s cave.
