VANCOUVER, British Columbia — Daniel and Henrik Sedin created a note-perfect home finale to their extraordinary 17-year N.H.L. careers with the Vancouver Canucks.
Even though the Canucks will miss the playoffs for the fourth time in five years, Vancouver fans showed their appreciation for the 37-year-old identical twins from Sweden.
The Sedins, two former N.H.L. scoring champions who announced their retirements on Monday, had said they wanted to treat their last home game like any other game. Yet it was hard to keep things low-key amid standing ovations, thunderous Viking claps, and blue and yellow lights across Vancouver paying tribute to their Swedish heritage.
The timing of their retirement announcement was intended to give the Canucks a chance to celebrate the Sedins’ legacy without setting the stage for a lengthy farewell tour. The twins, who will play their final N.H.L. game on Saturday in Edmonton, are in the final year of their contracts.
The brothers, born in Ornskoldsvik, Sweden, have reaped accolades for their unusual, creative style and their staggering statistics. Henrik is the Canucks’ career scoring leader with 1,071 points, and Daniel is second with 1,038 points. Their consistency has been their hallmark; this season, Daniel has 55 points to Henrik’s 50.
“If they can say that we always came into practice or games the same way, win or lose, whether we had two goals or were minus-4, that’s something we really take a lot of pride in,” Daniel said.
Since their rookie season of 2000-1, at least one Sedin has appeared in every Canucks game, including 1,359 regular-season contests and 105 in the playoffs.
Drafted second and third over all by Vancouver in 1999, the Sedins were not defined by big hits, last-minute goals or shootout success. Instead, they specialized in magical games of keep-away, whether cycling the puck down low or making no-look passes on the rush. When they got into “Sedinery” mode, finding each other intuitively, highlights happened.
The approach helped the Sedins become the only brothers in the 1,000-point club. On Nov. 30 against the Nashville Predators, Daniel surpassed 1,000 career points. Henrik, who has had fewer injuries, hit that milestone in January 2017. Only 87 N.H.L. players have scored 1,000 points.
The spotlight was unavoidable during Vancouver’s glory years. The club won the Presidents’ Trophy as the N.H.L.’s top regular-season team in 2011 and 2012. In 2010, Henrik, a puck-moving center, won the Hart Trophy as the league’s most valuable player and the Art Ross Trophy as the top scorer with 112 points. In 2011, Daniel, a slick left winger, led the league with 104 points, and won the Ted Lindsay Award, the Most Valuable Player Award voted by the N.H.L. Players’ Association.
But the Canucks got close to winning the Stanley Cup only once in the Sedin era, in 2011, when they lost to the Boston Bruins in seven games.
The twins struggled with the pace of the playoffs at times. In other series, lesser agitators than Marchand, like Dave Bolland of the Chicago Blackhawks and Micheal Ferland of the Calgary Flames, were able to limit the Sedins’ effectiveness.
Trevor Linden, the Canucks’ team president, who played six seasons with the Sedins late in his career, was impressed by how the Sedins persisted against physical, stick-wielding defensemen.
After the 2004-5 N.H.L. lockout, the twins’ skating improved drastically, and they were always the fittest players at Vancouver’s training camps — “by a mile,” Linden said. The Sedins’ increased offensive production erased thoughts of returning to Sweden, which had lingered after their lackluster third N.H.L. season.
They also decided to stay in Vancouver instead of chasing bigger dollars or a chance to win the Stanley Cup in another market.
Embedded in Vancouver, they endeared themselves both to the news media with their amiable, reliable availability and to the fans with generous acts like donating $1.5 million in 2010 to build a new children’s hospital.
The Sedins are likely bound for the Hockey Hall of Fame, especially after winning gold medals at the 2006 Olympics and 2013 world hockey championship, but their overall legacy will be debated. They were trailblazers in a league where puck possession is increasingly important, but their telepathic style is as inimitable as Dominik Hasek’s acrobatic style was for goalies.
