PACARAIMA, Brazil — Hundreds turn up each day, many arriving penniless and gaunt as they pass a tattered flag that signals they have reached the border.
If the current rate remains steady, more than 1.8 million Venezuelans could leave by the end of this year, joining the estimated 1.5 million who have fled the economic crisis to rebuild their lives abroad.
Ms. Campos said she took the “extreme measure” of suing the federal government because the influx of Venezuelans led to a spike in crime, drove down wages for menial jobs and set off an outbreak of measles, which had been eradicated in Brazil.
On a recent morning, squatters who took over the Simón Bolivar plaza, one of the city’s largest, were preparing meals on small wood burning stoves. Some napped in hammocks while others stared blankly, having nowhere to go and nothing to do.
The mood was grim. A stomach bug had spread through the camp, leading to bouts of vomiting and diarrhea. Adding to their discomfort, neighboring residents, in an act of defiance, had burned a row of bushes near the plaza that the Venezuelans had been using to defecate.
As she watched smoke billowing across the campsite, Ana García, 56, said she could scarcely believe her new reality in Brazil.
She was a homeowner who ate well and lived comfortably on a social worker’s salary in the Venezuelan city of Maturín. 
 As food became increasingly scarce, Ms. García set out on a nearly 600-mile journey with her 18-year-old daughter, hitchhiking most of the way.
The first night she slept in the plaza, Ms. García said, she broke down in tears before crawling under a black tarp she now shares with her daughter.
As public spaces became increasingly clogged with Venezuelans, the federal government in February took the unprecedented step of tasking the military with assuming control of the response to the refugee crisis.
Since February, in collaboration with the United Nations, the Brazilian Army has been building temporary shelters with spacious white tents across the city. By the end of May, it hopes to have 11 shelters with a capacity for some 5,500 people.
Venezuelans who have been vaccinated and registered at one of the shelters may apply to be resettled in larger cities in Brazil via a military flight. But that process is off to a slow start because of funding constraints.
The United Nations recently asked international donors to pitch in $46 million to address the crisis during the remainder of this year, but so far it has only secured 6 percent of that goal.
On a recent morning, Mercedes Acuña, 50, said she felt blessed to have been among the first admitted into a shelter. She arrived in Brazil two months ago, rail thin, after an anguishing period during which she joined an ever-growing mob in the capital, Caracas, picking apart piles of garbage for bits and pieces of discarded food.
Ms. Acuña said she had nothing but gratitude for the Brazilians who have helped her, but she has come to agree with those who say it’s time to shut the border.
At the General Hospital of Roraima, the director, Samir Xuad, says the daily patient population has surged from 400 per day to 1,000 over the past couple of years.
That requires working his employees so hard that some of them end up getting sick, too, said Mr. Xuad, adding that he had lost more than 20 pounds from the stress. Medical supplies as basic as syringes and gloves have run out, he said, and during particularly busy periods, patient gurneys line up in hallways.
Outside of work, he said, residents of Boa Vista have become fearful of crime and wary of the mobs of aggressive window washers who approach drivers at stop lights.
Throngs of Venezuelan prostitutes now work the streets of a residential area that has become an ever-expanding red light district.
On a recent evening shortly after sundown, three young women stood on a dark street corner, eyeing passing cars and motorcycles.
Among them was Camilla Suárez, 23, who worked at a waxing salon in Caracas until a few months ago. As food grew scarce, Ms. Suárez, who has a toddler, figured that she stood a better chance of providing for her child and her parents by working in Brazil.
“I knew Brazilian women liked getting waxed,” she said.
But as she walked around Boa Vista during her first few days looking for work, doors slammed in her face everywhere she went, she said.
Soon, sex work became a last resort to stay afloat financially and manage, every once in a while, to send some money home.
“There are lawyers, nurses here among us,” Ms. Suárez said.
To steel themselves, she and her roommates have a ritual to endure the work they find soul-crushing.
On a good day, they return to the rented room they share with the equivalent of $90 each. That covers rent and food for a week, plus about $30 to send home.
