Here are some of Mr. Zuckerberg’s claims, as well as some claims from the lawmakers, which we fact checked. The page will be updated throughout the hearings.
Tuesday was the first time that Mr. Zuckerberg cited 2016 as the date when the company identified new operations linked to the election.
Former employees of Cambridge Analytica have told The New York Times that they were using Facebook as early as 2014. Mr. Zuckerberg later said he had misspoken.
During the hearing, Mr. Zuckerberg was shown the terms of service of the quiz app that Aleksandr Kogan, a Russian-American academic, used to gather data from Facebook users. The fine print may have told users that their data could be used for commercial purposes, according to a draft of the app’s terms of service that was reviewed by The Times, and which was shown to Mr. Zuckerberg by Senator Richard Blumenthal, a Democrat from Connecticut.
The final wording of the terms of service for Mr. Kogan’s app is now most likely unknowable. Facebook executives said they deleted the app in December 2015 after they found out about the data harvesting.
Facebook users who downloaded Mr. Kogan’s quiz app did consent to sharing their own and their friends’ information by agreeing to the app’s terms and conditions. But their friends were not aware that their information had been shared and did not knowingly grant permission.
More than a million people downloaded the 2012 Obama campaign’s app, which gained access to the data of supporters and their friends. Facebook users who downloaded the Obama campaign app were aware of its aims: supporting and campaigning for a political candidate.
Those who downloaded the app from Mr. Kogan, however, believed they were taking a personality quiz for academic purposes and did not know that their data would end up in the hands of Cambridge Analytica.
Android users who recently downloaded the data that Facebook stores about them were surprised to learn that the company had information on their entire call history, going back years. Facebook recently explained in a blog post that users can opt out of Facebook collecting this data.