WASHINGTON — Senator Mitch McConnell’s unilateral declaration this week that he would not allow a vote on legislation to protect the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, provoked outrage from Democrats who said Mr. McConnell was giving President Trump carte blanche to oust the leader of the investigation into Russian election interference and the president’s inner circle.
In reality, the bipartisan bill would stand little chance of passage even if Mr. McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and majority leader, relented and allowed it to be debated and approved by the Senate. House Republicans are adamantly opposed. And if the bill somehow cleared Congress, Mr. Trump would have no incentive to sign a measure limiting his power. On top of that, the legislation might not be constitutional.
But supporters of the bill are pressing ahead anyway, intensifying a dispute that underscores both rising concern among Republicans that Mr. Trump might fire Mr. Mueller and uncertainty about just how they would react if he did.
Mr. McConnell’s stance has serious consequences. Backers of the legislation believe that a strong Senate show of support for Mr. Mueller and his inquiry would send an unmistakable signal to Mr. Trump that dismissing Mr. Mueller would present serious complications for his presidency.
“It would send a message,” said Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, who recently endorsed the special counsel proposal written by two Republican senators, Thom Tillis of North Carolina and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, and two Democratic senators, Chris Coons of Delaware and Cory Booker of New Jersey.
Republicans both inside and outside the government warn that firing Mr. Mueller would be very unwise.
Mr. McConnell’s argument has consistently been that such legislation is not needed because Mr. Trump will not take action against Mr. Mueller. But the president’s increasing anger and frustration about the inquiry has other Republicans joining Democrats in worrying that the counsel might be about to lose his job. Although top Republicans have said there would be significant blowback, it remains unclear what steps would be taken beyond admonishment and hand-wringing.
One top Senate Republican acknowledged privately that there may be little else the party would do. Any move toward impeachment seems out of the question in the Republican-controlled Congress. Conservatives in the House are instead demanding an end to the Mueller inquiry.
While the Senate could censure the president, it is doubtful Republicans would take that action before midterm elections in which they will be relying on Trump supporters to help them hold the Senate. It has been done only once before, in the case of Andrew Jackson (coincidentally a Trump favorite), and was later reversed.
Another Republican suggested that the Senate could refuse to consider Justice Department nominees unless the president agreed to the naming of a new counsel, a reaction Democrats would consider woefully insufficient. Democrats fear they might not learn the Republican reaction until after the president takes his own action.
Democrats are just as concerned that Mr. Trump and House Republicans are building a separate case for firing Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, who is overseeing the investigation as a result of the decision by Attorney General Jeff Sessions to recuse himself. They fear that a move against Mr. Rosenstein would not grab as much attention as dismissing Mr. Mueller and that Mr. Rosenstein’s successor could then constrain the inquiry.
Despite Mr. McConnell’s resistance, Senator Charles E. Grassley, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the Judiciary Committee, still plans for his panel to take up the special counsel bill next week. It appears to have a strong chance of receiving the committee’s approval.
“The views of the majority leader are important to consider, but they do not govern what happens here on the Judiciary Committee,” Mr. Grassley said Thursday.
Mr. McConnell has previously demonstrated that he is willing to bottle up a bill he believes could divide Senate Republicans or prove politically problematic, even if it has bipartisan support from members of the Judiciary Committee. In 2016, he refused to take up a criminal justice overhaul that could have passed the Senate with the backing of Mr. Grassley and many other Republicans, citing objections from a handful of conservatives.
The fight over the measure is taking place as James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director, continues a high-profile media tour promoting his tell-all about clashes with Mr. Trump. Ms. Collins and other Republicans say they have found the entire exercise unseemly and damaging to the F.B.I. They contrasted Mr. Comey’s performance with what they say is the professionalism being exhibited by Mr. Mueller, a man well known to many lawmakers from his time at the F.B.I. and Justice Department.
“James Comey is no Bob Mueller,” Ms. Collins said.
Now she and many others are eager to protect Mr. Mueller from suffering Mr. Comey’s fate — fired by Mr. Trump over the Russia investigation.