Paul Le Roux, one of the world’s least known but most prodigious criminals, emerged from the shadows this week and testified for the first time about the myriad illegal schemes he committed in his 20-year career on the wrong side of the law.
In a spellbinding two-day turn as a prosecution witness, Mr. Le Roux confessed to an astonishing array of crimes. He said he had once sold missile technology to Iran, shipped guns from Indonesia, and trafficked methamphetamines out of North Korea. He calmly told a jury in New York that he had taken part in at least five murders. With a businesslike demeanor, he admitted not only to arming a 200-man militia in Somalia but also to hatching plans to use mercenaries to overthrow the government of the Seychelles.
A South African businessman with illicit interests that spanned four continents, Mr. Le Roux recounted all of this at the murder conspiracy trial of three soldiers-of-fortune on his payroll who stand accused of killing a Filipino real-estate agent in 2012. The agent, Catherine Lee, was shot in the face while taking two of the defendants, Adam Samia and Carl D. Stillwell, on a tour of properties near Manila, prosecutors say, after which her body was dumped on a pile of garbage. Joseph Hunter, the third defendant at the trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan, was charged with overseeing the assassination.
Silver-haired and hulking in his prison-issue shirt, Mr. Le Roux spoke about Ms. Lee in his first few moments on the stand, saying he had ordered her murder because he believed she had stolen from him. “I had her killed,” he said matter-of-factly, adding that Mr. Hunter handled the details and that Mr. Samia and “a partner” did the actual work.
The chilling testimony was part of Mr. Le Roux’s cooperation with the government. In late 2012, he was arrested by the Drug Enforcement Administration after being lured to Liberia. Ever since, Mr. Le Roux, 45, has been assisting the authorities in rounding up the members of his sprawling organization in an effort to reduce a possible life sentence.
In 2013, he helped the D.E.A. launch a sting operation in Thailand that led to Mr. Hunter’s first arrest and eventual sentence of 20 years in prison. In that case, the drug agency caught Mr. Hunter and three others agreeing to murder one of its agents and an informant. Because the charges included a plot to bring cocaine to New York, the case was handled by prosecutors in Manhattan. They are also handling Ms. Lee’s murder, claiming it evolved from the same investigation.
The trial so far has focused on the car bombs, arsons and assassinations that Mr. Le Roux employed to protect his smuggling routes — violence that was previewed so unnervingly in opening arguments on Tuesday that a juror told the judge she feared for her safety and was excused the following day.
On Wednesday afternoon, Mr. Le Roux said that for two years his chief mercenary was a man named David Smith who in 2008 formed a company called Echelon Associates to recruit what amounted to a private Praetorian guard. Its members traveled the globe — from Mozambique to Papua New Guinea — often using false passports and code names like Daddy Mac and Rambo to scout locations for Mr. Le Roux, watch his assets and maim or murder on his behalf.
Among those murdered was Mr. Smith, Mr. Le Roux admitted. He said he had his henchman killed in 2010 after finding out that Mr. Smith was cheating him. Mr. Le Roux subsequently named Mr. Hunter his security chief.
A former Army sergeant with Special Forces training, Mr. Hunter, 52, had served in the military and with two private security firms in Iraq. During the sting in Thailand, he was caught on camera boasting of the vicious acts he committed for Mr. Le Roux: how he waterboarded one man, shot a second in the hand and pitched a third — another suspected thief — overboard at sea.
On Thursday, Mr. Le Roux testified that after two men on his hit team — a gunman from New Zealand and a former member of the French Foreign Legion — quit their jobs, he instructed Mr. Hunter to replace them. Mr. Hunter, emails show, reached out to Mr. Samia, a onetime Army sniper, who lived near Mr. Stillwell, a firearms instructor, in the small town of Roxboro, N.C.
Flight records indicate that Mr. Samia, 43, and Mr. Stillwell, 50, flew to Manila in January 2011, where, Mr. Le Roux recalled, he supplied the men with a rifle (for long shots), a pistol (for close-range shots) and an MP5 submachine gun from a weapons warehouse he maintained. He also gave them Ms. Lee’s address.
One month later, Mr. Le Roux said, the two men followed the plan he had concocted: posing as real-estate buyers, they lured Ms. Lee in a Toyota van into the countryside near Las Piñas. Mr. Stillwell later told the D.E.A. that he was driving the van as Mr. Samia fired the pistol into Ms. Lee’s face.
In early March, Mr. Hunter drove both men to the airport and put them on a plane, Mr. Le Roux said. Three years later, the D.E.A. tracked them down in Roxboro — with arrest warrants.