Illustrated. 308 pp. PublicAffairs. $28.
Illustrated. 281 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $28.
Launch Pad 39A, just north of Cape Canaveral, Fla., was the storied site where America’s space dreams and the imaginations of its youth were sent soaring. The first manned mission to the moon blasted off from there in 1969, as did the last, in 1972; so did the first space shuttle mission, in 1981, and the last, in 2011. But by 2013, with the shuttle program grounded and America’s half century of space aspirations having ended with bangs and whimpers, 39A was rusting away and weeds were growing through its flame trench. A crippled NASA was eager to sell it.
The space agency knew there was a natural customer: Elon Musk, the cheeky PayPal co-founder and Tesla creator whose SpaceX venture had become the first private rocket company to launch into orbit with a payload. Musk’s mesmerizing style — skittering on the border between visionary and eccentric — made it seem at times that his obsession with space travel involved a desire to return to some celestial home, but his Falcon rockets had won NASA’s respect. Surprisingly, a second bidder emerged: Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, who pursued his passion for all things, including space travel, with an awesome talent for being both exuberant and methodical. His company, Blue Origin, was building a reusable launch vehicle that, among other things, planned to take tourists into space.
Musk won the bidding for Launch Pad 39A, but a few months later Bezos bought the nearby Launch Complex 36, from which missions to fly by Mars and Venus had been launched. The transfer of these hallowed pads represented, both symbolically and in practice, John F. Kennedy’s torch of space exploration being passed from government to the private sector — from a once-glorious but now sclerotic federal agency to a new breed of boyish billionaires who embodied the daring passion and imagination of history’s great pioneers, adventurers and innovators.
Two new books chronicle this fascinating transition. “The Space Barons,” by Christian Davenport, a Washington Post reporter, is an exciting narrative filled with colorful reporting and sharp insights. The book sparkles because of Davenport’s access to the main players and his talent for crisp storytelling. “Rocket Billionaires,” by Tim Fernholz, a reporter for Quartz, is not quite as vibrant a narrative and lacks some of Davenport’s memorable scenes, but it provides smart analysis of the New Space sector as well as historical context about NASA’s triumphs and failures.
In the class that I teach on the history of the digital revolution, the students discuss whether innovation is driven more by big government projects or by nimble entrepreneurs. The answer, of course, is that it usually involves a symbiotic mix, like the semiconductor industry, which arose out of the Pentagon and NASA’s need to put guidance systems in the nose cones of rockets. Vannevar Bush was the dean of engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a co-founder of Raytheon, and oversaw the government science programs that resulted in the atom bomb and electronic computer. He wrote a seminal paper in 1945, called “Science — the Endless Frontier,” which described how a collaboration of all three sectors he had been part of — academia, business and government — would drive innovation. Government funding of basic research in university labs would lead to discoveries in fundamental science that would be the “seed” for future inventions.
Many innovations have progressed along that path. The ENIAC computer funded by the United States Army and built at the University of Pennsylvania was the genesis for UNIVAC and then most other electronic computers. The network funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and designed by a consortium of academic and private labs led eventually to today’s internet. The National Science Foundation, started based on Vannevar Bush’s paper, created a multiagency Digital Library Initiative that funded the academic research of Larry Page and Sergey Brin, which led to Google. The sequencing of the human genome, largely funded by the National Institutes of Health, planted the seeds for the biotech industry.
One of the first private pioneers was Burt Rutan, a mutton-chopped aircraft designer who regarded NASA as a bloated and unimaginative bureaucracy and in 1982 founded a company called Scaled Composites that designed aircraft so innovative that, as Davenport writes, “it was as if his inspiration came not just from the laws of aerodynamics but from Picasso.” One of his ideas was for a manned aircraft that could reach the edge of space and then fold its wings upward to act as a feather allowing the craft to re-enter the earth’s atmosphere, land on a runway, and be reused. It would become his entry in the Ansari X Prize, which offered $10 million for the first private company that could launch a reusable vehicle to space twice within two weeks.
Rutan attracted two billionaire partners. The first was the Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen, who as a schoolboy in Seattle yearned to become an astronaut but, being nearsighted, realized that was impossible so spent his time coding in the school’s computer room with his friend Bill Gates. Rutan’s second partner was the toothy goldilocked Richard Branson, a thrill-addicted serial adventurer and entrepreneur who was as enthusiastic about publicity as Allen was averse to it. Branson’s personal motto for his company, Virgin, was “Screw it, let’s do it,” which was no longer a guiding principle at NASA, and he created Virgin Galactic with the goal of taking tourists into space. “Paul, isn’t this better than the best sex you ever had?” Branson asked Allen during one test flight as the spaceship climbed higher.
In 2004, Rutan’s craft (with a Virgin logo on its tail) flew twice to space and back to win the X Prize. At the celebration, Rutan took a shot at NASA. “I was thinking a little bit about that other space agency, the big guys,” he said. “I think they’re looking at each other now and saying, ‘We’re screwed.’” Branson began selling tickets at prices that started at $200,000 to those who wanted to ride in a similar plane he began building, the launch date of which always seems to be about a year away.
Bezos spent every summer at his grandfather’s ranch, where he fixed windmills, castrated cattle and geeked out on the tiny county library’s surprisingly large sci-fi collection. His high school valedictorian speech was about space: how to colonize planets, build space hotels and save our fragile planet. “Space, the final frontier, meet me there!” he concluded.
At the end of 2015, within a month of each other, Musk and Bezos both launched rockets that returned safely to earth and were reusable. For the moment, Musk the hare had darted ahead: His powerful Falcon 9 rocket had lifted a payload into orbit, whereas Bezos’ smaller New Shepard craft had merely gone up into the edge of space and returned. But as happens with scrappy entrepreneurial business competitors, in contrast to government bureaucracies, Bezos and Musk were goading each other on. And unlike the race between the tortoise and the hare, they can both triumph — as can, one hopes, Richard Branson and others.
Indeed, even NASA and its big corporate contractor, the United Launch Alliance, a venture between Lockheed Martin and Boeing, can come out winners from competition. As is often the case with the innovation progression, the greatest technological advances come when a symbiosis is reached that combines the resources of a visionary government and the scrappiness of risk-taking entrepreneurs, each spurring the other onward and upward.