You’re one of the new “Fab Five” on the Netflix “Queer Eye for the Straight Guy” reboot. The show has touched a cultural nerve, with its focus on how toxic masculinity hurts men and on how we can help heal one another. Did you know it was going to be big? No, I was so worried about it. When you’ve been on Instagram and Twitter long enough, you know how mean people can be. I was prepared for the worst.
You’re the so-called grooming expert on the show. Did you always know that hair care would be your destiny? I always wanted to play with people’s hair. I was really into “The Golden Girls” and how big their hair was. I always had Barbies and Ken dolls, whose hair I wanted to play with and was always styling. I was very lucky — I never had to wonder what I was passionate about. I’ve always known that I’m really, really passionate about grooming.
You grew up in a small city in Illinois called Quincy. When did you come out at home? I think I started responding “Yes” to the question by the time I was in, like, sixth grade. I was someone who wore bright purple sweatsuits with tall Doc Martens boots. I would iron Hanson decals on my sweatshirt. I was extremely flamboyant as a child.
Before you were on “Queer Eye,” you were known for a “Funny or Die” web series called “Gay of Thrones,” in which you recap the HBO show. How did that come to be? I was in the salon one day with my co-worker, and her client was telling her about how much he hated “Game of Thrones” and why he couldn’t watch it. It made my ears fall off. I went into this fugue state of a recap. When I was done, my client in my chair, Erin Gibson, was like, “Oh, my god, Jonathan, we have to do that for ‘Funny or Die’!” It was only meant to be one episode, but that episode went viral. Five years later, we’re still doing it.
You’re the only single one in the “Queer Eye” group. What is that like? It makes me acutely aware of how many 14-year-old girls want to be my best friend. O.K.?
I ask because one thing people love about the show is how it explores the ways that men can have intimacy and love in their lives outside romantic partnerships. Yes. I call this the “Sex and the City” syndrome. We all think that we need that connection, that all-encompassing love so deep that a mountain or the ocean would be jealous, but connection does come in so many forms.
The show is filmed in Georgia, and a lot of the guys that you made over seem like jocks — guys who had friends but weren’t necessarily used to opening up to other men. How did you help them with that? I’m the youngest of three boys, both of the older two are very heterosexual football-watching, married, child-rearing, cornfed Midwestern guys. A lot of times people have asked me, “Did you feel culture shock going to Atlanta?” But I think it was much more shocking for a lot of people in small towns in Georgia to see me — a 6-foot-2 gay man with a really fierce blow dry and a midriff-baring top — than it was for me to be there.
But even though you grew up in a similar environment, you never felt pressure to pass or hide your sexuality? I literally cannot do it. Like, if you picture me at 13, imagine big curly hair, imagine buck teeth, imagine me at 5-foot-4; I could not stop talking about, like, Miss Alabama, who had won the Miss America pageant. I could not pass if you held a gun to my head. I can’t do it.
Was Quincy a good environment to be out? No, not at all. It was a terrible environment. I don’t think it’s overdramatic to say that I was verbally abused, like, very constantly on an hour-to-hour basis, especially in school. That’s partially where I got my sense of humor from, because I really had to learn how to be resourceful to keep a smile on my face and to keep myself entertained.