The next round of lawsuits against Mr. Carson’s HUD will almost certainly challenge his recent decision to suspend until 2020 rules introduced under the Obama administration that require communities to analyze housing segregation and submit plans to address it as a condition for receiving billions of dollars in federal aid.
Critics of the Fair Housing Act have glibly attempted to dismiss attempts to end segregation as “social engineering” — as if rigid racial segregation in housing were a natural phenomenon. In fact, the residential segregation that is pervasive in the United States today was partly created by explicit federal policies that date back at least to World War I. It is now widely acknowledged that the federal insistence on segregated housing introduced Jim Crow separation in areas of the country outside the South where it had previously been unknown. It stands to reason that dismantling a system created by a set of government policies will require an equally explicit set of federal policies.
That realization came home with particular force to George Romney, Richard Nixon’s HUD secretary, who initially took the law at its word and tried to enforce it by turning down grant applications from communities that continued to segregate themselves racially.
When white communities complained directly to the Oval Office, Nixon shut down Romney’s effort and eventually forced him out of government. Subsequent administrations shied away from enforcing the law in ways great and small — but the Reagan administration sold it out in an egregious fashion that angered even Republicans in Congress. The administration conspired with the real estate industry to undermine HUD’s already limited powers, brought cases that attacked integration programs and showed scant vigor in enforcing civil rights laws.
The Fair Housing Act received new life three years ago when the Supreme Court endorsed the doctrine known as disparate impact, ruling that housing discrimination did not have to be intentional to be illegal. The court reminded the country that the statute does indeed bar governments from spending federal money in a way that perpetuates segregation.
Soon after, the Obama administration issued a long-awaited rule that required state and local governments to affirmatively further fair housing goals by making efforts to address the cumulative results of the discrimination that historically shut African-Americans out of many communities.
The common-sense rule rightly breaks with the laissez-faire approach of the past, making it clear that compliance with civil rights and fair housing laws means abandoning the strategy of dumping affordable housing in ghettos — and giving poor residents access to areas that offer greater opportunity. To that end, communities that receive HUD money are being asked to consider data on segregation and concentrations of poverty when making affordable housing decisions.
The fact that Congress has not overturned the rule reflects a growing awareness on both sides of the aisle that ghettoizing poor people is counterproductive — and that the country has an interest in giving low-income families access to areas that further opportunity. Later this month, for example, the House Financial Services Committee is scheduled to hold a hearing on a draft bill that would increase mobility for families receiving federal housing vouchers, improving their job and educational opportunities.
The hearing is no doubt related to a widely cited Harvard study showing that young children whose families had been given housing vouchers to move to better neighborhoods were more likely to attend college and had higher incomes as adults than children whose families had not been given the vouchers. The data show that changing the circumstances in which poor families live can be crucial to breaking the cycle of intergenerational poverty.
This brings us back to the Fair Housing Act of 1968, which was intended to break down the walls around the country’s ghettos so that at least some people could forge successful lives elsewhere. If the country keeps betraying this landmark law, it will continue to squander a powerful tool for reducing lethal concentrations of poverty and for opening the door to upward mobility for the poor.