Style|What Makes a Greeting Card Black?
In 1991 the Hallmark greeting card company, based in Kansas City, Mo., decided it was time to get serious about diversity. America was changing, as was Hallmark’s work force, and while the brand had dabbled in cards for black consumers since the 1960s, it didn’t have a perennial line that addressed them directly.
Over the years, businesses of all kinds have had to acknowledge blind spots for racial exclusion, including “flesh-colored” crayons mixed and melted in dusty peach shades to cosmetics lines that offer few to zero options for dark complexions. Hallmark realized that speaking authentically to black people would require a slight shift in its traditional tone and direction. And so, 81 years after its founding, the company created Mahogany, its first year-round imprint dedicated to cards for the African-American community.
What makes a greeting card black? According to Dierdra Zollar, the editorial director for the Mahogany brand studio, sometimes it’s explicit, like a Father’s Day card bearing the silhouette of an African-American man, or a card touting “black love” for romantic occasions. Others, however, are more subtle.
Mrs. Zollar said that a black customer browsing the greeting card aisle at a CVS may notice on a Mahogany card “familiar expressions,” terms or phrases that hint at a shared history. “I see these cultural signifiers that let me know you’ve been to my house, you’ve been in my neighborhood, you’ve participated in some of these church affairs, you have that insider knowledge that really speaks to being known,” she said.
Mrs. Zollar nevertheless balks at the notion that Mahogany cards touch on perseverance and fortitude more so than any other Hallmark brand.
Several years ago, Mahogany did dip a toe into social issues — however unintentionally — with the Father’s Day card “For Mom on Father’s Day.” Many customers thought the gesture to single mothers was in poor taste, exaggerating a stereotype that has dogged African-Americans for generations.
Mrs. Zollar points out that other, race-neutral Hallmark imprints were offering similar cards at the time, as well as cards for single fathers. “There was not an intention to pigeonhole this caption to speak to a particular situation that was unique to African-American family dynamics,” she said. Despite Hallmark’s intentions, Mahogany has stopped printing the cards.
The goal now, one would think, is to ensure Hallmark’s enduring relevance under the cultural dominance of computers and other digital devices. Can snail mail compete with the speedy romantic overtures of swapping suggestive photos, sliding into DMs and faithfully liking your crush’s SpongeBob anxiety memes on Instagram (even the ones you’ve seen posted elsewhere)?
Mrs. Zollar said Mahogany keeps up with the trends through constant market research, some of which involves watching online communities like Black Twitter. It’s the reason Mahogany cards currently implore recipients to “slay,” “grind” and wield their “black girl magic.” The illustrations have changed as well. “For example, a few years back, as we noticed more and more blogs and websites devoted to natural hairstyles, we knew the aesthetic on our cards needed to reflect that,” Mrs. Zollar said.
