A few weeks ago, Mr. Critcheloe made a fresh journey to the city’s nocturnal past by visiting MoMA to see its Club 57 exhibition, which valorizes one of the most creative spaces for music, art and mischief of the late ’70s and early ’80s. Entering an immersive room dedicated to the throbbing Day-Glo work of Kenny Scharf, it was hard to tell where Mr. Critcheloe’s body ended and the art began. His outfit of the day, highlighted by Bazooka-pink tracksuit pants and a carrot-orange jacket, bled seamlessly into Mr. Sharf’s tsunami of color-saturated chairs, bottles and toys. “Everything is so bright and there’s so much of it,” Mr. Critcheloe marveled.
The same could be said of his own creations. Operating under the stage name Ssion (pronounced Shun), Mr. Critcheloe, 37, has amassed a rich body of work that sprawls over several disciplines — music, video direction and painting — all infused with a whimsically dense array of pop culture references. Each is fired by the spirit of queercore, a 30-year-old music and art movement that draws on the outsider perspective of the L.G.B.T. experience to both reclaim and redefine the early fury and independence of punk.
Mr. Critcheloe’s latest project pushes that principle to its limit. After concentrating for the last half decade on directing videos for other artists, including Santigold, Grizzly Bear and Ms. Minogue, he is releasing “O,” his third full album and his first in seven years, in early May. It’s by far his most ambitious work, making either sonic, or visual, allusion to everything from expected gay pop touchstones (George Michael, Prince, Liza Minnelli) to ones far afield (Pink Floyd, Sonic Youth, Jimi Hendrix). The sensibility and sound is at once dance-pop and classic rock, art and trash, all spun around the breathy vocals of Mr. Critcheloe, which can paint him as the lost love child of Prince and the Pet Shop Boys’ Neil Tennant.
Mr. Critcheloe has billed “O” as an “audiovisual” album, à la Beyoncé’s last two releases. But operating on a tight D.I.Y. budget means every song may not get its own video. Even so, the two he has released so far feature a million dollars’ worth of ideas. The first, “Comeback,” which lasts more than seven minutes, amounts to what Mr. Critcheloe called “my modest attempt at ‘Bohemian Rhapsody.’” It links three distinct musical segments, matched to scenes that draw on influences that range from the Bob Fosse film “All That Jazz” to the surreal cow cover of Pink Floyd’s 1970 album “Atom Heart Mother.” In the video, Mr. Critcheloe has the cow’s rear painted on his face, “where it belongs,” he said.
“I wouldn’t exist as a musician if it weren’t for punk rock,” Mr. Critcheloe said.
Mr. Critcheloe really blossomed when he entered the Kansas City Art Institute, located in a city he loves. He first came east after winning a one-year scholarship to the New York Studio Residency Program, which let him do whatever kind of art he wanted. He spent more of his time at rock clubs, which were then experiencing a resurgence with emerging bands like the Yeah Yeah Yeahs and the Strokes. After a show by the Yeah Yeah Yeahs at the small club formerly known as Brownies, he gave the group’s singer, Karen O, copies of the stop-motion animation pieces he’d been working on. Impressed, she not only invited him to design the cover of the band’s first album, “Fever to Tell,” but to create the art for all their early singles and posters.
After leaving the museum, Mr. Critcheloe made his way downtown to a studio rented by his friend, the fashion photographer Bruno Staub, for a session that would yield what he briefly considered using as the new album cover. Its design doubles as its own “name-that-reference” pop quiz. The lettering he chose for “Ssion” mimics Oasis’s favored font, while the “O” image of the title borrows the logo for the Germs. For the cover shot, Mr. Critcheloe wore a gray suit and sported a studiously wan expression, both inspired by an early ’80s photo he found of a young Neil Tennant.
