FRANK CONNIFF’S OPEN RIFF NIGHT at Q.E.D. (April 11, 7:30 p.m.). The host of this event hails from one of the O.G. riff-track shows, “Mystery Science Theater 3000,” so you know his ability to provide colorful commentary to terrible television and film alike is top-notch. Is yours? Here’s an opportunity to find out: Audience members sign up as they would at an open mike to offer riffs of their own as they watch clips from bad movies. Mr. Conniff and his guest judges will chose the best riffer, who will try to hold his or her own against Mr. Conniff at the end of the night.
DESUS AND MERO at Williamson Theater, Center for the Arts at the College of Staten Island (April 10, 8 p.m.). This comedy duo hosts a regular late-night talk show on Viceland, and they’ve had everyone from Rosie Perez to Al Sharpton to The Times’s own Sam Sifton as guests. Now they’re bringing their usually televised act to the stage in a five-stop tour across New York’s boroughs. That’s the good news. The bad news is this is the only tour stop that hasn’t sold out.
‘HOW TO AMERICAN’ at the Bell House (April 7, 7:30 p.m.). Perhaps best known for his role on the HBO show “Silicon Valley” as the infuriatingly stoic Jian-Yang, Jimmy O. Yang recently published a book about his experiences coming of age as an immigrant in California. His family moved to the United States from Hong Kong when Mr. Yang was 13. Much to the chagrin of his father, who apparently wishes his son became a scientist, Mr. Yang instead pursued stand-up and acting. On Saturday night, he will share these stories and more.
‘THOUGHTS AND PRAYERS: A MANDATORY ASSEMBLY’ at the Bell House (April 10, 8 p.m.). Some of New York’s best comedians have gathered for this event, which will be hosted by Kristen Buckels and Lacey Jeka and benefit Everytown for Gun Safety. The talented Aparna Nancherla, Jo Firestone and Ilana Glazer, of “Broad City” fame, will be joined by other performers for this night of laughs.
‘THE WHOLE STORY’ at Union Hall (April 8, 7 p.m.). Unsurprisingly, the comedian Mike Birbiglia spends a lot of time around other comedians, whether it’s backstage before shows or afterward at the bar. One thing he came to realize about comedians as a result is that while his comedy counterparts obviously bring the jokes while onstage, offstage they tell longer real-life tales that are just as entertaining. For this event, Mr. Birbiglia welcomes the effortlessly hilarious comedians Chris Laker and Jacqueline Novak to tell, as it were, their whole stories.
