Theater|Prepare to Be Provoked. Caryl Churchill Is Back.
Prepare to Be Provoked. Caryl Churchill Is Back.
On a recent trip to London, I attempted to arrange an interview with Caryl Churchill, who alongside Tom Stoppard is considered the greatest living English playwright. I didn’t expect to get an answer (Ms. Churchill hasn’t granted a real interview since the 1990s) and indeed, I did not get one. Trying to obtain an audience with her is like trying to obtain one with Thomas Pynchon or Cormac McCarthy. She maintains a Sphinx-like silence.
If you want to absorb a bit of Ms. Churchill’s London, however, the place to linger is the venerable Royal Court Theater, where many of her plays had their debuts. The Royal Court is a playwright’s arena, a word-drunk place, dedicated to new writing. John Osborne’s “Look Back in Anger” (1956) had its premiere there. So did Ann Jellicoe’s “The Knack” (1962), and Ms. Churchill’s own “Top Girls” (1982).
In it, Ms. Churchill throws the greatest and most surreal dinner party of all time. She gathers around a table eminent women from various points in history, including the explorer Isabella Bird, the Japanese Emperor’s courtesan and memoirist Lady Nijo, the subject of the Bruegel painting “Dulle Griet” (also known as Mad Meg) and Pope Joan, a woman thought to have been pope while disguised as a man from 855-858.
The critic Robert Brustein remarked that if moviegoing is a solitary act, theatergoing is a communal one. Few make this more apparent than does Ms. Churchill. For one thing, she has been known to squeeze a lot of human beings into her plays. One of her most intricate, “Love and Information,” which opened at the Royal Court in 2012 and ran Off Broadway two years later has 100 characters (!) played by 16 actors.
More essentially, she is communal in her working methods. There is no other modern playwright quite like her. Her stage directions are few. She gives directors enormous leeway, but often gives them little to go on.
“Buckinghamshire” is a difficult, fervent, political play, set in England in the mid-1600s, and it’s about a time when a new kind of governance seemed possible. King Charles I has been imprisoned for corruption; royalists have fled their estates. Factions of Oliver Cromwell’s Parliamentarians are trying to draft a new constitution.
Into this debate plunge the members of three new radical groups: the Diggers, the Ranters and the Levellers. Ms. Churchill’s play picks up from there. It takes its title from a Digger pamphlet titled “More Light Shining in Buckinghamshire,” which included this line: “You great Curmudgeons, you hang a man for stealing, when you yourselves have stolen from your brethren all land and creatures.” It’s a play about bravery and optimism.
This collaborative method is part of what appeals to James C. Nicola, the longtime artistic director of New York Theater Workshop, about Ms. Churchill’s writing. He calls “Light Shining in Buckinghamshire” perhaps his favorite play of all time.
Ms. Chavkin, too, likes Ms. Churchill’s process, but she was particularly drawn to this play’s urgent politics.
Ms. Churchill cooked dinner for Ms. Chavkin last summer in London. At 79, the playwright is still vital and working. Her most recent plays, “Here We Go,” about faith and mortality, and “Escaped Alone,” which envisions a dystopian future, appeared in 2015 and 2016.
She was born on the cusp of World War II. Her mother was a fashion model, her father a political cartoonist. After the war ended the family moved to Montreal. She went to college at Lady Margaret Hall, a woman’s college at Oxford University, where she began writing plays.
Her early plays included “Owners” (1972), about landlords and greed, which had its premiere at the Royal Court, and “Buckinghamshire.” Her breakthrough arrived with “Cloud Nine” (1979), a play in which one act is set in Victorian times in colonial Africa and the other in a present day London park. It’s a ferocious work that employs cross-gender casting and is about, among other things, sexual stereotypes.
Ms. Churchill won the first of her five Obie Awards in 1982 for “Cloud Nine.” She would win as well for “Top Girls,” “Serious Money” and “A Number,” in addition to one for lifetime achievement.
When the play was staged at London’s National Theater in 2015, however, the critic Lloyd Evans, writing in The Spectator, used it as an occasion to drop an incendiary bomb on her entire oeuvre.
“The play is hopelessly ineffective on every level,” Mr. Evans wrote. “Churchill must be the most overrated writer the English theater has produced. She has virtually no dramatic skills. She can knock out humourless preachy rhetoric by the yard but as for the rest of it she hasn’t a clue.” He was just getting going.
Some Churchill plays are, for sure, easier to consume than others. One of her merits as a playwright is that she tends to divide people. 
Another unusual feature of her production is a captioning board, visible at the back of the stage, for the hearing-impaired. Others may also find it useful at times, like supertitles during an opera. The language is indeed chewy, but it is a lot to bite off.
