Design-wise, the most famous collaboration between a writer and a photographer did not end up looking like much of a collaboration at all. Walker Evans contributed a preface to the 1960 reissue of “Let Us Now Praise Famous Men,” the study of poor tenant farmers in Alabama, originally published in 1941; “Walker” crops up a number of times in James Agee’s text, but a formal separation is maintained between the tenderly austere photographs of families and their homes — printed at the beginning — and the 400 pages of Agee’s highly wrought, much-agonized-over text. This, for Gore Vidal, was no bad thing, because it left Evans’s “austere” photos untainted by what “good-hearted, soft-headed admirers of the Saint James (Agee) version” so loved about the sharecroppers’ gospel.
When it comes to the relationship between a critic or curator writing about photographers or photography, the results span the spectrum of exclusion, segregation and integration. There is not a single photograph in Susan Sontag’s classic “On Photography.” At the other extreme, the exquisite silence of the plates in lavish monographs is sometimes protected by only the slimmest prefaces or afterwords. At all points in between, the word-image ratio shifts constantly between the writing informing the pictures and the pictures illustrating the writing. But there is one form — the simplest in many ways — that permits and encourages a uniquely intimate relationship between writer and photographer.
Dialogue between word and image does not always require two voices, two actors. Joel Sternfeld’s “On This Site” (1996) comprises photographs of innocuous places; the facing paragraphs of text, also by the photographer, set out the terrible things that happened at each of these unmarked sites. The photographs are not just changed by the accompanying words; the words are like a final stage in the process of development and printing by which an image comes fully into being. Fittingly, this volume was followed by “Sweet Earth” (2006), which depicts and offers a history of experimental utopias in America. The dialogue between image and text in each book is complemented by the dialogue between the two books: on the one hand, a dark testament to the enduring capacity of humans to inflict harm; on the other, a perpetual attempt to achieve social ideals — even if those very ideals condemn a particular enterprise to eventual failure.
The most recent one-person pairing of this kind is “Blind Spot” (2017), by Teju Cole: a writer, a photographer and a writer — serving this parish — on photography. Sternfeld’s texts and images work together to adequately document a place. With Cole, something like the opposite happens: The alchemy of verbal and visual is such that the world becomes “a series of interleaved apparitions.” The combination of modesty — nice pictures with a few words — and ambition suggested by this undertaking is not unusual. With few exceptions, writerly ambition tends not to operate at a grand level. Writers tend to proceed incrementally, pecking their way ahead like recovering addicts, one paragraph, one book at a time.
As they unfold over time, these accumulated dialogues constitute an enabling tradition through which Ford and Evans provide models and set standards that later writers and photographers seek to achieve or even surpass. W. Eugene Smith likened the struggle to finish his unfinishable photographic portrait of Pittsburgh to James Joyce’s long toil to complete “Ulysses.” In turn, Smith’s 1948 photographic essay from Life magazine, “Country Doctor,” set a precedent and provided inspiration for John Berger’s and Jean Mohr’s study of a country doctor in England, “A Fortunate Man (1967),” which is conceived and designed in such a way as to make words and images inextricable and mutually reinforcing.
Fortunately, someone heard that cry for help — that message printed and bottled in the pages of a magazine — and proposed the perfect subject, so perfect that I am still amazed I had failed to think of it myself: Garry Winogrand. Of course! Prolific, profane and profound; harmoniously chaotic, inexhaustible and funny — it could be only Winogrand. So I did it, and can go to my grave, on that score at least, with a degree of contentment. Winogrand died in 1984, before I even knew he existed, but as the composition of the book proceeded, I came to feel that we were engaged in an ongoing visual and verbal conversation.
The peculiarity of this undertaking — its extreme specificity in terms of form and subject matter — says something about the relationship we crave with the artists we most admire: the desire to get as close to them as possible. At some level, any writer is also like the fan who asks for a selfie with the author who sits gratefully signing books. There is, I mean, someone with whom we crave a similar record of shared experience and interaction. In my case, however, admirer and the object of his admiration were separated by years and could not be squeezed into the time or photographic frame. The best that could be hoped for was the intimate adjacency of the facing page.