U.S.|Do Stronger Gun Laws Stand a Chance? It’s Been an Uphill Battle.
In the 1980s, the attempt to assassinate President Ronald Reagan and the shooting of his press secretary, Jim Brady, led to a call for gun control. Decades later, students who survived the Parkland, Fla., shooting have reenergized the debate.
There was a time when horror over gun violence stood a chance of prodding national politicians to act on their outrage. Half a century ago, politicians seemed particularly amenable to tougher measures if a shooting victim was one of their own. After the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, and then mere months after the murders of Senator Robert F. Kennedy and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Congress was moved in 1968 to enact a gun control law.
Racial considerations also came into play at times. It was no coincidence that California’s Legislature and its governor, Ronald Reagan, imposed new gun restrictions in the 1960s after two dozen rifle-carrying members of the Black Panthers entered the State Capitol building. In 1994, a federal ban on assault weapons was passed nine months after a well-armed black man, Colin Ferguson, shot and killed six passengers and wounded 19 others on a Long Island Rail Road train.
That’s all well in the past, though. Efforts at the federal level to reduce the mayhem have gone nowhere for many years, to a large extent because of the power of the National Rifle Association. Not even the shootings of two House members, Gabrielle Giffords in 2011 and Steve Scalise in 2017, were enough to stir congressional action. In February, right after the mass killings at a school in Parkland, Fla., President Trump sounded as if he was ready for new steps to enhance gun safety. Then he backed off. Once again, the N.R.A. and its fundamentalist interpretation of the Second Amendment prevailed.
But is that organization as invincible as it has long seemed? Did the 17 Parkland deaths and the student-led protest marches they inspired change the dynamic and create a more favorable political climate for new gun laws, even if Washington has yet to do anything?
Retro Report, a series of video documentaries, explores those questions, as usual by looking back at key moments in America’s past to see where the country may be headed. This installment examines the tortuous path of the Brady Bill, which imposed a waiting period and a system of background checks in order for gun purchases to be made. It bore the name of James Brady, press secretary to Mr. Reagan, who was elected president in 1980.
Nothing is simple in America when guns are the issue. It took until 1993 for this bill to become law — 12 years after John Hinckley Jr. shot Mr. Reagan and several others on a Washington sidewalk. Among the wounded was Mr. Brady, shot in the head. He survived, but was left permanently disabled. As he later said, “What I was, I will never be again.” He died at 73 in 2014, his death classified as a homicide even with the passage of 33 years.
Long before then, he and his wife, Sarah, who died at 73 in 2015, were viewed by many as the “first family” of firearms regulation. Their intention, they said, was simply to limit the mayhem. But they had to contend with N.R.A. slippery slopesters and their congressional allies who insisted that the Bradys’ true goal was arms confiscation, with measures like background checks merely a first step. The pro-gun side believed it was “better to prevent the first good step than having to fight over the last bad step,” Richard Feldman, a former N.R.A. lobbyist, told Retro Report.
Any battle over guns can be epic. Even so, the pro-regulation forces could claim victory on occasion. The 1993 Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act, as the law was formally called, was one such moment. So was a 1994 ban on many assault weapons. They included the AR-15 semiautomatic rifle, a weapon of choice for rampaging killers, including the young man accused of killing four people and wounding four others this month at a Waffle House restaurant in Nashville.
Despite such laws, the nation continues to reel from one mass shooting after another. Since the assassinations of Dr. King and Senator Kennedy in 1968, more Americans have been killed by guns (at least 1.6 million victims of suicides or homicides) than have died in all of the country’s wars put together (about 1.4 million).
The road in recent years has been steeply uphill for gun control advocates. The assault weapons ban had a built-in sunset clause, and it expired in 2004. In 2005, President George W. Bush signed a law protecting firearms manufacturers, importers and dealers from lawsuits by victims of crimes involving guns. Three years later, in District of Columbia v. Heller, the United States Supreme Court ruled that a de facto Washington ban on handguns in the home for self-defense ran afoul of the Second Amendment.
The power of the N.R.A., which claims about five million members, is unmistakable. In the 2016 presidential election, it reportedly spent more than $11 million promoting the candidacy of Donald J. Trump and another $19.7 million attacking Hillary Clinton. After every mass killing, it has gone on a war footing, typically warning that its enemies would use the latest horror to pursue their supposed goal of rounding up all guns. Responding to that cry, many people have rushed out to arm themselves more thoroughly than ever. America has about as many guns as it has Americans.
Yet polls show that people in this country overwhelmingly favor measures like universal background checks and tighter rules that keep weapons out of the hands of the mentally unstable and the criminally menacing. And cracks are beginning to show in the N.R.A. armor, evidenced by widespread support for the Parkland students and the millions of others who have marched to demand that federal lawmakers finally do something to stem the violence.
How sustained this nascent movement will be remains to be seen. The long slog from the Brady shooting to the Brady Bill showed that any attempt at gun regulation is a marathon, not a sprint. But even in states that are politically as red as a barn door, some Democratic congressional candidates in the approaching midterm elections feel comfortable openly defying the N.R.A. and its demand for heel-clicking loyalty from elected officials.
