BELGRADE, Serbia — Bojan Bjelobaba, the owner of a carwash and auto-repair shop in Belgrade, says he has been threatened for refusing to vacate his 38-year-old business so that it could be razed to make way for a park.
The project of luxury skyscrapers and sprawling shopping malls has become a symbol of the plan of Serbia’s president, Aleksandar Vucic, to give the city “a new identity,” removed from the country’s militant past and international isolation.
Mr. Vucic — an ultranationalist during the Balkan wars of the 1990s who turned into a pro-European reformer as he gained more political power — aims to achieve his goal with borrowed money and revenue from the sale of state land to wealthy bidders from Russia, China and the Gulf States.
“They are determined to take us into the future, bulldozing their way there so we can reach the kind of future they have in mind for us,” said Dobrica Veselinovic, the leader of the opposition movement, known as Let’s Not Drown Belgrade, which has held street protests against the project.
In the view of officials, the protesters miss the broader goals of the waterfront’s redevelopment. “We want to restore Belgrade to its former glory and make it a great, respectable city again after years of shame that came with wars and unrest,” said the mayor of Belgrade, Sinisa Mali.
Before construction began, two years ago, 231 families were moved from state-owned property for the project, but some refused to leave. One night, about 30 masked men with baseball bats and heavy equipment appeared at the site. By dawn, several residential and business buildings had been razed to allow construction to start.
The raid, in 2016, shocked Serbs, who took their anger to the streets, denouncing what they said were the elite’s corrupt practices. The protests morphed into the largest antigovernment demonstrations since a popular uprising toppled the Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic in 2000.
Opponents of the project have accused Mr. Mali, the mayor, of being behind the raid, an accusation he vehemently denied in an interview. Many Serbs have accused the mayor and the president of not consulting with the public on plans to develop public land.
Mohammed bin Zayed, the de facto ruler of the United Arab Emirates, has identified Serbia as the main destination in the western Balkans for his country’s efforts to diversify its economy before oil runs out.
It started in 2013, when Mr. Mali brokered a deal with Etihad, the national carrier of the United Arab Emirates, to buy a 49 percent stake in Serbia’s state-owned and near-bankrupt Jat Airways, restructuring it under the name Air Serbia and turning the Belgrade airport into a regional hub.
Many Serbs have questioned the way the deals between Serbia and the United Arab Emirates have been worked out behind closed doors. But the Emirati leader likes the top-down decision making, analysts say, and Serbia’s president likes to see cash flow into the country without the regulations and safeguards Western investors expect.
“Their political cultures are in many ways compatible — it’s U.A.E. sultanisim meets the Balkans’ authoritarianism,” said Tena Prelec, a researcher on southeastern Europe at the London School of Economics and the co-author of a paper on Emirati investments in Serbia.
At the waterfront, two residential buildings shaped like a wave are nearly complete. The first owners of the most expensive address in Belgrade, a city of two million people, will pay as much as €7,000 euros per square meter, or about $8,500, in a country with an average monthly salary of €375 euros, or about $455.
Some residents continue to resist. Mr. Bjelobaba, the owner the auto-repair business, said that a construction explosion went off recently while he was working in the shop and a wall collapsed.
