Most parents have heard the advice that babies are supposed to sleep in their parents’ rooms, but for some it’s tough to live up to the recommendations.
Since it became clear in the 1990s that the incidence of sudden infant death syndrome could be reduced by putting babies down on their backs, the rate of SIDS has dropped dramatically, and the “Back to Sleep” campaign, now the “Safe to Sleep” campaign, is regularly — and fairly — cited as highly successful. But several thousand babies still die every year in the United States, around 3,700 in 2015, from all forms of what is called sudden unexpected infant death, of which 1,600 were classified as SIDS, and pediatricians are still trying hard to eliminate those deaths.
In the fall of 2016, the American Academy of Pediatrics revised its guidelines for safe sleep, recommending that infants sleep in the parents’ bedroom — but emphatically not in the parents’ bed — for at least the first six months of the baby’s life, and ideally the first year; the guidelines also recommend a safe sleep surface for the infant, without crib bumpers, stuffed animals, pillows or blankets.
There are families for whom the most important issue is keeping the baby out of the parents’ bed; for them, the idea of room sharing is not likely to seem too close for comfort. But there are certainly other parents who are not sure they can easily manage a year of the baby in a bedside bassinet, and for whom the topic evokes the fraught issues of parental sleep deprivation and “sleep training” for infants. Some parents fear — or find — that having an infant in the bedroom can strain their relationship, making what would otherwise be their private refuge into a place where it’s paramount to be quiet so you don’t wake the baby.
There are now several studies to show that room sharing is associated with a lower risk of SIDS, said Dr. Michael Goodstein, a neonatologist at WellSpan Health, who was a member of the A.A.P. task force on sudden infant death syndrome.
The current model for understanding SIDS suggests a confluence of risks. First, the infant may have some intrinsic anatomic or physiological risk factor. Second, there is a critical period of development when babies are vulnerable, before the age of 6 months. Third, there is an environmental component involving sleep position, bed sharing or overheated rooms. The final mechanism of death may be a failure to arouse out of deep sleep.
Maybe, Dr. Goodstein said, when babies sleep in the same room as their parents, the background sounds or stirrings prevent very deep sleep and that helps keeps the babies safe. Room sharing also makes breast-feeding easier, which is protective against SIDS.
Dr. Ian M. Paul, a professor of pediatrics and public health sciences at Penn State Children’s Hospital, has questioned whether it’s reasonable to suggest that families undertake room sharing for as long as a year.
In the first four to six months, Dr. Paul said, room sharing can help support breast-feeding. But by 6 months, he says it’s fine for the baby to be in a separate room. The baby should no longer need to be breast-fed overnight, and in fact, mothers may be more likely to keep breast-feeding longer if they are not waking up several times a night.
For women who need to breast-feed in the night, and are concerned that they may fall asleep while nursing, Dr. Goodstein suggested, stay in bed but clear the bed of pillows, loose blankets, comforters — and try to stay awake so that you can put the baby back into a “safe sleep environment,” that is, the bassinet or crib that is not the parental bed. Babies should not be put down on surfaces like water beds, couches or cushioned armchairs, where there is a very large increase in the risk of SIDS.
Indeed, it is a hard job, and Dr. Paul said that many parents and many pediatricians were relieved by his position.
She advised that doctors educate parents about safe sleep surfaces and the importance of no one smoking in the home.
