446 pp. Hogarth. $27.
It’s a very funny story and an insightful one, for Thurber shows how closely Shakespeare’s tragedy follows the contours of detective fiction. Thurber wasn’t the first to draw such connections; over a century earlier, in a brilliant essay about the play — “On the Knocking at the Gate in ‘Macbeth’” — Thomas De Quincey had reflected on how deeply Shakespeare understood the interplay of murder and suspense. If the many allusions to “Macbeth” in the works of Agatha Christie, Dorothy Sayers, P. D. James and other crime writers are any indication, Shakespeare’s play may be seen as one of the great progenitors of the genre, making Jo Nesbo, the celebrated Norwegian writer of thrillers, an ideal choice to update the play for Hogarth Shakespeare, a series in which best-selling novelists turn Shakespeare’s works into contemporary fiction.
Nesbo has spoken of finding himself on familiar terrain here, arguing that “Macbeth” is essentially a “thriller about the struggle for power” that takes place “in a gloomy, stormy crime noir-like setting and in a dark, paranoid human mind.” True enough, yet many features of this 400-year-old tragedy don’t easily fit the demands of a modern, realistic thriller. One of the pleasures of reading this book is watching Nesbo meet the formidable challenge of assimilating elements of the play unsuited to realistic crime fiction, especially the supernatural: the witches, prophecies, visions, and the mysterious figure of Hecate.
Nesbo’s most consequential decision was when and where to set his story. While he follows Shakespeare in locating it in Scotland, rather than taking us back to the 11th century he places it in the early 1970s. He doesn’t name the city, though there are many hints that it’s Glasgow. This choice signals Nesbo’s ambitions for his novel, giving it a sharp social edge as well as a timely political resonance. The Glasgow of that era was a desperately grim place, not unlike those parts of America now ravaged by the opioid crisis: It was staggered by alcoholism, environmental hazards, high suicide rates, corruption, gang warfare, the loss of industrial jobs and a significant rise in drug abuse. Things were so bad that historians speak of the “Glasgow effect” to account for why Glaswegians died younger and suffered more than those who lived in comparable places.
It’s tougher than it looks to create a world that is faithful to Shakespeare’s original while also feeling modern and real. Placing Shakespeare’s story in a late-20th-century world of drugs, gangs and corrupt civic leaders goes a long way toward solving this problem. “Brew” — the term used for the drug to which so many are addicted — is at the heart of Nesbo’s novel and neatly straddles the murky world of Shakespeare’s witches, with their caldron, and that of modern drug labs. By making addiction so central to his plot, Nesbo also makes Macbeth’s paranoia and hallucinatory visions, so crucial to Shakespeare’s play, not just believable but meaningful in a contemporary way.
Gang warfare also informs Nesbo’s retelling and is well suited to the extreme violence of Shakespeare’s original, in which the fighting that is described and staged is ferocious. In this dangerous world of ever-shifting loyalties and ill-gotten gains, it’s easy to become morally compromised. Such is the fate of Nesbo’s Macbeth, who at the outset is a good cop, but soon enough hungers for promotion and power — which prove more addictive than the drugs and alcohol that trap so many in the world of this novel.
In “Macbeth,” Shakespeare was unusually stingy when it came to sharing his characters’ back stories and motivations. Did Lady Macbeth have a child that died? Was the idea of killing Duncan planted in Macbeth’s mind by the witches or by Lady Macbeth, or had it been there, dormant, all along? Why does Macduff abandon his family? What Shakespeare withholds, Nesbo delves into deeply, taking one of Shakespeare’s shortest and most enigmatic plays and expanding on what brought his characters to this point in their lives.
So, for example, we think of Macbeth a lot differently once we imagine that he spent part of his childhood in an orphanage. And Duff (Macduff) becomes more sympathetic when we see him torn between personal loyalties and the demands of the heart. The price paid by developing these intertwining back stories is that it takes Nesbo almost 450 pages to connect them, though the pace rarely lags. He is gifted at using casual details to define character: It makes perfect sense that Banquo drives an old Volvo, while Malcolm prefers a muscle car, a secondhand Chevelle.
Minor characters like the demonic Seyton and Caithness (here a woman, and in love with Duff) have more significance and are brought to life. Surprisingly, although both Macbeth and his wife, Lady, are vividly drawn, Nesbo doesn’t give the couple much of a history together — they’ve only known each other for a few years — which may explain why their relationship feels far less intense and electric than it does in Shakespeare’s original.
Nesbo also makes much of one advantage he has over Shakespeare, who during the reign of the Scottish King James, recently targeted for assassination, could not show a Scottish monarch being killed onstage. The murder could only be described — so that early in the play Duncan is killed offstage and in the final act Macbeth, who succeeds him as king of Scotland, meets a similar fate, again offstage. Nesbo works under no such constraints, and these violent scenes are among the most memorable in the novel. The result is inventive and deeply satisfying, especially to readers already familiar with the plot (and in America that means pretty much everyone who didn’t sleep through 10th-grade English).
