U.S.|How M.L.K.’s Death Helped Lead to Gun Control in the U.S.
Finally, gun control became a possibility — at least in the hands of President Lyndon B. Johnson, a master at turning tragedy into legislative gain. He had used the death of President John F. Kennedy to pass the Civil Rights Act, and wrung the Voting Rights Act from the Bloody Sunday march from Selma to Montgomery. Now he would try for the Gun Control Act.
Today, it’s not clear that any shooting could be awful enough to embolden Congress to thwart the National Rifle Association. But even back then, the N.R.A. throttled much of what Mr. Johnson intended to do.
The new law outlawed gun sales to felons, drug abusers, minors and those with mental illness; banned most out-of-state and mail-order gun sales; and sharply curbed imported weapons, including the cheap, tiny pistols used in many homicides.
It remains a cornerstone of federal gun law today.
But it wasn’t until June 5, when Senator Kennedy was assassinated, that the logjam looked like it would break. A day later, a modest gun-control proposal that had languished passed Congress, raising the age to buy handguns to 21.
Still, Mr. Johnson wanted something far more sweeping. He proposed to treat guns like cars: They would be registered and their owners would be licensed.
Had something like this passed, gun-control proponents say, the United States today might look more like Britain or Australia, countries where guns are tracked and gun violence is a fraction of what it is here.
This time, there has been no similar urgency in Washington, even as hundreds of thousands of protesters in the capital and elsewhere have demanded changes after the killing of 17 students and staff at a high school in Parkland, Fla.
Crime is less a concern, as the murder rate has fallen sharply since the sixties. But mass shootings have become frighteningly common. Anyone — or anyone’s child — could be a victim, at a school, a concert, a church, a movie theater or a nightclub.
And while a smaller percent of households own guns, the country has more of them, and they are deadlier: Semiautomatic rifles like the AR-15 have become the weapon of choice in the largest recent mass killings, leading to death tolls in the dozens.
Most people today favor tighter gun restrictions, polls indicate, just as they did a half-century ago. But the N.R.A. also wields political power disproportionate to the size of its membership, as it did then.
In 1968, the organization was not yet as uncompromising as it is today. But it used tactics that would feel familiar now.
Frustrated gun-control backers called it “calculated hysteria and distortion.” But it was profoundly effective.
Soon, Mr. Johnson’s favored provisions were shorn from the bill by his old cadre of fellow Southern Democrats.
The Gun Control Act was signed into law that fall.
Two years later, the N.R.A. helped defeat the re-election bid of a leading Senate proponent of tough gun laws, Joseph D. Tydings, Democrat of Maryland, a man who had won his seat just six years earlier in a landslide.
By now the N.R.A. has perfected the art of going after lawmakers who defy the organization. That is one reason the demands of mass shooting survivors and their allies, now led most visibly by the Parkland students, remain so far apart from the measures Congress is considering.
Friends and relatives who feared for his safety urged him to hire a bodyguard and armed watchmen, he wrote in his autobiography. But soon, he and Coretta Scott King, his wife, reconsidered and gave up the one gun they owned. “How could I serve as one of the leaders of a nonviolent movement and at the same time use weapons of violence for my personal protection?” he wrote.
Fifty years ago, the death of great leaders prodded Congress to act on gun control. Now, at a similar juncture, it is the death of schoolchildren that has stirred the makings of a movement. It remains uncertain whether the current movement for gun restrictions will result in meaningful reform.
So far, the main impetus is in state legislatures. “Even in Republican-controlled states it appears there is at least some openness to doing something, building on the foundation laid over the last five years in less conservative states,” said Adam Skaggs, chief counsel of the Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence. But he said Congress may not do much unless midterm elections shake things up.
For Dr. King, who would have turned 89 in January, getting rid of his gun helped him reckon with his mortality and focus on his movement.
