Credit card points are generally more valuable than points or miles attached to a specific airline or hotel group. The reason? Flexibility.
There’s no such thing as a free lunch, but investing in a credit card rewards program can land you pretty close to the mark. Credit card points are generally more valuable than points or miles attached to a specific airline or hotel group. The reason? Flexibility. With a trove of credit card points, you can get flights, hotel rooms or even cruises. While Capital One and Bank of America are coming into their own, the three major players in the travel rewards game are American Express, Chase and Citi. Here’s a basic rundown of their current programs.
The basic points unit of currency for American Express is the Membership Rewards point. They can be redeemed for statement credits and used to buy things like gift cards, but you’re going to want to focus on one of two things to get the best bang for your point: booking travel through their portal or transferring points to partnered flight and hotel programs.
One advantage of American Express is that there are more products with which to earn Membership Rewards points than Chase or Citi offer to earn their points. There are well over a dozen cards that earn M.R. points, compared to five Citi products that earn ThankYou points and six Chase cards that can earn or transfer to Ultimate Rewards points. Make sure you know what you’re getting before you apply for a specific card: The Amex EveryDay and Platinum cards, for example, earn Membership Rewards points. The Blue Cash Everyday card does not.
How much points are worth is relative, but generally speaking, you should avoid redemption options that attach a value of less than a penny per point. That means while you certainly can redeem your points for Marriott or Walmart gift cards, you’ll be getting fewer than .7 cents per point, which is not optimal.
You’ll get better value booking flights through American Express Travel, where roughly 50,000 points gets you a flight worth $500 (a penny a point). Redemption levels on hotel rooms tend to be lower, back in the .7 cents/point range. It’s worth noting that Business Platinum Card holders receive 35 percent of their points back when paying for economy flights with points on a selected airline — meaning that the same $500 ticket costs just 32,500 points.
Dollar for dollar, the greatest value in redemption comes when you transfer points to flight partners like Etihad Airways, Singapore Airlines and ANA. It’s up to the individual traveler, though, to decide what he or she values most. If you like redeeming your points for splashy, once-in-a-lifetime experiences, like a luxurious trip from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City to Singapore Changi Airport in a private suite on Singapore Airlines, 240,000 points will get you that round-trip ticket (and all the lobster thermidor you can handle). At a cost of roughly $13,000 or $14,000, you’d be squeezing five or six cents out of each point — a very high value. But value is in the eye of the traveler — you may prefer to take that same number of points and use it for three round-trip flights in economy on that same Kennedy-Singapore route.
The Chase Ultimate Rewards family of cards includes their two Sapphire cards (Sapphire Preferred and Sapphire Reserve, which Wirecutter, the New York Times company that reviews products, says is the best travel credit card), their Freedom and Freedom Unlimited cards, and their Ink Business Cash and Ink Business Preferred cards. Only the Ink Business Preferred and two Sapphire cards allow transfer to travel partners and a bonus when redeeming through the Chase Ultimate Rewards portal (they also don’t have foreign transaction fees).
Many of the same principles as American Express apply to Chase: While you can redeem your points for things like gift cards or a statement credit (one cent per point) or purchases on Amazon (less than one cent per point), that’s not your best value proposition. Sapphire Preferred cardholders can redeem points toward travel at a value of 1.25 cents per point; Sapphire Reserve cardholders fare even better, getting 1.5 cents out of each point, or a 50 percent bonus. That means a $600 flight will cost you only 40,000 points — not bad.
Amassing value becomes even easier when you use multiple cards in tandem for everyday purchases, like a Sapphire Reserve card with a Chase Freedom or Freedom Unlimited card. The Chase Freedom earns quintuple points (up to $1,500) on rotating quarterly categories that can include department stores, PayPal, and gas stations.
The next part is a little tricky: Freedom cards are technically cash back cards that earn points redeemable at a penny each. But those points become much more powerful when you transfer them to a Sapphire or Business Preferred card (which is done easily on the Chase website), as you can then redeem them for a bonus in the travel portal and transfer them to travel partners.
This quarter (April through June), for example, those categories include grocery stores. That means $100 worth of groceries earns you 500 points, or five percent back on your spending. But those points can be transferred to your Sapphire Reserve and redeemed for travel at a 50 percent bonus, meaning it’s an effective return rate of 7.5 percent. The Freedom Unlimited, which is uncapped and gives you a 1.5 percent return on all categories, can also transfer points to the Sapphire Reserve, earning that 50 percent bonus. This equates to a 2.25 percent return on all spending when you redeem for travel.
The Citi Prestige is the centerpiece of the ThankYou Rewards suite of cards, and it has some fantastic perks: It has trip delay insurance benefits that are significantly better than those of its competitors, and offers a unique free fourth night hotel benefit that can pay for the card’s annual fee by itself. That means your fourth night of a consecutive four-night stay is completely free, from fleabag motels to the Four Seasons, provided you book through Citi. That’s the good news.
Now, the not-so-good: Citi isn’t quite on the level of American Express and Chase when it comes to its transfer partners which, as we know, offer the best points redemption value. Whereas Chase has United and Southwest Airlines as points transfer partners, and American Express can claim Delta, Citi doesn’t claim a major American legacy carrier. Partners Avianca (Star Alliance) and Asia Miles (Cathay Pacific) can still offer good redemption values, but cardholders may find less value in partners like Garuda Indonesia and Malaysia Airlines, which don’t fly to North America. Finally, while Chase has four hotel transfer partners, including IHG and Hyatt, Citi has zero.
As with American Express and Chase, I’d generally recommend forgoing the use of points to pay for purchases, merchandise and gift cards.
Unless you’re putting tons of spend on your credit cards every month, the most efficient way to get points quickly is through sign-up bonuses — the Chase Sapphire Reserve, for example, currently offers a 50,000 point bonus (possibly higher if you apply in-branch) when you spend $4,000 in the first three months of having the account open. I monitor forums and travel blogs (Doctor of Credit is good) to see what offers are out there.
A couple of things to keep in mind: Some cards have high annual fees — Chase Sapphire Reserve is $450, American Express Platinum is $550 — that only are offset if you manage to collect the bonus. Always make sure you can hit the target spend amount before signing up.  The point is to make money, not give it back to the banks.
I’m fastidious about avoiding interest and late fees, and don’t feel guilty canceling high annual fee cards once I’ve collected my bonus, thus I rarely hesitate to jump on a good sign-up offer. If the banks want to help pay for my next trip, at little or no cost to me, I’m all for it.