A guard at the federal jail in Lower Manhattan where some of the world’s most notorious accused criminals have been held was arrested on Thursday and charged with taking more than $45,000 in bribes from an inmate in return for providing him with prohibited items, like cellphones and alcohol.
The prisoner who paid the bribes was not identified by the government, but a person briefed on the matter said the inmate was Reza Zarrab, the wealthy Turkish-Iranian gold trader who pleaded guilty last fall and has assisted federal prosecutors in the investigation of a billion-dollar scheme to violate American sanctions on Iran.
Mr. Zarrab, who was arrested in March 2016, was held at the jail, known as the Metropolitan Correctional Center, through at least the middle of last year, the authorities said. The payments all occurred before he pleaded guilty, and he later admitted to paying the bribes as part of his confessed misconduct. But only a few details about the bribe scheme were offered at the time.
The guard, Victor Casado, 35, of the Bronx, was charged with bribery, honest services fraud and other counts. He had been employed as a correctional officer at the jail since about 2012, the government said.
According to a criminal complaint unsealed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Mr. Zarrab, cited in the document as Inmate-1, learned in late 2016 from another prisoner that Mr. Casado wanted to give him his phone number. Mr. Zarrab was also told he should pay Mr. Casado $5,000 or $10,000, depending on what he could afford.
“Reasoning that it could be helpful to have a prison guard indebted to him,” the complaint said, Mr. Zarrab directed one of his Turkish lawyers to provide about $5,000 to Mr. Casado. Overseas associates of Mr. Zarrab wired the money to the lawyer, and it was eventually given to Mr. Casado, the complaint added.
The lawyer has not been identified, but when Mr. Zarrab testified in December as a government witness at the trial of a Turkish banker, Mehmet Hakan Atilla, who was also charged in the sanctions scheme, Mr. Zarrab briefly described using a female Turkish lawyer to pay the bribes.
Mr. Casado told Mr. Zarrab that if he “needed anything, to let Casado know,” according to the complaint.
Over the next few months, Mr. Zarrab made two or three additional payments to Mr. Casado, the complaint noted.
The Metropolitan Correctional Center has housed many prominent inmates, including some charged in terrorism and mob cases. The Mexican drug lord known as El Chapo is awaiting trial in the jail’s most secure wing. A jail spokesman declined to comment, as did lawyers for Mr. Casado and Mr. Zarrab.
In return for the bribes, prosecutors said, Mr. Casado, on more than five occasions, smuggled alcohol into the jail for Mr. Zarrab in plastic water bottles.
The complaint said Mr. Casado also asked Mr. Zarrab for $25,000 to help one of his family members in the Dominican Republic, and that Mr. Zarrab, working through the lawyer, gave Mr. Casado $15,000 in cash.
Mr. Zarrab also regularly used Mr. Casado to smuggle a cellphone into the jail for his use, the authorities said.
Mr. Zarrab’s lawyer would provide the phone to Mr. Casado, who, at the beginning of his shift, would hand it to another inmate, who then passed it to Mr. Zarrab, according to the complaint.
A third inmate often held the phone and charged it, the complaint said. Near the end of Mr. Casado’s shift, Mr. Zarrab would pass the phone back to Mr. Casado through the second inmate.
Mr. Zarrab paid the second inmate $10,000, using the lawyer to send the money to the inmate’s wife, the complaint noted.
In his trial testimony in December, Mr. Zarrab said he used the phone to call family members, including his wife and his young daughter.
The complaint said that the inmate who would charge Mr. Zarrab’s phone also stood in line for him at a jail computer. Mr. Zarrab, in return, arranged to send money to that inmate’s commissary account.
Mr. Casado also smuggled food, vitamin C, over-the-counter pain medication and DayQuil into the jail for Mr. Zarrab, the complaint said.
Mr. Zarrab’s wealth was an issue throughout his case. After Mr. Zarrab’s arrest, Judge Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court denied his request to be granted a $50 million bond and to live in a leased apartment under 24-hour armed guard and GPS monitoring, all at his own expense. Mr. Zarrab also retained more than a dozen lawyers to defend him, before he decided to plead guilty.