Airlines will be prohibited from sending planes to Kennedy Airport during winter storms, like the one that caused chaos there in January, unless they have received assurances that gates will be available on landing.
The change is one of several the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey plans to announce on Monday to prevent a recurrence of the epic runway traffic jam that left hundreds of travelers stranded on planes for hours during the first weekend of 2018, officials said. The agency also will require better management of luggage at Kennedy after some travelers did not get their bags back for several days following the storm, nicknamed a “bomb cyclone” by meteorologists, that dropped several inches of snow on Queens.
The announcement of the new procedures by the Port Authority, which operates the three big airports that serve New York City, comes about a month before the results of an investigation into the causes of the chaos at Kennedy are due.
Ray LaHood, a former federal transportation secretary, is expected to release a report in May that will detail the breakdowns in operations at Kennedy and prescribe improvements. Rick Cotton, the executive director of the Port Authority, said the agency would not wait for Mr. LaHood’s report to assert more control over the companies that operate the six passenger terminals at Kennedy.
Unlike operators of some other big United States airports, such as Boston Logan International, the Port Authority had ceded much of the responsibility for loading and unloading planes to the private operators of Kennedy’s terminals.
The new rule on flights bound for Kennedy when a winter storm is forecast is an unusual restriction, airline industry officials said. The managers at Kennedy may recommend the cancellation of flights scheduled to arrive when storm conditions are predicted to be severe. If an airline decides to launch a flight anyway, it will have to obtain an assurance from a terminal operator that a gate will be available when the plane touches down.
That is a departure from standard practices, said Perry Flint, a spokesman for the International Air Transport Association, which represents airlines. In Europe, he said, airlines are required to have a landing slot, but not necessarily a gate, reserved at destination airports.
Mr. Cotton said he was not aware of another airport requiring prior assurance that a gate would be available. That restriction is appropriate at Kennedy, he said, because so much of its traffic is long-haul flights from overseas. The need for it became apparent after Kennedy was overwhelmed in January with more planes arriving than some terminals could handle.
In normal conditions, terminal operators and their airline tenants manage to get planes in and out of gates fast enough to keep up with the inbound traffic. But in the days after the snowstorm that swept up the East Coast on Jan. 4, frozen equipment and staffing shortages slowed operations and left some planes parked for hours without gate assignments. In some cases, the Port Authority had to send staircases and buses to rescue passengers from stranded planes.
Mr. Flint said his transport association, which has a liaison stationed at the Federal Aviation Administration’s command center in Virginia, had agreed to help facilitate communication between international airlines and the Port Authority and terminal operators.
“We look forward to working with the Port Authority and all stakeholders to collaboratively develop procedures based on industry best practices and expertise that will enhance the customer experience going forward,” Mr. Flint said in a statement.
Inside two of the terminals at Kennedy in January, baggage-handling procedures broke down, leaving hundreds of pieces of luggage piled up in waiting areas. Some travelers did not get their bags back for days.
Huntley A. Lawrence, who oversees the airports for the Port Authority, said the agency also would take inventory of all of the equipment at the airport in case it needs to ask an airline to lend a spare piece, “so when you have a winter storm emergency, you’re not scrambling around.” The Port Authority’s primary responsibility in a winter storm is to clear snow and ice from the runways and taxiways. After the January storm, the Federal Aviation Administration said it would investigate how the Port Authority handled snow removal.
Mr. Lawrence said he has not learned of the conclusion of that investigation, but the Port Authority has already decided to add snow-moving equipment.
He said the agency would spend $3.5 million on four snow blowers and $1.4 million on four plows.