GUSTAVIA, St. Barts — Francois Tolede, the director of the Les Voiles de Saint Barth regatta, was standing outside his house and drawing an arc in the air with his index finger.
He was showing the flight path of his neighbor’s roof during Hurricane Irma: a roof that, like so many on this small and upscale Caribbean island, was ripped free of its moorings by the force of the storm in September. The roof sailed across a street and landed directly on Tolede’s home, which, with its concrete construction, fared better than most.
But Les Voiles will take place here as scheduled this week, just as the other significant regattas in the leeward islands of the Caribbean have managed to maintain their slots on the calendar in the aftermath of one of the most destructive hurricane seasons on record.
The 38th edition of the St. Maarten Regatta was staged in early March on the Dutch side of the island of Saint Martin with a smaller than customary fleet of 100 yachts. The northern side of the island is French and was hit particularly hard by Irma with four deaths and extensive damage to infrastructure, including its main airport, which also has had a major impact on travel to St. Barts, which lies about 20 miles to the southeast and has an airport that can only handle small planes.
He said he knew several people who have left because the opportunities for work have diminished and because they don’t want to live through another hurricane season.
Asked why he had decided to stay, he started to speak of the generosity of fellow islanders after the loss of their home. He then leaned forward in his chair, pinched the bridge of his nose and began to cry.
This week they will come together with international visitors as Les Voiles reconvenes. There will be racing around the rocks and drinks on the rocks. There will be music nightly in Gustavia and reservations for tables with views at Bonito, one of the chic places to dine on a chic island; a gathering spot where the actress Uma Thurman was parked at a corner table with friends last week while the quick-witted bartenders deftly whipped up tropical cocktails at 18 euros a pop for the well-tanned.
It was St. Barts as usual until you struck up a conversation with Nicolas Gicquel, Bonito’s general manager and asked how his restaurant looked this good after such a wicked storm.
Gicquel turned somber, took out his phone and brought up a panoramic video of Bonito the day after Irma — shattered glass, splintered wood and drenched desolation in every frame.
