Art Bell, an apostle of the paranormal whose disembodied voice drew millions to his late-night radio soapbox beamed from the Mojave Desert, died on April 13 at his home in Pahrump, Nev. He was 72.
Lt. David Boruchowitz, a spokesman for the Nye County sheriff’s office, said an autopsy would be conducted to determine the cause of death. An announcement on Mr. Bell’s website said he had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
From a home studio 65 miles west of Las Vegas, Mr. Bell personally fielded unscreened telephone calls on five lines during a five-hour nightly marathon on KNYE-FM called “Coast to Coast.” At its peak, in the 1990s, the show was broadcast on hundreds of stations and reached as many as 10 million listeners a week.
Mr. Bell once had the third-largest radio audience among talk-show hosts, after Rush Limbaugh and Dr. Laura Schlessinger.
In riveting narratives punctuated by convincing details, his guests spun eyewitness accounts of past lives, contacts with aliens, time travel, crop circles and other ostensibly inexplicable phenomena, most of which were accompanied by a knowing affirmation from the host himself.
He had reason to be credulous. One summer night, he recalled, he and his wife were driving home when a 150-foot-long triangular craft silently hovered over their car before disappearing.
Just how much Mr. Bell believed was a matter of conjecture.
On one memorable program in 1997, a man who said he had been discharged for medical reasons from Area 51 — the storied Nevada air base that has long stoked rumors of unidentified flying objects — was mysteriously cut off in mid-interview.
Arthur William Bell III was born on June 17, 1945, in Jacksonville, N.C., while his parents were stationed at Camp Lejeune there. His father, a Marine Corps captain, was descended from one of the original settlers of Stamford, Conn., in the 1640s. His mother, the former Jane Lee Gumaer, was a Marine sergeant.
At 13, Art became a licensed amateur radio operator. He was an Air Force medic during the Vietnam War and later a disc jockey for an English-language station in Okinawa.
Mr. Bell enrolled as an engineering major at the University of Maryland but dropped out to return to radio, first as a disc jockey in California and Nevada. Students of numerology were mindful that he began his political talk show in 1984 — and also that he died on a Friday the 13th.
Mr. Bell is survived by his fourth wife, Airyn Ruiz; their children, Asia and Alexander; and three children from his earlier marriages, Vincent Pontius, Lisa Pontius Minei and Arthur Bell IV.
His “Coast to Coast” show was syndicated and broadcast from 1989 to 2003, followed by episodic returns on satellite radio and online with a program called “Midnight in the Desert,” which he canceled in 2015 after he said shots had been fired at his home.
Mr. Bell said he kept a .40-caliber Glock 22 in a desk drawer of his isolated desert home.
While some critics accused him of laying the foundation for right-wing conspiracists on talk radio, Mr. Bell’s politics were not easily pigeonholed. He described himself as a libertarian, but his passion was directed less at politicians or ideology than at debunking scientific doctrine and preaching apocalyptic prophecy.
With the horror novelist Whitley Strieber, Mr. Bell wrote “The Coming Global Superstorm” (1999), in which violent climate disruptions lead to a global deep freeze. The director Roland Emmerich adapted it for the 2004 film “The Day After Tomorrow,” starring Dennis Quaid.
Mr. Bell wrote several other books, including “The Quickening: Today’s Trends, Tomorrow’s World” (1997) and a memoir, “The Art of Talk” (1998).
His spoken words had a much wider reach, however. “His Marlboro-Lights-weathered voice blanketed the continent after dark, reliably chilling his audience,” one reviewer wrote.
Mr. Bell acknowledged that he had a certain hold on his nocturnal audience. As he told The Washington Post in 1998, “There is a difference in what people are willing to consider, daytime versus nighttime. It’s dark, and you don’t know what’s out there.
