Another bottle episode in a show made up almost entirely of narrative detours, the sixth chapter of the show’s second season, titled “Teddy Perkins,” was written by Donald Glover, the show’s creator and star, and directed by its visual mastermind, Hiro Murai. It centers on Darius (Lakeith Stanfield), who had thus far been mostly relegated to eccentric-sidekick status, as he rents a U-Haul to pick up what we come to learn is a free piano (with multicolored keys) from a dimly lit Southern mansion.
A horror movie in miniature, eerie and tense throughout, “Teddy Perkins” reveals itself slowly as a musing on generational trauma and artistic genius, heavy on allusions — and eventually, explicit references — to Michael Jackson. But while the King of Pop is most fully embodied through the character of Theodore Perkins, Darius’s diminutive and creepy host, whose bleached skin and distinctively molded face could be a nod to no one else, Jackson is far from the only cultural touchstone driving the episode to its violent conclusion.
Below is a (surely incomplete) list of the other Easter eggs, obvious and not, scattered throughout the episode.
In another back and forth about the merits of certain music, Perkins and Darius spar over the validity of rap, with Darius offering that sometimes “people just want to have a good time.” Perkins contends that the genre “never quite grew out of its adolescence,” adding, “Don’t you find it insufficient as an art form?” Darius shoots back: “We got Jay-Z — he’s like 65,” a rare light moment in this episode where it feels O.K. to exhale.
Since his retirement, Mr. Sosa, the former Chicago Cubs slugger, has become an object of derision online as his skin has appeared lighter and lighter. (Mr. Sosa has said he uses a bleaching cream, but insisted, “I don’t think I look like Michael Jackson.”) After Googling “Sammy Sosa hat” — go ahead, try it — Darius’s friends participate in a mini-roasting session that will ring familiar to anyone who’s read a tweet about Sammy Sosa in recent years.
The stack of books lingering near Darius’s head during a crucial moment was probably not arranged haphazardly, given the attention to visual detail throughout “Atlanta,” and especially this episode. Among a pile that also includes Joseph E. Stiglitz’s “The Great Divide: Unequal Societies and What We Can Do About Them” are a few books by Stuart Woods, a novelist from Georgia who happens to have created a recurring villain named Teddy.
Joe Jackson, Richard Williams, Earl Woods, Marvin Gaye Sr.
In the scene that cracks open this often-befuddling episode, Perkins, who aims to turn he and his brother’s mansion into a museum, shows Darius a faceless mannequin in a suit — a stand-in for the father that drove the siblings to musical greatness. “He wanted the best out of us,” Perkins explains, stating plainly that there would be physical punishment if they failed.
