“Very nice and clean,” says the pretty maid with the artificial smile, speaking with the scripted sunniness of a corporate employee. She is talking about both the antiseptic-looking hotel room she is tidying and the country, Switzerland, in which it is located.
Certainly, no one looking at the crisply anonymous set for Amelia Roper’s “Zürich,” which opened on Monday night at Next Door at NYTW, would argue with that description. But don’t assume that the standards of moral hygiene are anywhere near as high for those who inhabit this dark, teasingly contrived comedy.
Described in the program as “an Australian-American writer and activist,” Ms. Roper lends a bracingly astringent perspective to life as we know it today. Even the children who scamper through her play — which takes place in a series of interchangeable rooms on the 40th floor of a luxury hotel — seem somehow tainted, as if born into the latter-day equivalent of original sin.
“Zürich” takes what might be called a terrorist approach to the classic omnibus comedies associated with the likes of Alan Ayckbourn and Neil Simon. I mean those plays in which disparate (and often desperate) lives, portrayed in separate scenes, turn out to be linked by both theme and circumstance.
It is no accident that the majority of the characters are American or that the show begins with a hungover, half-naked banker (Paul Wesley, late of “The Vampire Diaries”) bellowing “The Star-Spangled Banner.” In what follows, various men and women (as well as one boy and two girls) embody an implicit, uneasy power struggle that often hinges on sex.
A sparkling cast has been assembled to play out these unsavory encounters. Its members include Mr. Wesley and Juliana Canfield as a couple blearily waking up from a one-night stand; Austin Smith as a self-disgusted businessman, who confides in and bullies a hotel maid, wittily played by Carolyn Holding; and the excellent Samantha Cutler and Gregory Diaz IV as a restless pubescent sister and her younger brother parked in their parents’ room.
Rounding out the ensemble are Renata Friedman as a German woman trying to track down the bank account of her grandmother, a Holocaust victim, and the 10-year-old Sammi Molly Bray as her distracting daughter; and Lynne Lipton and Matthew Stadelmann as an old woman and her caretaker, who have apparently fled from a nursing home.
There’s no denying that the play hangs together thematically, right down to its scatological references. You can’t mistake its central points. But despite the committed performances of the cast members, their characters too often seem like prisoners not only of a corrupt social order, but also of a pedagogical vision.
It’s not just that dividing glass wall that inhibits our empathy for these querulous figures. You can understand the temptation, expressed by two of the characters here, to want to blow these blighted specimens of humanity to kingdom come.
As the play proceeds, such an act of violence feels increasingly possible. Be warned: Each of the show’s five scenes ends, most appropriately, with a boom and a blackout.