This Sunday is the Big Sur Marathon, which I signed up for with my husband and father last July and have been training for since … and I’m not doing it. I got my long run up to 17 miles, but then it all went south, with searing pain in my left iliotibial band and aches in both knees.
I took two weeks off running, diligently doing the daily exercises prescribed by my physical therapist. Upon return I managed two easy short runs and a 10-miler, but the pain came back.
Part of me knew it was time to quit, but the rest of me didn’t want to believe it. All of the articles I found on running websites talked about how to come back from injury and cross that finish line, not how to stay away.
But I finally gave myself permission to give up — and realize it’s very much in keeping with the rest of my life right now, as I am learning the lost art of quitting.
I’m not talking about the spectacular #epicfail stories that are so in vogue, with successful entrepreneurs sharing their crash-and-burn experiences as a rite of passage at FailCons around the world.
I’m talking about quitting before the going gets tough. Leaning out. Not pushing yourself beyond what you think you can do.
So un-American, right?
And yet. Last year I walked away from what, on paper, was the dream job I had been striving toward for most of my career: I had been working in corporate social responsibility for 15 years, and got the chance to lead that function for Amazon.
But it turned out not to be the perfect fit, not least because during my 22-month tenure in the role my twins morphed from speechless baby lumps into wondrous compelling little people. (They’re now 5.) My hours were manageable, but I wasn’t as present as I wanted to be when I was home.
Could I have “had it all”? Sure: I had a supportive stay-at-home husband, a corporate salary, and plenty of working parent role models in friends, colleagues and my own upbringing.
Nor have I ever quit anything. Ever. I’ve always been all-in, a “Completer Finisher,” someone who sets ambitious goals and achieves them. I ran my first marathon while writing my first book the year after I had twins, for goodness sake.
But when I paused to really pay attention — and stopped busily managing logistics and proverbially running through the pain — I knew it wasn’t right.
It pained me to walk away from the team I had built and what we might have achieved together, but the quality and quantity of time I’ve had with my family and for myself since then has far outweighed my regrets.
Turns out my quitting didn’t stop there. For the first time, I’ve walked away from half-finished drafts of writing that didn’t flow. I’ve turned down consulting projects that I could have done with my eyes closed — because I don’t want to do anything with my eyes closed anymore.
I know that it is an enormous luxury to be able to choose not to work for even a short period of time. But I also realize that it is a necessity to hit the pause button once in awhile.
Wayne Muller, the author of “Sabbath,” has written about how cultures throughout history have recognized the importance of stillness and rejuvenation: The creation of the world was complete after God rested on the seventh day, not before.
 Our hyperactive culture is starting to acknowledge the importance of getting enough sleep and unplugging from our devices.
I am working on finding the right balance between literally and metaphorically sitting on the couch, and honoring my need to stay active and channel my energy. I took an art class; I stepped up my fiction reading. I returned to the Coming Into Your Own women’s retreat, which I’ve found helpful in the past for structured reflection.
To butcher the concept of kairos in modern parlance: knowing when to hold ‘em and when to fold ‘em. The job probably would have been right at a different stage of my life; another day I will take on a marathon and cross the finish line.
Am I still angry about bailing on Big Sur after months of prep, and experiencing regular waves of doubt about quitting that and everything else that I’ve quit in the past year? Of course.
And I know that I’ll be overcome with jealousy on race day when my dad and husband board the runners’ bus before dawn and come home with medals.
But I’m learning to be content with putting my feet up, and rest in what Mr. Muller calls the “hammock of sufficiency.” I can always try again next year. Or not.