MARSEILLE, France — No ordinary preacher, El Hadi Doudi is perhaps France’s leading proponent of fundamentalist Islam. His influence extends throughout Europe, where his lawyer says the cleric is the only imam authorized to issue fatwas. Over 37 years, he has often berated Jews, women and the modern world, yet the authorities have tolerated his hard-line sermons and occasionally cultivated him as an ally.
The government of President Emmanuel Macron appears poised to expel the preacher in one of the most striking examples of its hardening stance toward radical Islam. Mr. Macron has already used his huge majority in Parliament to inscribe into law some government tactics — searches and seizures, house arrests, shutting down mosques — that had been applied before only as part of the state of emergency put in place after terrorist attacks in Paris killed 130 people in November 2015.
The case of Imam Doudi, 63, who was born in Algeria and is not a French citizen, is part of a high-profile effort by the Macron administration to intensify scrutiny of Muslim clerics and, in some cases, to deport them. Some analysts say that Mr. Macron is using it to display toughness, as European governments struggle for tools to battle radical Islam, and as he fends off political challenges from the far right.
The tough line is another example of the unique stance Mr. Macron has taken since winning office almost a year ago. He is hailed globally as a great defender of liberal democracy, a voice of reason in a Europe awash in angry populism. Yet he has also assumed great executive powers, alarming critics who have charged the Macron government with overreaching in areas like immigration, and who now worry about his approach to fighting terrorism.
France was hardly passive toward extremism in the past; the Interior Ministry kicked out 40 Muslim clerics from 2012 to 2015, and another 52 people, including clerics, over the last 28 months. Not all of those recent expulsions have come during Mr. Macron’s time in office, yet his government seems determined to make clear that France now has a far lower tolerance for radical preaching.
“What we are fighting is also is this subterranean Islamism, which advances through social networks, which accomplishes its task invisibly, which works silently on the weak and the unstable, betraying even those it claims to represent, who, on our very soil, indoctrinate through proximity and daily corrupt,” Mr. Macron said.
In a confidential investigative report seen by The New York Times, the authorities blamed Imam Doudi’s “patient and insistent proselytizing” for helping to turn a quarter of Marseille’s practicing Muslims — the largest concentration in France — into practitioners of Salafism, an ultraconservative movement within Sunni Islam. For the country as a whole, the proportion of Muslims who are Salafists is much lower, about 5.5 percent.
Imam Doudi’s influence, the report noted, extends all over France and even “goes well beyond the country’s frontiers” and throughout Europe, as other countries, in particular Germany, have had their own troubles with Salafist preachers and monitor them carefully.
Yet few seem as bewildered that the government would turn on the preacher now than Imam Doudi himself, a slight, worried-looking man who pulled at his straggly beard occasionally in an interview at a pastry shop.
He was greeted without special ceremony as he strolled through his low-rise immigrant neighborhood north of the old port of Marseille, though everyone seemed to know him.
“The relationship that I’ve had with the population and the authorities has always been clear and correct,” he insisted.
Marseille — France’s second-largest city, one-fifth Muslim — is not especially radicalized. Other cities in the south of France, like Nice, have had higher numbers of young people leave to fight in Syria, and greater proportion of Muslim residents on the government’s terrorism watchlist.
But virtually all of the fines in Marseille for wearing a face-covering, head-to-toe veil — which is illegal in France — have been imposed in the vicinity of Imam Doudi’s mosque, the police say. The authorities are growing increasingly concerned about the potential for radicalization — especially since two young women were killed in a knife attack at the city’s main train station in October.
Here and elsewhere in France, Salafism is increasingly seen as the enemy, a menacing way-station to terrorism. Five members of Imam Doudi’s flock left to fight jihad in Syria, the police say, though the imam denies knowing them.
“That neighborhood is the epicenter of Salafism,” Mr. de Mazières added. Yet on the streets it feels calm, like any other working-class immigrant neighborhood in Marseille, with its fruit stalls, garages, subsidized housing blocks, multihued citizenry and pastry shops where both men and women are customers.
Similarly, Mohamed-Ali Adraoui, an expert at Georgetown on the French Salafists, notes that Salafism and jihadism do not neatly equate.
Those distinctions are being lost in a renewed wave of public anxiety in France, however.
“We must forbid the spread of Salafism, because it’s the enemy,” the former prime minister Manuel Valls said in a radio interview last week.
Most damning, the government report said, Imam Doudi “explicitly” justified jihad. Yet the texts it highlights, in bold in its report, are ambiguous — not in their content, but in their context.
While Imam Doudi acknowledges having once been a follower of Osama bin Laden and the radical Algerian leader Ali Belhadj, the preacher denied that he, or Salafism, was extremist.
Imam Doudi and his lawyer insist that many of his preachings are merely stock phrases taken directly from Islam’s sacred texts and are not meant to be taken literally.
His lawyer, Nabil Boudi, supported the assertion. “It’s a formula you’ll hear in every sermon,” Mr. Boudi said. None of the phrases cited by the government explicitly justify terrorist attacks. Imam Doudi said he is resolutely against such assaults.
Mr. Geisser, the Islam expert, is among those who say that, if anything, Imam Doudi was known as a government stooge.
“He was best known for having good relations with the security services,” Mr. Geisser said.
Sitting with him at the pastry shop, three of Imam Doudi’s flock, bearded and wearing loose robes, were downcast over his possible expulsion.
“It could be dangerous for France,” said Fayçal Mansari, a mason, who called Imam Doudi “ a barrier” against Islamic radicals.
