NASHVILLE — Brothers Osborne broke an unspoken rule at a recent songwriters round — a show where groups of writers take turns singing their songs in their most unadorned forms, spotlighting the lyrics and melody. But when the duo performed its hit “Stay a Little Longer,” the singer T.J. Osborne reached the end of the final chorus and tilted his head toward his older brother John, who promptly went into a rhapsodic acoustic guitar solo.
Besides showcasing some of the best-known entries in their catalogs, the participants in this songwriters round, a charity event called The First and the Worst, were asked to share some of their greenest, most embarrassing output for the audience’s amusement. So the Osbornes offered “Don’t Bring the Redneck Out in Me,” a song that reeled off rowdy, boastful good ol’ boy stereotypes. Midway through a line about having three children and a wife, T.J., 33 and lanky with a long face and combed-back hair, paused to wryly point out that at 16, this was what he’d thought country songs were supposed to be like.
Back then, the Osbornes naïvely assumed that copying country’s familiar templates might get them somewhere. Later, they concluded it was far more important, and satisfying, to commit to a musical identity they could inhabit convincingly. The one they chose — a groove-driven, occasionally jammy singing-and-shredding duo — has made for a rather exotic presence in contemporary country over the last half-decade. Guitar heroes have receded from the spotlight, and even in Nashville, once nicknamed Guitar Town, studio production is frequently powered by drum machines, programming and synthesizers these days.
The contrast between the beat-driven trend and the Osbornes’ approach proved an obstacle at first but eventually became an asset. The perception that country music had become too reliant on just one thing — so-called “bro country” — brought on a gentle loosening of the format, most spectacularly demonstrated by the breakthrough of the country-soul belter Chris Stapleton. The brothers began to accumulate modest chart successes and Country Music Association trophies on the strength of their 2016 debut. Having gotten Nashville’s attention, they slipped off to a sleepy, coastal town in the Florida panhandle to record an invigoratingly footloose follow-up, “Port Saint Joe,” out April 20.
Their parents wrote country songs on the side and made trips to Nashville, taking notes on what it took to hold down a honky-tonk gig. They returned home convinced that the family band, Deuce and a Quarter, a trio featuring John Osborne Sr. and his teenage sons, needed to work up a four-hour set for its local shows.
John and T.J., given identical first and middle names in reverse order (John Thomas and Thomas John), learned chords so they could join in at relatives’ picking parties. John developed into a full-blown guitar geek, spending endless hours dissecting Lynyrd Skynyrd, the Allman Brothers, Jimi Hendrix and Eric Clapton in the bedroom he and T.J. shared. With five children in the family, money was tight. Still, their dad managed to assemble a reel-to-reel recording rig in a shed in the backyard.
First John, then T.J. moved to Nashville after high school, envisioning separate musical paths. “All I wanted to do was grow up, be in a band, play songs that I think are great and get to play guitar solos,” John said.
People occasionally confused the Brothers Osborne with the Osborne Brothers, who’d made their mark in the 1960s and ’70s. A radio station intern once welcomed the younger Osbornes with a banner depicting the elder pair. John and T.J. found it hilarious, adding a funky cover of the bluegrass legends’ “Rocky Top” to their set. But it was harder to maintain a sanguine attitude about the monumental popularity of bro country songs leaving room for little else on country playlists.
“We were watching artists that were getting signed a year or two years after us just fly by us on the charts,” T.J. said.
After self-producing an EP, the brothers made their debut album, “Pawn Shop,” with the producer Jay Joyce. Known for his adventurous angle on commercial record-making, he pushed John in particular for gutsier performances.
The brothers have leaned heavily on live shows to build their audience, recalling the days when guitar-driven country groups shared sensibilities with longhaired Southern rock bands. They’ve opened arena dates for country superstars and headlined club tours but also ventured into territory more associated with jam bands: landing a Bonnaroo booking, playing the main stage at a festival headlined by Gregg Allman and warming up for the Tedeschi Trucks band at Nashville’s Ryman Auditorium.
“The conversation was, ‘Is there a country band that we can think of that this crowd would really appreciate, that can hold their own on that stage with Tedeschi Trucks?’” said the concert promoter Jason Zink. “That’s how we came to Brothers Osborne, because they’re not your average country band.” The fans who’d shown up to hear bluesy improvisation gave the Osbornes a standing ovation. “It was like, ‘Well, I guess they got it,’” Mr. Zink said.
The results of the distraction-free, two-week excursion capture a band breathing easily. Mr. Joyce supplied simmering organ parts and other textures, but the brothers and their longtime bassist, Peter Sternberg, and drummer, Adam Box, handled pretty much everything else, laying down sinuous arrangements and patient, viscous grooves.
T.J. Osborne isn’t much for enunciating. He drawls and croons in a pulpy, guttural timbre, his delivery mischievous, sensual or moony, but always thoroughly relaxed. When he’d flub a lyric or fudge a note, Mr. Joyce would often insist on keeping the mistakes. The same went for John Osborne’s playing.
In and beyond their music, the Osbornes are focused on reuniting blue-collar class consciousness with a socially tolerant outlook. They’ve made cracks about living on little in their songs, and supported the Women’s March, immigrants’ rights and same-sex marriage in Twitter posts.
T.J. Osborne said he considered it an honor to take part in the Grammys’ musical remembrance of the victims of the massacre at last year’s Route 91 Harvest festival. But it disappointed him that the issue of gun control went unaddressed. “I wish it said a little bit more, personally,” he said.
