Last June, Luda’s Dumplings, a small pelmeni shop, pitched its yellow-and-white-striped awning on Shore Parkway in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, an overpass away from the waterfront, where leafy trees hush the grumble of cars.
Inside, pelmeni are cooked to order, glossed with drops of clarified butter and tumbled into cardboard boxes. Each is crimped with a doily-like fringe, the skin thin enough that you can see the shadows of its interior. The dough is supple but sturdy, not a mere diaphanous veil but offering a bite of its own.
The space, once an auto-leasing office, is trim and sunny, with white walls, a concrete floor and a patch of tin ceiling. There are no tables, just a few yellow stools along a marble counter. The atmosphere is distinctly minimalist and modern in a neighborhood where restaurants often unapologetically embrace the past.
But the past has a hold here, too: The owners, Eugene Tulman, who immigrated to Brooklyn from Russia as a child, and Lawrence Rafalovich, who is American-born and of Ukrainian descent, named the shop in honor of Mr. Tulman’s mother, Luda.
Ms. Tulman grew up in Kazakhstan, where her family — descendants of the Volga Germans invited to settle in Russia in the 18th century by Catherine the Great — was relocated by Stalin’s edict during World War II. When she arrived in Brooklyn in 1996, her neighbors quickly discovered her culinary skills and began ordering her pelmeni for parties.
With the help of her husband and two sons, Ms. Tulman opened two restaurants (one now under a new name and ownership, the other shuttered) and ran factories that supplied pelmeni and crepes to the tristate area. But after her death in 2012, her younger son, Eugene, grew disenchanted with how far the factories’ products had strayed from his mother’s original cooking.
At Luda’s Dumplings, where he is the chef, Eugene pledged to follow his mother’s precepts — always use the freshest ingredients; mix everything by hand — if not exactly her recipe. The dough, for example, is made with organic flour and is “not as soft” as with traditional pelmeni, he said; growing up in Sheepshead Bay, a historically Italian neighborhood, he fell in love with pasta and wanted the dumplings to have a texture closer to al dente.
Of the six fillings available, the most robust and wintry in spirit is Siberian-style beef and pork, here grass-fed Angus beef shoulder and pastured pork butt, ground in-house and evenly split so neither lords over the other. One pierce, and the juices run.
In other versions, a mash of potato and Cheddar has surprising buoyancy, and spinach, melded with feta, Parmesan and mozzarella, retains its vivid green. But pulverized shrimp loses some of its briny character, muffled by Parmesan and ricotta inside a dough stained pink by beet juice.
All are enhanced by a choice of three toppings per order, among them soul-brightening dill, mushrooms chopped and sautéed until almost duxelles and slightly carnal, and roasted garlic minced so fine, it’s undetectable to the eye but an insistent imprint on the tongue.
Each order comes with two sauces, for dipping or pouring. For those who hew to tradition, there’s the bracing simplicity of vinegar or the velvety soft landing of sour cream, perhaps even better mixed together.
More maverick are variations of sour cream spiked with, by turns, raw garlic, Sriracha, chipotle, horseradish and pickled jalapeño, each with its own clarifying flare. “I know my mom would yell at me if she saw some of these things,” Mr. Tulman said.
Old-school pelmeni molds, looking like panels of honeycomb, hang above the counter. But Mr. Tulman shapes his pelmeni on a machine visible in the next room, built in Russia and customized with extra rollers so as not to overheat the dough when it’s compressed.
For dessert, there are slightly damp farmer cheese pelmeni with cocoa-infused skins, nicely muddled with sour cherries and chocolate flakes that promptly wilt into sauce. A lighter finish comes with kompot, a decidedly sweet fruit punch. It’s another nod to Luda, although Mr. Tulman allows that he’s been “experimenting” with the likes of pineapple and mango.
“Things in Russia we never had,” he said.