MANAGUA, Nicaragua — President Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua announced on Sunday that he was reversing a social security overhaul that had prompted days of protests in which up to two dozen people died.
His announcement seemed to acknowledge that the protests, which started on Wednesday as a picket by college students against the social security overhaul, had become a serious challenge to his authority.
But it is unlikely to sway protesters who still have other grievances against his government — including Mr. Ortega’s interference with the National Assembly, the law and the Constitution, like eliminating term limits. He is also widely criticized for having manipulated the Supreme Court, the elections council and mayoral races.
The Nicaraguan leader has faced protests before, but at no point since his 2007 re-election have so many sectors united against him in what has become the greatest test of his presidency. Experts say it is the largest popular uprising here since the end of the nation’s civil war nearly 30 years ago.
If anything, students at Polytechnic University in Managua, who had been protesting for days, seemed galvanized by Mr. Ortega’s Sunday announcement.
“We’re not going to move,” said Golden Rivas, 36, a nursing major who had been at the Polytechnic University throughout the sit-in.
Dara Nicole Díaz, 18, a graphic design major, whipped out her cellphone to read a long list of the students’ demands, which included the release of protesters detained in the past week and the resignation of the police chief.
Mr. Ortega’s announcement capped a weekend of intensifying pressure. The rallies had spread to cities around the nation and claimed up to two dozen lives, according to Cenidh, a leading human rights organization.
By the end of Saturday, a reporter for an official government channel had been killed while filming a Facebook Live video about the protests. A police officer in Managua, the capital, shot in the head, was fighting for her life as other families arranged to bury their dead.
The government posted images of city blocks burning, government buildings in shambles and widespread ransacking of supermarkets with no police officers in sight — looting that some accused the government of staging in order to justify a crackdown.
At lunchtime on Sunday, before Mr. Ortega’s announcement, the streets of central Managua were largely deserted, with businesses looted or shuttered, as tension lingered.
Mr. Ortega and Vice President Rosario Murillo, his wife, had said the previous day that they were willing to consider changes to the social security overhaul, but the private sector lobby Cosep responded that it would not enter into talks until the government ended police repression, released detained protesters and allowed freedom of speech. One news station has been taken off the air.
The business group also said other sectors would have to join the talks.
The social security overhaul would have forced contributors to pay more into social security and retirees to receive 5 percent less.
Now in his third consecutive term as president, Mr. Ortega has a strong grip on power, including every branch of government and the military. Many poor people who receive housing and other government benefits support him.
Oscar Pupiro Zuniga, 62, a local leader of the government’s leftist Sandinista Front party, acknowledged that the government had erred in not negotiating the social security overhaul with business and union leaders first, but he said well-financed right-wing groups had taken advantage of the issue to sow chaos.
On Friday, bankers joined the protests, as the nation’s largest business group called both for a dialogue and a nationwide protest on Monday. The Roman Catholic Church provided refuge to students as it became increasingly unclear whether the church, the business community or any other interlocutor could step in and resolve the growing crisis.
Saturday’s protests were galvanized by a rambling midday speech by Mr. Ortega, who cited what he called the cynical nature of the protests and said they were organized by right-wing forces.
He said his administration had worked hard to foster a positive image that encouraged tourism and investment, only to see that ruined by news coverage that harked back to the nation’s years at war.
After leading a 1979 revolution to overthrow a right-wing dictatorship, Mr. Ortega was president of Nicaragua in the 1980s. But a war financed by the United States marked his entire term in office until he was voted out in 1990. After losing several further elections, he took office again in 2007 when legal changes allowed him to win with a plurality.
In a flash, Dr. Avendaño and the engineers, lawyers, economists and publicists at the meeting grabbed face masks and bottled water and dashed off to the university, where they were met by dozens of youths carrying slingshots, rocks and bags of paint. They surrounded the university building as volunteers and nearby residents offered them water and first aid, while police officers at another entrance pushed back against student protesters.
The sound of mortar fire echoed in the air.