When a child has attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, it affects everybody in the family, said Dr. Mark Bertin, a developmental pediatrician in Pleasantville, N.Y. Parents need to understand the nature of A.D.H.D., he said, and appreciate that it affects “a host of self-management skills,” which play out in school but also in daily home routines.
Dr. Bertin, who is the author of “The Family A.D.H.D. Solution” (disclosure: I wrote a blurb for the book), and “Mindful Parenting for A.D.H.D.,” said research shows that parents of children with A.D.H.D. are more anxious, more stressed and less confident, and that their marriages may be strained.
Dr. Gabrielle Carlson said that she grew up with a brother who had attention problems, “and I was the perfect older sister.” She is a professor of psychiatry and pediatrics at Stony Brook University School of Medicine who became a child psychiatrist, in part, she said, because of an interest in these symptoms and in what could help.
Dr. Carlson’s own son was a smart kid with A.D.H.D. “My son used to say, it’s not fair everybody else can get their homework done and I can’t,” she said. “You get demoralized after a while when you try hard to do something and you just can’t do it.
“The smarter the person is, in some respects, the more frustrating it is for the person,” Dr. Carlson said. She referenced the Charles M. Schulz cartoon in which Linus laments that there’s no heavier burden than a great potential.
Part of the problem is that other people, including family members, don’t realize how difficult A.D.H.D. can make a child’s life. This is not about laziness or a lack of resolve. 
Sometimes “it’s surprising for parents to realize that A.D.H.D. is a proven medical condition and that part of the diagnosis is defining where it is disruptive in life,” Dr. Bertin said. Since kids may be better able to focus on things they find of absorbing interest — say, the Yankees’ starting lineup rather than the deadline for that science project — “it can look like it’s a motivational issue when it’s not,” he said. Sometimes just understanding different aspects of A.D.H.D. — that the child has executive function issues and needs help planning, or that the child cannot control his emotions and needs help with anger management — helps the parent cope.
So the kids need help, and successfully treating A.D.H.D. has multiple components. There is that essential education — for the child and the family — about what A.D.H.D. means. There’s educational testing, supports and accommodations in school, behavior techniques and routines at home, especially around schoolwork as kids get older. “You have lists, and you have incentives, and the star charts,” Dr. Carlson said.
And of course, there’s medication. The medication helps many struggling children, but “it doesn’t organize you,” Dr. Carlson said. On the other hand, “it focuses you, it decreases your impulsivity, it helps your mood regulation so you’re less volatile,” and all of that may help with the struggles and frustrations of academic work and family life.
Families should not expect simple answers, or short-term solutions. Parents have to take care of themselves, and pay attention to the family dynamic, looking for ways to help everyone thrive.  Make sure the child is getting all the appropriate interventions at school, and look for resources to help with the home side of academics.
And watch for sibling issues. It may not be healthy for a child who does not have A.D.H.D. to be cast in the role of the “good child,” he said. Parents should make sure all children get their share of positive parental attention.
Dr. Bertin suggested thinking of A.D.H.D. “as a delay in self-management skills.” With help and support and time to develop, “they will do well over time,” he said. So kids with A.D.H.D. need a short-term strategy that helps them function, he said, tied to a long-term plan to eventually give them the skills they need, because whatever they pursue in life, they will need those executive function skills.
