The Reader Center is one way we in the newsroom are trying to connect with you, by highlighting your perspectives and experiences and offering insight into how we work.
This past week, the City of New York removed the statue of a famous 19th century gynecologist, J. Marion Sims, from its perch at the edge of Central Park on Fifth Avenue. Because Sims had performed experimental surgeries on female slaves, an arts commission empowered with determining whether public sculptures were still deserving of display had determined that he should no longer be glorified, despite the advancements he furthered in medicine.
I wrote a column arguing that this was an exercise in easy virtue because the statue wasn’t being destroyed or even removed from view; instead it was getting sent to Green-Wood cemetery in Brooklyn, a gorgeously landscaped urban green space and national historic landmark that receives more than a quarter million visitors per year.
The column drew impassioned responses from readers, several of whom argued that Sims has been needlessly vilified by modern observers.
“Reading about Dr. Sims’ practices, the medical condition faced by these women, and the state of medicine in the 1840s, creates a far more nuanced story than that told by opponents of honoring Dr. Sims,’’ as JEG from New York put it.
In this vein, other readers pointed to the research of L. Lewis Wall, a doctor and medical anthropologist at Washington University in St. Louis, who has argued that the condition Sims was trying to repair, vesicovaginal fistula, a complication of childbirth for many 19th century women, was so painful and horrific that women were desperate for relief and that the female slaves on which he initially operated wanted to try something, anything, rather than live with the misery.
Dr. Wall also draws on primary source material in this journal article to counter the claim of Sims’ “anesthetic racism,” of the idea that he had chosen not to use anesthesia on his black patients. Because of the limited understanding of anesthesia at the time, Sims failed to use anesthetics on both white patients and black patients in his early operations to treat fistula.
The arts commission that voted to remove the statue from its original site had all of this information — they had the nuanced story, but they decided the statue needed to be taken down regardless.
Some readers including New York City’s former parks commissioner, Adrian Benepe, leveled what I started to call the “What Would You Do With the Pyramids?” argument.
To this I would say that historical distance matters. Jews who were enslaved by Egyptians are not living with the repercussions of that servitude now, in the way that African-Americans must bear the legacies of slavery all too often.
We would love to keep the conversation going, so feel free to do so in the comments section here.