New York|Was Sheldon Silver Corrupt, or Was It Just Politics as Usual?
Was Sheldon Silver Corrupt, or Was It Just Politics as Usual?
The fourth-floor courtroom in Manhattan was the same as the last time, as was the judge and, most important, the defendant: Sheldon Silver, the once-powerful speaker of the New York State Assembly.
On Monday, the retrial of Mr. Silver, 74, on public corruption charges began in Federal District Court, with Mr. Silver sitting at the defense table, a few years older, but with much of the case’s contours unchanged.
A prosecutor told the jury in an opening statement that Mr. Silver had obtained nearly $4 million in illicit fees in exchange for using his official position to benefit a cancer researcher, Dr. Robert N. Taub at Columbia University, and two real estate developers.
Mr. Silver’s lawyer, Michael S. Feldberg, in his opening statement, said the evidence would show that there was no corrupt agreement, quid pro quo or bribe involving his client.
“It is just not a crime to be a politician, even a powerful one,” Mr. Feldberg added.
Mr. Silver’s retrial is being watched as a test of the new rules for corruption prosecutions, as handed down by the United States Supreme Court.
Mr. Silver was convicted in November 2015, after a five-week trial, of charges that included honest services fraud, extortion and money laundering. Two weeks later, Dean G. Skelos, the Republican majority leader of the State Senate, was convicted in a separate corruption trial. Both men forfeited their seats upon their convictions.
The trials exposed Albany’s culture of secrecy, nepotism and influence peddling. But the convictions of Mr. Silver and Mr. Skelos were overturned last year on appeal, after the Supreme Court, in vacating the conviction of a former governor of Virginia, Bob McDonnell, narrowed the kind of quid-pro-quo actions that could constitute corruption.
The Supreme Court held that official action must involve concrete and formal government actions or decisions and not mere political courtesies, like setting up a meeting.
The appeals court ruled that the jury instructions at Mr. Silver’s trial were erroneous, and that a properly instructed jury might not have convicted him. Prosecutors vowed to retry both former New York lawmakers; Mr. Silver’s trial went first.
In one scheme outlined for the jury, prosecutors said Mr. Silver had arranged to have the State Health Department award two grants totaling $500,000 to Dr. Taub. In return, the government alleged, Dr. Taub sent cancer patients with legal claims to a law firm, Weitz & Luxenberg, which sent a portion of its fees to Mr. Silver.
“Dr. Taub was Silver’s golden goose,” the prosecutor, Mr. Williams, said.
In a second scheme, the government charged that Mr. Silver arranged to have the two developers, Glenwood Management and the Witkoff Group, send tax business to a law firm, Goldberg & Iryami, which also gave Mr. Silver a portion of its fees. Mr. Silver then supported real estate legislation that benefited the developers, prosecutors said.
The prosecution appeared to use its first witness, Amy Paulin, a Democratic assemblywoman from Westchester County, to bolster its depiction of Mr. Silver’s influence and lack of accountability.
Ms. Paulin was asked if, considering Mr. Silver’s access to discretionary funds, she knew that he had dispersed large sums of public money to entities he favored.
Ms. Paulin said that she had asked Mr. Silver for $3 million for a widely backed measure to fight sex trafficking. She recalled his response when she later asked him why the money had not come through.
“His words were something to the effect of, ‘You do for me, I do for you,’” Ms. Paulin said.