Citlali Fabián grew up in Oaxaca, Mexico, immersed in her indigenous culture — and photography.
Her people, the Yalatec, have deep roots in Oaxaca, descending from the Zapotecs in the Sierra Juárez mountains. Ms. Fabián, at 29, cannot remember when cameras entered her life. Like her Zapotec traditions, they preceded her. Her father runs a photographic print shop, and she learned the mysteries of the darkroom at his knee, then filed them away as a teenager, lured by the possibilities of digital photography. But a love of the old processes called her back.
“Mestiza,” Ms. Fabián’s current portrait project, uses classic photographic techniques to celebrate an enduring civilization steeped in history.
The moody, chiaroscuro portraits of indigenous women and girls from Oaxaca, taken with large format cameras, are both intimate and universal. While indigenous Oaxacan culture is celebrated by photographers from all over the world, Ms. Fabián wanted to capture its power. She turned to subjects she knew would make arresting images: her mother, cousins, nieces, friends.
She could have chosen families, or focused on indigenous ceremonies to make her point. But in a culture — like most — where men rule, demonstrating the strength and beauty of Mestizas, indigenous-Spanish females, through seemed to make the most sense.
Ms. Fabián, who still works at her father’s print shop, spent five years on “Mestiza.” She began the project after a postgraduate fellowship and further study in historical processing techniques at the Eastman Museum in Rochester. It thrilled her to learn ways of photographing that she had seen only in books.
She grew so enamored of large format photography that, knowing she couldn’t afford a new 5x7 camera, she made one herself, using a 19th-century lens.
“The soul of the camera is the lens,” she said. “ I possess this lens by luck. It is part of history; and it also offers me a beautiful perspective.
That perspective is a commingling of old and contemporary artistic sensibilities — images that look as old as a Rembrandt and as new as something you’ve never seen. Ms. Fabián’s “mestizas,” who range in age from babies to late middle age, wear tribal headwear, wreaths and necklaces and other adornments shaped from nature and ancient civilizations. Even partly nude, subjects look as though ready to take on the world. Not until she was deep in the project did she even know how it would shape up. She knew she would be creating something that veered from the current photographic trends in digital and smartphone image making. She also knew that, as always with film photography, alchemy, or the image gods, would have to be on her side.
“I think you create something with the simple idea to give it shape and to share it, then it grows its own legs and runs wherever others connect with it,” she said.
Ultimately, “Mestiza,” hopes to capture viewers’ attention and keep them looking. Its social purpose is “to give a voice and image to the minorities, who are my people,” she said. While Oaxaca is a global tourist destination, its indigenous communities still face discrimination and misunderstanding.
