Television|‘Atlanta’ Season 2, Episode 8 Recap: Is Al Finally Ready to be Paper Boi?
‘Atlanta’ Season 2, Episode 8 Recap: Is Al Finally Ready to be Paper Boi?
Though his rap lyrics paint a different picture, Al lacks a hustler’s spirit.
He is stagnating on all fronts. His home’s not in order and his personal life is virtually nonexistent. His career is the only facet of his life with any kind of forward momentum and it’s chugging along despite minimal effort on his part.
“Woods” is his wake-up call.
The episode starts with some run-of-the-mill maternal nagging. He’s passed out in his living room, where clothes are strewn across the sofa and the coffee table is littered with beer cans and candy.
Hours pass, daylight wanes and Al hasn’t moved an inch from that same spot. Earn calls to check in on him and remind him about some paperwork (this disembodied voice is the only trace of Donald Glover we’ll get all episode). Neither of his family members’ benign nudges motivate Al. As it turns out, it’s going to take far more forceful measures to penetrate his stupor.
The first shake-up comes in the form of a potential love interest — a confident, purple-haired around the way girl named Sierra who picks up Al for a day date. Despite being “allergic to girlfriends,” as Darius put it, Al seems open to the possibilities with this one. In conversation, she gives as good as she gets and they’re able to share a laugh together. She’s even a good cheerleader when one of his songs starts playing on the car radio. You can see him starting to let his guard down, so much so that he’s game for an itinerary that reeks of coupledom.
First, they stop at a high-end boutique, where Sierra aims to give Al a fashion makeover. We know she’s a former stripper, but her current gig hasn’t yet been revealed. One thing is obvious: the woman is fame-savvy.
“Nobody wants for somebody famous to look just like them,” she says in an authoritative tone, advising him to scrap his usual sweaty polo shirts and cargo shorts.
As she commands the store’s wary, dismissive employees to do her bidding, she makes it clear to Al that she’s not bossy, she’s a boss.
She urges him to “level up” in terms of his management, too. Earn’s free liquor connections are bush league; by her estimation, he should be procuring free shoes, clothes and more.
“You need someone who’s working for you,” she tells Al. It’s the third time (at least) that he’s heard this counsel this season and, by the look on his face, he’s finally ready to heed it.
After this mini-intervention, he waits patiently while she poses for photos with a pair of excited fans, gallantly opens the nail salon door for her and joins in a his-and-hers pedicure. These glimpses of domestic bliss look good on Al, but they’re short-lived.
As they’re seated in the cushy salon chairs — Al giggling at the tickle of his first pumice scrub — Sierra’s hustle comes to light. “I’m Instagram famous, boo!” she says, happily scrolling through photos that the fans outside just posted on social media. She promotes her brand of diva wigs on social media and, unlike Al, she’s unapologetic and proactive in her pursuit of fame. Of the two of them, she’s the one who’s actually all about that paper.
She pitches the idea of the two of them teaming up to form a power couple. “We can attach our brands. Boost each other,” she explains.
This draws his ire, loath as he is to go in for any of the “fake” trappings of celebrity. He starts to see Sierra in a different light. The assertiveness he’d admired earlier in the boutique now seemed more like rudeness. He’s visibly embarrassed as she reprimands the nail technicians for not speaking English. The date is officially over once she snaps a candid shot of the two of them, planning to post it online. He realizes that her image-driven tactics don’t jibe with his “I’m just trying to stay real” credo.
“You’re sitting over there whining, acting like you’re better than me because I’m trying to get paid,” Sierra says angrily as Al rises to leave.
He pads off on his own, despite the fact that she’s his ride. After a pitstop for a burger at Krystal, his fast-food chain of choice, Al heads home on foot. While walking, he encounters three teens who are discussing “Star Wars” (a not-at-all-subtle reference to Glover’s next big project). They stop short when they notice a rapper in their midst and feign fandom.
Here, Al gets his second rude awakening. While Sierra sought to benefit mutually from Al’s fame, these three just want to take full advantage of it, Robbin’ Season style.
This isn’t the kind of warm, fuzzy fan interaction that greeted Sierra. After a brief, tense exchange of stares, one boy distracts him as another lands a suckerpunch and the third pulls out a gun. They take turns punching Al, then steal his watch and gold chain.
He takes off into the wooded area nearby, running from bullets. The gun-toting teen calls out to him, taunting him, as a badly-beaten Al grabs a stick for protection and lies low. After a while, he presses on, the air growing thick with the sounds of birds singing, crickets chirping and then flies buzzing … around a bloody deer carcass. Then comes an ominous humming, followed by chuckling. It’s a chill-inducing “Deliverance” moment.
The thieving teens are no longer trailing Al; instead he comes face to face with a downtrodden old man. He’s staggering amid the trees, incoherently offering Al money and Chapstick.
“I’m sorry. I’m just high,” he says, temporarily snapping back to his senses.
Is this babbling old man real, or some sort of apparition? Al’s already had a run-in with an ambitious Lady Macbeth-type; why not a full-on supernatural experience in the forest, to boot?
Adding to this sense of David Lynchian suspense, the director, Hiro Murai, pans out slowly to reveal the vastness of the woods in which Al is now lost.
Night falls and Al is still wandering aimlessly through the trees, his footsteps and heavy breathing keep time with the sounds of crickets, rustling leaves and creaking branches. Classic horror film elements like these keep the tension intact, as they’ve done in nearly every episode this season.
After another flash of the dead deer, the old man reappears. This time, he’s got a new nickname for Al (“Big Ol’ Black Boy Deer Guts”), as well as a heavy-handed warning.
He gives Al until the count of 30 to get out of his sight. It doesn’t even take that long for Al to escape the trees and stumble into a gas station parking lot.
Perhaps that wooded expanse only seemed sprawling because his battered psyche led him to believe it was so. By that logic, maybe the old man or the deer or both were just more manifestations of Al’s (probably concussed) mind playing tricks on him.
Whatever the true nature of this unsettling sylvan scene, it was enough to make Al see the light. All this time, he’s been on the fence about whether or not he wants this fame of his. When a timid, preppy teen approaches him inside the gas station convenience store, he seems ready to step into his role. Despite being covered in blood, dirt and leaves, he gamely throws his arm around the young fan and poses for one photo after another.
It’s a move signaling that Al is finally ready to be Paper Boi. Now, let’s see if Earn’s ready to earn.
• “I’m gonna put my foot up in this,” he said, seemingly referring to that idiomatic compliment reserved for cooks who’ve made a top-notch dish. Only — Darius being Darius — he meant it literally.
• The show’s Easter eggs continue to keep us on our toes. Can anyone explain the grave looking video that was playing on the TV at the nail salon? It looked like a drug addiction PSA of some sort.
