Media|There’s No Smoking in Disney Films. What About When It Owns Fox?
There’s No Smoking in Disney Films. What About When It Owns Fox?
LOS ANGELES — Add cigarettes to the list of things that the family-friendly Walt Disney Company has to figure out as it prepares to integrate the sharper-edged 20th Century Fox movie and television studio.
Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, announced at a shareholder meeting in 2015 that Walt Disney Studios would “prohibit smoking in movies across the board: Marvel, Lucas, Pixar and Disney films.” He said the policy, which put Disney at the forefront of antismoking efforts in Hollywood, “was the right thing for us to do.” The decision brought cheers from activists concerned about the power of movies to promote tobacco use.
Now antismoking advocates want Mr. Iger to extend that rule to all future youth-rated films (G, PG, PG-13) made by Fox and its Fox Searchlight specialty label, which are among the assets that Disney is buying from Rupert Murdoch for $54.2 billion. Among other things, activists want “graphic health warnings” added to youth-rated films in the Fox library that depict smoking — like “Avatar” and “X-Men: Days of Future Past” — before selling them on DVD or via video-on-demand services.
Activists are continuously pressuring studios over one cause or another, but Mr. Murdoch has frequently dismissed such efforts as political correctness run amok. Disney, on the other hand, pays extraordinary attention to its brand perception, which activists often try to use to their advantage.
Antitrust regulators are studying Disney’s agreement with Mr. Murdoch to buy most of his 21st Century Fox empire, including the FX cable network, Hulu and pieces of two overseas TV providers, Sky of Britain and Star of India. Barring any dramatic developments — like an effort by Comcast to scuttle the deal in a renewed attempt to buy the 21st Century Fox assets itself — the Disney acquisition is expected to be completed by the middle of next year. Comcast, which bid against Disney for the assets in the fall but was spurned by the 21st Century Fox board, on Wednesday made an offer to buy Sky alone.
Disney has not laid out its plans for integrating 20th Century Fox. Mr. Iger has indicated that Disney intends to manage the Fox movie labels as their own entities — much as it did in the past with divisions that specialized in more mature content, like Miramax Films, Hollywood Pictures and Touchstone. Miramax, founded by Harvey and Bob Weinstein, was a headache for Disney and Mr. Iger sold it in 2010. Hollywood Pictures, known for “The Sixth Sense,” was folded in 2007. Touchstone was most recently used to distribute DreamWorks Studios films, including “Bridge of Spies.” That arrangement has ended.
The Marvel movies that Disney has released since “Ant-Man” have avoided tobacco imagery, which activists define broadly. For instance, a garden gnome sculpture with a pipe is what made “Ant-Man” a “smoking” movie.
Government studies have long shown that depictions of smoking in movies and television shows can lead to youth tobacco use. Under pressure, the Motion Picture Association of America said in 2007 that it would for the first time consider portrayals of smoking alongside sex and violence when assessing the suitability of movies for young viewers. Critics have since labeled the move ineffective, in part because the M.P.A.A. does not consider an image related to smoking — in and of itself — enough to warrant an R rating.
Most movie studios responded by putting pressure on filmmakers to kick the habit, which reduced tobacco imagery. But Hollywood, citing the need for artistic license, has resisted calls to give an automatic R rating to any movie that depicts smoking. The Motion Picture Association fought off a smoking-related lawsuit last year with a First Amendment defense. It also argued that automatic R ratings for smoking could result in similar demands for anything deemed socially unacceptable, including high-speed driving.
Studios also face pressure overseas from the World Health Organization, which has called for governments to implement more aggressive regulation of movies that contain tobacco imagery. India, France and Britain are among the countries where action has been taken or is being discussed.
