U.S.|Narcan Stops Opioid Overdoses. How Do You Use It?
Narcan Stops Opioid Overdoses. How Do You Use It?
“It should be just like carrying a first aid kit,” Mr. Childs said.
If someone has shortness of breath or is not breathing, is unresponsive or won’t wake up and has pale or discolored skin, they may be overdosing. Other signs include pinpoint pupils, confusion, vomiting and cold or clammy skin.
Trainers will frequently instruct people to perform what is known as a sternum rub.
Another symptom to look for is a snoring noise; this can actually be the sound of someone gasping for breath.
If you think someone is overdosing, call 911, even if you administer naloxone.
How do you give someone naloxone?
Naloxone comes in different forms.
If you are using the nasal spray version, commonly referred to by the brand name Narcan, tilt the patient’s head back and spray it into the patient’s nose. Most people will respond in a few minutes. People at trainings are often told to administer one dose, wait three minutes, do rescue breathing and then give a second dose if there is no response. They may be told to flip a patient on their side to prevent asphyxiation if the person vomits.
Injectable naloxone, which can come in syringes or in “auto-injectors,” is a muscle shot and can be injected into the thigh, buttocks or arms. Again, if it does not work within two or three minutes, administer a second dose.
Some people may need more than two doses.
If the person is not breathing, or if their breathing is shallow, perform rescue breathing. If nothing has changed and there is no pulse, the person needs CPR from a trained bystander and emergency medical care.
You can get naloxone at your local pharmacy. Some states allow you to purchase it over the counter at stores like CVS and Walgreens, but others require a prescription. And some community groups, local health departments and needle exchanges distribute low-cost or free naloxone kits, which come with gloves, face masks and instructions.
Many emergency workers and medical personnel carry naloxone as well.
It depends. The type of naloxone you can get often differs by state, pharmacy and what insurance you have. Many insurances cover naloxone, so you can ask to see what your share of the cost would be. Some public health programs also offer ways for people to get it for free or at a low cost, as do naloxone’s manufacturers in some cases.
Can you give someone too much naloxone?
No. Naloxone is not addictive. It does force people into opioid withdrawal, so a person receiving it can be distraught, irritable and upset when they come to.
But if you give it to someone and it turns out they are not overdosing, don’t worry. “It is not harmful to give it to someone who is not undergoing an overdose,” said Mr. Chester.
Naloxone only works for overdoses from opioids, not overdoses from other types of drugs.
Do experts think this will save lives or help end the opioid crisis?
