At one point in “Lean on Pete,” its adolescent hero, Charley, leans so close into a mirror that you can see — really see — just how excruciatingly young he is. For the most part, the director Andrew Haigh hangs back from Charley (the intensely sympathetic Charlie Plummer), preferring to show him in his world. It is a hard place, petty and mean and sometimes brutal. And the tall, coltish Charley is only 15, which, because he’s so very good at self-preservation, can be easy to forget as he slides deeper into calamity. And, then, it’s always easier to pretend we don’t see the Charleys around us.
A coming-of-age story that unfolds gradually, “Lean on Pete” takes place in what the writer Michael Harrington called “the invisible land” of the poor, a reality too little seen in American movies. Charley and his father, Ray (Travis Fimmel), have recently moved from Spokane, Wash., to Portland, Ore., and are living in a cramped house with worn furniture and unpacked boxes. For them, life isn’t shaped by blue skies and unthinking privileges like cellphones or even a real bed for Charley, but by a patchwork of miserly paychecks, rundown rentals and missed meals. Ray is doggedly independent, but no one is looking out for them, either. He also has a habit of disappearing, leaving the fridge to quickly empty.
Based on Willy Vlautin’s 2010 novel of the same title, “Lean on Pete” takes off when Charley discovers the local track. It’s there that he meets Del (Steve Buscemi), a vile, cantankerous owner who runs his horses into the ground and who, with his arm in a cast, begrudgingly hires Charley for odd jobs. He takes to the work eagerly, and Mr. Haigh digs into this chapter nicely, catching the light filtering through the stables and adding the textured details that turn movies into lived-in places. More important, the track is where Charley meets a pretty quarter horse named Lean on Pete, whose velvety brown coat and barely audible whinnies become a balm for the lonely teenager.
Quarter horses are sprinters, but there’s not much running and even less winning left in Pete. Del races Pete on the fair circuit, but also hauls him long distances to bleak, makeshift tracks where the horses are separated from onlookers by a length of rope. It’s a long way from the money and putative excitement of thoroughbred racing with its celebrity horses, hall-of-fame jockeys and millions of dollars in bets. Here, the animal abuse is more open and shrugged off, and its consequences are blunt. “Horses aren’t pets,” a jockey named Bonnie (Chloë Sevigny) cautions Charley, a warning that he ignores and that further unsettles the already fraught atmosphere.
Disaster violently upends and gives shape to the loose, episodic story when an angry stranger breaks down Ray and Charley’s front door, sending the father to the hospital and the son reeling. With no one else he can call, Charley runs off to look for a missing aunt, stealing both Del’s truck and Pete. They share starry nights — Charley talks to Pete as if confiding in a friend — but their difficult road soon turns treacherous. There are ominous men, kind women, persistent hunger, a desert trek, a breakdown and a grisly accident. Before long, this tough-minded if generous-hearted movie becomes nearly unbearable as its overarching ethic of honesty edges too close to sadism.
This has more to do with Mr. Haigh’s fealty to the source material (he also wrote the script), which stacks the decks high against Charley, than with his filmmaking, which retains an insistent if restrained intimacy that feels like compassion. At times, the only tenderness in Charley’s life seems to be the soft light that folds around him like a blanket. The loveliness of the images in these moments eases the trauma that threatens to engulf him and the movie. (The director of photography is Magnus Nordenhof Jonck.) There’s almost a cosmic dimension to some of the most beautiful passages, as if the world (call it nature or God or sensitive direction) were holding Charley in its embrace.
This visual beauty can seem at odds with the story’s ugliness but is as necessary as it is welcome because it gives you something to hold onto even as Charley slips further, grubbing meals, fending off violence. Steve Zahn shows up later in the movie, and while it’s always nice to see him, he proves, like its other indie-film veterans, somewhat of a distracting presence. That’s a minor complaint about a very fine movie that I haven’t stopped thinking about since I saw it, partly because stories about forgotten and mistreated children tend to be reserved for documentaries and foreign-language art cinema. In American movies, children get roughed up plenty, but rarely by poverty.