Lens|Why Did Garry Winogrand Photograph That?
Why Did Garry Winogrand Photograph That?
A: I was teaching down in Austin and had lunch with David Hamrick of the University of Texas Press, because I’d written something for them before. Being a complete and utter lowlife I went along not just thinking, “Great, it’s a free lunch,” which is often motive enough for me, but I deliberately went along with a completely empty canvas bag in anticipation of all the free books I’d take home.
Very quickly, he came out with this line: “I know what your next book is going to be.” He then proceeded to remind me of something I’d said in this printed email exchange with Janet Malcolm in Aperture, when having commented on the John Szarkowski book on [Eugène] Atget — which has a picture on each recto page, and an about 300-word caption on the facing verso page — I said something like, “I hope I don’t go to my grave without doing a book like that myself.” So David said, “Well, how about a book like that on Garry Winogrand?” And it really this kind of lightning flash of a realization: “Oh my God, of course! This is what I’ve been waiting for.” The strange thing is I’d not thought of Winogrand myself, but thankfully he had.
Q: The Press got you access to the Center for Creative Photography archive in Tucson, where Mr. Winogrand’s archive is housed. What was it like working there?
A: I came up against the Winogrand problem, which is that there’s just so, so much of it. And I realized also because I’m not a curator I just haven’t got the stamina for it, so my eyes and brain would become so quickly exhausted. I just wasn’t able to take any more in, especially when looking at the slides. The guy who organized the last big retrospective, I believe he looked at pretty much every box of contact sheets. I didn’t do that. But the great thing is there’s so much Winogrand that even in the little skim across the surface I did I think I came up with quite a lot of amazing stuff that had not been seen before.
Q: What’s it like being immersed in Mr. Winogrand’s world?
A: It’s absolutely fantastic. It’s inexhaustible. But as we know, one of the characteristics of the inexhaustible is it’s quite exhausting. Winogrand’s archive is studied by people interested in the history of photography, but of course it’s this amazing archive for anybody who’s writing anything about American history, American society, American anything in the years during which he was operating because there it all is. It’s just this amazing pharaoh’s treasure trove of material.
Q: Was it difficult to choose just 100 photographs?
A: It wasn’t difficult at all in terms of whether I could find 100 really fantastic Winogrand pictures. That’s fantastically easy. It’s even quite easy to find 100 Winogrand pictures that are really good that haven’t been published before. So the quality is not the problem. But they had to be not only interesting pictures, they also had to be interesting pictures that I had something interesting to say about.
On a few occasions, I actually found that — I hope — I had something interesting to say about pictures which, from the point of view of somebody doing an exhibition, from a totally visual point of view, were perhaps not interesting and would have been excluded on that basis. But they served my literary interests very well.
Q: What kind of photos were you looking for in the archive?
A: I’d said to the nice people at the archive that I’d really like to see more of his color work because the word was going around in the photography world that there was a lot of great unpublished Winogrand color work. And also, because of the show “Strange and Familiar,” organized by Martin Parr, that was on at the Barbican in London I was aware of the trips he’d made to Britain and Europe, so I was keen to see some of that stuff.
Q: Any great takeaway from viewing that color work?
A: Only the one that I think is now quite well established, which is that until recently the accepted narrative was that color photography was invented by William Eggleston and John Szarkowski with his MoMA show, but more and more the chapters in any book of photographic history about color photography are having to get revised. Some of those Winogrand pictures, like that one of the pizza and the monkey, are not just pictures that happen to be in color. There’s so much Winogrand stuff where he’s taking it in color because it’s a potentially great color photograph.
A: It just seems to me almost impossible to get to grips with what’s happening in late Winogrand, and I think at some point in the book I do sort of link it with late John Coltrane, which is something else I find difficult to process. If you’re talking about Beethoven there clearly is a late period, but really with Coltrane and Winogrand it’s not so much that we get a late period, we just get this particular period, which then became the last period, as it were, because it was curtailed by their deaths. So who knows what would have happened. Would Winogrand have continued just digging this hole of insistently maniacal photographing? Or was that going to yield to something else? We just don’t know and it remains a great enigma.
Q: Did you know before you started writing what you might be interested in saying about Mr. Winogrand’s work?
A: I didn’t have any kind of ax to grind, except of course I knew it should broadly cover the whole of his career, so I wanted something from every stage.
Q: Your first exposure to Mr. Winogrand came from the cover of a John Berger book, right?
A: Yes, absolutely. The picture in question is at the front of the book, the one with the seal or walrus with the people leaning over the curved railing to look at it.
Q: You dedicate the book to Mr. Berger, and you write about him to some extent in the book. I was reading that exchange you had with Ms. Malcolm in Aperture, and you said that one of Mr. Berger’s most distinct qualities is “his ability to look and stare at a photo until it yields its secrets.” Is that a quality you share?
A: I’ve got to watch out that I don’t get seduced into saying something rather self-aggrandizing at this point. So I would say yeah, I mean, everything I do have is derived from the Berger way of looking. But obviously the quality of my stare and my interrogation, my looking, is obviously not what Berger’s was, and I don’t think I have the stamina of gaze that Berger had.
But then I do think I have something maybe that John didn’t have. One of the key things about Winogrand is that he’s really funny, so I think there’s a kind of lightness, maybe, or a humor in the way I write about practically everything that is quite appropriate for Winogrand.
Q: Where does your eye go when you look at a Winogrand photograph? Is there a particular way of sorting through all that visual material that’s unlike looking at any other photographer’s work?
A: No, except the difference is with, say, [Henri] Cartier-Bresson that we quickly start to look for the rhymes and that kind of stuff, whereas with Winogrand you keep thinking, “Why did he photograph that?” But there was no particular thing I would look for. I’d just look at them really and then once a picture had sort of caught my attention, once it had detained me, then I’d start to look more closely at what was going on in it and find other little details.
Q: You have a habit of writing books whose form shares some of the qualities of the subject you’re covering. Your essays in this book sometimes turn fictional. Was that an effort to mirror Mr. Winogrand, whose work you say “resembles that of a realist novelist”?
A: Yeah, certainly. I mean, he’s always tempting one down that route. One of his most repeated maxims is “a photograph has no narrative ability at all.” He says about this one picture, “Look, you can’t tell whether she’s pulling her panties up or down.” And that is so, so true. But at the same time the pictures are all the time tempting you to explore the narrative possibilities.
Q: When did you start responding to Mr. Winogrand’s work with fiction?
A: I wasn’t writing the pieces in any particular order, so some pieces encouraged me to go into that way of writing and some didn’t. And the thing is it’s not like there’s such an abrupt distinction, because even in the ones where I’m not writing obvious fiction, still quite often I’m using the pictures — this is me sounding like a budget version of Berger — to tell stories of one kind or another. It’s just that in some of them the style is more evidently fictive than in others.
Q: Did writing this book change how you think about Mr. Winogrand?
A: What it did was make me aware that there’s room for another three, four or five Winogrand books still to come. I always remember a friend I had when I was in my 20s was writing a book about Marguerite Duras, and she never finished it because she’d gotten so sick of Marguerite Duras. But in a really nice way my admiration for and fascination with Winogrand is by no means sated.
