A housing proposal that is dividing neighborhoods and political leaders — state legislation that would override local zoning laws to build dense housing projects near transit lines — has become a top issue in the race for governor. The bill, sponsored by Senator Scott Wiener, was defeated Tuesday by a Senate committee, but Mr. Wiener vows he will bring it back. Two Democratic candidates for governor, Antonio Villaraigosa and Gavin Newsom, have said they won’t sign it. Mr. Wiener talked to us about his bill before the vote; the interview has been edited and condensed for clarity.
Q: Are you surprised your bill has become such a contentious issue in this race?
A: I absolutely did not see that coming, in terms of every candidate for governor having to take a position on it, having it come up every debate. We knew it was going to be a controversial bill. There is so much pent-up frustration around housing in the state that, in retrospect, it’s not surprising that this touched a nerve.
Q: Was the original bill, which you’ve amended to make less sweeping, a negotiating tactic to provoke discussion?
A: We knew it was an aggressive bill. I knew it was not going to pass in the exact form we introduced it.
Q: Were you surprised that Mr. Villaraigosa and Mr. Newsom said they wouldn’t sign it?
A: Full disclosure: I’ve endorsed Gavin Newsom. And Gavin has been more nuanced about it. He basically said he supports what’s behind the bill but wants changes. Antonio has expressed firmer opposition. Both Newsom and Villaraigosa have announced they are going to preside over the creation of 3.7 million new homes over seven years. Well, to get that done requires changing how we zone for and approve housing. You are not going to build 3.7 million homes over seven years if you allow local communities to enforce hyper-low density zoning in our job centers by public transportation. You’ve got to make the hard choices.
Gavin or Antonio will do what it takes get those homes built. When you are running for governor and you keep getting a controversial bill thrown in your face, you have to be cautious. I understand why they are taking the position they are taking.
Q: Would you expect them to sign it?
A: If this bill doesn’t pass this year, we are going to bring it back next year. This isn’t going away.
Last week, we reported on the suspension of a fraternity at California Polytechnic State University, after its members dressed as gang members, including one in blackface. One reader responded saying that she found it surprising that the university in San Luis Obispo is 57 percent white. How, she wondered, did the ethnic makeup there compare to other public colleges and universities throughout the state?
Roughly 59 percent of all students at Cal Poly are white, compared with about 20 percent at California State University Long Beach and about 25 percent in the Cal State system over all.
There have been sustained protests on campus since the incident was reported last week. At an open house for prospective students, several student groups boycotted, leaving empty tables with signs, including one that read: “Cal Poly: Not safe for students of color.” For a school that has put concerted effort into getting a more diverse group of students, the incident may prove to damage enrollment.
