LONDON — When I moved back to London in 2017 after more than 10 years living abroad, the first thing that hit me was the smell of diesel and the dusty haze hovering over the city.
Within months I was short of breath and coughing regularly. I decided to download an app that monitors the city’s air-quality levels. The data was startling, to say the least.
Toxic air in London has been at illegal levels since 2010, and for a brief period last year, air pollution here was worse than Beijing’s, according to statistics published by the London mayor’s office.
More than 9,000 Londoners die prematurely each year because of the toxic air in Britain’s capital, where approximately 50 percent of the pollution comes from vehicles on the road, with 40 percent coming from vehicles that use diesel.
Yet many Londoners seem to be unaware of how severe the problem is (the mayor’s office calls it a “health crisis”). The British artist Michael Pinsky decided he would try to change that.
He set up five geodesic domes, or pollution pods, on the grounds of Somerset House, an arts center in the heart of London. The aim was to emulate the atmospheric conditions in Beijing; São Paulo, Brazil; London; New Delhi; and Norway’s Tautra Island by recreating the air using safe chemicals.
He said he hoped that by experiencing levels of pollution from around the world, people would be jolted by what is an increasingly global problem — and be galvanized to act.
“These iconic images of polar bears on melting glaciers and children dying in African deserts are highly emotive, but they leave people completely disempowered — they don’t know what to do,” Mr. Pinsky said in an interview on Sunday as he watched people’s reactions as they walked through his installation.
Like many of the exhibition’s visitors on Earth Day, I was curious to find out how London’s pollution compared to that of other cities.
I started off in Norway’s Tautra Island. The air felt light and clean.
Then I moved to London, where my nostrils immediately began to tickle from the stench of diesel.
In New Delhi, my senses were assaulted as I walked through smog so thick and smelly that it made hazy Beijing feel refreshing.
By the time I reached São Paulo, I was desperate to get out.
A vast majority of the visitors to Mr. Pinsky’s pollution pods either scrunched up their faces or covered their noses as soon as they breathed in the scent of diesel.
Anna Whiston, a 24-year-old paralegal who recently moved to London from the countryside, said the pollution in the city was invisible, but she noticed it through her physical symptoms.

Visitors generally started slowly in the cleanest air pod and moved faster as the air quality deteriorated. Many coughed and sneezed, and some children cried and ran out.
Meredith Pistulka, 26, who moved to London from Florida this year, kept sneezing even after she left the domes.
Ms. Pistulka and her boyfriend said they recently bought plants to help improve the air quality in their apartment.
Mr. Pinsky said people’s experiences in the pods were subjective and depended on what levels of pollution they were exposed to daily. He recalled the experience of one couple from a rural part of Ireland who started gagging when they entered the New Delhi room and had to exit immediately.
The pods are climatically controlled and contain various levels of ozone, particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide.
Somerset House was chosen for the installation, which will end on Wednesday, because “this courtyard was deliberately built with no nature in it to demonstrate how mankind could make something more beautiful than nature,” Mr. Pinsky said.
To mark Earth Day, Somerset House raised a new Union Jack flag that will change color as it reacts to London’s air quality in real time. The flag, created by the artist Lauren Bowker, will transform from red, white and blue to gray and black as it reacts to levels of radiation exposure.
