The government doesn’t want you to pay too much to watch your shows. That’s why the Justice Department says it is challenging the proposed merger between AT&T and Time Warner.
The companies that beam, or stream, your favorite shows onto your screens, and how much they can get away with charging you, attract a lot of scrutiny when they start racking up acquisitions and cornering the marketplace. What keeps them in check are antitrust laws. “Unreasonable curbs on competition are, in theory, at least, criminal.” Too much control or market share can happen in two ways. The first is horizontal integration. If one studio gains monopoly power by buying up lots of other studios, and the resulting company squeezes out the competition across an industry, or jacks up prices for consumers, it could be violating antitrust laws. The second way is vertical integration of the supply chain. In the late 1940s, the government actually went in and busted up the Hollywood studio system because a few behemoths owned almost all the studios, and the theaters, and they controlled the distribution rights to almost all the films. “Hello, Mr. Aylesworth. How are you?” That made it extremely difficult for other companies in the business of making, or selling, or showing movies. If we look at today’s digital landscape, that would be like if an internet provider also owns the studios that make the shows and the channels, premium networks or streaming platforms. And in some cases, maybe even the device you watch on. Kind of like, say, Apple or Amazon. The government usually leaves these kinds of companies alone if the growth happens organically, through ingenuity. But when a company grows through mergers and acquisitions, that can raise a red flag. Historically there have been fewer challenges to vertical integration up and down the supply chain, than across industries. But when AT&amp;T decided it wanted to merge with Time Warner, the Department of Justice decided to challenge the move. “Your pricing is going to go up. I don’t think it’s a good deal for the country.” The companies say they need to make this deal to compete with the Amazons and Apples of the world. The question is whether one huge company plus another huge company would turn into one new enormous telecom and media company controlling so much content, and the way it’s delivered to you that it could charge consumers more and squeeze out other producers, suppliers or distributors who want to make you laugh, cry and binge-watch.
WASHINGTON — Lawyers faced off over the future of AT&T’s $85.4 billion blockbuster merger with Time Warner for a final time in a courtroom on Monday, sparring over what the deal would mean to consumers.
The Justice Department, which sued to block the deal, argued that the merger would cost people millions of dollars a year by limiting competition. If the judge does approve the deal, the government said, the court should force the companies to sell off certain business lines to protect consumers.
But the companies countered that the government had failed to make its case. They said consumers would benefit from the merger because it would allow Time Warner and AT&T to compete more effectively against Silicon Valley companies like Google and Netflix.
“The only lessening of competition that would occur is if this merger is blocked,” said Daniel Petrocelli, the lead lawyer for AT&T and Time Warner.
The judge, Richard J. Leon of United States District Court for the District of Columbia, is expected to rule on the case on June 12. He has given little indication of his thinking throughout the trial, and he gave no sign of his leanings on Monday, either.
The six-week courtroom battle, featuring top executives and glimpses of trade secrets, has been one of the most closely watched antitrust cases in years. It has the potential to reshape the fast-changing telecom and entertainment landscape, which is facing new competition from tech companies.
The judge’s opinion could also help set the course for antitrust regulation in the years ahead. A victory for the companies could embolden executives to pursue new deals. A government win could slow future deal-making. On Sunday, T-Mobile and Sprint announced a merger to better compete against AT&T, in a deal that is also expected to face close antitrust scrutiny.
The case has centered on the question of harm to consumers and whether the merger would lead to price increases. The Justice Department presented several theories for why prices could go up hundreds of millions of dollars a year over all for cable subscribers. The core idea is that AT&T could threaten to withhold Time Warner content, like N.B.A. games and CNN, to extract more money from rival cable and satellite operators that wanted to run that “must-have” programming.
The call for selling off business lines showed how little the two sides have changed their strategy throughout the trial. The Justice Department, which had made the same demand before it sued in November, says only the divestitures would solve antitrust concerns because restrictions on business practices are rarely well enforced.
The government called witnesses from Dish’s Sling TV and from Cox, Charter and RCN, which provide cable and broadband service, to discuss their fears that AT&T, one of the nation’s largest satellite television providers, would use Time Warner’s programming as its weapon to hurt them. The Justice Department also relied heavily on an economic analysis by Carl Shapiro, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, that estimated monthly cable bills could go up at least 27 cents.
“There are hundreds of millions of dollars in harms to consumers,” Mr. Conrath said.
AT&T and Time Warner fiercely attacked those economic arguments during the trial and in the closing argument on Monday. Rivals are always motivated to argue against the activities of competitors, Mr. Petrocelli said.
The companies assailed the economic analysis of Mr. Shapiro, saying the data sets used were not complete and cherry-picked points.
The companies’ ability to raise doubts about the Justice Department’s case put the government in a challenging position, analysts said.
“The burden of proof is on the government, and the consensus view is that it would be an uphill battle for the government,” said Paul Glenchur, a senior telecommunications and cable analyst for Hedgeye Potomac Research.
For a merger focused on the future of technology, the trial felt stuck in time. A clock on the wall was frozen at 5:05. Cellphones and other device were forced off. Lawyers relied on boxes of files and binders wheeled in on library carts. Judge Leon, with bow ties and cuff links, was a stickler for order and schedules. He took careful notes by pencil.
Political questions have hovered over the trial, but have not been allowed in the courtroom. President Trump, a vocal critic of Time Warner’s CNN, said during the election campaign that the merger should be blocked. Makan Delrahim, the Justice Department’s head of antitrust, told the court in filings that the White House had not influenced his decision. Judge Leon, however, said he wanted to keep the trial focused on the merits of the deal.
The outcome of the trial may not be a simple yes or no on the merger. Judge Leon may push the parties to work out a settlement that would let the merger proceed with the promise of assigning a third-party arbitrator to resolve business disputes over Time Warner content. He could also, as the government suggested, demand that some parts of the merged company be sold before the deal is approved.
Whichever side loses is expected to appeal.