Antonio Villaraigosa, the former mayor of Los Angeles, is a leading Democratic candidate for governor. California Today has been doing occasional question-and-answer sessions with candidates for office, and today we turn to Mr. Villaraigosa. The interview, edited and condensed for clarity, was done for our article on the race.
Q: Does Gov. Jerry Brown deserve any blame for the increase in poverty and homelessness?
A: No. I don’t think so. The state was in free-fall when he came in. And it took, what, four years, the first term at least, really five years, to get us back on the footing that we are on now. We weren’t in a position to do what we needed to do. The next administration needs to focus a lot more on building on that template of homelessness, affordable housing and economic development.
Q: Do you support the bill proposed by Senator Scott Wiener that would override local zoning laws to permit more dense housing construction near transit lines?
A: There are two problems with the Wiener bill. It starts out with a stick. I think you need to start out with incentives. And it only focuses on places where there is transit-oriented development. So Marin County, as an example, would be exempt. Marin has probably led the state in fighting affordable homeless.
Q: You have criticized the pledge by one of your opponents, Gavin Newsom, to pass single-payer health care system for California.
A: I’m for it in concept. But it would require waivers from Trump so you can get Medicare. That’s not going to happen. That’s why I call it snake oil.
Q: Is this an effective campaign issue for Mr. Newsom?
A: He’s the darling of the nurses. It is very, very effective with those who are just so disenchanted with what’s going on with Trump and want to believe that we can somehow do something about this without Trump’s cooperation and notwithstanding our own budgetary constraints.
Q: Do you support impeaching President Trump?
A: No. It’s become crystal clear that we are on our way to establishing that Donald Trump obstructed justice. But in order to impeach, that means you have to convince not just Democrats, you have to convince Republicans, too. You can’t just call for impeachment. We have to build for it.
When Gov. Jerry Brown turned 40 — that happened 40 years ago, the first time Mr. Brown served as governor — The Los Angeles Times marked the moment with a story. “The young governor becomes a middle-aged governor today,” the first paragraph reads.
Mr. Brown turns 80 on Saturday. He is the oldest governor in the United States, according to the authoritative source on such things (Wikipedia). He plans to head to a gym to “pump some iron” and weather permitting, take a bike ride with his wife, Anne Gust Brown. There’s dinner with staff on Friday night and another one with friends and family, including his sisters Kathleen and Barbara, at the Governor’s Mansion in Sacramento on Saturday.
“Per tradition, the first lady will also be baking his mother’s famous banana cake,” said Evan Westrup, Mr. Brown’s press secretary.
The writer of that original story observed that in the four years since Mr. Brown had taken office at age 36, his sideburns grayed, and keeping his weight down “has become a problem.” Forty years later, the sideburns are gone. All the hair is gone. We won’t say anything about the weight, except blame that famous banana cake.
