The epidemic didn’t just deprive us of millions of lives — it deprived us of decades of potential masterpieces of fashion, art, design, theater and dance. Here, we imagine Keith Haring, Tina Chow, Alvin Ailey and Perry Ellis as they might have been.
Most of the people we revere in the arts would be unknown if they’d died before 40. I was just thinking of Allen Barnett, who lived to publish one book of stories, 1990’s “The Body and Its Dangers,” before dying of AIDS a year later at 36.  And no wonder! His book had been excerpted in The New Yorker, and everyone expected great things. Now he’s nearly forgotten, along with all the other geniuses who found their start — and their end — in Manhattan in the early ’80s.
I remember 1981 in Larry Kramer’s living room, when the dermatologist Alvin Friedman-Kien told us for the first time about AIDS and added: “I would stop having sex if I were you guys.” We were incensed: Like most gays (and many straights), to us political liberation meant the freedom to be promiscuous. We still had wounds from the ’60s, when New York would close a gay bar as soon as it opened; 1969’s Stonewall uprising was, after all, sparked by the cops shuttering a Greenwich Village dance bar. In that pre-internet era, bars were the main places where gays met each other. The idea that we were being asked to give up sex altogether because of some mysterious new disease, which would undoubtedly be cured right away, outraged us.
But the disease wasn’t brought under control until 1996. During that period, thousands of painters, writers, dancers, actors, directors and other artists suffered and died — the ones who were the most daring, both aesthetically and sexually. Of course there were many sick non-gay people: Haitians, American blacks, a high percentage of women. But generally it was the timid who survived, those who stayed at home during those incredibly creative years.
As soon as a test existed, in 1985, I was tested. Like many people, I had been living with H.I.V. for years without knowing it — no one did. (Though, unbeknownst to me back then, I belonged to a tiny percentage of “slow progressors,” people whose T-cell count keeps dropping, but so slowly they seldom move into the danger zone.) Those of us who were positive quickly developed an entirely new way of thinking about time. We wanted to act as if everything was normal so we could fully enjoy what was left of daily life; at the same time, most experiences seemed unbearably trivial. How could you set out a picnic while time’s winged chariot was bearing down on you? I just stayed in bed for months, though many artists rushed to finish their life’s work, like the great French writer and photographer Hervé Guibert, who said to me, “I want to write all the books I might have written in a long life, even if I have to do them badly.” He left behind 35 titles when he died in 1991. Or take Paul Monette, who wasted his days writing silly “novelizations” of movies until his partner died, then turned his attention to his brilliant memoirs, “Borrowed Time: An AIDS Memoir” and “Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story,” before dying at 49 in 1995. Love and death had handed him the most important themes there are.
I recently learned that the Latin word “holocaustum” means a “burnt offering to the gods.” For 15 years in New York, starting in 1981, the gods were indeed very greedy. And as Fran Lebowitz once pointed out, AIDS not only decimated practitioners of the arts, it also destroyed a whole generation of its most dedicated consumers.
We are grateful to the families and foundations of Alvin Ailey, Tina Chow, Perry Ellis and Keith Haring for their gracious support of this story.
I was just a baby when he died, but everyone says my father was a ray of light. The fact that he asked my mother to share a child with him — which wasn’t done very much at the time — was a sign of who he was. She was a writer, already in her early 40s, in the television business, very far from the fashion world. But she had a tomboyish, Annie Hall fashion sense; she used to wear some of his suits. He thought she was one of the most beautiful women he had ever seen.
I first saw Perry one summer on the ferry to the Fire Island Pines. He was so striking, leaning against the boat’s rail. He was from the South, but his face was, to me, the perfect New England face, with that hair flowing. The thing that always distinguished him was his pure Americanness; he looked so clean and open. Yet he was very mysterious and quiet, a completely romantic character. Physically, he was someone who embodied the clothes he designed. It wasn’t a costume or a fantasy.
Even before she married [restaurateur] Michael Chow, everyone was taken with her. She was so light! That’s the word that distinguished her: Whether she was with Yves Saint Laurent or Jean-Michel Basquiat, she was the same person. At Mr. Chow, she would treat people as guests in her home. Every night was such theater, and she worked, nonstop, 24 hours a day.
As a teenager, Keith bought art supplies with his own money and took them to entertain kids in an inner-city neighborhood not far from our house in Pennsylvania. I was 12 years younger than him, but I can remember how energetic and committed he was to being an activist as well as an artist: In 1982, a few months before he had his first solo show at Tony Shafrazi’s gallery, he went to a nuclear disarmament rally in Central Park and distributed 20,000 posters. He didn’t have much money at that point, but somehow he got the posters made, and he had friends lug the boxes uptown and roll posters all day.
I met Keith at the School of Visual Arts in 1978, when I heard Devo music in the hall and walked until I found him painted into the corner of his room, having covered the walls, ceiling and floor to the beat. Around 1981, we moved together to a little apartment building near Times Square, which was quite dangerous at the time; we’d walk over to the subway where he would do the work that made him famous.
The head of his school, Denise Jefferson, would ask up-and-coming young choreographers like me to come and work with his students. And when I was at UCLA, in the early ’80s, he invited me to see him at the Del Capri hotel, which was straight out of the ’50s: kidney-shaped pools, bungalows where his dancers stayed. But while everyone was out by the pool, he was alone in a big suite, and I came to understand his loneliness: He did not have a partner.
The first time I laid eyes on him was when the company performed in Philadelphia: Can you imagine him dancing in “Wade in the Water” [Ailey’s legendary 1960 piece]? And then, you saw them afterwards, loading their costumes into wicker baskets to move to the next city. It was so difficult at the beginning. They did everything themselves. Everyone talks about diversity now; he cared about inclusion while keeping the company predominantly African-American. To him, this was entwined with the Civil Rights movement. But as long as you could really dance — as long as you were truly special — he didn’t care what color you were.
I wanted the photographer Anthony Goicolea to shoot this story, so I met with him to discuss an idea by Hanya Yanagihara, T’s editor in chief, to depict Keith Haring, Alvin Ailey, Perry Ellis and Tina Chow as if they were still alive: Above all, this project was meant to celebrate these creative legends and address the cultural void their deaths — and those of so many others with AIDS-related illnesses — left. Anthony, who is 46, told me that when he was a younger artist in New York he felt that he was “missing this whole group of people who, if they hadn’t died, would have been mentors.” He still feels this today.
Then I started talking to Regina Harris, who had done hair and makeup for three of Matthew Barney’s “Cremaster” films. She found three of the models (a casting agent scouted the fourth), people she encountered in daily life who had the right face shape and looked the appropriate age. Our stylist, Haidee Findlay-Levin, brought some scarves that were similar to ones worn by Ailey and went to visit Patricia Von Musulin, whose jewelry Tina Chow had often worn.
