A Trump administration proposal to steeply increase entrance fees to the most popular national parks landed with a thud when it was presented in November, and park officials say they are now reconsidering it.
The proposal, which would apply during the peak visitor season to 17 parks including the Grand Canyon, Yellowstone and Yosemite, called for a $70 fee for noncommercial vehicles, up from $30. The fee for motorcycles would rise to $50 from $25, while pedestrians and cyclists would be charged $30, up from $15.
Officials received more than 109,000 comments during a monthlong public comment period last year, with most commenters writing against the increase. Many said they would no longer be able to afford a trip, or would choose other options for vacations.
“We’ve taken the public’s suggestions seriously and have amended the plan to reflect those,” the service said in a statement.
No information was available about how the plan was amended. But some lawmakers hope a bipartisan bill introduced in March, led by Representative Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee, could address funding shortfalls. It would use revenue from energy produced on federal lands to chip away at a backlog of maintenance projects, estimated to cost more than $11 billion, at national parks.
Richard Dolesh, vice president for strategic initiatives at the National Recreation and Park Association, an advocacy group, said he was pleased that the administration appeared to be moving away from the initial proposal.
He said his group was not opposed to a more moderate fee increase, but that higher fees alone would not address the maintenance backlog, which includes basic infrastructure needs like rebuilding roads and facility improvements.
“It really needs the attention of Congress, and it needs dedicated long-term funding to address it,” he said.
The proposal would cover national parks including Acadia, Arches, Bryce Canyon, Canyonlands, Denali, Glacier, Grand Canyon, Grand Teton, Joshua Tree, Mount Rainier, Rocky Mountain, Olympic, Sequoia and Kings Canyon, Shenandoah, Yellowstone, Yosemite and Zion.
Advocates are concerned the $70 fee would make the parks inaccessible to lower-income families, which Mr. Dolesh said could have the long-term effect of the next generation never learning to love parks.
A survey of 1,000 Americans by the Outdoors Alliance for Kids in December found that 64 percent said they’d be less likely to visit a park if the fees were increased, including 71 percent of parkgoers with an income under $30,000.
Among public comments the National Park Service gathered, many said they would no longer be able to afford park visits, or expressed concern for those who wouldn’t.
“We do not want our parks to become only a destination for the wealthy and for foreign tourists — these parks are America’s heritage, and everyone deserves to see them,” another wrote.
Still, others were supportive of the fee increase, citing the need for improvements.
