The 48-year-old actress did same-sex love scenes for her new movie, “Disobedience,” but that’s not what’s about to shake and stir her marriage to Daniel Craig, a.k.a. James Bond.
Rachel Weisz is glowing.
I’ve interviewed her before and seen her at movie and theater parties, and she’s always glowing.
She already has an 11-year-old, Henry, with her former partner, the director Darren Aronofsky. And Mr. Craig, 50, has a 25-year-old daughter, Ella, with the actress Fiona Loudon.
Ms. Weisz (pronounced “Vice”) likes to say that happiness writes white, meaning it’s anathema to vibrant drama. But it seems quite cozy in life.
She and Mr. Craig, who have been married for seven years, share a similar quality on screen. It’s hard to look away from them. That’s true in person, as well. As the two stand at opposite counters, Ms. Weisz offering me tea and Mr. Craig proferring a cappuccino, it’s tough to know which way to turn.
Ms. Weisz’s latest movie, “Disobedience,” which she also produced, is about a young woman who becomes estranged from her father, a highly respected Orthodox rabbi in North London. She is persona non grata in their cloistered community — where gay and lesbian relationships are forbidden — because of a teenage relationship she had with her friend Esti, played by a deglamorized Rachel McAdams.
Ms. Weisz’s late mother, a teacher turned therapist, was Catholic and convent-schooled but a refugee from Vienna because her father was Jewish. Ms. Weisz’s father, an engineer and inventor, came from a Jewish Orthodox family in Budapest, and he also fled the Nazis, moving with his parents to London as a child.
“They met in their late 30s, early 40s, got married and they were like, ‘Oh, we’re both from Central Europe’ and she converted to marry him,” Ms. Weisz says.
There was a flap over whether “Blue Is the Warmest Color” was a lascivious product of the male gaze. But so far “Disobedience” — Ms. Weisz selected the director Sebastian Lelio, whom she described as “a straight Chilean lapsed Catholic” — has been praised for avoiding this trap.
I ask Ms. Weisz what it felt like to do her first love scene with a woman.
She had met Ms. McAdams on a one-day shoot on a Terrence Malick movie, which Ms. Weisz got cut from in the end.
“There’s a cycle of pulp fiction novels from the ’50s called ‘The Beebo Brinker Chronicles’ by Ann Bannon,” Ms. Weisz says. “‘Journey to a Woman’ is my favorite. And I met her and she’s completely fascinating. She’s a professor of linguistics. And she was a gay woman living in a 1950s heterosexual marriage, and she started to write these pulp fiction lesbian novels with an avatar in the book that was her lesbian self. It was mostly in her imagination. And she came down to Greenwich Village and there were lesbian bars where she researched.
Did Ms. Weisz do any research for the love scene with lesbian friends?
Ms. Weisz seems to float above Hollywood’s tortured relationship with women. She says she has not had any Me Too experiences and after her kick-start in “The Mummy” franchise, she has managed to find sultry and strong female roles in a series of indie films and a few big-budget ones.
“I think what happened was, women’s appetites were taken away from them,” Ms. Weisz says. “As women got the pill, suddenly it’s like, ‘Let’s not let them be free in the stories.’ Once we had Barbara Stanwyck running around making trouble. Then the ’70s were worse and in the ’80s and ’90s, it got really scary.
“Transgression is delicious. You can be a force for good and sleeping with a married man. That’s what makes you a human. That’s what makes you, in stories, believable and relatable. I can’t bear just really good, idealized characters.
She cited the example of her Oscar-winning turn in “The Constant Gardener” (2005) as Tessa Quayle, a human-rights activist.
Since Mr. Craig is my favorite Bond, I tell Ms. Weisz I’m relieved that he is doing Bond 25 and that he got over feeling that, as he said in 2015, he would rather slash his wrists than do another Bond.
I ask Ms. Weisz if she still loves being married.
Ms. Weisz has said if she were a record, she’d be a Beethoven piano concerto. She also loves David Bowie, Lou Reed and Patti Smith.
Besides her production of “a little human” with Mr. Craig, Ms. Weisz has been optioning novels and has six other movies focusing on women in the works.
“So I’m going to be a bloke,” Ms. Weisz says, excitedly.
Rachel Weisz considers the utility of advice in a round of Confirm or Deny.