Americas|Who Is Miguel Díaz-Canel, Cuba’s New President?
But one mystery remained: While nearly everyone knew of Cuba’s president, Raúl Castro, his handpicked successor, Miguel Díaz-Canel Bermúdez, was virtually unknown.
So when members of the United States Congress visited Cuba in early 2015, they peppered Mr. Díaz-Canel with questions: What did he think of the revolution that defined the island’s politics and its place on the world stage?
Mr. Díaz-Canel, who became Cuba’s new president on Thursday, the day before his 58th birthday, has spent his entire life in the service of a revolution he did not fight.
He took the helm of government on Thursday morning to a standing ovation from the National Assembly, which elected him in a nearly unanimous vote. Mr. Castro embraced him, lifting the younger man’s arm in triumph.
Mr. Díaz-Canel’s slow and steady climb up the ranks of the bureaucracy has come through unflagging loyalty to the socialist cause — he “is not an upstart nor improvised,” Mr. Castro has said — but he largely stayed behind the scenes until recent years.
Life After Castro: Who Is Cuba’s Next President?
As Raúl Castro of Cuba steps down, Miguel Díaz-Canel Bermúdez steps up. Here’s a look at Mr. Castro’s handpicked successor and what’s ahead for the communist country.
For over a half century, Cuba and the Castros have gone hand in hand. Often clad in green military fatigues, Fidel ruled the island nation as a dictator, squashing dissent and confronting a superpower just 90 miles away in America. Now, in a historic power shift, a new face is assuming power in Cuba. His name is Miguel Díaz-Canel and he’s been lurking in the background, standing shoulder to shoulder with Fidel and his brother Raúl, and yet all the while, he was slowly moving up the ranks, becoming the country’s vice president in 2013. It’s the first time a non-Castro will be president in more than 40 years. He takes over from Raúl, who succeeded his older brother in 2008. It’s also the first time that someone who wasn’t part of the revolution takes the reins. Raúl Castro had put in place rules that limit a president to two five-year terms. And he’s lived up to that. But Castro is not exactly disappearing. He will continue to head the Communist Party, arguably the most powerful political post in Cuba. So this is a slow changing of the guard. But it signals a huge shift in how Cuba will operate, politically and economically. Unlike the Castros, who established their legitimacy through the communist revolution, Díaz-Canel will have to cement his role by delivering on some much-needed reforms, including fixing the island’s two-currency system. As it stands, there’s both a national currency and another one pegged to the U.S. dollar, effectively barring parts of the population from purchasing certain basic goods and from actively participating in the larger economy. Díaz-Canel also needs to cultivate more opportunities for the country’s restive youth. “I hope that the line that Raúl Castro established a few years ago can be steadily improving and more businesses, more licenses, that’s what I hope.” Díaz-Canel is likely to maintain Cuba’s ties with Russia and China as relations with the U.S. continue to sour. He has also said that he plans to expand access to the internet. But on the question of human rights, like censorship, Cuba’s tight grip is likely to take longer to loosen. So just how did Díaz-Canel emerge in a country whose rulers have had an iron grip on power? He grew up 170 miles east of Havana, in Santa Clara, where he worked as an engineering professor and a local Communist Party leader. From there, he went on to become the youngest-ever member, at 43 years old, of the Politburo, the most powerful body within the Communist Party. He was appointed minister of higher education in 2009 and was handpicked to be vice president in 2013. Experts say he rose by keeping a low profile and toeing the country’s line. And with Raúl keeping close watch over his rule, any change will likely come slow.
In his speech before the National Assembly, Mr. Díaz-Canel offered many of the same revolutionary talking points of his predecessors, but perhaps with less of the verve or creativity of Fidel Castro or the gravitas of Raúl.
Raúl Castro said Thursday that he thought Mr. Díaz-Canel would serve two terms as president, for a total of 10 years. After that, Mr. Castro said, he envisioned Mr. Díaz-Canel taking over as party leader in 2021, when Mr. Castro suggested that he would retire from that post for good. This, to some, is a glimpse of the future leadership structure of Cuba after the Castros.
He was viewed from an early age as a rising star within Cuba’s Communist Party.
As a young man, he joined the Union of Young Communists, the party’s youth league, where he stood out among his peers. He later worked as a bodyguard to Raúl Castro. According to a friend who knew him at the time, the assignment allowed him to show loyalty to the cause, and drew Mr. Díaz-Canel close to both Raúl and Fidel Castro.
In his 20s, he was named the party’s liaison to Nicaragua, the only other Communist government in the region at the time, a posting viewed as important to the Cuban government.
Rodolfo Stusser, 72, recalled meeting Mr. Díaz-Canel in the late 1980s, while working as a doctor during Nicaragua’s civil war. Dr. Stusser felt the other doctors around him were lazy, not serious about their work. And just as he began liking his life in Nicaragua, he was being deployed elsewhere. He took his complaint to the Cuban Embassy, where he ran into a young Mr. Díaz-Canel, who offered him a ride.
Juan Juan Almeida, 52, recalls hearing Mr. Díaz-Canel’s name come up years later in conversations with his father, who was a prominent member of the Cuban Communist Party at the time. He remembers his father coming home one night in 1993 after a meeting in which officials discussed future leaders of the country.
José Ramón Machado Ventura, a member of the Cuban old guard, proposed a slate of young leaders and Mr. Díaz-Canel’s name was among them.
From then on, he said, Mr. Díaz-Canel’s name came up often. He moved from one prominent job to another — including provincial posts where he developed a reputation as an effective and loyal functionary.
His beliefs also skewed liberal, residents say. He lent his support to one of the country’s only gay clubs, El Mejunje. When it opened decades ago, the club was a point of contention. But Mr. Díaz-Canel, who took his children to the club when it hosted children’s activities, consistently backed the club in the face of controversy.
Yet some saw Mr. Díaz-Canel’s persona as crafted and less genuine than is often supposed. Sure, he rode his bike to and from work. But he was always trailed by his personal security in vehicles, others said.
At about 3 o’clock in the morning, Mr. Díaz-Canel, who was first secretary in the province, went to the hospital and began going from room to room, checking on patients and apologizing for the blackout.
“My impression was that he was doing politics,” Mr. Fariñas said.
Mr. Fariñas also recalled how, after graduation, Mr. Díaz-Canel became a teacher and party functionary at his university, joining a nationwide campaign to fight “negative tendencies” in Cuba.
“He was very active, very militant and very unconditional in his loyalty to the regime,” Mr. Fariñas said.