MOSCOW — A demonstration in Moscow against the Russian government’s effort to block the messaging app Telegram quickly morphed on Monday into a protest against President Vladimir V. Putin, with thousands of participants chanting against the Kremlin’s increasingly restrictive bent.
The crowd responded with a resounding “Yes!” to both questions.
The rally comes two weeks after Roskomnadzor, the official internet watchdog, began its bumbling effort to shut down Telegram by blocking what the regulator said was some 18 million I.P. addresses.
The F.S.B., the K.G.B.’s successor agency, went to court to obtain the order to block the app after Pavel V. Durov, Telegram’s inventor, a Russian who lives in exile, declined to provide the security agency with the means to decrypt messages. The F.S.B. said it needed to be able to read the messages to thwart terrorist attacks.
The effort to close Telegram has knocked out countless other sites, including some top websites, like Yandex and Vkontakte, the Russian equivalents of Google and Facebook. Although the shutdowns were brief, those companies did not hide their pique.
“A large number of people are aware of the situation and they are not O.K. with it,” said Nikita Likhachev, editor in chief of TJournal, an online publication covering internet culture, technology and politics.
With no public accountability, nobody has any real sense of the scope of the shutdown, he said. “The whole point about the internet being broken in Russia is that we don’t know what is happening and whether it can be fixed at all,” Mr. Likhachev said.
Countless people who play online games or use specialized services and tend to be apolitical, Mr. Likhachev said, have suddenly realized how much the government can affect their daily lives. “They have started asking questions about what is happening,” he said.
The rally, organized by Russia’s small Libertarian Party, had an official permit — often a sign that the government knows that a broad segment of the population is angry. The roster of speakers included opposition stalwarts like Aleksei A. Navalny, the anticorruption activist. He led chants of “Down with the Czar!” and called on people to continue to fight censorship at the May 5 rally he has called nationwide to protest Mr. Putin’s inauguration for a fourth term.
Various speakers and demonstrators said they had never been to any public demonstration before.
Alexander Gornik, 34, a software entrepreneur, said many of the tools that his employees use for work, like Slack, Pipedrive and Tralier, were now inaccessible. To make high-quality software that can compete globally, Russia needs to be connected to the world, he said.
“This is not just about Telegram, it is an attempt to isolate the Russian segment of the internet,” Mr. Gornik said.
Despite all the attention paid to Russian hacking and other expertise on the internet, the programmers at the government regulatory agency have not been capable of handling the complicated process of shutting down an app with international reach.
Mr. Durov, who left Russia after his previous creation, Vkontakte, was wrestled away from him in 2014, generated countless additional I.P. addresses to thwart efforts to block Telegram. Some 13 million Russians are among its 200 million users worldwide, and many in Russia can still access the site. Mr. Durov encouraged the demonstrators from afar with a series of posts on Vkontakte.
In recent months, the Putin administration, particularly the Foreign Ministry, has repeatedly accused the West of “Russophobia” for sanctions and the general sour mood toward Russia.
One rally organizer turned that accusation on its head, telling the demonstrators that it was various politicians and bureaucrats who were shutting down the internet who were really afraid of the Russian people. He began shouting the names of some of them followed by “Russophobe,” and the entire crowd chanted with him.
There was no immediate government reaction to the protest.
Many of the demonstrators carried paper airplanes, the symbol of Telegram, which whipped around above the heads of the crowd.
The turnout of many thousands was particularly notable in that Monday was the start of a weeklong holiday, when Muscovites depart the city in droves for the country or abroad. A second rally is planned for Tuesday in St. Petersburg.
Polina Oleinik, 17, and Polina Bulakh, 16, both students, said it was the first demonstration that they had ever attended.
