Style|Are Astronaut-Style Face Shields the Future of P.P.E.?
Are Astronaut-Style Face Shields the Future of P.P.E.?
They may look high-tech, but so far there’s no evidence these devices are more effective than face masks.
“If you have to sneeze, you’re in trouble,” Bill Johnson said of wearing the Air, an acrylic visor that evokes 1960s Soviet cosmonaut culture. Mr. Johnson, 44, a voice and video engineer in Utah, had tested an early model of the device on an airplane from Salt Lake City to Seattle to Ketchikan, Alaska, then on a three-hour ferry ride and a floatplane to reach his bush cabin.
The Air, which features built-in HEPA filters, four hours of power on a lithium battery and a removable washable fabric, is one of the new space age-style wearables being marketed as the evolution of mask culture.
There’s also the BioVyzr, a pressurized, anti-fog face shield with two adjustable fans that run for up to eight hours on a single USB charge. The creators describe the device, which looks a bit like the weather shield of a baby carriage, as a new form of P.P.E.: a powered air-purifying respirator, or PAPR, which they say can remove as much as 95 percent of particulate matter, such as droplets and aerosols.
A more minimalist Bubble Boy option is the iSphere, a plastic orb with half a dozen attachable variations such as filters, valves, headsets, even snorkels.
Mask mania has given way to a very experimental cottage industry. BioVyzr, which raised over $750,000 in May on the crowdfunding site Indiegogo, has sold more than 50,000 units to customers and wholesalers worldwide, totaling over $5 million in sales, according to Yezin Al-Qaysi, the 32-year-old C.E.O. of Vyzr Technologies. Shipping begins this week and will continue through October. Microclimate, the makers of Air, say they have sold 1,000 units at $199 each and will begin shipping them in mid-October.
Laurie Herzlin, 55, purchased two BioVyzrs, “to get back out into the world again as I have been in isolation for 203 days now.” She is immunocompromised and had planned to wear the face shield on a flight from her home in Florida to visit her daughter in Toronto.
After multiple emails and phone calls with Air Canada, providing them with photos of the BioVyzrs, which they requested, the airline refused to let her wear it on the plane. “Air Canada finally came back with a generic response that cited ‘safety concerns,’” she said.
Are these masks more effective than normal masks?
Short answer is: No. Added eye protection, such as glasses or a visor, may be beneficial, according to a September study of 276 Covid-19 cases in a Chinese hospital in Suizhou. While such a small study group means it’s too early to draw conclusions, any barrier to touching our faces is positive.
While masks play a role in communication and expression, eye-popping products create false security, said Dr. Sun, who emphasizes continued need for affordable P.P.E., distancing and basic hygiene.
“A simple cloth covering, surgical or cloth mask, will be more than adequate for most people,” said Peter Chin-Hong, an infectious disease specialist at the University of California, San Francisco.
There is also new evidence that plastic coverings may not be as good as advertised. In late September, Japanese researchers reported that face masks provide effective protection and that nonwoven fabric masks block the most droplets from a cough. Plastic face shields are not very effective at protecting others, they found; they may protect a wearer against droplets from others, but not the other way around.
