“Every mesquite tree tastes different, so you have to walk around tasting them all,” says chef Rocky Barnette about the southwestern plant that grows plentifully in Marfa, Tex., where he lives and cooks. The indigenous flora and fauna of the sleepy town have become an obsession for Barnette. So much so that in December, he will launch a preconquest tasting menu — a collection of dishes inspired by the ancient cuisines of the region — at the Capri, the restaurant and events space owned by his wife, the arts and culture philanthropist Virginia Lebermann.
If Barnette’s unusual concoctions, such as prickly pear wine and marigold vinaigrette, give him a reputation among locals as a mad scientist chef, then Lebermann, a Texas native, may well be the creative community’s unofficial mayor. In 2003, Lebermann and the arts patron Fairfax Dorn co-founded the arts and culture nonprofit Ballroom Marfa, creating a gallery and performance space in a converted 1927 dance hall. Then, in 2004, Lebermann doubled down on her commitment to the blossoming artistic community that had grown around Marfa’s Judd, Chinati and Lannan foundations, and purchased a dilapidated 1950s motel, the Thunderbird, which she resuscitated and reopened the following year. The adjacent military hangar next door would eventually become the Capri — with interiors styled by the Hollywood set designer Sean Daly (“Sherlock Holmes”), and food that speaks to the town’s diverse lot of cattle farmers, expats and artists.
Barnette’s early years were formative, and a precursor, you could say, to his new menu. Growing up in North Carolina, he cultivated cactuses and chiles in his trailer park garden before leaving home at 18. He then spent three months off the grid in Querétaro, Mexico, without running water, electricity or telephones before an eight-year-stint at the Michelin-starred restaurant near D.C., the Inn at Little Washington. When Barnette moved to Marfa, he worked in consumer advocacy, educating the community on the Farm Bill, and eventually opened a waffles, shrimp and grits joint called the Miniature Rooster with a chef pal. He also met Lebermann, almost immediately upon arrival there, and advised her on creating an affordable and efficient kitchen in the Capri.
