TOKYO — Wherever the Japanese animated filmmaker Makoto Shinkai goes these days, he gets some variation on the question of what it’s like to be the Next Big Thing.
Yet “Your Name,” which blends gender swapping with time travel, a natural disaster and star-crossed teenage lovers set to a J-pop soundtrack, is the second-biggest-grossing Japanese movie in the country’s history, exceeded only by Mr. Miyazaki’s “Spirited Away.” Since it opened in August, “Your Name” has spent 12 weeks at the top of the box office and has grossed 19.4 billion yen (about $170 million).
“Your Name” has started a one-week Oscar qualifying run in Los Angeles and opened last week on 7,000 screens across China. (Funimation, its United States distributor, will give it a wider American release in early 2017.) The Japanese government is promoting “Your Name” — along with “Godzilla Resurgence,” another box office hit this year — as a major cultural export.
Early word outside Japan has been strong. Writing in The Daily Telegraph in London, Robbie Collin described “Your Name” as “so beautiful it’s almost laughable.” Last month the International Animated Film Society nominated “Your Name” for an Annie Award in the best independent animated feature category.
In Japan, where the movie has received mostly positive reviews, the film’s surprise success has been propelled by word of mouth. Fans are so ardent that they have been making pilgrimages to some of the locations believed to have inspired important scenes in the film.
Although the hit status is new for Mr. Shinkai, the themes in “Your Name” are not. Since his first film, “Voices of a Distant Star” (2002) — which he made almost entirely by himself on a computer — Mr. Shinkai has explored how young men and women do and do not connect. Text messages disappear, cellphone calls don’t go through, and characters only just miss meeting on trains.
In “Your Name,” Mitsuha, a country girl who longs to move to the big city, and Taki, a soulful Tokyo teenager, swap bodies in their dreams. Comedy ensues as they each discover the joys and challenges of being in the body of the opposite gender.
But gradually, as they leave cellphone messages for each other describing what each has done in the other’s body, romantic feelings kindle even though they have not met.
In a slouchy gray cardigan, wire-rimmed glasses and a fuzzy soul patch, Mr. Shinkai sipped from a bottle of vending-machine iced coffee and smiled almost sheepishly as he described the recurring themes of his work.
“When I was young as a teenager, that was the biggest mystery in the world to me: Why don’t people connect?” said Mr. Shinkai, who is married with a 6-year-old daughter.
Beyond the allure of teenage romance, “Your Name” has struck a chord here as it deals with a town’s grief after a natural disaster. The comparison is inescapable to the 2011 earthquake and tsunami that took close to 18,500 lives while setting off a nuclear meltdown at a power plant in Fukushima.
The movie clearly taps into a sense of regret and wish fulfillment in Japan.
Mr. Shinkai’s method is different from that of many anime directors. He writes a script first, and for “Your Name,” even wrote a novelization, released two months beforehand, which has sold more than 1.3 million copies.
Using a digital tablet, he lays down the dialogue, sound effects and music in a multimedia storyboard before introducing images.
He readily describes his drawing ability as mediocre. To fill out the storyboard, he plucks images from around the web, including Google Maps, and then animators flesh out his vision.
“Your Name” features exquisite detailed images of old Japanese customs in Mitsuha’s hometown and the bustling modernity of Tokyo. Prosaic touches like a cellphone lighting a character’s face at night take on an surprising beauty.
