BERLIN — When a 19-year-old medical student was found raped and drowned in the university city of Freiburg in October, it was seen as a sad and awful crime, but a local one. Beyond a few tabloids, the story failed to make national headlines.
But only after Chancellor Angela Merkel and members of her cabinet weighed in on the fierce debate over that question did the country’s leading public broadcaster, ARD, pick up the story, which it had originally judged did not meet the threshold for national news.
Over the past week, citizens, politicians and journalists have wrestled with the reality that to the German public, it seems that a crime committed by a migrant is of national interest and importance, while a similar one committed by a German is, perhaps, not.
ARD’s earlier decision not to report on the crime set off further anger and accusations that the country’s “liberal media elite” were intent on protecting migrants, going so far as to underreport or even cover up their crimes.
The differing views have revealed deep rifts in German society between those who support Ms. Merkel’s decision to welcome some one million migrants and those who view the newcomers, who are mostly Muslim, as a threat to the country’s stability and security.
Typing the German words “are migrants” into Google’s search engine in Germany completes the phrase with “more criminal than Germans” on its second suggestion. In an attempt to calm a heated debate and answer just that question, Germany’s Federal Criminal Office, or BKA, released statistics in June about migrant criminality last year.
Less than 10 percent of Germany’s population of 81 million people is foreign born. Of the roughly two million people investigated for all crimes, just 6 percent were migrants.
Of 2,721 crimes that ended in a death, migrants were responsible for 233, or about 9 percent. And of 1,683 cases of sexual abuse, including rape, migrants were responsible for about 5 percent.
All of those percentages were at least double the previous year’s, but the BKA report noted that the migrant population had increased by 357 percent.
In short, it was not a particularly damning portrait.
After members of Ms. Merkel’s cabinet and other leading politicians from across the spectrum joined the debate, Kai Gniffke, ARD’s editor in chief, defended the station’s decision in a blog post.
After careful consideration, he said, editors did not consider the crime in Freiburg to be any different from the roughly 300 other murders that take place in Germany each year. But as the crime, and the station’s handling of it, became the center of a stormy national debate, ARD changed its mind, even inviting Ms. Merkel on the evening news program to comment.
Ms. Merkel’s measured comments, made just a day before she called for banning full-face veils “wherever legally possible,” were indicative of the political balancing act she is now undertaking.
On the one hand, she has repeatedly underscored the Western liberal values that underpinned her decision to embrace the migrants. She has also consistently defended that decision with a “We can do this” slogan intended to minimize the logistical and security challenges she may have invited.
But as pressure has grown from the far right and Germans have grown more wary after prominent episodes, including widespread sexual harassment blamed on migrants in Cologne last New Year’s Eve and terrorist attacks this summer, the chancellor has also made clear that Germany would be less welcoming in the future.
Her conservative Christian Democrats have begun taking a harder line, passing a resolution at their party congress this week aimed at toughening penalties for forced marriage and honor killings and urging an end to dual citizenship.
The far right has been quick to seize on crimes like the murder in Freiburg of Maria Ladenburger, whose body was spotted in the Dreisam River by a jogger on Oct. 17, the morning after she was killed.
The police say they identified the suspect — a 17-year-old whose name they gave only as Hussein K., in keeping with German privacy law — through DNA evidence from a strand of hair found near the crime scene.
In the aftermath, Hans Peter Stauch, a member of the legislature in the state, Baden-Württemberg, for the rightist-populist Alternative for Germany party, warned of future dangers.
“The refugees that have come to us are certainly not per se to be marked as bad or criminal,” he wrote in a letter to a local newspaper, The Reutlinger Wochenblatt. “But it would be and is naïve, if not outright careless, to declare that through such uncontrolled immigration ‘only’ the peaceful and good people have come here.
“It is equally naïve and careless to believe that especially the young men, who have been socialized in an archaic value system from the Middle Ages, will be magically transformed into enlightened, socially acceptable democrats after they cross our borders,” he added.
Such feelings have made editorial decisions especially wrenching for the country’s two main broadcasters, ARD and ZDF, which are funded by a public that increasingly wants a say in how its money is spent.
“The public broadcasters, even more than commercial media outlets, must become transparent about their processes and how they make decisions,” said Leonard Novy, a political scientist at the Institute for Media and Communication Policy in Cologne.
“Whether these institutions are able to survive in the future depends on this, because they are not simply accepted today as they were in the past,” he added.
The struggle to put the crime in its place was not limited to the broadcasters, however. Many traditional news media also questioned whether it should be treated as the terrible act of one individual, or said anything larger about clashes of culture and the integration of refugees in Germany society.
“A terrible crime happened in Freiburg,” Reinhard Müller wrote in an editorial critical of ARD’s decision in a conservative newspaper, The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, which began covering the murder in November, after it was broadcast on a national television show about unsolved crimes.
“It is of course debatable how these incidents should be covered. But is it really acceptable not to cover a crime because it has possibly been perpetrated by a young asylum seeker?” Mr. Müller wrote.
