Re “Trumps Hurry to Unscramble Business Ties” (front page, Dec. 25): All the moves discussed by the Trumps to resolve their potential conflicts of interest add up to sacrificing pawns to protect the king(dom) — the Trump Organization.
The Constitution’s Emoluments Clause is unambiguous. It forbids an American president from accepting anything of value from a foreign entity, without congressional consent, because that would open the door to bribery or extortion.
The only way for President-elect Donald Trump to cure this problem would be an arms-length sale by a public trustee, not piecemeal judgments after Jan. 20 about the thousands of possible winks and nods between foreign leaders and the new administration.
Here come the post hoc rationalizations. Unfair to the family? It would probably pocket a cool $3 billion-plus. Voters don’t care? They will after the first scandal, but even if they don’t, popular opinion doesn’t amend the Constitution; only amendments can.
Undoable because of size? Mr. Trump chose to put himself in this situation and cannot now act aggrieved, nor is there a too-big-to-sell exemption in the Constitution; if anything, the larger the potential for conflict, the more urgent a sell-off.
Because of a lifetime habit of cutting corners while pursuing profit, Mr. Trump might assume that he could again just brazen his way through this situation. But the White House is not Trump Tower. Merging public office and self-enrichment would be corrupt, unprecedented, unconstitutional and an ongoing impeachable offense.
When asked during the campaign about sacrifices he has made for the country, Donald Trump ludicrously pointed to his hard work and the great buildings he had built. Those buildings did not necessarily benefit the country, but they certainly enriched Mr. Trump himself. Now, as his inauguration approaches, he can make a real sacrifice for the country by liquidating his businesses and putting the proceeds in a truly blind trust, and by requiring his children to do the same if they are at all involved in his administration.
It’s not enough simply to settle lawsuits and shut the Donald J. Trump Foundation, which is already under investigation by New York’s attorney general, Eric Schneiderman, as a result of its past practices and failure to register with the state.
We’ve already seen the “pay to play” ethos at work with Mr. Trump’s Washington hotel and his children putting access to him up for sale to the highest bidder (later reversed). No reasonable citizen should expect that anything less than a complete separation of the Trumps from their businesses and foundations will protect against corruption by a man who has always put his own prosperity ahead of his investors, his employees and his country.
The first thing Representative Elijah E. Cummings, who has called for an investigation into Mr. Trump’s potential conflicts, should do is persuade his congressional colleagues to demand the release of Mr. Trump’s tax returns.
Until he does release his tax returns there will be no way of knowing to which lenders Mr. Trump owes money, in which countries he is conducting business, and if there are oligarchs and dictators with whom he has shared deal making.
It is unacceptable that Mr. Trump is able to flummox the press, the government and us citizens by keeping his business secrets hidden even after his election.
