Guillermo del Toro’s best work — in films like “Pan’s Labyrinth” and “Hellboy 2: The Golden Army” — combines rousing storytelling with a rarely equaled visual splendor. “Trollhunters,” the new series he created for Netflix (based on a book he wrote with Daniel Kraus), signifies two firsts that both seem suited to Mr. del Toro’s protean imagination: his first work in animation and his first project for children.
The show does have del Toro characteristics. Like nearly all his work, “Trollhunters” is about the encounter between the prosaic human world and a hidden, nearby zone of supernatural and potentially threatening beings. Here the beings are the trolls, goblins, changelings and other beasts living beneath a fictional town called Arcadia, whose dry, paved riverbeds place it in the general vicinity of Los Angeles.
In the pilot’s invigorating opening sequence, the incumbent Trollhunter — latest in a line of heroes charged with defending both the human and troll world against bad trolls and their allies — is defeated by a hulking baddie named Bular (voiced by Ron Perlman, a del Toro regular). The amulet that gives the Trollhunters their power is then inherited by a human, Jim (Anton Yelchin, who had completed most of his work on the series when he died in an accident in June).
Jim is a parent’s dream, sticking up for underdogs and making lunches for his hard-working single mother. Responsibility is the theme of “Trollhunters” — already more conscientious than your average teenager, Jim struggles with the idea of being responsible for the safety of the trolls as well. There’s never any doubt that he’ll answer the call, though, especially since the job comes with a nifty costume of glowing armor and visits to an underground city that looks like a neon-lighted amusement park.
What makes “Trollhunters” stand out, in the early episodes, is another del Toro trademark: the design of the monsters, who are significantly more interesting to look at and listen to than their human counterparts. Particularly endearing is the troll who trains and cheerleads for Jim, a six-eyed, four-armed creature named Blinky who’s voiced — in a tour de force performance — by Kelsey Grammer. The cleverest thing about “Trollhunters” might be that the fate of the world is in the finicky hands of Frasier Crane.