R. Bruce Josten has been in the middle of the biggest deals in Washington over the past few decades without ever holding office, working on Capitol Hill or serving in the White House.
As executive vice president for government affairs at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Josten, 66, was the point man for business interests in a slew of heavy-duty trade, tax and energy negotiations. He was a master at the inside game.
After more than 30 years in the Beaux-Arts-style chamber headquarters across Lafayette Square from the White House, Mr. Josten is now in his own transition, retiring after helping turn the chamber into a political powerhouse and watching his specialty — sophisticated legislative give-and-take — become less prized in a polarized capital.
Washington, he said, has become an “I win, you lose” town rather than a “how do we get this done” town where those skilled in what he calls the “art of the back room” can have a big effect.
One thing Mr. Josten was not able to get done over the years was any kind of serious overhaul of the big entitlement programs such as Social Security, he said, noting ruefully that he struck out on three occasions. But he did lead a coalition that led to a balanced federal budget in 1996. And he took the chamber from handing out scorecards on lawmakers to spending millions of dollars on campaign advertising.
Mr. Josten does not always have patience for those without the grasp of the policy details that he marshals on a variety of complex tax and trade subjects. But the Harvard graduate and collegiate swimmer who began as a telemarketer for the chamber in 1974 was widely respected by those on all sides for his command of the issues and his ideas about how to bridge differences. K Street ran straight through his chamber office on H Street.
His exit comes at the end of a campaign season during which the Republican candidate for president — typically someone expected to be aligned with the chamber — was the one bashing big business for exporting jobs and accepting flawed trade deals at the expense of American workers.
Mr. Josten is not leaving because of the changing landscape and the arrival of President-elect Donald J. Trump. He says he just sees it as a good moment to turn over his responsibilities to successors he has helped recruit. But he does not dispute that the chamber has become a punching bag for some on the right who view establishment entities and their defense of institutions such as the Export-Import Bank as a big part of the problem in Washington.
He attributes the criticism of the bank, which provides government help to exporters, to a lack of understanding of international markets. And he sees the assault on the chamber by advocacy groups as a way to tap into public anger — and wallets.
Mr. Josten is more concerned with the trend toward one party going it alone legislatively, using its power to impose its priorities on the other as the Democrats did with the health care law and Republicans are threatening to do by repealing it. That approach is not sustainable in the long run, he said.
“If you want durability and lasting law, the only way to really achieve it is to engage both sides of the aisle and reach an outcome that the president, regardless of party, will sign because of the product itself,” he said.
He sees a current political and legislative climate marked by a certain inflexibility and intransigence that is not conducive to compromise and ends with little being accomplished.
With Republicans about to assert themselves, Mr. Josten fears they will not learn from the mistakes made by Democrats when they had control of the White House and Congress and will “ram them and jam them” on taxes and health care. He suggests another course for Republicans who think there is but one alternative.
Now, for the first time in a long time, the lawmakers who choose to work at it will do so without Mr. Josten.