1. As much as I disliked the outcome of the election, I don’t think Obama and his administration made the right decision.
They are coming off as sore losers. Let us not seek to blame for the past.
What’s done is done, Trump won the election, unfortunately, but this doesn’t mean the Democratic Party is morally right for strategically manipulating our foreign relations before our new president takes office, in order to complicate his presidency.
It’s indeed a selfish, immature, and desperate move by our fellow Americans. Let us learn from these times, and accept our responsibility for the future.
— Jeff in New Jersey, reacting to an article about President Obama ejecting 35 Russian intelligence agents in retaliation for Russian interference in the American election.
This comment received more than 250 reader recommendations.
2. Whether the Russians were behind it or not (all evidence seems to point to them), it is clear that some criminal actor committed these hacks and leaked the information in an attempt to influence the election.
This is, of course, a huge — even potentially existential if it keeps happening — threat to our nation. The fact that this isn’t a big deal to some people only exposes the degree to which those same people benefited.
— Dave Hamm in Madison, Wis.
This comment received more than 3,000 reader recommendations.
3. In order for a conflict to end — whether an international dispute or a personal quarrel — both sides have to want a resolution.
— Lindsey in Burlington, Vt., reacting to an article about Secretary of State John Kerry’s criticism of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu over Israel’s stance on a two-state solution.
This comment received more than 1,000 reader recommendations and more than 30 reader responses.
Remembering Carrie Fisher ...
4. Death is a natural part of life. Rejoice for those around you who transform into the force. Mourn them do not. Miss them do not.
— Tommy Linder on The Times’ Facebook page, responding to an article about the death of the actress, writer and “Star Wars” icon Carrie Fisher at age 60.
This comment received more than 441 likes.
5. The original triple threat — effortless dancing, a voice that could fill a Broadway house without microphones and crystal clear characterizations. Her talent is for the ages, unsinkable and indelible.
— John Quixote in New York, reacting to an article about the death of the actress Debbie Reynolds, 84, one day after the death of her daughter Carrie Fisher.
6. This world is incredibly hard on those who are sensitive, who have a heightened sense of justice, who want equity and fairness.
You fight, then you retreat.
He spent his life standing up, speaking out, fighting the good fight for those that were afraid, that were disadvantaged, those that had no voice or power. He would retreat then come back to fight again. It is the cycle of introverts who want to change the world, in big ways and small.
He gave much. His talent was unparalleled, and we would have embraced him, no matter how much time he needed away. I am sorry that the often superficial world, rife with jealousy and resentment and bullying, injures those who give so much. May you R.I.P. George.
— Leslie Ó Briain on The Times’ Facebook page, responding to an article about the death of the pop star George Michael at 53.
7. They say charity begins at home, and so should the supposed America-first policies of the incoming President. If these folks are for real, all Trump business manufacturing should be brought home during his first year in office.
Oh, and start hiring American workers at all your resorts, buildings and construction projects!
— Teresa Worley Strombotne on The Times’ Facebook page, responding to an article about the potential conflict between President-elect Donald J. Trump’s promise to punish companies that send manufacturing overseas and his own family’s businesses.
8. It is unreasonable for Trump to be asked to divest his business empire.
Trump’s situation is very different, representing a lifetime of work that belongs to him and his family if he so chooses. Democrats are only demanding it out of spite and bitterness. Voters knew he had these businesses coming in, and he never committed to full divestment, nor should he. The guy is already a billionaire and has said his focus is on the Presidency.
I truly believe he isn’t doing this to line his pockets. He’s not Clinton, renting out the Lincoln bedroom. What is the point of that for him? That’s why he was elected, because he has the means to be genuine and not use the White House as a moneymaking scheme, unlike the Clintons. Let’s give a 70-year-old guy who can’t be bought a shot.
— TL in Connecticut.
This comment received more than 100 reader responses.
Can Feminism Recover From the Election?
9. I hope my generation’s contribution to feminism — those of us somewhere between the end of Gen X and the beginning of the millennials — is one of inclusiveness.
— Katie in Chicago, reacting to an op-ed column about whether Hillary Clinton’s loss represents a setback for American feminism as well.
10. What makes 2016 such a disaffecting year is not that it was the outright worst year of humanity’s existence, but that so much of the tragedy seems archaic. We failed to learn from history.
Everything that is happening in the world now — deaths of beloved celebrities aside — seems like relics of a less developed society: the rise of fascism and the far right, retreats into isolationism and factionalism.
The world’s current situation too eerily parallels the fractured state of the world right around the time of World War I, when an interconnected, globalized economy descended into national tribalism. It took two global conflicts for a more coherent and prosperous world order to emerge after World War I began, and I think there’s a sense that 2016 was our Archduke Franz Ferdinand.
It seems that things are only going to get worse before they get better. “Never again” we said after the horrors of the first half of the 20th century, and yet here we are.
— Auguste in Washington, reacting to an op-ed about the relative gloom of 2016.