As a Japanese-American community activist I have heard many displeased responses to the Dec. 18 Sunday Review article by Amanda Sakuma, “The Patriotism of Time at ‘Camp.’ ” It gives the impression that members of our community channeled their camp experience into patriotism and a desire to assimilate so strong that they could embrace a presidential candidate expressing racist views.
The response to the camps was much more complex. While many Japanese Americans sent their sons to die for this country, others showed true patriotism by resisting their imprisonment. They were further punished and stigmatized for their courageous positions.
And while all of them were generous in their continued belief in American democracy, I would not characterize this as a “fierce resolve to forgive the country that had imprisoned them,” as Ms. Sakuma did.
After the war, many Japanese Americans remained deeply bitter and heartbroken, but held it privately. They worked to restore communities that had been destroyed in their absence. In the 1970s we witnessed the genesis of a movement to demand redress and reparations for the World War II incarceration. It was anything but quiet and passive, and came about as a result of a national organizing effort fueled by outrage and indignity.
I suspect that most Japanese Americans did not vote for Donald Trump. Mr. Trump’s speculation that he might have supported the World War II camps and a surrogate’s citation of the Japanese American incarceration as a “precedent” for Muslim registries are deeply alarming to my community, and we have been outspoken about this. Yet I have seen little in The Times documenting our community’s sentiments other than Ms. Sakuma’s essay.
The writer is co-chairman of the New York Day of Remembrance Committee, which promotes educational and healing efforts related to the incarceration of Japanese Americans.
Like Amanda Sakuma’s grandmother, I, too, was put in a concentration camp during World War II. I was 9 when I and other Japanese Americans were imprisoned as enemy “non-aliens,” and it took me decades to understand how deep the wounds were and how long they festered.
If Amanda’s grandmother was like many of us, she probably did not tell Amanda about her feelings about her wartime experience because she had suppressed them, or she did not want to share them with her grandchild.
Some Japanese Americans did actively cooperate with the government in the mass imprisonment as a show of patriotism. The majority of us did not offer any resistance to the mass imprisonment because we knew it would be futile and even dangerous in the face of the vicious anti-Japanese rhetoric being expressed at the time by politicians and the media.
The postwar years were trying. The impact of wartime propaganda that depicted the Japanese as cruel, duplicitous and subhuman left its traces. Most of us kept our heads low, not acknowledging even to ourselves the trauma of the war years. It was not because we “adored” our country; it was a wish to feel safe, and perhaps we have finally achieved a sense of security.
If there are Japanese Americans who voted for Donald Trump, it shows that we can be as susceptible as anybody else to demagogy, racism, misogyny and, ironically, even nativism.
Victimhood during World War II did not necessarily make us wiser, more tolerant or politically astute. We have finally become, for better or for worse, as American as everybody else.
The writer is the author of a memoir, “In Search of Hiroshi,” and a novel, “Fox Drum Bebop,” both based on the Japanese-American incarceration.