Once upon a Hollywood time, one of filmdom’s biggest directors was Lois Weber. Woodrow Wilson was president, and women couldn’t have voted for him even if they had wanted to, but inside the movie industry, women thrived, and Weber thrived above all others. An auteur before that word entered the cinematic lexicon, she wrote, directed and edited films and was admired for her sensitive work with actors, her on-set meticulousness and her stories about women. Her name was invoked alongside the likes of D. W. Griffith, yet, like most female directors of that era, she faded into obscurity.
This weekend, the Anthology Film Archives is giving New Yorkers a chance to discover Weber again with the premiere of a beautiful restoration of her 1916 film “The Dumb Girl of Portici.” A lavish historical drama from Universal — with pictorial sweep, revolutionary conflagrations and severed heads bobbing atop spikes — the film was considered to be that studio’s most ambitious production to date. It’s also notable for being the high-profile Hollywood debut of the Russian ballerina Anna Pavlova (“the Incomparable”), though Weber finally seems to have received better reviews than her star did. Some critics deemed Pavlova not camera-ready, but Weber was seen as a titan.
Although Weber developed a lot of her own original material at Universal, where she was under contract, the studio assigned her to take on “The Dumb Girl of Portici,” one of the 10 (!) features she directed that were released in 1916. (The studio boss Carl Laemmle said he “would trust Miss Weber with any sum of money that she needed to make any picture.”) She wrote the film, adapting it from an 1828 opera, set in Spanish-controlled Naples in 1647, that tells the story of Fenella, a mute woman seduced by a Spanish nobleman, who promptly abandons her. As passion sours into betrayal, a personal affront quickly feeds a political outrage that, in turn, ignites a violent peasant uprising.
Pavlova stepped into the role providentially. In 1915, with World War I making a return to Europe difficult, she was touring with the Boston Opera Company, when it nearly went under. She apparently helped save it by accepting Universal’s offer — and a $50,000 payday — to star in “The Dumb Girl of Portici.” Weber started shooting the film in Chicago (the production later moved to Los Angeles), where Pavlova was performing. Pavlova and her company are said to have worked on it in the morning before going off to give matinee performances. One account claims that the film features the Hollywood debut of Boris Karloff, although it’s hard to pick him out among the hundreds of thronging extras.
There isn’t all that much pirouetting in “Dumb Girl,” which probably matters less to film lovers than to dance aficionados. Pavlova twirls on occasion, including during a charming, folksy frolic on a beach, complete with a shaking tambourine, but, for the most part, she delivers a heightened version of silent-era realism. Her exaggeration makes sense for her character, who, after all, cannot speak.  Pavlova’s thin, pale arms are especially striking — they’re trembling parentheses — whether she’s throwing them up in joy or thrusting them forward in entreaty.
In the end, though, what thrills in “The Dumb Girl of Portici” is Weber, who handles the large-scale rioting as persuasively as the intimate interludes, including a nakedly carnal seduction. It’s no surprise that Universal put its trust in her. A concert pianist turned stage actress, Weber had entered movies as a writer. After selling some scenarios, she and her husband, Phillips Smalley, ended up at Gaumont, the same studio where Alice Guy Blaché, often thought to be the first female film director, was working. As Shelley Stamp points out in her recent book, “Lois Weber in Early Hollywood,” Smalley followed Weber into the business, where they acted in, and made, their own films. Although they often shared credit (including on “Dumb Girl”), Weber soon emerged as the visionary.
Weber is known for her films about women, families, social problems and religious themes, but her range was larger than many summaries suggest. She directed a few films about birth control (including the sensational “Where Are My Children?”), but she also adapted Shakespeare (“The Merchant of Venice”) and directed an anti-capital-punishment film (“The People vs. John Doe”). Like a lot of silent directors, she was somewhat of a self-promoter and gave many interviews to writers who seemed to feel compelled to let readers know that Lois Weber was also Mrs. Phillips Smalley. Female directors may have enjoyed independence in the industry; outside was another matter.
By the 1920s, Weber’s career was headed into dramatic decline. As the industry consolidated into a big business, women were effectively shut out from positions of studio power, including directing. She directed her last film, the interracial romance “White Heat,” in 1934 and died five years later. It’s hard not to think she had so much more to offer. In 1915, in an article about how she became a director, she wrote that she had found the writing in films “a jumble of melodrama and stage tricks, hastily thrown together, quite adequate to meet the demands of the public.” Instead of thinking of the possibilities of “the boundless art,” writers “were satisfied to keep the characters moving through a thin plot, insipid in conception, and pathetic in sentiment.” Weber sought to change that, and got to work.
Milestone Films will release both Weber’s brilliant “Shoes” (1916), about an impoverished young woman led astray, and “The Dumb Girl of Portici” on DVD and Blu-ray in 2017; it also distributes “The Blot” (1921), a tale of desire and class inequity that is among her finest. You can watch a preserved, if incomplete, copy of her amazing “Idle Wives” (1916) on the Library of Congress website. A slice of realism that goes delightfully surreal, it involves characters who go to the cinema and end up watching a movie featuring people just like them. Weber and her husband appear in the film-within-the film, which is titled “Life’s Mirror” and is directed by — you guessed it — Lois Weber.
Some of Weber’s other titles are floating around, sometimes only in fragments, on YouTube, including “Where Are My Children?” (1916), her shockingly blunt movie about birth control (Weber is for it) and abortion (decidedly against). In the extraordinarily shot and edited “Suspense” (1913), Weber splits the screen into three neat triangles to show simultaneous narrative threads: a wife at home, a husband at work and the thief who is about to disrupt their world. In “Hypocrites” (1915, and streaming on Amazon) a priest, after failing to rouse his bored congregation, dreams that he’s a medieval monk who leads the willing up a mountain toward the Truth, who’s played by a near-naked woman.