Let’s turn it over to Adam Nagourney, our Los Angeles bureau chief, for today’s introduction.
Mr. Brown likes to surprise. And after the drubbing Democrats took in Washington this year — and the defeat of Hillary Clinton, who Mr. Becerra campaigned for so intensely that he even entertained the idea she might pick him as his running mate — it’s hardly a shock that Mr. Becerra is eager to return to California.
“Most insiders believed he wanted to move back to California, so all in all it was a pretty elegant political play,” said Peter Ragone, a political consultant in San Francisco who is advising Gavin Newsom, the lieutenant governor who is running for governor in 2018.
But the appointment shakes up a Democratic political world that had already been girding for fundamental changes as its three most senior elected officials, all of whom are over 70 — Mr. Brown, Senator Barbara Boxer and Senator Dianne Feinstein — prepare to exit from the scene. Mr. Becerra joins a very crowded list of Democrats angling for some of those jobs. And now he has the advantage of a perch, the office of attorney general, that historically has afforded its occupant a lot of exposure.
Mr. Becerra, 58, will now be one of the highest-ranking Latino officials in the state at a time when California is gearing up for clashes with President-elect Donald J. Trump on immigration. He could run for attorney general again and make a career out of that. But he now has a platform that will allow him to run for governor, or for that matter senator.
But not too soon.
“I don’t think it’s viable to get appointed and then quit immediately to run for something else, but he will run for something else down the road,” Mr. Ragone said.
See a pothole in San Diego? There’s an app for that.
Over the summer, the city introduced “Get it Done San Diego,” an app and companion website that allows residents to report problems along the streets and sidewalks using their smartphones.
After six months of operation, we checked in with city officials to see how it’s going.
Almis Udrys, San Diego’s director of performance and analytics, said the app had been downloaded roughly 9,500 times and was used to send more than 38,500 reports to the city.
About half of those reports have been resolved, either fixed or determined to be a nonissue, he said. The rest were referred to other agencies, like a utility company, or remain open.
The most common complaint? Graffiti, followed by potholes and broken streetlights.
According to Mr. Udrys, the fix time has averaged around 10 days, but longer in the case of a big repair like a bent traffic light pole.
There are still kinks to work out. Some app users have expressed frustration after reporting problems that fall under the responsibility of other agencies — for example, a bridge managed by Caltrans.
The city refers those reports to the agencies, but whether they get addressed is anyone’s guess, some users said.
What’s more, for residents uninterested in downloading yet another app, San Diego does not offer the convenient 311 phone reporting system used in other cities like San Francisco and Los Angeles.
Reviews of the “Get it Done” app in the iPhone store and Android website, as well as in a recent discussion on Reddit, the online forum, have been generally positive.
Karl Decker, 38, said he used the app to report a curb that needed a fresh coat of red paint outside his house. Workers took care of it in less than a week.
“I was just really, really impressed,” he said.
