Last week, as Lorri Ayer planned to surprise her husband with a vow renewal ceremony at Cupid’s Chapel of Love in Gatlinburg, Tenn., she made a stomach-churning discovery: The chapel had burned down, swept away in an aggressive wildfire that destroyed some 1,000 buildings and caused at least 13 deaths last week.
The couple thought about staying home, but this town in Appalachian East Tennessee has sentimental value: They had celebrated their honeymoon in Gatlinburg 25 years ago. As residents recovered from what they described as a hellish, wind-fueled fire that originated in the Great Smoky Mountains, the Ayers were among the first wedding tourists to trickle back into town.
“We just got our minds set to it and we went,” Ms. Ayer said.
Lee Bennett, who owns Cupid’s Chapel of Love, made arrangements for the Ayers to renew their vows on Saturday at another venue he owns, The Chapel at the Park, which was untouched by the fire. When the Ayers arrived at the chapel, they said an employee who had lost his home directed them to an empty parking space. The man had lost all of his belongings, Ms. Ayers said, and was dressed in gear lent to him from a member of the National Guard.
Employees of Gatlinburg’s bustling weddings industry have spent the days after the fire trying to get back to normal, even as livelihoods have been threatened and homes have been lost.
Cupid’s Chapel was one of more than a dozen wedding chapels that had helped the 4,000-person town earn a reputation as a wedding capital of the south, drawing lovebirds from Indiana, Ohio and Kentucky who see Gatlinburg as a more wholesome, more beautiful alternative to Las Vegas. Most important, it is within driving distance.
Confronted with an array of choices, from The Chapel in the Glen to Gatlinburg’s Little Log Chapel, couples have their pick. But Cupid’s Chapel of Love was one of the most popular places in Gatlinburg to be married, according to Mr. Bennett.
Part of the reason was simple economics: The $99 “Get Er Done” special, a deal that promised speed, convenience and a no-frills “say your vows and be married” ceremony was popular.
Lonnie Patton and his husband, Lee Smith, were among the couples who had to adjust their plans when the fire flattened Cupid’s Chapel and also damaged their wedding cabin. They also took their chances and decided to make the 100-mile drive from Athens, Tenn.
While visiting the town with his new husband, Mr. Patton said he was struck by the kindness of local workers, who showed up to work without homes and belongings.
“It amazes me that the folks in Gatlinburg were so resilient,” Mr. Patton said.
For those involved in Gatlinburg’s various tourism-based industries — from wedding chapels to Christmas stores to the nearby Dollywood amusement park in Pigeon Forge — efforts are being made to return to normal as closed-off parts of town begin to open up later this week.
On Facebook, other chapels in Gatlinburg are attempting to entice visitors back to the area by sharing photos of the undamaged parts of town. Mr. Bennett said that GoFundMe pages have been set up to collect donations for the three employees of Cupid’s Chapel who had lost their homes. One campaign has collected about $4,000.
In an email, Mark Adams, the president of the Gatlinburg Convention and Visitors Bureau, called the town’s weddings industry “one of the top in the country” and said that efforts would be directed at assuring visitors that the town is open for business in the coming months.
Jessica Russell, a manager at Fireside Chalets, a Pigeon Forge-based company that rents out about 140 cabins in the area, said that a handful of cabins had been lost or damaged, including the one picked out by Mr. Patton and his husband for their wedding weekend. She is concerned that the fire will cause short-term loss to local businesses, and said that the main objective would be to show visitors that the area is working hard to get back to normal.
