233 pp. Scribner, $24.
Johnson’s book, the record of a single year’s email correspondence with his friend E. Ethelbert Miller, is a piecemeal meditation on the daily routines and mental habits of a writer. Johnson describes his study’s curated clutter, his nocturnal working rhythms and the intense labor of his revisions, alongside a careful outline of a theory, reminiscent of both Aristotle and Henry James, of how plots emerge from a “ground situation.” There is a winning sanity here: Johnson wants his students to be “raconteurs always ready to tell an engaging tale,” not self-preoccupied neurotics.
The book raises sociological questions. Johnson has spent three decades as a teacher of writing at the University of Washington, though he himself had no such training, and he has fascinatingly conflicted thoughts on the teaching of creative labor. He praises the virtues of his own education in academic philosophy and daily journalism, while defending the possibility that writing programs can rigorously and unsentimentally improve an author’s technique. Where the book radiates warmth, however, is in its continual return to Johnson’s mentors, from an inspiring high school writing teacher, Marie-Claire Davis, to his longtime friend the novelist John Gardner. Gardner in particular is quoted at length. A writer’s true education might start in institutions, it seems, but for Johnson it is more a lineage of good, memorable talk, which is an uneasy fit with the formalities of the classroom.
390 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins, $27.99.
Criticism as practiced by working critics, Oates asserts in her new collection of essays and reviews, inclines toward preaching or propaganda, always implicitly arguing for a set of beliefs about art or life. Criticism as practiced by creative writers, however, is for Oates a less strident enterprise, since a writer worries about exposing creative sinews. Famously prolific as both critic and imaginative author, Oates bounces here between these critical modes. These essays are often carefully undogmatic. But at times a philosophy creeps in. About great Victorian realists like George Eliot and Charles Dickens, Oates is either dutiful or skeptical; their explorations of compromise and comic social friction feel to her like conformity. A high-modernist, Promethean vocabulary — by now its own kind of consensus — is her touchstone of praise: the unsettling, the rebellious, the subversive.
Perhaps as a result, Oates is most engaging when thinking about more eccentric, even marginal, writers. H.P. Lovecraft, Georges Simenon, Derek Raymond, Patrick McGrath: Their stylistic peculiarities, even when they misfire, elicit Oates’s sympathy. In a short confessional piece, she admits to being more interested in the view out her study’s window than in the room’s contents, and to yearning for a view of the sea. It is a Romantic aesthetic, this restlessness for the open and unfettered. The room or the view? How you answer that question will go some distance toward determining how useful a literary guide you find Oates.
316 pp. Catapult, paper, $16.95.
Orner opens his meditations with an anecdote. Accused by his daughter of loving only two things — “books and apples” — he protests that of course he dearly loves many things, including her. But, as he wryly notes, he had to suspend his reading to answer her, and while answering had kept his place in his book with his finger.
What Orner ponders is the oscillation between reading and living, concentrating on the moment when we look up from the page. Reading takes its color, for Orner, from the ways it is aerated by those interruptions. As a result, this record of his reading life is a fractured memoir, even a travel diary. He tells of reading Cheever stories in an Albanian cafe, “To the Lighthouse” by a lake in northern Minnesota, Álvaro Mutis while volunteering with the Zapatistas in Chiapas. Some of the traveling is simply in time: Orner weaves vignettes from the death of his father and the slow demise of his first marriage with loving, eccentric paraphrases of stories by Chekhov, Kafka, Welty, Wideman and Babel, treating his reading not as an escape from, but a mode of experiencing, his life’s unspooling. Too irresponsible to be literary criticism, and too irregular to be autobiography, Orner’s book (with illustrations by his brother, Eric Orner) is instead an entrancing attempt to catch what falls between those genres: the irreducibly personal, messy, even embarrassing ways reading and living bleed into each other, which neither literary criticism nor autobiography ever quite acknowledges.
250 pp. Bloomsbury, paper, $19.95.
Weiner’s is an intellectual history told as a horror story. The history is a deliberately ironic one: how “rational egoism,” the doctrine of Nikolai Chernyshevsky’s 1863 novel/manifesto “What Is to Be Done?,” which was the inspiration for Russian revolutionaries from Bakunin to Lenin, migrated to the United States in the guise of Ayn Rand’s far-right objectivism. The horror is the uncanny resilience of this particular bad idea: Like a zombie, rational egoism has staggered on despite attempts, from Dostoyevsky’s “Demons” to Nabokov’s “The Gift,” to kill it by ridicule, parody or the power of superior art. But there are real monsters in Weiner’s story as well, from the ascetic and ruthless revolutionary Sergei Nechaev to the coterie of sycophants (among them Alan Greenspan) who gathered around Rand.
Weiner rises to the challenge of paraphrasing Chernyshevsky and Rand and illustrating the clumsiness and incoherence of their books. But his effort doesn’t solve the mystery of their evergreen appeal; instead he inadvertently deepens it. Is graceless style and faulty logic enough to make a book unreadable? Weiner seems to suggest as much, but the record of Chernyshevsky’s and Rand’s countless dedicated readers says otherwise. The mystery of the appeal of “bad writing” is something Weiner’s prosecutorial approach can never quite solve. To tackle the problem would require considerable sympathy, even for writers and readers who, given the disastrous impact of these books, don’t deserve it.