Updated, 8:30 a.m.
Good morning on this warmer Tuesday.
This month, we asked our readers to nominate candidates for our New Yorker of the Year column. (We offered a few suggestions to get the ball rolling.) We received more than 100 submissions about model citizens who have made a difference — in ways big and small — during 2016.
This week, we are highlighting a few of the exemplary (noncelebrity) neighbors you nominated. We look forward to meeting more of them in 2017. And as always, if you would like to share a story, you can write to us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Also required reading in his class: “Holler if You Hear Me: Searching for Tupac Shakur,” by Michael Eric Dyson, about the history of hip-hop and race relations in the United States.
As far as teachers go, Mr. Gabay, 47, who has a Ph.D. in urban education, is somewhat unconventional.
A majority of his career has been spent in unconventional settings, teaching literature to students who had been locked up.
While an undergraduate at the University of Southern California, he worked at a group home for children who had been incarcerated. He went on to receive a master’s degree in education from New York University and his doctorate from the City University of New York, where he focused on juvenile offenders.
This led him to teach for more than a decade at Passages Academy, a juvenile detention school in the city, and at his current post at Brooklyn Democracy Academy, a transfer school for under-credited students whose education had been interrupted.
During his four years at the academy, Mr. Gabay has broadened his role to become like an older brother to these struggling teenagers — many of whom have spent time in foster care or in jail. He is as adamant about nurturing them socially and emotionally as he is about preparing them to take tests.
“Brownsville has the worst schools in the city, the worst health care, the most homicides, the worst food — there are no Starbucks here — and I want to give them access to all the good things that I was blessed to have,” said Mr. Gabay, who was born on the Lower East Side and grew up in Great Neck on Long Island.
He networks relentlessly to open doors for his students.
He brought in a spoken-word performer who inspired one young man to travel to Africa with the artist to study. After Mr. Gabay invited an Oscar-nominee, Jesse Eisenberg, to the school, the actor mentored a student who was passionate about the entertainment industry. When John Wallace, the former Knicks player, came to class, another student ended up with a job.
It is not quite the same as the work done by large nonprofits; Mr. Gabay says he is much more informal, focusing on the little things — small deeds that can inspire one person, and have the potential to turn a life around.
“When you go places, you’re always thinking: ‘What can benefit the students? What can benefit the school?’ ” he said.
Here’s some heartwarming news: It’ll be almost 60 in the city today.
Expect drizzle and clouds in the morning, followed by sunshine in the afternoon.
We have heard reports, however, of snowmen weeping over this weather. They feel excluded. Unwelcome. Like it’s impossible to survive here.
Our thoughts are with you, Frosty and friends. Your time here will come, but perhaps not until next year.
• Scoreboard: Nets capture a hive of Hornets, 120-118.
• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Tuesday Briefing.
• Islanders host Capitals, 5 p.m. (MS+2). Devils host Penguins, 5 p.m. (MSG+). Rangers host Senators, 7 p.m. (MSG).
• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.
• Roads: Check traffic map or radio report on the 1s or the 8s.
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until New Year’s Day.
This year was one for the books, as far as fake IDs go.
But, perhaps surprisingly, New York City was not to blame.
Almost 900 fraudulent driver’s licenses were seized at bars, restaurants and concert venues across the state in 2016, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced. That’s more than 100 higher than the number confiscated last year.
Operation Prevent, a project by Governor Cuomo and the Department of Motor Vehicles, investigates fake ID seizures and underage drinking arrests, region by region, across New York.
According to this year’s results, New York City was the best behaved thus far, with only 16 busts for fake IDs.
The biggest culprits?
The capital region (including Albany, Saratoga, Schenectady and Schoharie Counties) and the central New York region (including Cayuga, Onondaga and Oswego Counties). Each of the two regions seized more than 200 fake IDs this year.
New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. You can receive it via email.
For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.
What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.
Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.
You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.