Illustrated. 368 pp. The Museum of Modern Art, New York/Kunsthaus Zürich. $75.
With copious illustrations and 16 essays, this hefty catalog for the current retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art attempts to chart a zigzag career that made up in energy what it lacked in depth of exploration. Anne Umland, one of the show’s curators and an editor of the volume, notes in her introduction that unlike Picasso’s “stylistic pluralism,” Picabia’s “style-switching involves extremes that exude — and provoke — skepticism and doubt.” She goes on to quote the art historian Benjamin Buchloh, who observed a “specter of derivativeness” in the artist’s work. This imitative quality and its attendant “pluralism” (noted to some degree or another by most of the critics assembled here) doesn’t only bother art historians; it’s readily apparent to those less schooled. In a single year, 1922, Picabia produced geometric abstractions, figurative silhouettes (“La Nuit Espagnole” is perhaps the most notable), and conventional, vaguely impressionistic watercolors of women draped in floral fabrics. It can be hard to reconcile such aesthetic dissonances.
Even when the contributors properly contextualize the role of strong influences, the images themselves have their own say. George Baker, in his essay “The Body After Cubism,” compares Picabia’s “Figure Triste” to Marcel Duchamp’s “Jeune Homme Triste dans un Train” and then strives to account for the inanimate quality of the Picabia, whose “still-legible figure seems securely seated, resting head on hand in an obvious homage to another ‘sad’ figure, Albrecht Dürer’s female allegory in ‘Melancolia I.’” But the painting’s lack of dynamism, a deficit made pointed by the inclusion of the kinetic Duchamp, suggests Picabia’s understanding of Cubism was less organic, less inspired than that of his contemporaries.
Yet Picabia could also appear to be prescient about future trends. During World War II he retreated to the South of France and produced a number of paintings that could be said to anticipate photorealism. Drawing his imagery — largely portraiture, with all-too-apparent narrative motifs — from photographs, he created near literal transcriptions of one medium to another. Scenes include a nude contemplating a sculpture of herself, a happy couple posing while another couple cavorts among blossoms, and nude bathers admiring one another. The earnest realism renders bodies in ways not entirely unreminiscent of Socialist or Nazi versions of idealized figures. Michèle C. Cone, in her essay “Francis Picabia’s ‘War,’” describes his residence in Vichy France and association with the local Gestapo as “confused and confusing behavior.” His paintings from the period, too, touch ambiguously on Jewish themes with depictions of the adoration of the calf and the figure of the wandering Jew. In any event, Cone notes that after the liberation these wartime paintings disappeared and were, in fact, kept out of the 1970 Guggenheim Museum retrospective.
Along this peripatetic path it was in the realm of language — of poetic rant and anarchic wit, and enigmatic inscription — that Picabia showed himself most inventive. Early in his career, in pamphlets, on posters and in paintings, and in his later years, in a series of illustrated letters and drawings, he gave free rein to wordplay and employed his acute sense of writing’s materiality. His literary inclinations were never far from his visual expression: On a 1948 canvas titled after Nietzsche’s aphorism “Heresy and Witchcraft,” a blocklike figure surrounded by circular forms (heads?) stands above the printed phrase “L’argument de l’isolement” (“The argument of isolation”). The notion chimes in almost elegiac fashion with a self-prophetic line from the cover of a magazine — La Pomme de Pins — that Picabia designed in 1922, which lends this book its subtitle: Notre tête est ronde pour permettre à la pensée de changer de direction. Our heads are round so our thoughts can change direction, the artist claimed. Indeed, Picabia changed direction many, many times. In the end, perhaps it is that variousness that confers on this artist a peculiar kind of originality.