THE CHOREOGRAPHER Reggie Wilson has keen instincts for both danciness and theatricality. Specializing in bridging postmodern dance and the cultural heritage of African-Americans, he has often shown himself an appealing and original dancemaker.
Even so, his work sometimes demonstrates a huge divide between theory and practice. For his latest creation, “Citizen,” he’s provided a long, thoughtful program note about the history of black people (as individuals and collectively) in the West. Yet this turned out to be little use when it came to watching his piece, which had its world premiere last Wednesday at the BAM Harvey Theater.
“Citizen” proved to be weirdly schematic and highly fragmented. Several simultaneous film montages on tall screens around the stage allowed the five dancers to come and go. A range of taped music was played (uncredited in the program), largely showing different kinds of descent from African music, but there were also extensive passages of silence.
Most of the dance’s 70 minutes were taken up by extended mini-marathon solos for one woman (white) and three men (black). Now they seemed independent of any music, now they seemed connected to their accompaniment. Each soloist stayed isolated from the others; each solo had a different handful of movements, obsessively reiterated. Though the music made us listen for African-diaspora qualities, the movements almost all looked emphatically Western.
Each dancer in a different way looked alone in a wilderness: deracinated, insistent, limited. A fifth dancer introduced a finale in which all the dancers started to become part of a whole — sort of.
The motifs of the first solo — turn to the left, turn to the right, stiff high kick and so on — had a particular force, but the rhythm was abrupt. The woman, dancing next, had one-legged open-armed balances that especially smacked of Western academic dance; the second man had a new kind of fluency in big sweeping phrases that took him across the stage; the final man had wonderful rotations of the pelvis and determined quarter-turns (south, east, north, west).
These eclectic movements didn’t illuminate the lives that Mr. Wilson drew to our attention in the program. What’s more, they had no particular communicative or expressive quality. “Citizen” made some impact as a pure-dance piece, though it’s far from Mr. Wilson’s most absorbing; its connections to racial issues never became interesting.