Mayor Bill de Blasio at the Brooklyn Navy Yard in 2014. A city plan to create and protect new industrial jobs has undergone changes, spurring strong criticisms in some circles.
On a cool November day last year, Mayor Bill de Blasio stood with local manufacturing advocates and elected officials to unveil a plan to create and protect new industrial jobs in New York City. The mayor vowed to develop new rules for developers that would curtail hotel construction and spur manufacturing businesses.
But a draft of those rules, which the City Council was told to expect by October, has yet to be written. Instead, without an announcement, the de Blasio administration set aside the effort in favor of a much broader and more ambitious one favored by an influential union, the New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council.
The switch comes at a time when Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, and his aides are actively courting union endorsements as he gears up for a 2017 re-election bid.
The story of promises made amid fanfare, then quietly scrapped or amended, is a familiar one in all levels of politics. But an examination of this pledge provides a window into the political maneuvering, union influence and back-room gamesmanship that characterize the sausage-making of city government.
It might seem counterintuitive for a union representing hotel workers to push for any proposal that could curb the growth of hotels in New York City — let alone advocate to broaden its effects.
But the proposals had a key element: Special permits would be required to build hotels in certain industrial areas of the city. That would force hotel owners to seek City Council approval for projects — most likely subjecting the projects to union labor requirements.
The interests of the powerful union, which enjoys close ties to the mayor, dovetailed with those of advocates for manufacturing jobs, who have watched with increasing dismay as new hotels have popped up in industrial zones. Both were initially happy with the mayor’s announcement last year.
The original proposal called for the City Council to create special permits for any hotel developments in industrial business zones, or I.B.Z.s, and, separately, to limit ministorage buildings through land-use controls.
“If you’re a developer and you want to build a hotel, or a ministorage facility, you will now need the permission of the city — a special permit from the city — to do so,” the mayor said in November 2015.
But after the announcement, the union pressed the city to go further. The union wanted the rules to apply to manufacturing zones citywide, putting the administration in potential conflict with a far greater number of hotel owners. The de Blasio administration quietly agreed to push for the changes.
A small group of council members, led by the speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, a Democrat, took a closed-door vote last month; everyone present agreed with the idea of setting aside the original proposal in favor of the new one. But one City Hall official said council members did so under heavy pressure from the union.
The union’s political director, Jason Ortiz, stood on the steps of City Hall and spoke with those who came and went, said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations and avoid the ire of the union. Mr. Ortiz acknowledged being present at City Hall for the vote, but denied exerting any pressure.
“The overdevelopment of hotels is a serious land use issue that merits immediate attention and action,” he said in a statement.
Under the new proposal, the city will now seek a special permit process for hotel developments in all so-called M1 manufacturing zones, a broader portion of the city that includes areas as disparate as Port Morris in the Bronx and Manhattan’s garment district.
The city’s Planning Department told City Hall that because the proposed regulations for I.B.Z.s and the larger collection of M1 zones were connected, they had to be pursued together, not separately, officials said. The ministorage plan was unchanged.
City Hall dismissed any notion that undue influence by the union had affected its decision-making. “When looking to make any important policy change, we always seek input from impacted stakeholders,” Melissa Grace, a spokeswoman for Mr. de Blasio, said.
But advocates for manufacturing businesses, who stood with the mayor a year ago, did not learn of the change in approach until after the Council’s informal closed-door vote to gauge members’ positions.
The concern, among advocates, is that the administration will face much stiffer resistance to the broader effort. As a result, they fear, the more modest goal of creating new rules in industrial business zones will be severely delayed or possibly go unmet.
In an email, City Hall officials said the new approach affected three times as many manufacturing areas and would ensure better-paying jobs were not displaced by low-wage hotels; the anticipated timeline for creating the special permits system is a year.
City Hall also pointed to growth in the city’s industrial-job numbers, up about 3 percent from last year to 515,000, and hundreds of millions of dollars in investments to develop industrial spaces, including at the Brooklyn Navy Yard and in Hunts Point in the Bronx. A first grant from a new industrial development fund — also part of the announcement last November — is about to be awarded, officials said.
But that has not quieted concerns.
“I think it’s a big deal because of the messaging; a certain set of expectations were created at the press conference a year ago,” said Adam Friedman, the executive director of the Pratt Center, a research and advocacy group that presses for strengthening the city’s manufacturing sector.
