HOUSTON — Oops! Just when I thought it was safe to come out as a Texan again — you can’t pin Donald J. Trump on us — the president-elect goes and nominates two of my countrymen to his cabinet. And not just any Texans, but two of the most quintessential Texans on the planet: Rick Perry, our former governor, as secretary of energy, and Rex W. Tillerson, the Exxon Mobil chief executive, to head the State Department.
There’s no reason to spend long weighing the merits of each, or lack thereof. If you stop to consider a “Dancing With the Stars” contestant (Mr. Perry) making decisions about the nation’s nuclear arsenal, well, that way lies madness. Better to understand where each man is coming from — literally.
On the surface, Mr. Perry and Mr. Tillerson seem like creatures from different planets: one, a good ol’ backslapping pol; the other, a cagey corporate titan. Both types can be found in Texas in abundance, of course, but in the case of this particular pair, their similarities speak louder than their differences.
Both are from northern Texas, Mr. Perry from a speck on the map called Paint Creek, and Mr. Tillerson from Wichita Falls, a metropolis by comparison but a far cry from, say, Fort Worth. Both became Eagle Scouts, because in that dry, dusty and vacant part of Texas, being an Eagle Scout is one of the few pathways up and out — the way ambitious small-town boys meet the bank presidents and the oilmen who can ease the way to the right college (Texas A&M University for Mr. Perry; the University of Texas at Austin for Mr. Tillerson).
Mr. Perry studied animal science, while Mr. Tillerson opted for civil engineering, but both men used their college years to make the contacts that would help them advance afterward. For Mr. Perry, that meant being a disciplined member of the Corps of Cadets and a zealous Aggie Yell leader at football games. Given that Aggies have traditionally done well in Texas politics, this was good prep.
In other words, both men are shrewd judges and dedicated followers of the path to success, as they would define it.
Say what you will about Mr. Perry’s policies on education, the environment and health care, but it’s widely accepted in Texas that he had no equal as a politician. He saw the winds shifting from Democratic to Republican long before most others, and he switched allegiance as the party of L.B.J. and Ann Richards lapsed into helplessness. Later, when most Texas Republicans still worshiped the Bush wing of the party, Mr. Perry embraced the rise of the Tea Party — even if that meant flirting with birtherism and suggesting that the BP oil spill could have been an act of God.
Mr. Perry’s goal wasn’t to do good, but to stay in power. So he did, longer than any other governor in Texas’ history.
This explains why no one here was surprised when it came time to walk back his harsh remarks about Mr. Trump. Sure, Mr. Perry had called the candidacy of his onetime presidential rival “a cancer on conservatism,” deriding his style as “a toxic mix of demagoguery, meanspiritedness and nonsense that will lead the Republican Party to perdition if pursued.” But when opportunity knocked for Mr. Perry, perdition looked just fine.
Mr. Tillerson’s ascent has been less swervy, but involved a similar climb up a greasy pole. Exxon is another country, and proud of it. The corporate milieu is like Harvard crossed with the former Soviet Union: a culture of excellence combined with a set of rules that are byzantine and uncontestable. No one talks to the press.
The company is known to hire its executives right out of college and to rarely go outside after that. Everyone works their way up, serving time in facilities like the giant Baytown refinery east of Houston, before learning how to negotiate with foreign potentates and gaining a spot in the C-suite.
Reward your friends and punish your enemies. That maxim may not be in the Boy Scout handbook, but that’s how these guys roll.