MOSCOW — Russia and Turkey vowed on Tuesday not to let the assassination of a top Russian diplomat by an off-duty Turkish police officer derail their work or their fight against terrorism. Along with Iran, they pledged to expand a fragile cease-fire deal involving Syria’s government and the opposition.
A team of 18 Russian investigators landed in Ankara to look into the killing of the envoy, Ambassador Andrey G. Karlov, whose body was to be returned to Russia on the same plane in which the investigators arrived.
In Moscow, the Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, and his Turkish counterpart, Mevlut Cavusoglu, placed flowers next to a portrait of Mr. Karlov, who was fatally shot on Monday at a photography exhibition at an art center in Ankara, the capital.
“Turkish people are mourning this loss as much as Russia and the people of Russia,” Mr. Cavusoglu told Mr. Lavrov at the ceremony. Mr. Lavrov said that Russia was “grateful to our Turkish colleagues” for their condolences and for their rapid response to the killing.
“This tragedy is making all of us combat terrorism in a more resolute way and is making our meeting today ever more relevant,” Mr. Lavrov said.
The assassination of Mr. Karlov — which appeared to be the first killing of a top Russian diplomat since before World War II — elicited widespread worry that relations between Russia and Turkey might deteriorate. But most analysts played down those fears, saying the attack was unlikely to derail the reconciliation between the countries that has been underway over the past year.
At the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, a makeshift plaque was unveiled to honor Mr. Karlov, who became a diplomat in 1976 for what was then the Soviet Union, and who was fluent in Korean, having served in posts in both North Korea and South Korea. He was named ambassador to Turkey in 2013.
Turkish officials said on Tuesday that the street of the Russian Embassy in Ankara would be renamed to honor Mr. Karlov.
Marina Karlova, the ambassador’s widow, held red carnations and cried as she watched Turkish soldiers carrying her husband’s coffin, draped in a Russian flag, into a plane to be returned home. Patriarch Kirill, the leader of the Russian Orthodox Church, is to lead a funeral service for the diplomat at the Cathedral of Christ the Savior in Moscow.
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey said the fatal shooting of Russia’s ambassador in front of stunned onlookers at a photo exhibit in Ankara was aimed specifically at derailing closer ties between Turkey and Russia.
The attack is, however, an embarrassment for the government of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, and it has prompted questions about how the gunman, identified as Mevlut Mert Altintas, 22, was able to enter the exhibition — “Across Russia, From Kaliningrad to Kamchatka, Through the Eyes of Travelers” — and shoot Mr. Karlov in front of a horrified crowd. The gunman was fatally shot by police officers.
The Turkish state-run Anadolu Agency reported that six people had been detained in the investigation, including the attacker’s mother, father and sister in the western city of Aydin, and his roommate in Ankara.
According to a preliminary forensic report, the gunman fired 11 rounds, nine of which hit the ambassador, the Turkish newspaper Hurriyet reported. The gunman had checked into a hotel just behind the art center and planned the assassination there, Hurriyet said.
According to the Dogan News Agency, the assailant’s uncle, also detained after the attack, used to be the principal in a network of schools that were shut down over alleged ties to the cleric Fethullah Gulen, who lives in exile in the United States and is a major opponent of Mr. Erdogan’s government. Mr. Gulen, through a representative, has denied any role in the assassination.
Murat Yetkin, in a column for Hurriyet, said the fact that the gunman was killed — rather than captured — would hinder the investigation. “If it was possible to capture him intact or wounded, but he was killed instead in a gunfight, this is like a sabotage,” Mr. Yetkin wrote.
Officials in the Cankaya section of Ankara said that the Contemporary Arts Center, which is owned by the municipality, was protected by five private security guards and had cameras on every floor, as well as scanning machines. “It has been determined that on the day of this hateful attack, the security guard warned the assailant for not passing through X-ray machine, and the assailant then showed his official police ID,” the municipality said.
The United States closed normal operations at its embassy in Ankara on Tuesday, and at its consulates in Istanbul and Adana, after a person approached the embassy and discharged a firearm at 3:50 a.m., the embassy said. The person was taken into police custody, and no one was injured.