Adolf Burger, believed to be the last surviving concentration camp prisoner forced to make counterfeit pound notes in a Nazi plan to undermine Britain’s economy, died on Tuesday at his home in Prague. He was 99.
His son-in-law, Lubomir Hübner, confirmed Mr. Burger’s death to iDNES, a Czech news site.
Mr. Burger’s skills as a printer in Slovakia led first to his incarceration, and then to his unlikely survival.
Arrested by the Gestapo in 1942 in Bratislava for forging baptismal certificates for fellow Jews to avoid Nazi persecution, he was sent to Auschwitz with his first wife, Gisella, who was killed in the camp’s gas chambers. But after Mr. Burger was shipped to Birkenau, Auschwitz’s companion camp, his profession became an advantage: The Nazis were looking for prisoners to work on their ambitious counterfeiting scheme.
Mr. Burger, Prisoner No. 64401, recalled the moment the commandant of Auschwitz, Rudolf Höss, recruited him to Operation Bernhard, which was named for its leader, SS Major Bernhard Krüger.
Being selected along with about 140 other prisoners to work in Block 19 at Sachsenhausen, which was about 20 miles north of Berlin, afforded Mr. Burger privileges — but none of the freedom that Höss had promised.
“I always said I was a dead man on holiday,” Mr. Burger told the historian Roger Morrison. “We never believed we would get out of there. But in the block we had everything — food, white sheets on the bed. Each one of us had his own bed; not like Birkenau, where six of us slept under a single lice-ridden blanket.
But the counterfeiters were segregated from the thousands of other prisoners. Their windows were kept covered.
An estimated 130 million counterfeit British pounds were produced at Sachsenhausen. The Nazis wanted the prisoners to forge American dollars as well, to destabilize the United States economy. Mr. Burger recalled during a radio interview in Prague that another prisoner had wanted to drag out the counterfeiting of dollars but that their captors told them to proceed quickly or face a firing squad.
The war was turning against Germany, however, and the dollar-counterfeiting scheme had not advanced far when the Nazis moved Operation Bernhard to the Mauthausen camp in Austria, where the prisoners expected to be killed. But in early May 1945, Allied troops liberated them. Mr. Burger was freed from the Ebensee forced-labor camp, part of the Mauthausen network.
Along the way, fleeing Nazis had dumped crates of the counterfeit pounds. Some of them were discovered in 2000 beneath Lake Toplitz in the Austrian Alps.
Mr. Burger was devoted in later years to speaking about his experience, especially to students. His memoir, “The Devil’s Workshop,” published in 1983 (an English translation was published in 2009), was turned into a film, “The Counterfeiters,” directed by the Austrian filmmaker Stefan Ruzowitzky, with August Diehl playing the role of Mr. Burger.
