This week, the mailbag has gone international. We’ll begin in Aleppo, where a pro-Syrian government offensive was forcing civilians to flee. The Times captured the ongoing escape with the lead photo of the Dec. 13 issue carrying the caption: “A man fleeing to rebel-held areas of Aleppo, Syria, on Monday, carrying a child with an IV drip.” Readers took issue with the fact that the caption did not note the woman in the photo.
There are clearly THREE human figures in this image. By omitting mention of the third, the veiled woman, the Times editor has completed what the radical religious fundamentalists began: making women invisible behind the veil.
Samira Kawash, Brooklyn, N.Y.
I was puzzled to read the caption on the main photo on today’s front page (Dec. 13), which showed a scene from Syria. The caption read that it was a man fleeing with a child. However, the picture is clearly of a couple — a man AND a woman (in a burka) — traveling together. I thought it was really odd that the caption completely erased the woman from the image. Was it because she was covered and dressed in black? This is a humanitarian crisis affecting whole families, and it’s important that we recognize the humanity of women living through this nightmare, even if they are wearing clothing that makes them less visible.
David Furst, the international photo editor, explained the thinking behind the caption.
The original caption from Reuters didn’t specify that the adults in question were a couple, and the situation — fleeing a war zone — precluded us from asking additional questions about their relationship. We could not assume what it was. Additionally, given the limited caption space we could only address the fact that the man was carrying a baby, which is not immediately clear in the photograph.
The public editor’s take: The cutline caught my attention too — why no mention of the woman, when there are clearly three people in the photo? The chance seems quite small that this isn’t a couple — given how close together they are walking, in the Arab world no less. If we don’t want to take the risk, how about saying: “A man and woman flee Aleppo, carrying a baby with an IV drip.” As is, the caption leaves open questions about our own cultural motives.
Our next reader took us to Australia, where a reader was concerned about a Times travel article on her native country. The article, “36 Hours in Sydney, Australia,” recommended a local gallery that specializes in Aboriginal art.
Purchasing First Nations Australians’ art is an ethical minefield, that must be explained with thought and care. This is something the New York Times has covered in the past.
The gallery your piece recommended is not Indigenous-owned, nor does it appear to be a signatory to the Indigenous Art Code (it certainly doesn’t proclaim to be on its website). The code itself is considered relatively toothless by many Indigenous activists, but at least it operates as a minimum standard.
I am saddened to see that the New York Times, an organization which I revere, did not take care in explaining, at least in brief, the issues surrounding the acquisition of Indigenous art, or choose to champion a business that is Indigenous owned and operated.
“Storm troopers” refers to Nazi thugs. To describe American riot police as storm troopers is outrageous.
Justin Huang, Albany, Calif.
The caption and article have since been updated, and a correction was appended. Vanessa Friedman, a fashion critic and the author of the article, explained that the police officers in the photo “were called ‘storm troopers’ on social media fairly widely at the time,” and she added, “I should have specified that was the reference (and I believe the social media people were referencing Star Wars),” not Nazis.
Bias incidents on both sides have been reported. A student walking near campus was threatened with being lit on fire because she wore a hijab. Other students were accused of being racist for supporting Mr. Trump, according to a campuswide message from Mark Schlissel, the university’s president.
The emails piled up quickly.
These two “incidents” bear no comparison. It is incumbent upon journalists to point out such discrepancies. Now, more than ever, we must be extra wary of false equivalence, extra attuned to the insidious process of normalizing the abnormal. We must choose our words wisely and question the word choice of others.
The story was also discussed widely on Twitter.
According to a campuswide message from Mark Schlissel, the university’s president, bias incidents have been reported. A student walking near campus was threatened with being lit on fire because she wore a hijab. Other students were accused of being racist for supporting Mr. Trump.
We asked Marc Lacey, the national editor, to comment on the changes, and he addressed Ms. Rosenbaum-Kranson directly.
Firstly, thank you for subscribing all these years. Really. Without you and people like you, there would be no New York Times. Secondly, thanks for pointing out your concern. We heard from other readers and made an attempt through editing to make clear that we were not likening the various post-election incidents to each other but were instead characterizing a letter by a university president.
The public editor’s take: First off, I applaud the editors for identifying an interesting story in the Midwest that goes against the grain of much media coverage: showing some Trump voters as victims. The piece, of course, was more nuanced than that, but it was a good read. That said, I see the readers’ point on that particular paragraph. The subsequent changes made to it, I believe, solved the matter by making clear this was a letter from the president, not an assertion of the Times reporter.
Why did the author use the term “union boss” rather than “union leader,” “labor leader,” or “president of United Steel Workers Local 1999”? The term “union boss” is a staple of anti-union rhetoric, just one step up from “union thug.” To use such a term in the context of an article about President-elect Trump’s bashing of a union leader is perverse.
Chris Sturr, Boston, Mass.
Happy weekend, workers of the world.