The Manhattan district attorney, government watchdog groups and campaign finance officials are criticizing legislation before the City Council for its potential to weaken New York City’s landmark campaign finance system.
Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the district attorney, sent a letter this week to Melissa Mark-Viverito, the Council speaker, and other council members warning that one bill being considered could make it easier for those seeking money under the city’s matching funds program to commit fraud.
The program provides a six-to-one match for up to $175 in contributions from an individual city resident, meaning a $175 contribution would open the door to an additional $1,050 in matching funds.
The bill being considered would let candidates complete or make changes to contribution cards required of donors that give identifying information, including, among other things, the date and amount of contributions.
“This bill would eliminate an important safeguard against violations of campaign finance law and the defrauding of taxpayers,” Mr. Vance wrote in the letter, which The Daily News reported about on Friday.
Mr. Vance said the contribution-card bill would make it hard to prosecute some fraud cases. In one such case, his office secured an indictment this year against Celia D. Dosamantes, a Democrat accused of altering contribution cards to make it appear as if some donors had given more than they had and to increase the amount of matching funds she received.
City Council officials said the bills being considered were still going through the legislative process and that concerns like those voiced by Mr. Vance would be weighed. A vote on the bills is expected before year’s end.
Rose Gill Hearn, chairwoman of the city’s Campaign Finance Board, also criticized the contribution-card bill in a memo last month, saying it would complicate the task of detecting instances of fraud involving the matching funds program.
Ms. Gill Hearn criticized several other proposals being considered by the Council, saying they could hamper the board’s ability to do its job. She said the bills had advanced without sufficient deliberation, unlike other proposed reforms backed by the board that have languished for months but now are expected to win the Council’s approval by year’s end.
“These unwelcome proposals should not be the cost of implementing those reforms,” she wrote.
One proposal drawing Ms. Gill Hearn’s criticism would strictly limit who could attend the board’s executive sessions, which are closed to the public. Ms. Gill Hearn said that could keep the board from consulting with its own staff members or others when considering penalties for campaign-finance violations. She also took issue with a proposal that would place new requirements on the board when a candidate contests its findings that a violation has occurred. In addition, she objected to a bill that would compel the board to report to the Council and mayor on efforts to make its software compatible with state Board of Elections’ software.
The bills are expected to be voted on along with other legislation long sought by advocates. That legislation includes a proposal to keep contributions bundled by lobbyists and others doing business with the city out of the matching-funds system.
There are now strict limits on how much money lobbyists and those with business with the city can give to candidates directly, but those same people can raise unlimited sums from others that they can package together and give to candidates in a process known as bundling. Because bundled funds can qualify for the matching-funds program, the process greatly magnifies bundlers’ influence.
While the proposal on bundling would not ban it, it would remove the match for those funds — a significant improvement in the view of government watchdogs. The finance board proposed the change in 2014, and it has awaited a Council vote for months.
Also under consideration is a bill that would strictly limit how much lobbyists or those doing business with the city can give to nonprofit groups controlled or created by elected officials. The bill is aimed at a practice used by Mayor Bill de Blasio, who was heavily criticized for the activities of the Campaign for One New York, a nonprofit created to support his agenda. The group received millions of dollars in donations from builders, lobbyists, unions and others. The mayor, a Democrat, shut the group down this year, but its actions and fund-raising practices have been the subject of multiple investigations.
