For more than 30 years, Taro Ichihashi has been working away in near-seclusion behind a metal roll-down gate protecting 551 Grand Street in Brooklyn.
The price was right, at $35,000, when Mr. Ichihashi, an abstract painter, bought the two-story building in 1983 in East Williamsburg, just off the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway.
He moved into the second floor and used the ground-floor storefront space for his studio. But the roughness of the area and clashes with neighbors turned him into something of a recluse.
Some neighbors saw him as a curmudgeon whose life inside the shuttered storefront remained a mystery.
“The neighbors never knew what I was doing, what was inside here,” he said.
Now they know. Mr. Ichihashi recently began opening his roll-down gate to reveal that those decades were spent churning out artwork. He has amassed more than 1,000 works of art, from large canvases to prints and drawings.
“My neighbors said, ‘Oh you’re finally opening your gate,’” said Mr. Ichihashi, who has taken to welcoming visitors to his gallery every other weekend.
Mr. Ichihashi said he was born on Sado Island in Japan during World War II; his father served in the Japanese military as a gunner.
As a young artist, he had a talent for figurative, realistic art but preferred a radical, abstract approach. He made minimal paintings, in the spirit of the painter Robert Rauschenberg, and frenetic pencil scrawls not unlike those of Cy Twombly.
Rejection from a prestigious art academy in Japan strengthened his resolve to gain recognition for his individualized approach.
“It was a challenge — it was art or die,” said Mr. Ichihashi, who moved to the United States in 1973 and settled near Washington with a relative. Soon his work was appearing in art shows, galleries and museums. He received favorable reviews in The Washington Post.
Eager for a bigger arena, he moved to New York City and settled first in Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn, then in the Grand Street building, a former wholesale cosmetics space.
Drug addicts used his doorway as a urinal, he said. The hydrant in front became a summertime fountain. Cars were repaired at the curb, and a nearby bakery spewed fumes his way.
Once, a burglar broke through his skylight and took some appliances but ignored the art. Another time, Mr. Ichihashi’s wife, Mie, had her handbag snatched. He said his van became covered with graffiti and routinely had its tires slashed.
The broad storefront windows that let in such wonderful natural light also attracted vandals, so Mr. Ichihashi kept the gate closed.
Still, he became ill from the stress of the neighborhood and deliberated often whether to leave New York, he said.
“I came from Japan, a peaceful country,” he said.
He lost his art dealer and laid off his assistant, but he never stopped working. Now the place is cluttered with finished canvases of all sizes and boxes and drawers of smaller paintings and prints.
A visitor need look no farther than the pop-up shop that opened across the street — the Swedish Tobacconist, which sells tobacco pouches known as snus — to witness the metamorphosis of Mr. Ichihashi’s block.
With each snazzy new restaurant, his storefront looks more out of place and more attractive to real estate agents.
The revitalized neighborhood has drawn creative types and young professionals and lured Mr. Ichihashi from his roll-down shell.
At a street fair, a smaller painting was snapped up on the spot for $600 cash, he said, and during a gallery weekend, he sold a painting for $1,000.
He said he had turned down lucrative offers to sell or rent out his building, mostly to avoid interrupting his creative flow.
