A former correction officer on Rikers Island was convicted on Thursday of violating the civil rights of a seriously ill inmate who died after the officer kicked him repeatedly in the head while other officers pinned him facedown on the floor.
The former officer, Brian Coll, 47, was also convicted of obstruction of justice and falsifying records and conspiring with others in a cover-up of the death of the inmate, Ronald Spear, 52.
A jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan found that Mr. Coll had deprived Mr. Spear of his constitutional right to be free from excessive force, and that the assault resulted in Mr. Spear’s death.
Mr. Coll could face a term as long as life in prison on the civil rights count alone when he is sentenced by Judge Loretta A. Preska on April 24.
The case illuminated longstanding problems at Rikers — the culture of violence and a code of silence among correction officers and staff. The government showed, for example, that officers had filed false reports about the altercation and lied to investigators.
Mr. Coll and Mr. Spear got into a dispute after Mr. Spear asked to see the unit’s doctor and was told he was not available. Mr. Spear, not wanting to wait, tried to kick Mr. Coll and push past him into the doctor’s office. Mr. Coll then punched Mr. Spear in the face and stomach, and another officer, Anthony Torres, tackled him. Mr. Torres and another officer then held him down.
Mr. Torres, who has pleaded guilty to helping cover up the attack and who has been cooperating with prosecutors, testified that Mr. Coll then forcefully and repeatedly kicked Mr. Spear’s head — “like he was kicking a field goal,” he said.
Ronald Spear, an inmate at Rikers Island, died in 2012 after Brian Coll, a correction officer, kicked him repeatedly in the head while other officers pinned him facedown on the floor.
Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, said after the verdict that F.B.I. agents and prosecutors had not forgotten Mr. Coll’s words. “And today, neither did the jury,” he added.
Mr. Coll, who left Rikers in 2014, did not testify. But his lawyers, Sam A. Schmidt and Joshua L. Dratel, argued that Mr. Spear initiated the conduct that led to his death.
The defense was that Mr. Spear, already in poor health, sustained a cardiac arrhythmia as he resisted officers who were trying to control him after he began fighting with Mr. Coll, and that he died before any kicking occurred.
Prosecutors said Mr. Coll was culpable and proud of what he had done. They introduced evidence that for years, he displayed in his bedroom a framed article from The Village Voice about Mr. Spear’s death, which included his photograph.
“Let’s call it what it is: a trophy, a reminder of how tough he could be,” Ms. Cucinella told the jury.
New York City paid $2.75 million to settle a lawsuit by Mr. Spear’s family.
Testimony showed the cover-up began almost immediately. Mr. Torres testified that Mr. Coll told a captain that Mr. Spear had attacked him with a cane and that Mr. Torres had come to help him. Mr. Torres said that he told the captain that was true, even though it was not.
“You don’t snitch on another officer,” Mr. Torres said.
Martin S. Bell, another prosecutor, invoked the musical “Hamilton” in a rebuttal argument, saying that in Mr. Spear’s final moments, he had no idea whether he would live or die, and no control over who would tell his story.
