Over the last decade, N.B.A. championships have been evenly split between teams from the Eastern and Western Conferences. But season in and season out, the West has had more good teams.
If your team had a record of .500 in the West at the end of the season, it probably was not making the playoffs. In the East, at least one sub-.500 team sneaked in most years.
But last season, things started to turn. In the East, the Bulls (42-40) and the Wizards (41-41) missed the playoffs. In the West, two 42-40 teams made them, as did the 41-41 Rockets.
This season, even as the West fields the most dominant teams, the East has more teams at or above .500. If the playoffs had started Sunday, the 12-13 Portland Trail Blazers would have advanced in the West. Two Eastern teams with records of .500 would have been done.
Let’s get into some games.
Have a question or a suggestion for this column? Send an email to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or reach me on Twitter: @Jonesieman.
Christmas is coming. The geese are getting fat. And there aren’t all that many nationally televised games worth watching this week.
So what better time to delight in the potential of our own New York Knickerbockers?
In their last two seasons, under their Zen president, Phil Jackson, the Knicks were 49-115. The team hasn’t had a winning season since 2012-13, when a squad that at times included Amar’e Stoudemire, Rasheed Wallace and Jason Kidd earned the second seed in the East.
Now the Knicks look as if they might be ready to charge back into the playoffs. On Monday, they were 14-10, tied with the Hornets for third place in the East, above the Chicago Bulls and the Boston Celtics, and three wins from matching their total from Jackson’s first full season of running the show.
But the news media have not been particularly good to the Knicks, mostly because Jackson’s episodic issues with foot-in-mouth disease have surfaced again. Just last week, he criticized Carmelo Anthony for stalling the offense by holding the ball too much, leading The Daily News to denounce his management ability and “massive ego.” In November, he insulted the Cleveland Cavaliers’ LeBron James, using the word “posse” to describe the player’s business partners.
Neither comment seemed particularly strategic. But Jackson’s willingness to soak up the bright glare of the Gotham spotlight has allowed his team to progress under the radar.
Porzingis is joined by stars like Anthony and Derrick Rose, but also by a deep roster. Shooting guard Courtney Lee gives the team some much-needed grit on defense, and three big men coming off the bench — Kyle O’Quinn, Willy Hernangomez and Mindaugas Kuzminskas — have solidified the Knicks’ second unit.
In his first season as Knicks coach, Hornacek has been able to escape critique, even as he experiments with a version of Jackson’s much-criticized triangle offense. Over the summer, Hornacek explained that despite its ostensible complications, the system emphasizes spacing on offense. His players have demonstrated the point, spreading themselves around the perimeter and using picks to move the ball inside and out.
New York has had some good wins, over the Hornets, the Bulls and the Grizzlies. But partly because of their unimpressive defense, they have yet to beat anyone truly impressive. And Golden State is likely to wipe the floor with them on Thursday.
But with any luck, Jackson will say something outrageous (but ultimately inoffensive), the rout will go unnoticed, and these quietly determined Knicks will continue to improve until they’re in a position to make some noise come April.
Boston lost to the Toronto Raptors on Friday, but the game was close given that the Celtics’ Isaiah Thomas was out with a groin injury. The little big man says he hopes to be back for a visit to San Antonio, where the Spurs have been surprisingly inconsistent this year at 6-4, even as they have the second best record in the league.
After a string of tough losses, the Bulls seemed to right the ship last week with a victory over the Spurs at home. Chicago’s offense was supremely balanced; each of its starters scored at least 12 points. The Bucks are in a bit of a tailspin, losing three of their last four games, including a loss in Washington. Embarrassing!
League Pass Game of the Week: Memphis at Cleveland, Tuesday, 7 p.m.
Memphis has won six games in a row, including a Saturday night beatdown of the Warriors. Next up, the defending champion Cavaliers, who have won four in a row, including tough wins over Toronto and Charlotte.
The Philadelphia 76ers are a bad team. But even in a city not exactly known for its tolerant fans, they are attracting some buzz.
And it’s all because of their newly minted star, and a player who seems like a shoo-in for rookie of the year: Joel Embiid.
Embiid’s numbers are solid: 18 points, 7.6 rebounds and 2.5 blocks a game. But that doesn’t fully explain why Sixers fans have taken to him as if he were an overrated historical artifact or a glorified Kwik-E-Mart.
“Let’s start on the court,” Daniel says.
“In addition to being a 7-foot-2 graceful bully in the post, Embiid has a smooth 3-point stroke (44 percent) that Alvin Gentry, the former Warriors assistant, has compared to Steph Curry’s, along with the agility to drive past any bigs who venture out to the 3-point line to contest it. Defensively, he is always good for a few highlight blocks, and puts the Sixers among the league’s best defenses when he’s on the court.
As if all that were not enough, Embiid is also extremely kind to small children.
