Illustrated. 304 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $28.95.
Some of the minor ways in which American English differs from British English point to different approaches to looking at the world, and the word “wood” is a case in point. In American, it is a substance; in British English, it is also a place. Americans do not generally refer to a wood; they say the woods, where bears proverbially relieve themselves, or woodlands, or sometimes a woodlot, but a discrete parcel of the primary forest that once covered the land scarcely excites the American imagination.
Britain is different, because its countryside is much smaller-scale and more intimate, with vast forests the exception, and a block of trees no more extensive than a soccer pitch can be cherished, especially if threatened. Indeed, individual British woods are instinctively regarded with affection, and in recent years the idea of owning one’s own small wood has, in Britain, grown in popularity. Richard Mabey, doyen of English nature writers, has written lyrically of the beech wood he owned in the Chiltern Hills to the northwest of London (pleasingly referring to himself merely as its “custodian,” as opposed to its proprietor).
Now here comes another writer about the natural world, with his own Chiltern beech wood, and his own book about it. Richard Fortey is a paleontologist, formerly in residence at London’s Natural History Museum, who is also an acclaimed popularizer of science, a man with talent as a storyteller; and with his earnings from a TV nature series, he bought Grim’s Dyke Wood, four acres of beeches and bluebells a mile away from his hometown, Henley-on-Thames, and decided to compile its biography. You can do that with a named wood; it is finite, it has boundaries, it is a self-contained world.
Fortey realized that the account of his wood needed to be conducted on two levels, the human as well as the scientific, because the English countryside has been shaped for millenniums by people. The results, presented in “The Wood for the Trees,” are fascinating: a vivid history of the nearby manor house, Greys Court, and its noble families who owned the wood for hundreds of years, and of the woodsmen who turned the harvested timber into everything from kindling to chair legs; but even more striking, an immensely detailed portrait of the flora and fauna contained in these four acres, which seem to expand exponentially the closer one looks.
It’s not just the deer, and the woodpeckers, and the bluebells: It’s the six species of bats, more than 30 species of spiders, the 150 species of moths, the 300 species of fungi, the mites, the centipedes, the pseudoscorpions, the myriad things so tiny they have no English names. Fortey creates with them an astounding portrait of multilayered life in one relatively restricted space, reviving the great tradition of natural history, so cast into the shade in recent years by molecular biology and genetic studies.
If it has a fault, it is that this is a book that does not really catch at the heart. Toward the end, Fortey proclaims his contempt for the emotional aspects of modern nature writing; he is inflexibly empiricist. He stands or falls by his scientific expertise, which is indeed magisterial. Although it is not quite infallible. He refers, for example, to his wood’s hairy snail as Trochilus hirsutus; he should have said Trochulus hispidus (the former name refers to a South American hummingbird). Elsewhere he misquotes the name of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew — he writes “Botanical,” a lapse that may seem perfectly trivial, but which would be regarded in Kew itself as most unfortunate. Yet these are trifling blemishes in an account of one small place that conveys unforgettably the staggering variety and abundance of the whole natural world.