It’s admirable that Eric Trump has decided that he will no longer directly solicit contributions for his charitable foundation, recognizing the conflicts that his efforts might raise now that his father will become president. Perhaps the younger Mr. Trump’s sincere dedication to his philanthropic projects helps him, at least in this instance, to make the moral choice to achieve a greater good.
I wish I could be as confident that he, and his adult siblings, will do the same when it comes to their business holdings — and the many thorny conflicts that await should they continue to be involved with government activities.
In your article on the incoming White House counsel, Donald McGahn, I was horrified once again to read President-elect Donald Trump’s claim that “the president cannot have a conflict of interest.” Even worse, in this one instance, his boastful assertion is actually correct. Apparently, this exemption to the conflict-of-interest laws for the president and vice president was “codified” in 1989.
Why on earth would this exemption have been created? Are we more concerned with the murky business connections of a backbench member of Congress than we are with the worldwide holdings and questionable relationships of the man who will shape our policies on terrorism, human rights and climate change for years to come?
I would urge members of Congress to repeal this unfathomable and dangerous exemption to our conflict-of-interest laws. Of course, that might take political courage, a quality seemingly in short supply these days on Capitol Hill.
Donald Trump bullied and blustered his way through primary season and the general election, making a mockery of our country’s democratic institutions along the way. He has already shown a predilection for mixing the country’s business with his own — more accurately, leveraging the country’s business for the benefit of his own.
Now, after saying he’ll spin off his businesses to his children, only a half measure to begin with, he’s reneging on that.
I realize that the Republican-led Congress is giddy with power, but it needs to take action to prevent Mr. Trump from running roughshod over a system the founding fathers sought to protect.
