Spencer Frank and Bethany Paquin at their one-bedroom apartment on First Avenue.
Spencer Frank, who grew up primarily on the Upper East Side, left the city for four years at Syracuse University and later roomed with a friend in Midtown East. He rode the 4 or 5 train to his office in the financial district, where he works in mobile advertising technology.
Almost three years ago, he met Bethany Paquin, a dancer and former aerialist at Tokyo Disney Resort, who is from northeastern Connecticut. She was living with her sister in Harlem.
The couple planned to find a place together. Last year, Mr. Frank moved in with his mother on the Upper East Side to lower his rent and save for a security deposit and broker fee. Ms. Paquin returned temporarily to Connecticut, teaching dance and working toward a physical therapy degree.
Ms. Paquin, 28, craved a laundry room in the building, something her Harlem building had lacked. One awful winter day, all the dryers at the local laundromat were occupied, and she trekked around with her wet clothes, hunting for a place with a free dryer. “I was, like, I am never doing this again,” she said.
Their rental budget was up to the low $3,000s, but they preferred to pay less. Mr. Frank liked a one-bedroom with a balcony in a 19-story condominium building, suitable but small. The rent was $3,000. His offer of $2,700 was declined.
On Craigslist, a no-fee listing for $2,800 took them to the large, sunny and rundown top floor of a townhouse in Kips Bay.
She liked an alcove studio, for $2,500, in an Upper East Side co-op building, and was fine with getting less space for less money.
That one, however, came with plenty of upfront fees. They would need co-op board approval and could stay for no more than two years. But Ms. Paquin and Mr. Frank’s mother argued for a studio. “Fine, you guys win,” Mr. Frank told them in exasperation.
Searching for studios in a lower price range, he found an unusual new listing in the East 50s. It was a huge one-bedroom, with around 800 square feet, in a walk-up building with no laundry. The rent was just $2,200 — a one-bedroom for the price of a studio.
“In terms of price, size and location, this listing was a definite outlier,” said the listing agent, Nicholas Dalton Lee, a salesman at Sierra Residential.
Mr. Frank sent a video to Ms. Paquin, who was willing to take the place sight unseen. By now, she didn’t care if the building lacked a laundry.
They signed on in late summer, paying a broker fee of 15 percent of a year’s rent, around $4,000. The $2,200 rent took into account one month free on a year’s lease. The actual rent is $2,400.
The gas, under repair, was off for several weeks. The water pressure is low. The honking from the avenue is relentless.
The closest laundromat is eight blocks away. “It is a pain to carry the laundry for two people,” she said. “You need a saddlebag.” So they avail themselves of the nearby wash-and-fold place.
“We drop off laundry across the street and are guaranteed to lose a sock every time,” Mr. Frank said.