BERLIN — Germany’s highest court on Tuesday upheld the government’s decision in 2011 to shut its nuclear reactors ahead of schedule, but it ruled that power companies must be compensated for losses incurred as a result of that decision.
The ruling by the Federal Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe brings to an end a long, bitter dispute between the government of Chancellor Angela Merkel and German power companies on the decision in 2011 to abandon nuclear power in the wake of the nuclear disaster in Fukushima, Japan.
In 1988, Germany began transforming its energy sector to one powered largely by renewable sources like wind, solar and biomass. Progressively shutting down the country’s nuclear reactors over time had been part of the original plan.
In the months before Fukushima, Ms. Merkel’s center-right government had extended the life of several reactors, citing their use as a so-called bridge technology to ensure a stable flow of power through the grid. But the government changed course after the Fukushima disaster in March 2011, taking eight reactors out of service and accelerating plans to close the remaining nine by 2022, earlier than originally scheduled.
The energy companies E.On, RWE and Vattenfall sued the government for compensation estimated at 19 billion euros, or about $20.2 billion at current exchange rates, for losses incurred as a result of the decision to move up the deadline, and they questioned the legality of the decision.
At the time, nuclear power accounted for 23 percent of electricity in Germany, leaving the companies with energy they could not sell in the months after reactors were taken offline. In addition, the companies were saddled with costs for processing and storing waste from the reactors, projected to total €23.6 billion.
The court ordered the government and the power companies to reach an agreement on the compensation by 2018, but it gave no guidance on an amount.
Even as the legal dispute simmered, Germany moved ahead with the transformation of its energy sector. In 2015, when the nuclear reactor at Grafenrheinfeld, in Bavaria, was shuttered — the most recent to be taken offline — renewable sources produced 29 percent of all electricity in Germany, government figures showed.
The country’s move away from nuclear power comes as it aims to increase production of energy from renewable sources to at least 35 percent, and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 40 percent of 1990 levels, all by 2020.
The transition to renewable energy is projected to create about 430,000 new jobs by 2020, PricewaterhouseCoopers said in a report this month.
Ms. Merkel has indicated that she will use her country’s term as president of the Group of 20, which began last week, to continue to push for increased use of renewable energy around the world as a way to fight climate change.
