On a dreary afternoon in late November, inside a cavernous former shipworks at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, Michael Zaragoza was busy dipping shredded burlap sacks into buckets of gritty plaster. He then draped the stiffened sheets over a plywood platform, creating a craggy stage for Verdi’s “Macbeth,” the 1847 work that LoftOpera presents here starting Thursday. Nearby, Alyshia Taboas cut into bright blue sheets of roof insulation, her utility knife forming the notches and ridges onto which Mr. Zaragoza would drape his rocky fabric.
Most days, Mr. Zaragoza would be directing construction workers at one of a handful of luxury condominium developments around the city. They would be using the same plywood, the same Structo-Lite basecoat plaster, the same Georgia Pacific extruded polystyrene boards, to give form to multimillion-dollar apartments. Ms. Taboas, a marketing manager, would then help stage and sell them for her and Mr. Zaragoza’s employer, the Manhattan developer DDG.
It’s not unusual for corporate entities to give money to arts organizations. It’s far less common for them to actually break out the hammers and nails.
When Mr. McMillan started DDG, he also established the DDG Foundation, which mostly partnered with visual artists on its sites. Among them, an 11-story edition of Yayoi Kusama’s “Yellow Trees” surrounded its 345 Meatpacking development, and two murals have adorned a TriBeCa lot where DDG will eventually build a small condominium.
“People who came to the first show and came back for the second one said, ‘Oh my God, the production value is so much greater,’” said Sam Bartlett, Apotheosis’s lead producer.
DDG donates supplies and labor for its opera projects. “We have so many buildings going; we have lots of materials on hand,” Ms. Taboas said. The developer also hosted a fund-raiser for Apotheosis at one of its condominiums downtown, at which the opera raised about $4,000, while DDG got to pitch its apartments.
The developer began working with LoftOpera in late summer, when the “Macbeth” production was already underway, so the job was more about expanding the opera company’s vision, which called for a cavelike set within the looming surroundings. Old pine joists salvaged from a DDG project in TriBeCa will serve as a table; hunks of bluestone from past projects were also considered but were deemed too unwieldy. DDG’s experience with the city’s building bureaucracy has helped with getting permits and expediting inspections for the vast manufacturing space.
That space, inside Building 128 at the Navy Yard, was donated by Mast Brothers chocolate company, which is relocating its factory there. (Rick Mast, one of the founding brothers, studied opera in college.) Much of the burlap used for the stage came from old cocoa sacks.
“This is way beyond what we would normally do,” said Mr. Ellis-Ferris, who was testing acrylic finishes on a boulder the crew had assembled in four days from yet more plaster and plywood. It rolled on a large scaffolding that would have recently carried electricians and painters at a DDG site. A week earlier, it had all been just a rendering on Mr. Zaragoza’s computer screen.
