A senior commander of the notorious Ugandan rebel group the Lord’s Resistance Army went on trial on Tuesday to face charges of organizing massacres and kidnapping thousands of children, 11 years after an international warrant for his arrest.
The commander, Dominic Ongwen, was the subject of a decade-long manhunt until he turned himself in last year, saying he feared that Joseph Kony, the founder of the group, was planning to kill him.
According to a United Nations estimate, the Lord’s Resistance Army killed more than 100,000 people, abducted 60,000 to 100,000 children and displaced more than 2.5 million civilians in four African countries from 1987 to 2012.
Both Mr. Kony and Mr. Ongwen were indicted by the International Criminal Court in 2005, along with three other rebel commanders, making them the first people ever charged by the court. Three have since died; Mr. Kony, who claims to be a prophet with mystical powers, is said to be in hiding near South Sudan.
Over the past few years, Mr. Kony’s group is reported to have dwindled to 100 or so men. But the Obama administration once considered him such a threat to peace in the region that it offered a reward of up to $5 million for his capture, even though the United States is not a member of the International Criminal Court. The rebel group’s reign of terror, which included its practice of mutilating and burning victims, spread beyond Uganda to southern Sudan, the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Central African Republic.
Mr. Ongwen was brought to the court early last year, after being detained in the Central African Republic by American Special Forces who had been helping to track Mr. Kony and his men. Mr. Ongwen, long a top commander in the Lord’s Resistance Army, is believed to have fallen from favor with Mr. Kony and to have been held captive by him before breaking free and eventually handing himself in. Some analysts said Mr. Ongwen’s escape and surrender had probably been motivated by the fear that Mr. Kony would kill him, as he had done with others.
Mr. Ongwen told the court last year that he was born in Uganda in 1975 and that he was abducted by the Lord’s Resistance Army when he was 14. People who knew him as a child soldier said he had been taught that his destiny was to fight for the rights of the Acholi people, a group to which both he and Mr. Kony belonged. He rose to become one of Mr. Kony’s trusted commanders, joining the control altar, as the warlord’s headquarters were called.
Mr. Ongwen has been charged with 70 counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity in connection with atrocities committed in northern Uganda, many of them victimizing the Acholi people he was said to have felt called to protect. Even though his fighting career lasted more than 25 years, his trial focuses on a series of four attacks on refugee camps in northern Uganda between 2002 and 2005, for which prosecutors apparently have the best evidence.
As his trial opened, with Mr. Ongwen in a court-issued gray suit, an official read out the list of charges against him, including murder, torture, rape, sexual slavery and conscription of children under 15.
“In the name of God, I deny all these charges,” he replied.
The unexpected emergence of Mr. Ongwen came at a delicate moment for the court in The Hague, which was under growing criticism from governments in Africa because it was focusing almost exclusively on that continent. Since then, Burundi, Gambia and South Africa have begun proceedings to withdraw from the court, although Gambia’s newly elected government has said it plans to reverse that decision.
But the case against the Lord’s Resistance Army commanders was explicitly requested more than a decade ago by President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, whose government the rebels were seeking to overthrow. Mr. Museveni met Luis Moreno Ocampo, then the court’s chief prosecutor, in London and offered his government’s full cooperation.
Prosecution documents say the Ugandan government provided investigators with thousands of pages of logbooks and intelligence reports, along with recordings of radio intercepts and satellite calls of the rebels.
Chief Prosecutor Fatou B. Bensouda said that Mr. Ongwen had “many forced wives,” and seven had already provided evidence against him.
In her opening statement, Mrs. Bensouda seemed to anticipate disappointment among victims who were following the trial from Africa, where the court had set up a number of viewing centers.
Between 2002 and 2005 there were hundreds of attacks on civilians, she said, and many crimes may receive little or no attention. “The prosecutor has to make choices and to limit the scope of the case,” she said.
Mr. Ongwen’s lawyers are expected to argue that their client was himself kidnapped, brutalized and brainwashed while still a boy, and that he is therefore a victim rather than a criminal. They have said that much of the prosecution’s evidence is unreliable and that the court’s arrest warrant for Mr. Ongwen contributed to his notoriety.
Prosecutors say that Mr. Ongwen’s forcible conscription as a child soldier may be a mitigating factor in his case, but that he is nonetheless responsible for crimes he committed as an adult.
After Tuesday’s session, the trial is expected to adjourn until January, when the prosecution will start presenting evidence.
Mr. Ongwen’s lawyers have told the court that they will not make an opening statement and that they will make their case only after the prosecution finishes.