This week’s efforts to repeal a cruel and discriminatory North Carolina law were procedurally confusing and politically confounding.
But after state lawmakers wrapped up a special session on Wednesday night, having failed to revoke the law, known as H.B. 2, their message was clear. The Republican-dominated legislature, the General Assembly, would rather allow discrimination against gays and lesbians and peddle malicious stereotypes about transgender people than undo a colossal mistake that has cost the state hundreds of jobs and millions of dollars worth of investment.
This week’s saga began in Charlotte on Monday morning, where the City Council voted to rescind parts of an antidiscrimination ordinance it passed in February. The ordinance, in addition to protecting people against discrimination based on sexual orientation, also sought to grant transgender people the right to use public restrooms based on their gender identity. In response, the legislature passed H.B. 2 to outlaw that bathroom policy and forbid local jurisdictions from passing antidiscrimination ordinances.
Charlotte City Council members had been told by Governor-elect Roy Cooper, a Democrat, that under a deal he had struck with some lawmakers, the legislature would repeal H.B. 2 if Charlotte repealed its ordinance — thus paving the way for local jurisdictions to pass antidiscrimination ordinances in the future.
Charlotte officials did as Mr. Cooper advised and waited for the General Assembly to do its part. But shamefully, the lawmakers reneged.
This is a travesty for all North Carolina residents, who will continue to suffer a backlash from companies that simply don’t want to invest or do business in a state that condones discrimination. And it’s likely to get worse. On Thursday, William Barber II, the president of the North Carolina NAACP, said he would ask the national organization to call for an economic boycott of the state. Job expansion plans by some companies and some conferences have already been canceled, and the National Collegiate Athletic Association and the National Basketball Association have decided to move some sports events out of the state.
Taxpayers will be forced to continue shouldering the cost of defending lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of H.B. 2. Litigation may be the most effective means to strike down this unjust law, but definitive rulings may take several months.
Until that happens, transgender people in particular will endure discrimination with little legal recourse. The findings of a recent survey of transgender people conducted by the National Center for Transgender Equality shows how pernicious the damage can be. It found that 29 percent of transgender people in the United States live in poverty, when the national average is 14 percent; joblessness is rampant; and one third of transgender Americans have been homeless at some point in their life.
It’s unconscionable that North Carolina’s lawmakers would go out of their way to stigmatize and injure this vulnerable population.