BANGKOK — The police in Thailand on Saturday arrested a student pro-democracy activist accused of sharing an article about the country’s new king that was posted on Facebook by the Thai-language service of the BBC.
The arrest was apparently the first under the country’s tough lèse-majesté law since King Maha Vajiralongkorn Bodindradebayavarangkun took the throne on Thursday, succeeding his father, King Bhumibol Adulyadej. A conviction for lèse-majesté, or insulting the monarchy, carries a penalty of three to 15 years in prison.
The law student, Jatupat Boonpattararaksa, was arrested while attending a Buddhist ceremony in the northeastern province of Chaiyaphum, said Duangthip Karith of the group Thai Lawyers for Human Rights. Mr. Jatupat posted that he was being arrested and briefly broadcast the police reading the charge on a Facebook Live video stream.
Mr. Jatupat is a prominent member of Dao Din, a small student organization that has held public protests against Thailand’s military government.
Critics of the lèse-majesté law, known as Article 112, say it is used to silence political dissidents. The military junta that took power in a 2014 coup has especially cracked down on internet commentary.
The authorities had warned that even “shares” — links to postings, rather than the content itself — could be considered in violation of the law. Mr. Jatupat also posted several passages from the BBC Thai article.
The BBC article included mentions of the king’s personal life when he was crown prince, including details of three marriages that ended in divorce and other material that cannot be published in the Thai news media.
Ms. Duangthip said the lawyers’ group believed that Mr. Jatupat’s case was the first in which the accused had not created or edited the content considered illegal.
It also appeared that the case might be the first involving material produced by a mainstream news outlet, although previous cases involved content from foreign tabloids. Articles about the Thai monarchy in mainstream news outlets, including The Economist and The International New York Times, have been censored, through the blocking of their websites and the voluntary stopping of distribution of print editions in Thailand.
Dao Din, the student group, issued a statement calling for Mr. Jatupat’s immediate and unconditional release, and the dropping of the charge.
Ms. Duangthip said a member of the lawyers’ group had met with Mr. Jatupat in Khon Kaen Province, where a soldier had filed the complaint against him. She said that he had denied the charge and that the group would apply for his bail on Sunday.