KINSHASA, Democratic Republic of Congo — Nearly 300 people were arrested across the Democratic Republic of Congo as two days of protests against President Joseph Kabila appeared to subside on Wednesday, the police said.
Sporadic gunfire rang out over Kinshasa, the capital, and witnesses reported clashes in Lubumbashi, the southeastern mining hub, but nothing on the scale of the violence when youths took to the streets on Tuesday accusing Mr. Kabila of trying to cling to power.
The police said that 275 people had been arrested and that 21 civilians and one officer had been killed in the protests that erupted as Mr. Kabila’s mandate expired without any elections in place to pick a successor. Rights groups earlier gave higher death tolls.
Mr. Kabila and his supporters have denied any plan to retain power and have said logistical problems delayed elections.
But African and Western powers have expressed fear that the political crisis could spiral into broader conflict, risking a repeat of the 1996-2003 wars in this vast, chaotic country that killed millions and drew in the armies of half a dozen neighboring states.
Col. Pierre Mwanamputu, the police spokesman, said most of the dead civilians had been hit by stray bullets or shot while looting on Tuesday and Wednesday.
“The heavy security presence will remain in place until the end of the year,” he added.
On Wednesday, security forces repressed protests in Lubumbashi in which 10 died and 47 were wounded, said King Kasongo, a lawyer and activist for Humanism and Human Rights, a nongovernmental organization.
Crowds also wounded a policeman and attacked government offices, health centers and gas stations, he said.
Human Rights Watch said at least 26 people had been killed across Congo, including one in Lubumbashi, though it had yet to provide a final tally. The director of the United Nations human rights office in Congo, Jose Maria Aranaz, said he had confirmed 19 dead and 45 wounded.
As an uneasy calm returned, some Kinshasa residents ventured from their homes on Wednesday, but the city’s normally hectic traffic had slowed and buses were limited.
The authorities arrested 20 members of the activist group Luncha for sitting in front of the office of the governor of North Kivu Province in Goma, an eastern city, the group said on Twitter.
The main opposition bloc attended the resumption of talks mediated by Congo’s Roman Catholic bishops, but Jean Marc Kabund, the leader of the U.D.P.S., a party in the bloc, told reporters he was only there to insist that Mr. Kabila resign.
The church has assumed the responsibility of trying to prevent the crisis from spinning out of control.
“Those of you with political responsibility, listen to the voice of your own conscience, recognize the cruel suffering of your people and take to heart the common good,” Pope Francis told his weekly audience on Wednesday, addressing Congolese leaders.
“They should go to dialogue to find a solution,” said Maggie Munanango, who was selling peanuts in a Kinshasa market.
Democratic Republic of Congo, Africa’s biggest miner of copper and metals like cobalt used in gadgets, has not had a peaceful transition of power since independence from Belgium in 1960. Armed groups have repeatedly clashed over Congo’s land and mineral wealth and used mass rape as a weapon.
Separately, clashes between the police and a militia led by a Christian pastor in northwest Mongala Province killed 15 militiamen and three police officers on Tuesday, said Michael Sakombi, the former deputy commissioner of Mongala.
The clashes were not linked to the wider politics, but they underscored how easily armed conflict can erupt.