Bury St. Edmunds, England — Making a statement right at the heart of the English cathedral town of Bury St. Edmunds, Northgate House has more than one story to tell.
Once home to the British novelist Norah Lofts, the eight-bedroom red brick house in the county of Suffolk is now on the market for 2.5 million pounds, or $3.1 million, with the real estate agency Jackson-Stops and Staff.
With a wealth of architectural features, including ornate detailing inside and out, the property has a long street-front facade with a recessed, colonnaded entrance, and 9,372 square feet of living space.
It largely dates to 1713, during the Queen Anne period, but evidence can still be seen of Tudor timberwork in the roof, and the cellars are believed to be medieval.
Ms. Lofts, who was a prolific writer of historical fiction, won a National Book Award in the United States for “I Met a Gypsy,’’ voted by members of the American Booksellers Association in 1936. She lived at Northgate House from 1955 until she died in 1983, and is named on a historical marker mounted on an external wall.
Her son, Clive Lofts, still lives next door in Northgate House’s former coach house, which has been converted and is today a separate property not forming part of the sale.
Many of Ms. Lofts’s novels, including her Suffolk Trilogy, follow the history of specific houses and their residents over several generations.
Northgate House still embodies much of its period grandeur, with many rooms fully paneled, and with features such as marble fireplaces, Georgian door casings and architraves.
The 494-square-foot drawing room has a notable molded ceiling and floor-to-ceiling sash windows. The 408-square-foot reception hall has a fireplace and French windows opening on to the garden, while the 456-square-foot dining room can comfortably accommodate a 12-seat table.
The first floor also includes an entrance hall, kitchen-breakfast room, study and music room. A 285-square-foot sitting room and a laundry room form the lower level of what could be a separate, two-story home within the larger house. Here, one of two service staircases rises up to a shower room, kitchenette and a 285-square-foot bedroom. This accommodation could be self-contained.
The Georgian main staircase sweeps up from the center of the house to a large, second-floor landing, leading to seven well-proportioned bedrooms, together with three large bathrooms.
One of these bedrooms, which is approximately 320 square feet, was Ms. Lofts’s study.
On the third floor of Northgate House are hobby rooms, which may well have been servants’ quarters. The cellar is also extensive and could possibly have had an entrance to a tunnel leading down to an abbey that once stood on the site close to where the cathedral is today.
Northgate House sits on approximately half an acre, including landscaped gardens and a summer house dating to the 1920s. There is also a kitchen garden and off-street parking.
Ms. Lofts, who also wrote under the pen names of Peter Curtis and Juliet Astley, had dozens of books published, as well as short stories and nonfiction, while she lived at the property. In one piece of writing, which she titled “Home with a History,’’ her son explained, she discussed Northgate House.
