U.S.|California Today: Big Cat Attacks Alpacas. Does He Deserve to Die?
California Today: Big Cat Attacks Alpacas. Does He Deserve to Die?
Let’s turn it over to Jennifer Medina, a national correspondent based in Los Angeles, for today’s introduction.
The Santa Monica Mountains are home to dazzling peaks, Native American archaeological sites and old movie sets, along with bustling roads and large housing developments. They are also home to mountain lions.
Last weekend, one of those lions — known as P-45 — attacked nearly a dozen alpacas and a goat at two ranches in the Malibu hills. Now, the lion may be facing his final days.
On Monday, the owner of the animals asked for and received the permit, which gives her 10 days to hire a hunter to go after the lion within a 10-mile radius.
But there has been outcry in the days since, with advocates worrying that P-45’s death might threaten the whole species in the region.
P-45 is one of only two breeding male lions in the mountain range, and researchers say his elimination will further weaken the already struggling population.
Preying on livestock is not uncommon for the mountain lions, and officials from the National Park Service constantly urge homeowners in the area to fully protect their animals. The animals killed over the weekend were apparently surrounded by an electric fence, but researchers say the lions can jump up to 15 feet.
Seth Riley, a wildlife ecologist with the National Park Service, said the death of P-45 would make it harder for the population to grow. And, he said, the problems with livestock are likely to continue. Three other mountain lions have killed domestic animals this year.
“Most of what they are eating is deer, but if they have free prey they are going to figure that out,” Dr. Riley said.
This is not the first time mountain lions have caught the attention of city dwellers. In March, a mountain lion attacked a koala at the Los Angeles Zoo and Botanical Gardens. That lion, known as P-22, now how his own social media following.
It’s been nearly 500 years since Martin Luther upended the practice of Christianity worldwide.
For the anniversary, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art recently opened an engrossing new exhibit, “Renaissance and Reformation: German Art in the Age of Dürer and Cranach,” which will be on display until late March.
It was in 1517 that Luther, a renegade monk in Germany, was said to have nailed his 95 theses to a church door in Wittenberg, setting off more than a century of religious strife.
Several years ago, the German government approached the Los Angeles museum to discuss lending works from three state museums for a show themed around the Reformation.
J. Patrice Marandel, the museum’s curator of European art, said he agreed eagerly, but that he didn’t want it to be just about Luther. Instead, the collection would examine the influence that the Reformation had on the culture of the time as artists coped with new patrons, ideas and images.
The show that resulted features more than 100 works — paintings, sculptures and armors — from luminaries including Dürer, the great painter and admirer of Luther, and Cranach, who became the official painter of the Reformation.
Mr. Marandel said the works hint at new attitudes toward the divine and evoke a theme of the individual standing up to power that echoed later in the Enlightenment and even the writing of the United States Constitution.
The exhibit also explores cruder expressions of the time. The Reformation coincided with the rise of Gutenberg’s printing press, which was used to spread the propaganda of the new faith as well as the response from the Catholic Church.
Mass-produced broadsheets that demonized either side were handed out like leaflets on the street. The Catholic Church portrayed Luther “as a sort of seven-headed monster of the apocalypse,” Mr. Marandel said.
“Renaissance and Reformation: German Art in the Age of Dürer and Cranach” runs through March 26 at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 5905 Wilshire Boulevard, Los Angeles; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| .
