Mark Moyar’s suggestion that Republican presidents are good for American foreign policy because they are tough while Democrats are bad because they are spineless on global security is an especially egregious contention.
Besides the fact that Mr. Moyar never mentions one of the Democratic Party’s greatest presidents, Franklin D. Roosevelt, who won World War II, he criticizes Harry Truman for supposedly permitting the Korean War to happen — this the same president who enacted the Marshall Plan and NATO, which have kept the peace in Europe for the last 70 years.
In addition, he might have cited John Kennedy’s triumph in the Cuban missile crisis. In turn, the notion that Lyndon Johnson showed “restraint” in Vietnam is laughable. Bill Clinton bombed Serbia to win Kosovo’s freedom. Barack Obama killed Osama bin Laden and still has American military troops or advisers in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria.
Meanwhile, Mr. Moyar’s heroic leaders like Dwight Eisenhower did nothing to stop the Soviet invasion of Hungary, and George W. Bush sat on the sidelines as President Vladimir Putin seized two enclaves, South Ossetia and Abkhazia, from Georgia.
Foreign policy is, in the end, not a matter of instilling fear or acting passively; in every case, it is a matter of weighing the propriety of diplomacy, sanctions and other peaceful measures against employing military troops.
The writer is a fellow with the Century Foundation, a progressive think tank.
Mark Moyar’s analysis is, unfortunately, misguided. Unless one believes that Russia is our ally and NATO is our enemy, our enemies are clearly not afraid, while our friends are deeply worried.
The fear is not that a Trump administration will be tougher and stronger and less loved than the current one. Rather, it is that it will be not just unpredictable but inconsistent, erratic and unprincipled — and therefore very dangerous.
Fear is no substitute for respect, and the time is long past when we could safely isolate ourselves from the world.
The world is scared of Mr. Trump, but not for the reasons that Mr. Moyar suggests, and that is not a good thing.
Mark Moyar thinks it’s good for the world to be scared of Donald Trump. He lauds the president-elect’s “tough talk on everything from the Islamic State to Air Force One,” which he sees as the means to bring “international respect” to the United States.
In support of his thesis Mr. Moyar cites tough stands taken by Presidents Eisenhower, Nixon and Reagan at critical junctures. But no earlier president was as erratic and blustery as Mr. Trump.
A more apt historical parallel is to be found in Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany before World War I. In his quest for respect for himself and for Germany, Wilhelm bumbled and blustered and frightened his neighbors to the point that all it took was a spark to plunge Europe and the world into a disastrous war. Foolish beyond words at the time. Madness in the nuclear era.
Here in our own country, half of us are scared of Donald Trump because of his reckless behavior, actions and, in most cases, alarming cabinet choices. Mark Moyar says America is stronger when its enemies don’t know what to expect, but I fear that America is weaker when its own people don’t know what to expect.
