EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The legacy of Giants quarterback Eli Manning may be shaped by his two Super Bowl victories over the New England Patriots, but it is the Dallas Cowboys who have been the lasting measuring stick and had the most sway over his career.
Sunday at MetLife Stadium, Manning is set to face the Cowboys for the 26th time in what figures to be the latest entry in a lengthy catalog of significant Dallas matchups in the Manning era.
Whether the games have been sparkling, imperative victories or shocking, dispiriting defeats, it always seems to come back to Dallas for Manning. The Cowboys have even brought out Manning’s rarely seen impish, taunting side.
And Manning knows it.
Asked on Tuesday to reflect on the record of his starts against Dallas, which date to the 2004 season, Manning did not need to think before answering.
To start, Manning acknowledged that his first fourth-quarter, winning drive in the N.F.L. was against Dallas as a rookie. The rivalry has not stopped there.
Just the fact that he has already played Dallas 25 times made Manning snicker.
As just one example of where the Cowboys stand on Manning’s résumé, he and the Giants would not have had the chance to win either Super Bowl over the Patriots without notable, late-season victories against Dallas.
Manning has saved some of his best performances for the Cowboys.
In the postseason and regular season, Manning has had 38 winning drives in the fourth quarter when the Giants were losing or tied. Six of those drives, including the Giants’ victory in the season opener this year, were against Dallas.
Perhaps the most crucial of those comebacks was in the Giants’ divisional playoff game at Dallas in January 2008 when the Giants rallied for a 21-17 victory. Two games later, they were Super Bowl champions. It was more of the same during the 2011 Super Bowl season. First, Manning led the Giants to two touchdowns in the final 5 minutes 41 seconds for a shocking 37-34 victory at Dallas in mid-December.
Then, with a playoff berth on the line, Manning’s Giants defeated the Cowboys, 31-14, on the final day of the regular season. If the Giants had lost, they would have missed the postseason.
It has not always been fun for Eli. Some losses to Dallas have been humiliating, and not because the Giants have twice scored 30 points and lost, or because the Giants have lost five of their last seven contests with the Cowboys.
In the season opener at Dallas last year, Manning’s bizarre clock management at the end of the fourth quarter turned a certain Giants victory into a 1-point defeat. It was an ignominious failure for Manning. The next day, a New York tabloid put Manning’s face on its back page with a dunce cap perched atop his head.
Worse, Manning’s misguided decision-making set the tone for a ruinous 6-10 season in which the Giants lost four games in the final 75 seconds of play.
It was a low point in the Dallas rivalry for Manning, whose regular season and postseason record against the Cowboys is 13-12. But there have been lighter, more playful moments.
Manning’s graffiti was soon painted over by Cowboys officials. But it was not forgotten.
Manning did not seem too worried.
“I figure they’ll eventually get over it,” he said.
The Cowboys lost the next two games against the Giants, including one at home. However, when the Giants moved into a new home, MetLife Stadium, Dallas won its first game there.
And the Cowboys continued to win at MetLife, including a 2014 victory that will forever be remembered for something other than the outcome. In the second quarter of that nationally televised Sunday night game, Manning lofted a pass from midfield that Odell Beckham Jr. snatched out of the sky with three fingers of one hand while falling backward into the end zone. It is considered among the greatest catches in N.F.L. history.
Beckham’s jersey from that night is now in the Pro Football Hall of Fame.
At this point, Manning knows enough to look for the Dallas games when the schedule comes out each spring.
Manning shrugged his shoulders. He was looking forward to the next chapter.
“You know, it keeps it exciting,” he said.