In this image provided by Deepwater Canyons, octopus and deep sea corals were among the species encountered during an expedition which was jointly funded by the U.S. Geological Survey, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, and NOAA.
Updated, 9:23 a.m.
Good morning on this crisp Tuesday.
While New York’s waters might not be filled with singing sturgeon and dancing crab, they are home to a large underwater canyon that was nominated by the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium as a national marine sanctuary.
The Hudson Canyon is 100 miles southeast of the Statue of Liberty, off the coasts of New York and New Jersey. It’s comparable in size to the Grand Canyon, said John Calvelli, the society’s executive vice president for public affairs.
At two and a half miles deep, it’s the largest submarine canyon on the Atlantic Coast.
Mr. Calvelli called it a “biodiversity hot spot, because warm water from the south meets cold water from the north,” causing many species to mingle.
Among its residents are 200 species of fish, from sharks to yellowfin tuna; 115 types of invertebrates; 17 kinds of marine mammals, including whales; four types of sea turtle; and 20 seabird species. Deep-sea corals live almost two miles down.
“When you think of one of the most urban places in the world having one of the most diverse marine areas in the world right next to it, that juxtaposition is amazing,” he added.
Federal designation as a marine sanctuary — of which there are only 13, the closest to us being Stellwagen Bank near Boston — would help fund Hudson Canyon’s preservation and protect it from oil and gas exploration, Mr. Calvelli said.
Efforts to study and protect the Hudson Canyon have been nearly a century in the making, he told us.
These can be traced to William Beebe, a scientist from Brooklyn and an early explorer for the Wildlife Conservation Society, who first began studying the area, originally referred to as the Hudson Gorge, in the 1920s.
You can show your support for the Hudson Canyon here and learn more about the goings-on in our waters from Blue York.
In December, we can’t ask for much.
So we’re pleased that the sun is shining on this chilly morning.
But clouds, and possibly rain, are on tap for this afternoon.
And it won’t feel warmer than the mid-40s all day.
• Scoreboard: Wizards zap Nets, 118-113. Colts flatten Jets, 41-10.
• New York Today’s New Yorker of the Year contest continues. You can nominate someone by filling out the form at the bottom of this page.
• At 10:30 a.m., tickets go on sale for Kids’ Night on Broadway, an evening in February when children 18 and younger can see participating Broadway shows for free.
• Rangers at Islanders, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Devils host Canucks, 7 p.m. (MSG+2). Knicks at Heat, 7:30 p.m. (MSG).
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until Dec. 8.
There will always be that dog owner who waits until the dog does its deed, looks around for any witnesses, has that internal monologue — “It’s cold, and I have no gloves. My hands are full, leash in one hand and coffee in the other.” — and then skulks away from the scene of the crime, never to look back, relieved to have escaped a $250 fine for failing to scoop it up.
If you’re one of the culprits (you know who you are), you may be breaking the city’s pooper-scooper law, instituted in 1978 after a campaign by a New Yorker named Fran Lee.
As New Yorkers, many of us are familiar with such scofflaws, perhaps more so in the Bronx, the borough reported to have had the most complaints about dog feces last year.
About a quarter of the nearly 3,000 calls made to 311 on this topic in 2015 came from the Bronx, according to a recent tally.
Queens and Brooklyn were tied for second place, followed by Manhattan and Staten Island.
