The car coasted down her sister’s old block in Brownsville, Brooklyn, and in the front seat Janis Borden glanced out the window and, for an instant, saw not a Monday in December 2016, but an evening in the late 1970s or early 1980s. At the time, Ms. Borden’s sister, Carmelia Goffe, had three little sons.
The street she looked at Monday afternoon had rows of tiny, tidy one-family homes, children spilling along the sidewalks, traffic with legitimate purposes. It is unthinkable in the New York of 2016 that here, and on hundreds of acres of the city in the 1970s and 1980s, the blocks teemed with menace.
Street signs were stolen for their scrap metal value. A falsely named “urban renewal” project bulldozed entire blocks, then left the lots vacant. In the husks of dead buildings, copper pipes were ripped from the walls, the flashing stripped from roofs, banisters wrenched from stairs.
Against the march of decay stood, among others, Ms. Goffe, who grew up in Brownsville and died last week at 68.
“They saved East Brooklyn and helped save New York City as surely as any mayor or governor or banker did,” said Michael Gecan, a co-director of the Industrial Areas Foundation, a network of faith and community organizations.
This was not the work of gurus or messiahs or political egomaniacs.
Ms. Goffe was one in a family of four sisters who grew up in the Van Dyke Houses. She attended Thomas Jefferson High School. The family belonged to Pilgrim Baptist Church. The Brownsville of their youth, with its strivers and the lively stretches of Pitkin Avenue, began to give way by the ’60s to depopulation and disintegration. But Ms. Goffe did not lose track of what had been, and saw it as the shape of what could be again, Ms. Borden said.
An encounter with an after-school program backed by the Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn gave a focus to Ms. Goffe’s activism. She joined with Doug Shafer and John Reynolds in starting East New York Christian Fellowships, which became a founding member of East Brooklyn Congregations in 1980.
With both vacant land and despair in abundance, East Brooklyn Congregations approached the city with a startling proposal: It would build single-family houses for about $50,000 each if the city would give it the land and abate the real estate taxes. The project was called Nehemiah, for a prophet who rebuilt the walls of Jerusalem.
Ms. Goffe bought a Nehemiah home in Brownsville, and became the head of the homeowners association.
If fences were mistakenly built over drainage lines, she worked out solutions. When people in an apartment building and Nehemiah owners were getting on each other’s nerves, Ms. Goffe opened diplomatic channels.
She sang “Battle Hymn of the Republic” with the Brooklyn Tabernacle Choir at President Obama’s second inauguration, and ran a weekly circle that is making a giant quilt about Brownsville.
