Zymere Perkins should be a happy, healthy little boy today. He should be in school.
Instead he is a child-welfare tragedy, the subject of two government fatality reports, the reason for criminal charges against his mother and her boyfriend, who are accused of beating him to death, and the reason for investigations into the agency and people who were supposed to have protected him and failed. Soon enough, he will be a symbol, like Marchella Pierce, Nixzmary Brown and Elisa Izquierdo before him, of a system that breaks and is said to be fixed and breaks again and is said to be fixed again, until it obviously isn’t.
Mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration says Zymere’s death was the result of a “perfect storm,” an unusual accumulation of bureaucratic and human mistakes that allowed manageable problems to become a calamity. The point of a child-welfare system in a city like New York is to make perfect storms impossible. It is supposed to be alert, to connect dots, to keep the cracks from widening so that children do not fall through.
As Zymere did. The Administration for Children’s Services, the city agency whose caseworkers had been checking on Zymere and his family since 2010, seems to have been unable or unwilling to fulfill its basic duties — to recognize signs of abuse and neglect, to learn why this often-injured boy seemed so “accident-prone,” to follow through with Zymere’s relatives and doctors. A report by the state Office of Children and Family Services found that the city missed, time and again, many chances to save Zymere, long before he arrived on Sept. 26 at St. Luke’s Hospital, in his mother’s arms, his bruised, lacerated body limp and cold. He was 6 years old.
The agency’s boss, Gladys Carrión, took responsibility for Zymere’s death at a City Council meeting in October, and her resignation was announced this week. Her sense of accountability is admirable, though it seems fair to ask why it wouldn’t have been more responsible for her to stay and fix what was broken.
An independent monitor, on orders of New York State, will be conducting a thorough review of the city agency’s child-protection programs. Whatever deficiencies and remedies are revealed will have to be dealt with by Ms. Carrión’s replacement, who needs to ensure that the system balances its crucial oversight duties while keeping families intact, whenever possible.
And Mr. de Blasio, who is seeking re-election, will have to explain to voters why issues that supposedly play to his strengths and reflect his highest priorities — social-welfare and homelessness, to name two — are so trouble-prone and resistant to improvement. He ran on compassion, but he will be judged on competence.
That means getting children out of homeless shelters and out of danger from caregivers and caseworkers. Tragedies will happen — two toddlers recently died, scalded by a broken radiator in an apartment for homeless families run by anotorious slumlord. Homelessness, the lack of apartments and wretched landlords make up a constellation of housing problems that are not entirely the mayor’s fault. But even Mr. de Blasio admits that tackling them is his responsibility. As is the child-welfare system.