It is deeply disappointing that the Obama administration shamefully abstained from the anti-Israel vote in the Security Council. In doing so, Mr. Obama steps away from his presidency, turning his back on the unbreakable bond with our great ally Israel.
A peaceful resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can be achieved only by direct negotiations between the Israeli and Palestinian leadership, without outside interference. By allowing the Security Council to condemn Israel, America has undermined Israel and legitimized harmful boycotts and other commercial predatory practices against Israel.
Moving forward, we dedicate and commit ourselves to rekindling the American-Israeli relationship, and we greatly appreciate President-elect Donald Trump’s efforts to fight for Israel on this critical issue.
Someone needs to tell Mr. Netanyahu that friends also don’t put friends in the position of continually having to defend indefensible, illegal and immoral activities.
As a longtime friend of Israel, I approve of President Obama’s decision to allow the United Nations resolution condemning Israeli settlements.
While some of the language is harsh, the resolution addresses one of the major obstacles to a renewal of the peace process.
I am glad to note that the resolution also includes a message to Palestinian leaders condemning “all acts of violence against civilians.” These, too, are grave impediments to peace.
Ultimately, the parties themselves urgently need to work out a solution, and I hope that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and the incoming Trump administration do not incite further tensions in the area.
Regardless of one’s views of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is hard to escape the conclusion that animus toward Israel is the only factor that can motivate United Nations action.
On the same day that the anti-settlement resolution passed with 14 votes and a United States abstention, the same Security Council could not muster the necessary nine votes to impose a targeted arms embargo on South Sudan (news article, Dec. 24), where tens of thousands have been killed and raped in ethnic conflict bordering on genocide.
Consistency would breed credibility.
