CHICAGO — Marian Hossa arrived in Trencin, his hometown in Slovakia, in May, returning to family and friends months earlier than he had in recent memory.
At 37, Hossa, the Chicago Blackhawks right wing, had completed his 19th N.H.L. season, one that presented plenty of scoring chances but netted only 13 goals, his fewest for a full season in his career. The season ended suddenly and unceremoniously when the St. Louis Blues ousted the Blackhawks, the defending Stanley Cup champions, in seven games in the first round of the Western Conference playoffs.
In his younger days, Hossa would have continually analyzed his statistical shortcomings to determine where his game had broken down. But only a year removed from helping guide the Blackhawks to their third Stanley Cup since 2010, Hossa found himself staring into his longest off-season in four years — a grueling stretch that encapsulated 329 games, including 71 in the playoffs.
Just 29 games into this season, though, Hossa has experienced a renaissance. He enters Tuesday’s game against the Rangers with 15 goals, tied for fourth in the N.H.L., among a group that includes his former Pittsburgh Penguins teammate Sidney Crosby; 20-year-old David Pastrnak of the Boston Bruins; and 18-year-old Patrik Laine of the Winnipeg Jets.
Chicago defenseman Niklas Hjalmarsson surmised that Hossa had discovered the fountain of youth. Hossa’s agent, Ritch Winter, cited a different source for Hossa’s resurgence.
During his time in Chicago, Pittsburgh and Detroit, Hossa became accustomed to going home to Slovakia in late June or early July, only to return to the United States a short time later.
But the Blackhawks’ run of success — including Stanley Cup titles in 2013 and 2015 and a loss in the Western Conference finals sandwiched in between — had taken its toll, perhaps more than Hossa realized.
He signed a 12-year, $62.8 million deal with Chicago in 2009 after back-to-back Cup finals appearances with the Penguins and the Red Wings. Winter calculated that Hossa was pushing 42 in hockey years because of the bevy of punishing postseason minutes he had logged during recent seasons.
Worn down, Hossa was determined to discover a silver lining for an aging survivor competing in a league headlined by young talent.
After allowing himself time to recuperate, Hossa shifted his attention to preparing for a bounce-back season. Rather than following the power-centric off-season workouts of his past, Hossa changed course. He replaced heavy lifting with a cardio-heavy program designed by the Blackhawks’ strength and conditioning coach, Paul Goodman, and executed by a coach he hired in Slovakia.
Hossa regularly pushed his limits through demanding workouts with only short breaks to keep his heart rate elevated, replicating the shifts, and often double shifts, he would experience on the ice.
Hossa trained with his brother, Marcel, a wing with HC Plzen in the Czech Extraliga, who had spent time with the Canadiens, the Rangers and the Coyotes. He visualized keeping pace in a league that has increasingly become faster and left older players in its wake. Although his role in Chicago was not what it once was because of an abundance of young scorers, Hossa was not willing to allow his game to slip in ways last season’s numbers suggested.
“I don’t think there’s ever really been a drop-off in his game,” Blackhawks Coach Joel Quenneville said. “He has always had a consistent approach to his game. You notice the speed, you notice his competitiveness and his professionalism.
In a 7-4 win over Philadelphia in October, Hossa scored his 500th goal and is fourth among active players on the career goals list. His season also includes four game-winners, and the meaningful goals have bred confidence and left any residual frustration behind.
In addition to being the Blackhawks’ top goal scorer, Hossa has also upheld his duties as elder statesman. Hossa does not speak up much these days, leaving such responsibility to the captain, Jonathan Toews, and others. Hossa’s voice resonates in his work ethic, including his off-ice training sessions, when doing extra little things to maintain a high standard of play has become exceedingly necessary.
Chicago’s young stars marvel at Hossa’s commitment and the way he blends natural speed and strategic body positioning to beat opponents to the puck and down the ice. They also take note of the effort Hossa exerts to ensure he is contributing, even when the goals do not come.
Hossa plans to play out his contract, which will expire after the 2020-21 season, when he is 42. Then he will contemplate if the time is right to return to a house he is building in Trencin for himself, his wife, Jana, and his daughters, Mia and Zoja.
For now, Hossa’s expectations do not fluctuate with age. He dedicates himself to working smarter and harder while skating with purpose as he always has. Hossa realizes in hockey, nothing is guaranteed. That, like the age differential separating Hossa from the N.H.L.’s rising stars, will not deter him.
