New York Times reporters are investigating the devastating fire that killed 36 people this month at a warehouse called the Ghost Ship in Oakland, Calif. We’re also doing something new: providing regular updates on our findings. Do you have information, advice or feedback? Send an email to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Past updates can be found here, here, here and here.
Conor Dougherty takes a look at an increase in evictions in the aftermath of the fire.
A few days after the Ghost Ship fire, Angela Scrivani, a photographer and curator who lives in a West Oakland warehouse, got some news from the building’s landlord.
“He came in and said anybody living here he wants to move out by January 3rd,” she said in an interview on Tuesday night.
Ms. Scrivani is one of a number of people living in warehouses illegally here who are facing eviction after the tragedy. Looking to prevent evictions from spreading more widely, members of the Oakland City Council have started working with the city attorney to write legislation that would allow tenants of these spaces to stay in place, as well as allow city inspectors to investigate buildings for life-threatening risks without imposing the full extent of the building code.
“There is a real danger of a mass overreaction that would cause great harm and suffering to the same community that is in mourning right now,” said Rebecca Kaplan, an Oakland council member who is working on the legislation.
Since the fire, several tenants including Ms. Scrivani have reported receiving eviction notices from landlords. Tenants at warehouses in Oakland and elsewhere said fire marshals were scheduling emergency inspections that they fear will put them on the street. City Council staffers and tenant defense lawyers said they had been inundated with calls.
“We’ve heard from more than a dozen people on both sides of the Bay who are in some stage of the eviction process as a result of the fire,” said James Cook, a lawyer in the office of John Burris, a prominent civil rights and plaintiffs’ lawyer.
Mr. Cook, who does work in eviction and tenant law, said the firm planned to work with the Eviction Defense Collaborative in Oakland and the Justice and Diversity Center in San Francisco to assist tenants with their defense. Tenants who have called the office have said they received written and verbal eviction notices.
Still, since tenants are technically not supposed to live in warehouses like the Ghost Ship, any large-scale solution to allow them to stay will probably come from legislation approved by the city.
During a City Council meeting on Tuesday, several people used the public discussion period to complain that the city was responsible for unfair evictions since the Ghost Ship fire. Many said the city needed to come up with more affordable-housing options before going into other warehouses and kicking out people who have nowhere else to go. At least one man who lost a friend in the fire and spoke at the meeting, Steven DeCaprio, wants the city to stop doing inspections for the time being and come up with a housing plan for people in warehouses.
The fear of eviction goes beyond Oakland. Now that cities around the country are cracking down on live/work warehouses and illegal performance spaces, some D.I.Y. warehouses are trying to go even further off the grid. Residents who haven’t been contacted by the city or landlords are canceling parties and events and making furious efforts to scrub the internet of any evidence of which warehouses might be occupied.
The moderator of a site called DoDiy.org, a guide to building warehouse spaces, took down the site.
Brandon Bailey, 29, a philosophy student who lives in a punk rock-themed warehouse called “Burnt Ramen,” worries that he might soon be homeless. His warehouse, about 15 minutes north of Oakland in Richmond, Calif., is a live/work space owned by another tenant, Mike Malin, who also goes by Mykee Ramen.
Shortly after the fire, Mayor Tom Butt of Richmond declared Burnt Ramen to be a local version of the Ghost Ship, and a fire inspection is scheduled for later this week.
“It just feels like we’re being attacked,” Mr. Bailey said in an interview at Laney College in Oakland during a break between final exams.
Alex Knox, the chief of staff to the Richmond mayor, said the city had stepped up building inspections since the fire.
People like Mr. Bailey have a long list of reasons for why they live communally, but cost is key. He declined to say how much he pays in rent, but said that it was “by far the cheapest situation any of us know of” and that his friendship with the owner allowed him to do things like trade work for lower rent.
Ms. Scrivani, the photographer, lives in a gentrifying part of West Oakland that is full of recently purchased condominiums and block after block of construction. Her 500-square-foot loft is a model of efficient living, with tight spaces and hand-built shelves, that is perched above a concrete-floored warehouse.
She declined to say how much she pays, only that it is far less than the rent for a typical Oakland apartment.
One question I have yet to answer is exactly how many people live in illegal warehouses, both in Oakland and nationwide. I talked to several Oakland tenant lawyers, and they estimated that the number was at least 1,000 but probably less than 5,000. I have talked to demographers and also reached out to several apartment rental sites that might catch illegal dwellings from advertisements.
