In the flurry of moves the Yankees made this summer, the last one, which came minutes before the Aug. 1 deadline, seemed the most inconsequential: The team sent Ivan Nova to the Pittsburgh Pirates for two minor leaguers to be named later.
While the Yankees knew that players like relievers Aroldis Chapman and Andrew Miller and outfielder Carlos Beltran would be coveted by contenders, they were eager to get whatever they could in exchange for Nova, who was about to become a free agent they had little interest in re-signing. At the time, the trade seemed an odd move for the Pirates; they were drifting out of contention and had just traded starter Francisco Liriano.
But the trade proved to be a boon for Nova — and the Pirates. The right-handed Nova, who was troubled by inconsistency and had Tommy John surgery in 2014, became the latest pitcher to be revitalized under the Pittsburgh pitching coach Ray Searage. Over the last two months of the season, Nova, 29, was 5-2 with a 3.06 E.R.A. A pitcher who frequently nibbled his way into trouble with the Yankees became a strike-throwing machine with the Pirates, striking out 52 batters and walking three in 64 ⅔ innings after the trade.
While other teams were unwilling to put too much stock in Nova’s transformation — even in a free-agent market with a dearth of talent — the Pirates seemed to know what they had. They waited until his price dropped low enough and on Thursday they agreed to a three-year, $26 million deal to keep him, according to multiple reports.
As a 24-year-old rookie, Nova went 16-4 with a 3.70 E.R.A. in 2011, but he has shown only glimpses of that immense promise ever since. That may have been why the Yankees were happy to unload him for two modest prospects at Class A — the left-handed pitcher Stephen Tarpley and outfielder Tito Polo.
But one of the hallmarks of the Pirates’ three consecutive playoff appearances had been Searage’s work with pitchers like Liriano, J. A. Happ and A. J. Burnett, another pitcher with whom the Yankees once parted ways. On Thursday, the Pirates signaled that they believe Nova can join that parade of successful reclamation projects.