New York|A Bad Year for New Yorkers. However ...
A Bad Year for New Yorkers. However ...
In June, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced a plan to invest $325 million to expand the city’s ferry service. Boats will carry about 4.5 million passengers a year, first up and down the Brooklyn-Queens waterfront, relieving burdened and not always accessible subway lines. So, yes, you’ll be able to buy a colander at Ikea in Red Hook, then head for spanakopita in Astoria, never having to take Uber, or hitchhike, to the N train. Eventually, you’ll be able to get from the Lower East Side to the coastal Bronx in less time than it takes to get to Baden-Baden. And amazingly enough, the city is on track to have 12 of its 19 vessels arrive in New York Harbor early in 2017.
Admittedly, that is a fake-news headline. But while the city is hardly at Cleveland levels of affordability — New Yorkers indeed remain monumentally burdened in terms of housing costs — there were signs this year that the rental market had softened. A glut of new construction in Brooklyn pushed landlords to offer all manner of incentives, including months of free rent, to fill buildings. According to the apartment rental site Zumper, New York showed the sharpest drop in rental prices of any city in the country’s top 10 markets. In 2016, prices for one-bedroom apartments were down 7 percent from 2015, and those for two-bedroom apartments were down 8 percent. It’s diamonds and Priuses — or really just a few ounces of vegan caviar — with all the savings.
In 2005, the city promised a 27-acre park to the neighborhoods of Williamsburg and Greenpoint, along the Brooklyn waterfront, to make up for the toll that rezoning the area would take. In the intervening years, what was once an industrial wasteland became a community of glass high-rises and culinary preciousness. But longtime residents never got the full green space that had been pledged to them. Then in November the city completed the deal to acquire the parcel of land that would allow Bushwick Inlet Park to be finished. Grassroots activism and local political commitment made it happen.
Richard Price returned to HBO to make (with Steven Zaillian) “The Night Of,” a Kafka-esque noir drama, at once hyper-real in its sociology and dreamy in its cinematic style. A tale of a Pakistani-American student accused of murdering a rich, wayward beauty, the eight-part series delivered the scope of the city unlike anything else recently — the world of uptown money obsession, the fragility of immigrant aspiration, the horrors of Rikers Island, the indignities suffered by those in the professional class who measure up not quite enough. There was all of that and the gale-force brilliance of Jeannie Berlin, as a prosecutor who literalizes leaning in.
In 2015, Aaron Bell, an African-American ad man turned sculptor, was selected by the Art Students League for inclusion in its prestigious Model to Monument Program, an initiative run in conjunction with the city’s parks department, which puts enormous works of site-specific art in select parks. His proposal for an abstracted human form with a noose around its neck was initially rejected by parks officials. They were concerned that the image might be too unsettling for people doing yoga and Pilates in the southern tip of Riverside Park, where the sculpture was to go on display. Community fury followed the lunacy and the city conceded, ultimately allowing the piece, a powerful statement against hate in an age when so much of it has been percolating, to be shown as intended.
The fact that Tiffany & Company’s flagship store on Fifth Avenue is next to Trump Tower has been a problem since Donald J. Trump was elected president. Security around the building where he lives has made it difficult to saunter into Tiffany and buy a porringer. In its third quarter earnings report, the company noted that reduced traffic had affected sales. To make matters worse, Mayor de Blasio snidely pointed out that the impact wasn’t of great concern to him. Happily, the Museum of the City of New York recognized the importance of the iconic store in the city’s history. In its new permanent exhibit, New York at Its Core, the museum included a ceremonial shovel made by Tiffany that was used to break ground in the building of the subway system.
In 2009, Jayden became the most popular name for boys in New York City, with 872 Jaydens born the previous year. This was because Jayden had become a beloved name among black and Hispanic New Yorkers. At the time, Jayden ranked 14th among Asian-American boys. The city’s most recent baby-naming data show us that Jayden is now the most popular name for Asian boys. And the number one hottest name for male newborns of Latino descent? Liam. Is there a nicer homage to our multiculturalism?
In March, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, as if it needed to give us more, opened the Met Breuer on Madison Avenue as a home for 20th and 21st century art from around the world. In October, it delivered one of the highlights of the fall cultural season, “Mastry,” a retrospective of the work of the American artist Kerry James Marshall, an Alabama native whose narrative paintings ingeniously depict the African-American experience.
