1. President-elect Donald Trump began a “thank you” tour with a boisterous rally in Cincinnati, reiterating his campaign pledges to limit immigration, repeal the Affordable Care Act, lower taxes and alter America’s trade policies.
The debate over trade heated up as Carrier, a manufacturing company that planned to shift jobs to Mexico, reversed course and agreed to keep around 1,000 jobs in Indiana. It will receive state incentives of $7 million in return.
Mr. Trump wants to strengthen American manufacturing, but one of his signature ideas — slapping high tariffs on Chinese imports — would raise costs for many domestic companies. Our reporters traced the ripple effects such a move would have on the global supply chain.
2. Mr. Trump’s freewheeling phone calls with foreign leaders have rattled diplomats.
On Friday he spoke with Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, above, breaking with nearly four decades of American policy. China considers Taiwan a breakaway province, and the United States has, since 1978, recognized Beijing as China’s sole government.
China’s official reaction to the call was fairly benign — it filed a formal complaint — but Mr. Trump’s protocol-shattering move renewed questions about what kind of relationship he will foster between the United States and Asia’s most powerful nation.
3. After four months, protesters near the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation have been ordered to clear out by Monday.
Native Americans and their allies are fighting a nearly complete oil pipeline that traverses tribal water sources and sacred burial sites. Thousands of tribal members, activists and celebrities have come to the sprawling protest camp, turning the North Dakota prairie into a hive of environmental and tribal-justice activism.
4. A fire gutted a makeshift nightclub in Oakland, Calif., on Friday night, leaving at least 24 people dead in what officials at the scene called one of the worst mass-casualty events in the city’s history.
“It was a very quick and chaotic build, from a little bit of chaos to a lot of chaos,” said a musician who escaped.
The residents of Gatlinburg, Tenn., are also dealing with the aftermath of a tragic blaze. Wildfires killed 13 people and damaged or destroyed nearly 1,000 buildings in the area. Dolly Parton, whose Dollywood theme park is a few miles away, pledged $1,000 a month to each family left homeless by the disaster.
5. Italian citizens will vote Sunday on a critical constitutional referendum to overhaul the national government.
Matteo Renzi, Italy’s prime minister, has vowed to resign if it fails. That could plunge the country into a political crisis and intensify the populist wave crashing through the European Union. Another leader fell this week: President François Hollande surprised France by announcing that he would not seek re-election next year.
6. Fidel Castro’s funeral will be held on Sunday, capping nine days of public mourning. An authoritarian leader responsible for brutal acts, Mr. Castro leaves behind a complicated legacy of revolutionary transformation and economic turmoil.
President Obama will not send a formal delegation to Cuba, but one of his top aides will attend.
7. Mr. Trump continued filling out his cabinet, picking James N. Mattis, a retired general, as his defense secretary.
General Mattis is known for his hawkish views and is likely to advocate a more assertive stance in the Middle East — but unlike Mr. Trump, he does not favor tearing up the Iran nuclear agreement.
8. Joe McKnight, a former N.F.L. player who spent three seasons with the Jets, was fatally shot last week in an apparent road-rage fight.
Tensions grew when the Louisiana police released the shooter, who admitted killing Mr. McKnight, just hours later without charges. The local sheriff said investigators need time to determine whether the shooting was justified.
The move inflamed Mr. McKnight’s supporters and former teammates.
9. Politics shadowed this year’s unusually muted Art Basel Miami Beach, America’s largest contemporary art fair. Overtly political works dotted the show and a tentativeness hung over the sales market, breaking with the frenzy of recent years.
“We’re at this very interesting moment of learning how to be optimistic in an unpredictable environment,” one gallerist said.
10. One of our best-read stories of the week is about the millions of dollars a wealthy businessman tried to make disappear when he set out to divorce his wife.
It vanished into an offshore financial system used by the richest people and companies in the world to camouflage their wealth. Drug lords, dictators and multinationals like Apple game it to their advantage — and unraveling the financial mysteries it conceals requires sleuthing skills.
