World|Russia Turns Over American Cybertheft Suspect to the U.S.
Russia Turns Over American Cybertheft Suspect to the U.S.
MOSCOW — Russian authorities have deported to the United States an American cybercrime suspect who is one of the United States’ most wanted men, even as the two countries are at loggerheads over politicized hacking.
Joshua Samuel Aaron, whom the authorities accuse of stealing hundreds of millions of dollars from Wall Street banks in what a prosecutor called “security fraud on cybersteroids,” was arrested at John F. Kennedy International Airport on Wednesday after arriving on a flight from Moscow.
The timing of the deportation suggested that the Kremlin, which has become the focus of intense scrutiny in the United States over allegations of hacking and meddling in the presidential election, was trying to deflect criticism.
“Politics is set aside when talk turns to real cybercriminals,” Sergei Plugotarenko, director of the Russian Association for Electronic Communications, an industry group, said of the deportation.
Mr. Aaron, 32, who has been implicated by federal prosecutors in the Southern District of New York in the theft of details of more than 100 million American bank accounts, moved to Russia in early 2015, two months before a warrant was issued for his arrest. Prosecutors say he and two Israelis, Gery Shalon and Ziv Orenstein, used the stolen account details from JPMorgan Chase, Fidelity Investments, E-Trade and others for a wide range of frauds, including manipulating stocks. They then laundered the money abroad, the authorities say. Israel deported Mr. Shalon and Mr. Orenstein to the United States in July. Mr. Aaron pleaded not guilty Wednesday in federal court in Manhattan.
Despite the gravity of the charges, Mr. Aaron had lived freely in Moscow for eight months in a downtown apartment. Even after his arrest this year on a visa violation charge, Mr. Aaron was not immediately deported.
Russia is now facing an outpouring of criticism in the United States for what the Central Intelligence Agency determined was an intelligence operation to tip the election for Donald J. Trump, by using computer intrusions to steal and selectively release compromising materials about Democratic candidates. Mr. Trump has suggested the evidence is inconclusive, and that other American intelligence agencies disagree with the C.I.A. finding.
There is no indication Mr. Aaron had any ties to the political hacking that has roiled Washington since the summer.
Russia has no extradition treaty with the United States and a long history of stonewalling on cross-border cybercrime investigations. Most famously, it has refused to extradite Edward J. Snowden, who is wanted in connection with obtaining and releasing a vast trove of surveillance data from the National Security Agency.