Through Jan. 21. Craig F. Starr Gallery, 5 East 73rd Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , starr-art.com.
Myron Stout’s black-and-white paintings come with built-in moonlight, which sets aglow their exhibition at the Craig F. Starr Gallery. The show, “Myron Stout,” contains five of this artist’s small, taut black-and-whites, as they’re often called — more than have been exhibited together since 1990. Stout (1908-1987) started them in the mid-1950s after rereading the tragedies of Aeschylus and Sophocles. Until then, his work had been primarily colorful and delicately geometric. At this point, he abandoned color, distilling his feelings into single blazing white shapes — meticulously rounded and textured — on smoother black backgrounds.
The shapes can seem almost dimensional, like marble, and related to the sculptures of Jean Arp and Brancusi. Yet they press against the surrounding black, holding the surface in a vibrating equilibrium. These works are pure and formalist, but so suggestive that it almost seems inaccurate to call them abstract. The gently tapered, shieldlike rectangle of “Aegis,” which takes its title from Zeus’ magical breastplate, also resembles a (Cycladic) head. “Apollo,” which has two shapes, evokes a person with arms raised or perhaps carrying something round, as befits a god who transports the sun across the sky.
Other paintings bring to mind a lyre and a yoke or a helmet and a trident. But the strongest is an untitled work that resists meaning: It is simply a fat, truncated archway or inverted U, one side longer than the other, resolved into a perfect asymmetry. The show also contains 11 of Stout’s graphite drawings, whose finely textured images range through the gray spectrum and seem almost veiled. In one of the palest, a series of orbs and slices of orbs follows the phases of the moon.
Through Jan. 22. Frick Collection, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , frick.org.
Late in his career, however, he stepped up his game with a large, ambitious multifigure scene, the “Repentant Magdalene,” thought to be a commission for Emperor Leopold I of Vienna. Now installed at the Frick (on a loan from the Norton Simon Museum in Pasadena, Calif.), it shows the free-spirited Cagnacci more than capable of compositional rigor and emotional complexity.
Three pairs of figures define the painting. In the foreground, the Magdalene has shed her fancy clothes and jewelry and hurled herself onto the marble floor; her sister, Martha, is tending to her. Behind them, two distressed servants are fleeing the awkward scene; so is a devil, ushered out the window by an angel with a spear.
The juxtaposition in a shallow space of bodies bound by gravity and others that aren’t — like those of the prostrate Magdalene and the floating devil — is productively unsettling. So, perhaps less productively, is the feeling that Cagnacci can’t help lingering on the Magdalene’s supple form or her castoff luxuries; her loosely draped hips, unspooling strings of pearls and bejeweled shoes, snaking along the painting’s bottom edge, nearly upstage the narrative of repentance.
Reading the accompanying texts (including a new book on Cagnacci by the Frick’s chief curator, Xavier F. Salomon), it becomes clear that the artist had a lot to prove: He had been told that he couldn’t paint convincing spaces or full-length figures, and critics had savaged his treatment of feet in particular. “Repentant Magdalene” looks, at times, like a point-by-point rebuttal of such comments. Nonetheless, it’s a vigorous, full-throated and ultimately endearing defense.
Through Feb. 26. American Folk Art Museum, 2 Lincoln Square, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , folkartmuseum.org.
One thing Americans can be grateful for, even in this uncertain season, is that death is not the constant companion for us that it was for earlier generations. One way they had of coping — the memorial portrait — is the subject of the American Folk Art Museum’s exhibition “Securing the Shadow: Posthumous Portraiture in America,” an intermittently fascinating, quietly unsettling and slightly overstuffed show (with more paintings, photographs and reproduction gravestones than comfortably fit in the museum’s modest space).
In a wide-ranging catalog essay, Stacy Hollander, chief curator at the museum, points out that in the years after the Revolution, one in four children died before the age of 10, and as many as another 10 percent before 21.
Their parents, of course, were no less bereaved for being more inured, and they were left without even snapshots to cherish. What they did have were artists who could copy likenesses from fresh corpses or even reconstruct them from family descriptions, though some charged extra.
One particularly striking example is “Charles H. Sisson,” a narrow rectangle, four feet high, painted by Joseph Goodhue Chandler of East Haddam, Conn. It shows the late, lamented boy on a dirt road against a distant background of houses and a moody sky, his pink-cheeked, preoccupied face tacked onto an ill-proportioned, generic body. He pulls a strangely tiny toy cart with one hand and raises a whip over his head with the other, lifting one foot from the ground as if in motion, but he still looks frozen and stiff. The whole thing is more like the compulsive re-enactment of a trauma than the inscription of a fond reminiscence.
When photography did arrive, in the years before the Civil War, it was expensive, still something an ordinary family might not invest in until after the final fact. A vitrine of daguerreotypes and tintypes from the Burns Family Collection shows a series of ingeniously heartbreaking attempts, only some of them successful, to make recent corpses look lifelike for the camera.
The efforts are at once foreign and familiar, a mysterious, long-distance mirror of our own desperate cultural moment. One very young girl from Albany County, N.Y., with dress, cheeks and toy drum hand-colored in red and pink, seems to be looking at the viewer; in “Child on Dead Father’s Lap,” the image is tender enough to justify what must have been the horror of the shoot. In other cases, such as that of a mother cradling an infant with glassy eyes and its head lolling over her arm, it’s difficult to imagine what anyone involved could have been thinking — until you remember some accident or tragedy you’ve witnessed yourself, and think back to the bystanders holding out their iPhones like amulets between themselves and the raw fact.
Through March 12. The Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , stjohndivine.org/programs/christa.
Now that Christmas is over — although, based on the Bible’s chronology, the wise men wouldn’t appear in Bethlehem for several more weeks — it’s time for some revisionist history. “The Christa Project: Manifesting Divine Bodies,” at the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine, provides an excellent vehicle for thinking about sacred incarnation, and one that reaches out to humans of all genders, races, religions and sexual orientations.
This exhibition includes works by 22 artists, installed throughout the cathedral, and was inspired by Edwina Sandys’s 1975 bronze sculpture of a nude woman on a crucifix titled “Christa,” which raised a commotion when it was displayed in the cathedral during Holy Week in 1984. “Christa,” among the pieces in the current show, is still a radical gesture, and the other artworks here mostly align with that impulse. Kiki Smith’s resin and fiberglass sculpture “Ice Man” (1995) is hung like a traditional crucifix, but other works, like Loren Eiferman’s little clay and iron heads resting on a pillow, imagine the body in more abstract ways.
Several works here serve as memorials: Bettina WitteVeen’s 2016 installation of crosses pays homage to female social activists, like Rosa Luxemburg; Kara Walker’s nearly all-white canvas from 2009 memorializes a 13-year-old rape victim stoned to death in Somalia; and Eiko Otake and William Johnston’s gorgeous photographs from 2014 to 2016 honor victims of the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in northeastern Japan.
For a more participatory experience, you can hold Genesis Breyer P-Orridge’s hand, cast in bronze and suspended over a quotation by Brion Gysin: “Wisdom can only be passed on by the touching of hands.” I tried it and felt a tingle — although it might have been chilly in the cathedral that day.