KANSAS CITY, Mo. — With their postseason spot secured, the Kansas City Chiefs turned to Travis Kelce and Tyreek Hill to roll past the Denver Broncos, 33-10, on Sunday night and keep their A.F.C. West title hopes alive.
Kelce had 11 catches for 160 yards and a touchdown, and Hill took a handoff 70 yards for another score as the Chiefs beat the Broncos for the third straight time and eliminated Denver, the Super Bowl champion, from postseason contention.
Kansas City punctuated the win when the 346-pound defensive tackle Dontari Poe, who had lined up at quarterback, threw a jump pass to Demetrius Harris with under two minutes left.
The Chiefs had already been assured of a wild-card berth when Pittsburgh beat Baltimore earlier in the day. But a win next weekend in San Diego, coupled with a loss by Oakland in Denver, would give the Chiefs their first division title since 2010, not to mention a first-round bye and a home playoff game.
Trevor Siemian completed 17 of 43 passes for 183 yards and threw a game-ending interception, and the only touchdown drive he led came after a pick had given him the ball at the Kansas City 6. Justin Forsett scored two plays later.
The lackluster performance came a week after a dismal showing in a 16-3 loss to New England led to a locker-room shouting match between the Broncos’ offense and defense. The team played down any kind of disharmony this week, but its performance on a sloppy, soggy night at Arrowhead Stadium only seemed to underscore the rift during a most frustrating season.
Alex Smith capped a 77-yard touchdown march with a 10-yard keeper in the first quarter, and Hill outran the banged-up Broncos a few minutes later to give the Chiefs a 14-0 lead.
It was the fourth touchdown Hill had scored against the Broncos this season.
Forsett’s touchdown gave the Broncos fleeting hope, but that hope was dashed moments later. Kelce took a screen pass and followed perfectly executed blocking for an 80-yard touchdown and a 21-7 lead.
The biggest hit of the night came when a security guard tackled a fan who had run onto the field. Of course, the tackle occurred after the fan had run about 90 yards untouched, so in that respect the security force was not a whole lot better than the Broncos’ first-half defense.
Broncos cornerback Kayvon Webster was taken from the field on a cart after being hit high by Chiefs linebacker Terrance Smith while covering a touchback in the second quarter. Webster’s head was snapped back by the block, and he was being evaluated for a concussion. He did not return.
Broncos defensive end Derek Wolfe left in the first half with a neck injury and did not return. Denver was already without leading tackler T. J. Ward and tight ends Virgil Green and A. J. Derby because of concussions and linebacker Brandon Marshall because of a hamstring injury.