TORONTO — It is a dark and rainy night when about a dozen members of the Conacher family descend the steps into Mike Wilson’s basement.
The Conachers are a legendary name in Canadian hockey, with bloodlines from the Hall of Fame to the modern N.H.L. But Wilson has his own piece of hockey fame: His 1,000-square-foot basement, in a stately three-story home in the Forest Hill neighborhood, houses what is believed to be the world’s largest collection of Toronto Maple Leafs artifacts.
Wilson, 62, could be considered hockey’s version of Barry Halper, who at one time had assembled the most acclaimed private collection of baseball memorabilia in the United States. In Wilson’s basement, one will find more than 2,000 pieces, including game-worn sweaters from as far back as the 1930s, but also photographs, pucks, sticks, contracts, documents and the original door to the dressing room at the old Maple Leaf Gardens, signed in blue ink by about 60 former Leafs.
Originally, all Wilson wanted was a room where his buddies could come and have a beer and watch sports surrounded by great memorabilia.
What it has turned into is something much more significant. Once a month, by invitation only, Wilson hosts former N.H.L. players, executives and sports journalists for a film night and a round-table discussion. Many of hockey’s most famous names, like Bobby Orr, Wayne Gretzky and Paul Coffey, have come to visit.
On one occasion, Wilson had Gretzky, Coffey and the N.H.L. executives Brian Burke and Brendan Shanahan together for a powerhouse panel that would rival anything that a major television network could assemble.
This month, he welcomed the Conachers. The family arrived with their own piece of history: a mounted puck from the first goal scored at Maple Leaf Gardens, on Nov. 12, 1931, off the stick of Charlie Conacher.
Charlie, Lionel and Roy Conacher, the only set of three brothers in the Hockey Hall of Fame, were among 10 Conacher children who grew up in a working-class neighborhood of Toronto at the turn of the 20th century. About a century later, a dozen of their relatives gathered in and around reclining theater chairs to see, for the first time, Charlie Conacher being interviewed by the revered broadcaster Foster Hewitt in the 1930s.
Later, Charlie’s son, Pete, now 84, watched himself playing for Toronto in a 1957 game against the Detroit Red Wings, fighting Al Arbour. And Brian, 75, a son of Lionel, who played for the Maple Leafs in the 1960s, watched film of himself scoring twice to clinch a semifinal series victory over Chicago en route to the Leafs’ last Stanley Cup title, in 1967.
As the film ran, so did the jokes.
Someone asked Pete if fighting Arbour was a means of securing a job.
Nearby, letters from the former Maple Leafs coach and general manager Punch Imlach to his players, mounted on display cases, offer insight into Imlach’s personality and the times. In early August 1962, Imlach warned the players to come to camp prepared to perform 20 push-ups, 20 situps and 30 knee bends. Imlach also reminded them to bring their golf clubs.
Four years later, Imlach penned a sarcastic letter to Eddie Shack, a player known as the Entertainer and one with whom Imlach had a love-hate relationship, in part because of Shack’s off-season commercial interests.
Wilson related a different type of story when showing off the latest addition to his collection, the Maple Leafs’ 1962 Stanley Cup banner. The story traces back to 1951, when the Leafs won the Stanley Cup on Bill Barilko’s overtime winner. That summer, Barilko disappeared after a small-plane crash.
The Maple Leafs did not win the Stanley Cup again until 1962; weeks later, Barilko’s body and the wreckage were discovered in northern Ontario.
It is a point of pride; Wilson says that he will accept a piece of memorabilia only if there is a story to go with it.
His own story is modest.
Wilson grew up as a center playing minor hockey in Toronto, then played for Port Alberni, British Columbia, in the Pacific Coast League and got as far as semipro in Sweden before wrapping up his career with a couple of senior/intermediate teams in Ontario.
He now plays beer-league hockey three times a week.
Wilson, who spent decades in the brokerage business before retiring this year from his job as an institutional equity trader, has been accumulating memorabilia for more than 50 years. His first piece was a hockey stick once owned by Leafs defenseman Carl Brewer.
When Wilson met his wife, Debra Thuet, they expanded their collection.
In their early years together, the couple dragged their children, Ryan, now 21, and Andra, 24, to card shows, antique stores, flea markets and swap meets. They have traveled throughout the United States and Europe seeking ideas in museums, bars and restaurants.
This museum, however, will soon need a new home.
Wilson, who would not disclose what he had paid to amass his collection or estimate its value, said he planned to move out of the house in the next two years and did not expect to take the collection with him. He is in negotiations with an undisclosed organization to take it over but said he wanted to stay involved.
But he seems to value the personal connections even more than his brushes with greatness.
“To him, we’re just like normal guys who happened to play for the Maple Leafs,” the former captain Rick Vaive said by phone.
No one is paid to visit. The only time that Wilson raises money from the collection is when he collaborates with N.H.L. personalties like Burke, an executive with the Calgary Flames, for a charitable cause. Those events, with tickets priced at $500 to $2,000, have allowed his N.H.L. fraternity to raise about $1 million for a half-dozen causes, Wilson said.
“A lot of players are kind of guarded to do anything nowadays,” said Rick Tocchet, a former N.H.L. player who is an assistant with the Pittsburgh Penguins. “But this is something they’re not scared to do.
At Gretzky’s urging, Tocchet took his teenage son on a pilgrimage to Wilson’s basement last summer and spent a couple of hours there.
