It would be good policy for the incoming administration to let contractors know that the federal government will negotiate hard to rein in costs on all contracts for goods and services. Starting with a high-profile contractor like Boeing and a highly symbolic item like Air Force One will certainly get the attention of all vendors.
However, the president of the United States cannot get involved in negotiating all government purchases. A few billion dollars is a major investment for a real estate business, but it is an extremely small portion of the federal budget and should be delegated to the officials at the proper level. 
Donald Trump and Mike Pence have orchestrated a transparent and cheap publicity stunt with respect to Carrier Corporation’s keeping about 1,000 jobs in Indiana instead of relocating them to Mexico.
Mr. Trump surely knows that a private corporation’s primary obligation is to its shareholders — not its employees. And if free-market forces dictate such a move, nothing (save national security) can prevent that corporation from acting in the best interests of those shareholders.
The fact that Mr. Pence promised public funds to stall that move clearly informs us that this is a one-off — a maneuver that cannot be broadly replicated across the Rust Belt. Those who believe that a president-elect can wave a magic wand and save their jobs are seriously deluded, and are guaranteed to end up bitterly disappointed by this silly gambit.
If that’s the case, and if even the free market’s most strident advocates are now questioning the workings of the “invisible hand,” maybe we should rethink our devotion to unbridled capitalism.
Perhaps it wouldn’t be the best idea to privatize our public schools, open up our public lands to rampant resource extraction, or subject our citizens to the whims of the health care markets by overhauling Medicare and Medicaid. Maybe it doesn’t make sense to restrain the free market one corporation at a time, but rather we should consider broader policies that respond to free market failures.
Can we say it? Maybe we should regulate capitalism so it works for all Americans.
“1,000 Jobs Stay but Still More May Be Going” (front page, Dec. 1) reported that the 1,000 Carrier jobs saved in Indiana may not offset others at risk. Noting “steady gains in employment like food service, retail and logistics” in Indiana, it missed another major growth sector. Nearly 48,000 workers were employed in clean advanced energy businesses in the Hoosier State in 2015, according to BW Research.
That’s more than those in machinery manufacturing (43,000), nearly twice the 25,000 jobs at colleges and universities, and approaching the 60,000 in auto parts manufacturing. Most advanced energy jobs in Indiana are in energy efficiency, followed by transportation, solar, wind, biomass and advanced natural gas.
Indiana illustrates a nationwide trend: We are in the midst of a major transformation in the advanced energy sector that has now created more than 2.7 million jobs. We should encourage this shift on the national, state and local level while making the energy we use more secure, clean and affordable.
Mr. Ballard is a senior fellow for Indiana Advanced Energy Economy and former Republican mayor of Indianapolis. Mr. Richard is chief executive of Advanced Energy Economy and former Democratic mayor of Fort Wayne, Ind.