In “Cities Must Lead on Climate” (Op-Ed, Nov. 30), Jeff Biggers is correct to say cities can be the catalyst for significant and potentially transformative climate action. This action needs to focus not only on reducing greenhouse gas emissions but also on adapting to the change already baked into our climate system and affecting urban areas right now.
Equally important is that cities must work toward progress on climate mitigation and adaptation simultaneously and in an integrated way, in which maximum co-benefits can be achieved. This integration will also require a more robust and dynamic link between urban managers and scientists to co-produce new knowledge that can be used and built on over time.
Then cities will be able to define and undertake flexible climate response policies as the challenges and opportunities of a more dynamic climate emerge.
The writers lead the New York City Panel on Climate Change. Mr. Solecki is a professor of geography at Hunter College. Ms. Rosenzweig is a senior research scientist at the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies.
Jeff Biggers makes a compelling case for cities to play a leading role in combating climate change, but he did not emphasize the critical role of states and regional collections of states.
In addition to California, which he mentions, New York recently approved policies to achieve 50 percent renewable energy by 2030. Massachusetts passed an energy bill to start a whole new offshore wind industry. And Texas invested billions in transmission lines to unlock cheap and plentiful wind energy.
States have a critical lever: the authority to regulate electricity and hence to replace a fossil-fuel supply with cleaner sources. States can also pursue multistate solutions, like the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, which has helped dramatically cut power plant emissions in the Northeast and mid-Atlantic and has generated billions that states have invested in energy efficiency. State leadership will be needed now more than ever.
How encouraging it is to read Jeff Biggers’s article. This good news is most welcome, and there is more good news to add.
According to the International Energy Agency, renewable energy sources — mostly solar and wind — overtook coal in 2015 in cumulative installed world electric generating capacity. The market forces at work are not only self-interested but also happily in line with the most attainable strategy for addressing climate change.
The best thing we can do now with fossil fuel resources is to leave them in the ground. Retrieving and burning them will bring only more climate destabilization.
H. JAMES QUIGLEY Jr.
The writer is a lecturer and director of environmental design, policy and planning in the Sustainability Studies Program at Stony Brook University.