HAMILTON, Bermuda — Tom Slingsby, one of the world’s top sailors, would really rather race close to shore and spend the night on dry land. But that has not kept him from becoming a regular at the Rolex Sydney Hobart Yacht Race, which can turn into quite a rough and sleepless ride on the way to Tasmania.
Slingsby is going against his own grain for a good cause. His friend, the Australian skipper Anthony Bell, owns the 100-foot (30.48-meter) maxi Perpetual Loyal and races in “the Hobart” to raise money for the Humpty Dumpty Foundation, an Australian charity that purchases medical equipment for children.
Slingsby donates his day rate, which is considerable at this prosperous stage of his career. Slingsby, 32, is not only an Olympic champion (he won gold in the Laser Class in 2012) but one of the leaders of Oracle Team USA, the America’s Cup defender. Oracle won the cup in San Francisco in 2013 and is preparing in Bermuda to defend yachting’s most prestigious trophy next year.
The team has an American owner in Larry Ellison and represents the Golden Gate Yacht Club in San Francisco, but it continues to have a strong Australian flavor with the skipper Jimmy Spithill, wing trimmer Kyle Langford, chief operating officer Grant Simmer and Slingsby, who also has a United States passport via his American mother but whose accent and allegiances are undeniably Aussie. He still hopes to be part of an Australian America’s Cup challenge at some stage, but that can wait.
Despite his doubts about the delights of the open ocean, Slingsby also said it is important to take part in the Hobart race because of what it means to Australians.
He has now raced in three but only finished once. That was in Slingsby’s first year in 2013, when Perpetual Loyal finished about three hours behind perennial contender Wild Oats XI for line honors.
In both 2014 and 2015, Perpetual Loyal had to withdraw because of damage, striking an unidentified object underwater in 2014 and then breaking its rudder in 2015.
Slingsby was a top-level junior tennis player in Australia, but he burned out and quit in his teens. He has channeled his competitive fire into sailing. In Oracle’s winning campaign in San Francisco, with Slingsby as part of the onboard brain trust, Oracle rallied from a 1-8 deficit to win 9-8 against Emirates Team New Zealand.
Nicknamed “the wind whisperer,” he is expected to play an even bigger role in next year’s America’s Cup in Bermuda. As the sailing team’s manager, he has been responsible for hiring much of the crew and will pick four of the team’s six spots on the race boat next year. As for the other two, Spithill, as confident as ever, seems a sure thing as helmsman as does Slingsby at tactician, although Spithill will have the final say.
For now, he will not be racing on an America’s Cup-style foiling catamaran in the Great Sound of Bermuda — he will be co-skipper of a fully crewed maxi heading out of Sydney Harbor and into the Tasman Sea.
