OVERLAND PARK, Kan. — Brett Parker, an elementary school teacher and rookie politician, was a Democrat running against a Republican incumbent in a Republican state that the Republican presidential candidate, Donald J. Trump, clinched by 20 percentage points.
In spite of all that, Mr. Parker will be sworn into the Kansas House of Representatives next month, one of 13 legislative seats the Democrats picked up here.
Going door to door, Mr. Brown said, some voters he met voiced frustration with Mr. Brownback, but were still reluctant to cross party lines. “I’m like, ‘I’m glad you brought that up, because I’m a registered Republican voter, and let me tell you why I’m doing this right now, walking, holding a sign for a Democratic candidate,’” Mr. Brown said.
Mr. Brownback, who took office after eight years of Democratic governors, has led a rightward policy shift. He signed legislation rolling back income taxes and eliminating some business taxes, all the while assuring voters that economic growth would help make up for lost revenue.
The type of growth Mr. Brownback counted on has not materialized, though, and the state’s revenue estimates have repeatedly been off by wide margins, forcing years of cuts to state agencies and reductions in government services. Mr. Brownback, who has promised to announce next month a way to deal with the latest deficit, has defended the tax cuts and criticized past government spending levels as too high.
Some here have speculated that the governor might take a job in the Trump administration. A spokeswoman said Mr. Brownback was unavailable for comment.
Distaste for the governor, combined with a decreased emphasis on social issues like abortion, created an opening for candidates like Mr. Parker, who campaigned largely on the budget and the threat he said conservative policy-making posed to public schools.

In Olathe, the nearby suburb where he teaches, Mr. Parker said staff layoffs, reduced janitorial service and the elimination of Spanish classes for elementary students had already taken a toll.
Education and fears about more budget strain helped lift Mr. Parker and other candidates in suburban districts, where grass-roots parent groups emerged as a new political force.
One group, Stand Up Blue Valley, named for a school district, endorsed Mr. Parker and several other legislative candidates, both Democrats and Republicans, who campaigned on education issues. The public schools in this affluent suburban county are considered some of the region’s best, with parents saying they moved here for the schools and are counting on continued success to maintain their property values.
“People are so fed up, so tired, frustrated, of what is happening to our great state,” said Jennifer Jarrell, a former Republican precinct committeewoman who became involved with Stand Up Blue Valley.
But moderates and Democrats also made gains outside suburban Kansas City, and education was hardly the only issue that drove voters to the polls. A collection of grass-roots groups called the Save Kansas Coalition pushed for a return to political centrism and brought attention to topics as diverse as Medicaid expansion and the method for selecting judges.
In Hutchinson, home to about 40,000 people near the state’s middle, Patsy Terrell said a road project had been put off because of the budget woes, frustrating voters. “That means jobs, and not just jobs, but good-paying jobs, as well as updating our infrastructure,” said Ms. Terrell, a Democrat who won a first term in the Legislature, beating a 25-year incumbent.
While Democrats picked up 13 seats in the Legislature, and several moderate Republicans beat conservatives in primaries, the practical effect of the state’s shift remains uncertain. Republicans held onto large majorities in both chambers of the Legislature, and conservatives kept the most influential leadership positions. Moderate Republicans and Democrats might pass some bills by voting as a bloc, though they may not be able to overcome a veto.
Complicating matters, the Kansas Supreme Court is expected to rule soon on a lawsuit challenging the adequacy of state funding for public schools. The Supreme Court justices, many of whom conservatives tried unsuccessfully to oust in last month’s election, could order hundreds of millions of dollars in additional education spending.
