From left, Justin Bartha, Zach Galifianakis, Ed Helms and Bradley Cooper in “The Hangover Part III.”Credit...Warner Bros.
In the parts of the world that experience winter as winter, New Year’s Day is special. On a sunny cold New Year’s Day here in New York, the piercing light and the sharp air can serve as a metaphorical — and metaphysical — reproach, even if you’re stone cold sober; it’s not desirable hangover weather. In the years before my domestication, my New Year’s Day hangover cure involved more alcohol and a trip home to New Jersey, where I and some similarly afflicted friends would gorge on regional comfort food — deep-fried hot dogs and fries all the way at Rutt’s Hut in Clifton, perhaps, or a cheeseburger and onion rings from the sadly departed Hearth on Route 46. Only after completing this ritual would we consider a movie, preferably something loud and empty.
I no longer drink, so I’ve not had to contend with a New Year’s Day hangover in a while. And you, reader, don’t need a columnist to direct you to loud and empty movies on streaming video. So what’s your cinematic pleasure? Hair shirt or hair of the dog?
For the purpose of this column, I’ll divide hangover movies into two loose categories: “What Am I Doing With My Life?” and “Well, That Wasn’t So Bad, Was It?” We’ll begin with the first group. “Smash-Up: The Story of a Woman,” a 1947 movie starring Susan Hayward, who played an alcoholic as such in three pictures (and an implied one in a bunch more). The movie begins with Ms. Hayward in a hospital bed, three-fourths of her head bandaged up, repeating, “I need a drink.” It then flashes back to how she got that way. The movie has not aged well, in spite of its authentic portrait of alcohol abuse — the script was written in part by Dorothy Parker, who struggled with the same her whole life. (“I’ll Cry Tomorrow,” the 1955 film in which Hayward plays the singer Lillian Roth, is the best of Hayward’s pictures in this category but is not available on streaming video.) “Smash-Up” is available free to Amazon Prime members, but it’s also in the public domain, which means it’s on YouTube, undisturbed (a lot of the copyrighted material users post there is taken down by the copyright holders). Amazon offers “Smash-Up” in two versions, one of which is promoted as being restored by a company called the Film Detective — that’s the one you want. Watching the other, a dark, fuzzy, noisy transfer of the movie, might make you think you’re still drunk.
Amazon also offers a small assortment of latter-day recovery tales for rent or purchase: “When a Man Loves a Woman” (1994), starring Meg Ryan and partly written by Al Franken (long before he was a Democratic Minnesota senator); “28 Days” (not to be confused with “28 Days Later”), the 2000 Sandra Bullock rehab movie; and Michael Keaton’s first stab at Serious Movie Stuff, “Clean and Sober” (1988), in which he charts a cocaine addict’s progress into some kind of integrity. Claudia Christian, a supporting cast member from “Clean and Sober,” is the narrator and partial subject of a movie that’s free to Amazon Prime members, “One Little Pill,” a 2014 documentary advocating alcoholism treatment via the so-called Sinclair Method, which treats the disease with naltrexone. I’m all about what works for people, but I was unpersuaded over all.
More current fare includes “Smashed,” an indie from 2012 with Mary Elizabeth Winstead and Aaron Paul, and the occasionally terrifying “Flight” from the same year, which melds the alcoholism drama with the near disaster pic, focusing on an airline pilot played by Denzel Washington. “Krisha,” last year’s much-praised indie in which a raging drunken aunt gives her family a super-memorable Thanksgiving, is available free to Prime members. I didn’t care for it — but I loved the rentable “Sideways,” the 2004 film directed by Alexander Payne about two friends’ ill-starred journeys in California wine country.
Netflix seems a little thin on instructive or inspiring fare with respect to the adverse effects of booze, although it seems to teem with cheesy, borderline-creepy soft-core variants on “The Hangover,” which could be appropriate if you’re spending New Year’s Day determined to continue behaving badly.
Cinephilia-inclined services offer strong stuff from strong directors. John Cassavetes was a maestro with boozers, although you couldn’t say that alcoholism per se was a central theme of his films. Nonetheless, “Faces” (1968), “A Woman Under the Influence” (1974) and “Opening Night” (1977), all viewable on Filmstruck, depict with painful clarity the messes one can make by drinking. “Days of Wine and Roses” is a remarkably tough-minded film for Hollywood in 1962, but that’s the director Blake Edwards for you. Nonalcoholics watch it and think, “So sad about Jack Lemmon and Lee Remick”; alcoholics in 12-step programs watch it and think, “Damn, why can’t I have Jack Klugman as my sponsor?” The movie is on the Warner Archive site, as is “The Helen Morgan Story,” a 1957 picture with Ann Blyth as Morgan, the singer who catapulted to fame in Broadway’s “Show Boat” and fell hard for the hard stuff. A young Paul Newman is the cad who takes advantage of her condition.
I know, I know — where’s the “That Wasn’t So Bad” stuff? There’s not a lot of it, and much of it is, well, loud and empty, like the films of the “Hangover” franchise, which Amazon has up for rental or purchase. From the first film in 2009 to “The Hangover Part III” in 2013, the movies implicitly argue that alcohol, despite some of its deleterious effects, is the greatest male-bonding elixir out there. The second installment finds one of its characters blacking out and hooking up with a beautiful transgender prostitute in Bangkok; later, toasting his enablers at his wedding, he invokes the franchise’s “wolf pack” premise as his new wife stands there, presumably in the dark about his infidelity. Nice. The genial 2008 indie “Bottle Shock,” free on Amazon Prime, is a paean to connoisseurship, depicting in fiction form the rise of California wines in the 1970s.
Finally, there is “The Thin Man,” from 1934, which reassures its audience that characters played by William Powell and Myrna Loy can imbibe their own weight in gin and still remain as charming and good-looking as William Powell and Myrna Loy. The movie has other virtues as well. It is for rent or purchase on Amazon. Here’s to your health, which will improve if you take a break from the sauce.