Bogie is athletic. She likes to walk, about four miles a day. She loves tetherball too, though she broke her leg in a recent game. Bogie can be shy and doesn’t always do well in group situations. She enjoys chewing on the head of one of her friends, who is a cat.
A friend introduced me to Dog of the Day in 1998, when I was staring at the cubicle walls in my first corporate job. The charming canine stories and photographs guided me through those dark years, to a happier job and happier days. And the thanks I gave the website? I forgot about it, like a half-filled journal left to gather dust in the better times.
That is until one day late last year, when that same friend and I were sighing over a recent wave of bad news — personal, geopolitical — and she paused and asked me: Whatever happened to Dog of the Day?
Absolutely nothing, thank God (or Dog). The site and its siblings look much as they did at the turn of the century. And each day’s homespun story of a beloved pet, whether from Wailuku, Hawaii, or Turner, Me., or most anywhere in between, is as lovely as those I remember.
As I’ve fallen in love with Dog of the Day in a new phase of my life, though, and reached out to talk to Ms. Watts, I’ve realized that what I like best about her site — its deep, seemingly easy reserves of animal-inspired goodness — is in fact an enormous labor for her, one that offers a window as much onto the complexity of human relationships as onto the simplicity of animal ones.
Take factionalism, in this age of it. Each day, Ms. Watts says, Dog and Cat of the Day duke it out for traffic stats. One day, virtuous Dog triumphs (hurray!). The next, treacherous Cat claws its way back on top. The only rule in this ancient struggle is that Pet of the Day — a sort of D.M.Z. where Ms. Watts attempts to interest readers in such charmers as Spike, a porcupine from Edmonton, Alberta, who “has no idea what a threat is and therefore his quills are always laying flat on his back” — never wins.
With pets, as in politics, ours is a two-party system.
While Ms. Watts navigates the partisan shoals of Cat and Dog (she won’t take sides, though she did say she has a “sadly genetic” cat allergy), her inbox forces her to confront other, even more dispiriting aspects of the human condition.
The tale of Mancha the llama, savaged by another pet, was also a tough editorial call. It eventually ran with a disclaimer (“This is an exceptionally sad story”) and on a weekend, so that “anyone who viewed it didn’t have to get weepy at work,” Ms. Watts said.
Her three sites also have a large contingent of elderly fans, many of whom have been forced to leave their homes and their beloved pets. It turns out that these readers are one of the main reasons Ms. Watts largely retains the fin-de-siècle look of the websites. “We want to keep it simple, for people in nursing homes or people on modems,” she said.
In the spirit of her friendly websites, Ms. Watts tries to answer everyone who contacts her, even if it’s only to explain why a submission isn’t suitable. For example, she occasionally receives a touching story accompanied by an image of what she presumes is the pet, lying on an identically colored piece of furniture. “We can’t tell if there’s a dog in that photo,” she’ll reply politely.
Then there are the rules about what, or who, is eligible for nomination. You can’t nominate a co-worker, however beastly, as Pet of the Day. You can’t nominate a younger sibling, no matter how strong a case you make. You’re not allowed to nominate a wild or zoo animal, though Ms. Watts once made an exception — who wouldn’t? — for Takara, a killer whale that meant the world to a cancer patient.
It seems that with her sites, Ms. Watts isn’t trying to distract us from the sadness of the world. Rather, she is suggesting we see life’s trials as surrounded by unconditional love, of the sort we find in the stories she curates for us.
