For years, they operated with presumed immunity from public disclosure laws — longtime friends and advisers to Mayor Bill de Blasio who took no public salary yet enjoyed a direct line to City Hall’s corridors of power.
But now the advisers, known as agents of the city, have effectively been asked to turn in their badges.
In an about-face, the de Blasio administration announced Monday that starting immediately, city lawyers and officials would no longer challenge the disclosure of new emails between his administration and a handful of unpaid outside advisers who were designated as city agents.
“They will be de-deputized,” Eric F. Phillips, the mayor’s top spokesman, said Monday.
But the change, he said, would apply only to future emails with those advisers and not to the past communications that are the subject of a continuing court battle with two news organizations, NY1 and The New York Post, seeking their disclosure.
The turnabout was unexpected. As recently as last week, Mr. de Blasio, in an interview on NY1, vigorously defended the practice of withholding emails with the advisers — some of whom also represent clients with business before the city — on the grounds that their advice was akin to that from the kitchen cabinets of countless public leaders.
“Before, we had ground rules from our counsel’s office saying this is confidential,” Mr. de Blasio said. Now, he said, the rule would be to disclose such communications in the future. “So choose your words wisely and act accordingly,” he said, as if speaking to the advisers directly.
He said the advisers — including the original five: Jonathan Rosen, of the public relations firm BerlinRosen; Bill Hyers and Nicholas Baldick, of the political consulting firm Hilltop Public Solutions; John Del Cecato, a speechwriter at AKPD Message and Media; and Patrick H. Gaspard, the United States ambassador to South Africa and Mr. de Blasio’s close personal friend — had communicated with the mayor on the promise of confidentiality in the past, so those previous communications would remain shielded.
Many had roles in Mr. de Blasio’s political nonprofit group, the Campaign for One New York, which took donations from many with business before the city and which figures in the state and federal investigations into the de Blasio administration.
Any future communications they have with the city will be treated like any other communication between the city and a member of the public.
The issue returned to headlines the day before Thanksgiving when the de Blasio administration released more than 1,500 pages of emails in response to a public records request from several reporters seeking communications involving the advisers. Most of the emails pertained to Mr. Rosen and were limited to discussions about clients; none of his emails with Mr. de Blasio or other city employees about policy were released.
Communication within and between city agencies are exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Law under a provision aimed at fostering internal discussions without fear that they might become public.
The de Blasio administration’s application of that idea to outside advisers with no formal connection to the city attracted scrutiny in May after the mayor’s counsel at the time, Maya Wiley, referred to them in a news conference as “agents of the city.” The designation struck some political observers as novel, and many good government advocates found it an example of a shadow government at City Hall.
He added that the mayor would still communicate with those advisers, only now with the assumption that everything they write could become public.