When Diamond Torres was growing up in North Brooklyn four decades ago, drug dealers and prostitutes walked the streets at night and crime was endemic.
But at least she could open her window.
However bad the situation was years ago, she said, it was better than what exists now: a neighborhood ruled by the rhythms of a trash transfer station and the rumble of trucks cruising through the streets day and night.
It is so bad, Ms. Torres said, that residents cannot even open their windows because of the dirt and dust whipped up by the constant traffic at the Brooklyn Transfer Station on Thames Street, which has been the subject of a neighborhood campaign calling for it to be closed.
“I preferred the hookers,” she said.
The battle is part of the city’s never-ending trash wars, waged across the city with increasing intensity ever since the closing of the Fresh Kills landfill in Staten Island 15 years ago, which forced the city to find alternative ways to collect and get rid of the mountains of garbage it creates every day.
The city produces an astounding 14 million tons of trash every year. But the Department of Sanitation, with a $1.5 billion budget, collects only residential garbage.
Roughly 70 percent of the city’s trash is generated by commercial businesses and is collected by dozens of private hauling companies.
The city is now considering one of the most ambitious overhauls of the city’s commercial trash collection in decades, creating distinct zones where only one or two private haulers would be responsible for refuse collection.
At the same time, after more than a decade of fights and bureaucratic hurdles, the city is finally nearing completion of work on several marine transfer stations that would allow millions of tons of trash to be moved out of the city on barges rather than on trucks.
Taken together, the changes could transform waste disposal in New York.
But when it comes to trash, grand proposals have a way of being sidelined. The four marine transfer stations were proposed by the Bloomberg administration in 2004. Currently, only one is operational; the others have been delayed by years of court battles and community opposition.
But Kathryn Garcia, the sanitation commissioner, said that the last hurdles had been cleared and construction on all of the stations would soon be completed. “We hope to be done by 2018,” she said.
When they are all up and running, the stations will handle all of the residential trash in the city and will be able to take in half of the city’s commercial trash as well.
Revamped commercial collection could start as early as 2021, she said.
Unlike with other agencies, she said, if anything goes wrong in the transition — even for a day — the public will notice and the political fallout will be swift.
However, even when the marine stations are up and running, there is no guarantee that they will change the situation in the North Brooklyn neighborhood where Ms. Torres lives.
After the closing of Fresh Kills in 2001, a patchwork network of waste transfer stations emerged, often in what were then largely industrial sections of the city.
The burden fell particularly heavy on three neighborhoods in North Brooklyn, the South Bronx and southeast Queens, where some 75 percent of the city’s trash is hauled and sorted.
For years, activists pushed for what they called waste equity, with more communities shouldering a share of the trash burden.
As property values in parts of these neighborhoods boomed, the calls for an overhaul gained powerful allies in the city’s real estate community.
Melissa Iachan, senior staff lawyer in the environmental justice division at New York Lawyers for the Public Interest, said the fact that only one marine transfer station was up and running a decade after the stations were approved was evidence of how maddeningly long it takes for change to occur.
“The pace of change is far slower than the problem and the harm that the problem causes,” she said.
Jen Chantrtanapichate, 28, a founder of a nonprofit organization called Clean Up North Brooklyn, moved to Bushwick in 2009 and quickly became aware of how much the waste transfer station near her was affecting the community’s daily life.
“We all shared a very similar experience — a negative experience,” she said.
Feeling as if the city was not taking their complaints seriously, she helped organize a sting operation of sorts. Over six days in May, volunteers with video cameras sought to document the activities in and around the Brooklyn Transfer Station.
In December, they issued a report that they said showed more than 1,200 violations of city and state code.
The owners of the station, Five Star Carting, said the report was flawed and disputed the findings. Ms. Garcia, from the city’s sanitation department, said it sent officers to every transfer station at least once a week and conducted drive-by inspections as well.
While residents said that calling 311 to complain was useless, Ms. Garcia said that when enough people call, it helps alert officials to serious problems.
“I do pay attention to what the public says,” she said.
But Ms. Torres said it was likely to be the rising rents and the increasingly affluent makeup of the neighborhood that might spur change.
While she did not want to disclose her monthlyrent, she said that it was far less than the $4,000 a new tenant was paying to live in the same building.
But like many of the newcomers to the neighborhood drawn by hip coffee shops and new yoga studios, the tenant did not realize that the trash war would be part of daily life.
