The summer before my senior year of high school, I went to New York and made a nonunion film called “Camp.” It was a unique film in many ways. People have either never heard of it, or they want to tell me that it changed their life, no matter how inappropriate the circumstances.
“Camp” was written and directed by Todd Graff, based on his real experiences at Stagedoor Manor, the (in)famous children’s theater camp in upstate New York. The camp is known for putting on arguably inappropriate shows with its young campers. Imagine “The Glass Menagerie” with an all-preteen cast. It’s not universally relatable material for a movie.
Because the movie was replete with song and dance, a monthlong rehearsal period was scheduled in Manhattan. Some of us had nowhere to stay, so the indie production company Killer Films found competitively priced living spaces to accommodate their out-of-town actors. For example, I lived in the walk-in pantry of a small uptown apartment shared by three film students. Don’t worry, the film students were really nice, and the pantry was mostly empty.
I had no complaints. It was summer, I was 16, I got to take the subway to work in the morning and learn the film’s music and choreography all day. I felt like such a grown-up.
Toward the end of the rehearsal period, our choreographer, the Broadway legend Jerry Mitchell, stopped us for a pep talk. He said that whether we liked it or not, this movie was going to be around forever and that what we put on film in the coming months would, unlike theater, exist long after we were dead. It was super dark and probably should have scared me off making movies forever.
What can I say? I was living in a pantry, I was getting yelled at in dance rehearsal — if I wasn’t living the dream, I don’t know who was.
Weirdly, my excitement did not stem from the fact that I was about to be in my first film. I guess, if I’m honest, it didn’t feel like we were making a real movie. Real movies had famous actors in them, like Tom Hanks or the German lady from “Austin Powers” (my metric was all over the place). And films about teenagers had gorgeous, polished, 25-year-old actors, and the plots revolved around summer crushes — not going to prom in drag and getting your [butt] kicked.
I don’t mean to suggest that I didn’t believe in what we were doing, I just couldn’t imagine a world where anyone outside the cast was ever going to see it.
My big problem was Fritzi, a weird girl with greasy hair and terrible clothes who happened to be the character I was playing. Fritzi was the camp loser, and she was obsessed with (and probably in love with) Jill, the hot, popular girl at camp.
 At the time, I just wanted to wear makeup and have my hair done, like the other girls in the cast. I wanted to play down the ambiguously sexual nature of Fritzi’s (very much unrequited) interest in Jill. I still had to go back to high school once this was over, and I so badly wanted to be the hot girl in a movie, not the girl who washes the hot girl’s underwear by hand.
That first scene was the only thing we shot in Manhattan, and when we finished, we piled into vans and drove up to a vacant camp in the Catskills, the real Stagedoor Manor, where we would shoot the rest of the film. In interviews, lots of actors say that making a movie is “like sleepaway camp.” They have no idea.
There was no phone, no TV, no internet, and no cell reception. If you weren’t working on a certain day (or a certain week), too bad. No one had a car, so you weren’t leaving. We got paid $75 a day on the days we worked, and only on the days we worked.
We spent our days off wandering around the camp to see who else wanted to hang out. It was as close as I ever got to having a gang of neighborhood friends, like I’d seen in movies from the ’90s about growing up in the ’70s. Our ages ranged from 12 to 25, and our interests ranged from musical theater to music. Or theater. Casual singing became so normalized that when I went home, it took me weeks to stop peppering my conversations with melodic interludes.
I shot my first real scene about a week into our stay. That morning, I got into my awful wardrobe, a woman rubbed down my frizzy hair with fistfuls of men’s pomade, and I went to the set (a.k.a., I walked three minutes to a different part of the camp).
We did a few final rehearsals in the set of Jill’s bedroom. Someone yelled “Last looks!,” which meant that three people came into the room and poked at me: The wardrobe department pulled my sleeves back down to my wrists, the hair department gave me another handful of grease, and the makeup department looked me over to make sure I hadn’t secretly applied lip gloss again.
This new ritual of last-minute touch-ups taught me that actors could become unfilmably ugly at any moment and needed to be beautified at 10-minute intervals. At first, it felt like pampering, but very quickly it became the standard by which I measured how insecure I should feel that day.
Once Jill had been glossed, fluffed and shimmered and I’d been, well … greased, we stood on our start marks and waited for “Action.” We did the scene, which was really just a conversation, and eventually heard Todd’s voice call “Cut” from the next room.
That was it; that was my first time filming a scene in a movie. It might have driven me to distraction had it not been so … ordinary. I’d only ever performed in front of an audience before. The audience gave you energy; their presence filled the room with a kind of electricity that told you, This is it, this is happening! The “audience” on a film set was just your director and the perpetually bored crew. Filming a movie felt exactly like not filming a movie.
I’ve come to love film sets and see the low-key environment as an asset, but it’s still unnerving that you can finish a scene and not know how it went. While you’re shooting, you rely on the director to tell you if it’s going well, and you have to trust that he or she is right. With my favorite directors, at least four times per shoot I’ll think, That is a terrible idea, let’s do it.
Fritzi’s solo number was “The Ladies Who Lunch” from the musical “Company.” It’s a wildly inappropriate song for a teenage girl and was even more bizarre coming from one with the body of a 12-year-old. This peculiar situation arises in the film because Fritzi has poisoned Jill after being rejected by her and steals the role midperformance. She then sings a song about the ennui of middle-aged womanhood and her disillusionment with the bourgeoisie who surround her privileged 1970s Manhattan life. Sure.
When we finished shooting the number, we were supposed to get a shot of Jill watching me from backstage, furious and still throwing up, but Todd said he was going to scrap it. He whispered to me, “You don’t cut away from lightning in a bottle.” I’d never heard the expression before, but I knew it meant I’d done well.
My mom came to pick me up on the last day of filming. I wept so hard and for so long that she pulled the car over, thinking I was going to need medical attention.
I haven’t cried at the wrap of a film since. At the time, I couldn’t reconcile the fact that I would never go back there, never be with those people ever again. Now, I see catch-and-release as part of the beauty of what I get to do. Then again, I haven’t been stuck on a campground with 20 people and no technology for two months since.