Few neighborhoods have transformed as quickly or drastically as the Los Angeles Arts District, just east of downtown. Once the city’s center of manufacturing, the neighborhood is now home to an expanding arts scene, with galleries galore alongside high-end boutiques and trendy restaurants.
The district is already home to a handful of gleaming apartment and condo buildings, but it may soon get its most fanciful project yet.
The Danish architect Bjarke Ingels unveiled a proposal to build two connected glass and steel buildings last week that would reach up to 30 stories high and stretch nearly to the Los Angeles River. The project, called 670 Mesquit, would house 800,000 square feet of office space, 250 apartments and two hotels as well as retails shops and restaurants on the ground floor. The design includes a large deck that would extend over the rail yards that divide the area from the river and include some kind of museum or public sculpture park.
The project comes as city officials have vowed to radically transform the river, much of which has been sheathed in concrete for nearly a century.
“The L.A. River was really the heart of Los Angeles, it’s why downtown is located where it is,” said Vince Bertoni, the director of planning for the city. “We turned our back to the river, we’re trying to reverse that and really embrace it,” he said.
“The Arts District is becoming a place that could become a walkable neighborhood and an enclave of urbanity in L.A.,” he said.
The project faces considerable hurdles before it can move forward. Because of its height and density, it would need several variances from the city’s planning department, including permission to build residential units. And the variances may need to come before March, when voters will be asked to approve a measure that would impose a moratorium on new developments that require significant variances.
Mr. Ingels bristled at the notion that the development would further gentrify the neighborhood.
“We wanted to embrace and enhance the kind of architecture that is there, to build something with flexibility and the raw quality of manufacturing buildings,” he said.
Mr. Bertoni said the plans offered a “very good start” to work with the existing fabric of the area.
• On Monday, members of the Electoral College will cast their presidential votes. While Donald J. Trump’s triumph will be officially sealed, Hillary Clinton will be the candidate of choice for California’s 55 electors. Watch live video of the Sacramento event at 2 p.m.
• On Tuesday, directors of California’s state pension fund will discuss whether to lower their investment targets, a move that could set off more costs for taxpayers and cities.
• On Wednesday, more than 180 homeless people who have died in Orange County in 2016 will be honored at a memorial service.
• Sunday is Christmas. But not everything will be closed. Sea World in San Diego, Legoland in Carlsbad, Disneyland in Anaheim and Madame Tussauds in San Francisco are among the places open for business.
A reader photo shows San Diego’s seaside community of La Jolla.
Andrew Oh, 26, said he captured the scenic piece of coastline during a helicopter tour of the San Diego area a few weeks ago.
The image shows the Village of La Jolla, a commercial area about 10 miles up the coast from downtown San Diego that is known for its beauty as well as its affluent restaurants and galleries.
The sandy stretch of beach in the foreground is the popular La Jolla Cove. At the bottom right of the photo, Point La Jolla juts into the ocean.
Mr. Oh, a software engineer, said he was getting ready to move to San Francisco from San Diego for a new job and went up in the helicopter with a few friends as a last hurrah.
The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Davis. Follow him on Twitter.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and attended U.C. Berkeley.