It’s a bluer Christmas without the soul singer Sharon Jones, who died on Nov. 18. This Claymation video highlights the power of her voice and the retro-R&B savvy of the Dap-Kings band; it also has an ecumenical twist. J.P.
Ms. Ballerini’s voice, sweet, strong and clear, is a natural fit for this Rodgers and Hammerstein holiday staple, which provided the title of Mr. Alexander’s debut album last year. They’re otherwise a bit of an odd couple — glittery young country spark plug meets soft-spoken jazz pianist, a decade her junior — but stranger things have happened in the name of holiday synergy. N.C.
A gentle, surprisingly touching and warmly nostalgic duet by two of hip-hop’s rising stars. Dej Loaf preaches the virtue of family, and Kodak Black — out of jail but still facing a criminal sexual conduct charge in South Carolina — humbly offers thanks for his talents. J.C.
A few chords, some sleigh bells and a heavy dollop of reverb: welcome to the new song by Best Coast, released in conjunction with a new holiday special for kids on Amazon. (The special, “An American Girl Story — Maryellen 1955: Extraordinary Christmas” is a tie-in to the American Girl doll company.) Sonically, it’s Best Coast in classic retro form, evoking a Phil Spector girl group; lyrically it’s a boilerplate message about the power of imagination. “Did you know, when you fall asleep,” Bethany Cosentino sings, “You can be anything?” She adds: “Dreams become reality/On Christmas, and everyday.” N.C.
Last year the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra released an album of recent highlights from Big Band Holidays, its seasonal concert program. This year, in addition to a 10-city tour, the band issued a limited-edition vinyl single in the shape of a Christmas tree. Side A features a surging arrangement of “God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen,” while Side B consists of a stylish “Little Drummer Boy.” The playing is sharp and committed, and the holiday spirit is palpable. N.C.
The gospel singer Kim Burrell hails from Houston, Tx., which also happens to be the hometown of the keyboardist and producer Robert Glasper. Their collaboration on this ubiquitous Christmas carol is a low-simmering stock, full of comfort and easy charisma. Ms. Burrell sings it entirely in the sweet spot of her range, never showing a trace of strain, and Mr. Glasper adds a sinuous R&B chord progression, with help from his regular band mates, the drummer Mark Colenburg and the bassist Derrick Hodge. N.C.
Julien Baker copes with holiday depression in a gradually self-consoling song for “Jingle Yay,” a benefit album for the mental-health service provider Punk Talks. Strumming an acoustic guitar and sometimes joined by a sprinkling of piano, tentative at first, she recalls moving back in with her parents — “still haven’t figured anything out” — and imagines hanging herself with Christmas lights on someone’s decorated lawn.  J.P.
There may not be a more insistent new ode to holiday escapism than the new song by Nellie McKay. It’s a Christmas inducement to light up an aromatic botanical (not frankincense), arranged as a lite-reggae ditty. Ms. McKay sings the melody in tandem with the Minneapolis soul singer Maurice Jacox, and in the video she cheerfully takes her message to the streets of New York, costumed as a cannabis leaf. She can’t help but insert some pointed commentary about the prison-industrial complex, but her main point is more lighthearted, at least on the surface. “You want the strife of humankind to finally cease?” she raps. “Start getting sublime on the peaceful leaf.” N.C.
Despite the title, and a chorus that declares “Hallelujah!,” this isn’t a Christmas song. From the soundtrack of the animated movie “Sing,” it’s a joyous, uptempo declaration of love that’s also a very savvy update of 1960s soul and rock, written by the 21st-century producers and hitmakers Ryan Tedder, Benny Blanco and Francis Farewell Starlite (a.k.a. Francis and the Lights). The drums have the crispness of hip-hop, but the structure is based in the blues and there are strong hints of Ray Charles, James Brown and the Beatles. Ariana Grande, flirting and swooping up to high notes, may not know those sources first-hand, but Stevie Wonder most assuredly does. J.P.
This year’s most joyfully raunchy holiday number, bar none. Unruly! J.C.
Sufjan Stevens’s “Sister Winter” is a study in regret and estrangement that ends in holiday greetings; it starts out fragile and apologetic but turns hearty. The Silver Lake Chorus, which devises elaborate arrangements of indie-rock songs, makes it a communal a cappella piece full of ethereal oohs and ahs, making way for handclaps and la-las as it prettily revs up. The video clip captures the music-nerd charm of the project, with smiling, slightly rumpled, slightly gawky singers glancing away from the camera’s long tracking shot in a white-walled house without a stick of furniture. J.P.
Well, sooner or later someone had to realize that traditional minor-mode “Carol of the Bells” could align neatly with the cellos in the “Game of Thrones” theme. The three French women who sing in L.E.J. (also known as Elijay) specialize in clever, precise mashups, and they execute this one neatly, harmonizing or trading phrases and switching between the carol and the theme. The merry tidings get a wry, ominous undercurrent. J.P.
Low, a long-running indie-rock band from Duluth, often writes quiet songs that move in slow motion. But “Some Hearts (at Christmas Time)” is far eerier than usual. A lone electric guitar is picked slowly in a sustained electronic ambience, mostly a drone that’s flecked with bits of voices run backwards. With gently keening vocals, the song works out a kind of emotional equation, gazing at peaceful hearts and ones that are tormented even at Christmastime with equally serene sympathy. J.P.
Hip-hop holiday music enthusiasts have a bounty in the new compilation “Hip-Hop & R&B Christmas Gold,” a set of unlikely seasonal music from a wide and not totally orderly range of rap stars and almost-stars. Take this borderline comic Onyx song about holiday hostility — “Santa wanna know if i’m naughty or nice/I’m in the trap blowing trees with the 40s on ice.” It’s an encouragingly disruptive take on tradition, on a collection that also includes Cam’ron, Camp Lo, Celly Cel(!) and the Ying Yang Twins. J.C.
The Mexican singer Carla Morrison’s six-track Christmas EP, “La Niña del Tambor,” includes this new song among familiar ones. It’s a prayer of gratitude and devotion, sung in her pristine soprano, building almost like a power ballad before returning to humility. J.P.
On the plus side, we have arrived at the point where a New Orleans bounce song can be on the soundtrack of a mainstream Hollywood production (in this case, “Office Christmas Party”). On the down side . . . well, let’s not dwell on the details. Big Freedia does an effective translation of bounce bawdiness into holiday exuberance. And in the video, every square person who comes into the frame ends up a licentious reveler — Big Freedia’s powers remain undimmed. J.C.