Cyril D. Tyson, who led antipoverty programs from inside and outside government in New York City and Newark in the 1960s in a tense racial atmosphere punctuated by violence, died on Thursday at his home in North Salem, N.Y. He was 89.
His wife of 64 years, Sunchita, said he died after several strokes.
“Athlete, educator, civil rights activist, public servant, dad,” his son Neil deGrasse Tyson, an astrophysicist, a television host and the director of the Hayden Planetarium in Manhattan, said on Twitter.
Cyril Tyson was a former college track star who had worked on the staffs of the New York City Commission on Intergroup Relations and its successor, the Commission on Human Rights, when, in 1963, he joined Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited, a new, government-financed antipoverty organization that became widely known as Haryou.
He played a major role in designing the group’s programs, which were aimed at improving the area’s public schools and its residents’ job skills and opportunities. It included after-school remedial study centers and on-the-job training projects.
Urban affairs specialists at the time recommended such programs to remedy shortcomings that, they said, fueled racial unrest. In July 1964, the fatal shooting of a black teenager by a white police lieutenant led to rioting and looting in Harlem that left one person dead and many injured and caused extensive property damage.
He also defended welfare recipients, saying they had been unjustly stigmatized.
While he worked on shaping Haryou’s programs, a fight for control of the group flared between its most prominent founder, Kenneth B. Clark — the psychologist and educator whose studies influenced the Supreme Court a decade earlier when it ruled against racial segregation in public schools — and the Rev. Adam Clayton Powell Jr., the congressman from Harlem.
Mr. Clark, with whom Mr. Tyson had worked closely, resigned from the group, and Mr. Tyson, then the acting executive director, followed suit in late 1964, when Mr. Powell was about to prevail in his choice for a permanent executive director. Mr. Tyson became executive director of the nonprofit United Community Corporation in Newark, newly created to run that troubled city’s antipoverty programs.
The Newark organization, too, was soon involved in a battle with politicians. A City Council committee demanded that United Community be replaced by a commission controlled by City Hall. The committee contended that the group lacked controls to keep it from becoming a “grab bag and a pork barrel” and that it paid excessive salaries. United Community said the “real issue” was a desire for political control over the programs.
Mr. Tyson was later named commissioner of the New York Manpower and Career Development Agency, where he centralized efforts to help the poor find work. The “piecemeal approach of the past,” with programs carried out by many public and private agencies, was rife with inefficiencies, he said.
But he found critics in New York as well. A City Council committee said his agency’s job-training courses had failed to meet the needs of business. Mr. Tyson argued otherwise. He offered statistics from August 1970 showing that the agency had placed nearly 19,000 people in jobs and trained 15,000 others in the previous year.
He left the agency that year for a fellowship at the Institute of Politics at Harvard. Later in the 1970s and in the ’80s, he was a public and community affairs official at City College of New York and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, where he was also a transportation planning official. He wrote several books based on his years in antipoverty work.
Cyril deGrasse Tyson was born on Oct. 19, 1927, in Manhattan to Albert Tyson, a security guard, and Altima Tyson, who was active in community affairs.
He competed in military track and field events while in the Army. As a member of the track team at St. Francis College in Brooklyn, he was the metropolitan intercollegiate 600-yard champion in 1950 and 1951. He earned a master’s degree in social work at Columbia University.
Mr. Tyson married Sunchita Feliciano in 1952. In addition to his wife and his son Neil, he is survived by another son, Stephen Joseph Tyson, a painter; a daughter, Lynn Antipas Tyson, a business executive; a sister, Joan Fortuné; and six grandchildren.