Given concerns about global warming, should we promote greater use of nuclear energy?
To the Editor: Re “To Save the Planet, Go Nuclear,” by Senators Lamar Alexander and Sheldon Whitehouse (Op-Ed, Dec. 22): The writers appear to have forgotten both the renewable revolution and the dangers of nuclear power. Today solar and wind power are lower in cost than even the existing nuclear plants, much less the runaway cost of new nuclear reactors. They also ignore the danger of nuclear power despite the very real risk of a huge release of deadly radiation from Fukushima-type accidents and the highly radioactive waste that they generate, for which there is no safe resting place after a 50-year search.
The real path “to save the planet” is the agreement we’ve reached in California with Pacific Gas and Electric to replace the Diablo Canyon nuclear plant with a portfolio of efficiency and renewable energy. The utility itself agreed that renewables are cheaper than continuing to run that old nuclear plant.
The writers are senior advisers to Friends of the Earth. Mr. Freeman is former chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority.
To the Editor: As a physicist I absolutely agree that nuclear power is essential for mitigating global warming, as I explain in a video of a talk I gave. The risks of nuclear power are far exceeded by the actuality of fatalities from political instability due to global warming. We are at almost half a million deaths and counting in Syria alone. The civil war there was precipitated in large part by the worsening (due to global warming) of a drought that began in 1998. Millions of failed farmers migrated to the cities, leading to social unrest and civil war. The refugee crisis has also induced political instability in Europe and America.
The intermittence of wind and solar and the lack of cost-effective energy storage preclude achieving the necessary reductions in carbon dioxide with “renewables.” The only carbon-free source of continuous power is nuclear.
Modern reactors are far safer than those in Chernobyl or Fukushima. Neither of these designs would have met current Nuclear Regulatory Commission standards. We should be replacing our old reactors with safer new ones and expanding the total number.
To the Editor: The senators are right, we should level the playing field. Let’s start by repealing the most excessive energy subsidy of all: the one provided by the Price-Anderson Act. Its curtailment would require that nuclear energy companies assume full responsibility for the cost of any damage beyond that covered by their liability insurance in the event of an accident. If advanced reactor designs do, indeed, reduce the threat of a meltdown, then perpetuation of this corporate welfare program should no longer be necessary.
Nuclear waste does not dilute and disappear, as industry would have us believe, but is blown by the winds, carried by the tides, seeps into earth and groundwater, and makes its way into the food chain and us, adding to the sum total of cancers and birth defects throughout the world. For good reasons, the industry crumbled under its costs, inefficiencies and dangers at the end of the last century; let it rest.
El Cerrito, Calif.
The writer is the author of “The Woman Who Knew Too Much: Alice Stewart and the Secrets of Radiation,” a biography of the pioneering radiation epidemiologist.
To the Editor: Senators Lamar Alexander and Sheldon Whitehouse make an excellent case for nuclear power. The United States was on the road to the development of safe, modular reactors in the 1960s that used the abundant element thorium. This design has two major safety features. One is that it operates at ordinary atmospheric pressure and does not require pressure vessels that could potentially explode. The other major safety feature is that if the reactor overheats, which has been the major cause of nuclear power plant accidents, the liquid salt thorium reactor simply stops working and automatically cools.
This brilliant design was rejected by the United States government at the time because thorium reactors did not produce plutonium, needed for nuclear weapons, as was accomplished in uranium-based reactors. Uranium-based reactor designs thus became entrenched in the United States, as well as in other nuclear weapons states. Society has been living with that legacy ever since. While considerable research and development will be needed to produce reliable thorium reactors for public use, success can be achieved. The goal of ameliorating global warming should make this achievement the centerpiece for energy policy in the industrial world.
The writer is emeritus professor of technology management at Stevens Institute of Technology.
To the Editor: The senators make great points. But, climate aside, one of the biggest benefits of nuclear power is that it creates thousands of construction jobs in the short term and hundreds of high-paying technical jobs throughout the operating life of a plant. For each 1,000 megawatts of installed capacity, nuclear creates approximately 5,000 jobs during construction, compared with only 1,000 jobs each for natural gas and wind. During operation, a nuclear plant produces approximately 500 jobs, compared with only 60 and 90 jobs for natural gas and wind, respectively.
Nuclear energy presents a fantastic opportunity for President-elect Donald Trump to take a leadership role in creating high-quality, lasting jobs without sacrificing any of the progress we’ve made on reducing emissions.
Mill Valley, Calif.
The writer is a lawyer with clients in the nuclear energy industry.
To the Editor: Should I laugh or cry? Lamar Alexander and Sheldon Whitehouse make what might be a compelling argument for increasing our use of nuclear energy in normal times. But these are not normal times. With Rick Perry likely to be in charge of the Energy Department and a new administration bent on cutting back regulations and oversight, Chernobyl here we come. Could we please reconsider this proposal once we have grown-ups running our government again?
