Our guide to plays and musicals coming to New York stages — and a few last-chance picks of shows that are about to close. Our reviews of open shows are at nytimes.com/reviews/theater.
COIL FESTIVAL (performances start on Jan. 3) As PS122 awaits a return to its permanent home, the theater’s annual festival of experimental performance unwinds in January. Ducks, clairvoyance, gaming, children’s whispers and Greek tragedy appear in works from Nicola Gunn, Britt Hatzius, Yehuda Duenyas, Yara Travieso and Forced Entertainment.
THE EXPONENTIAL FESTIVAL (performances start on Jan. 4) Eight Brooklyn theaters band together to co-produce this festival of some of the borough’s most exciting interdisciplinary performance. Highlights of this year’s lineup include Kate Benson’s “[Porto],” Witness Relocation’s “The Loon,” Title:Point’s “Chroma Key” and “The Last Class: A Jazzercize Play,” in which select audience members can break a sweat with the cast.
PROTOTYPE: OPERA/THEATER/NOW (performances start on Jan. 5) This festival doesn’t go in for spangles, chorus girls or tap numbers, but it does celebrate innovative hybrids of music and theater. This year’s premieres include an adaptation of Lars von Trier’s “Breaking the Waves” and a piece about public dissection.
UNDER THE RADAR (performances start on Jan. 4) Is your performance sonar pinging? The Public Theater’s annual festival of innovative live arts returns with a roster of hometown favorites and visiting darlings, including several site-specific shows. This year’s schedule includes a new audience-involving piece from 600 Highwaymen, a coming-of-age tale from Manual Cinema, an espionage exercise from Rimini Protokoll and lost revues performed aboard the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum.
‘MATILDA THE MUSICAL’ at the Shubert Theater (closes on Jan. 1). The most satisfying and subversive musical ever to come out of Britain. This adaptation of Roald Dahl’s novel is an exhilarating tale of empowerment, told from the perspective of that most powerless group, little children.
