Hey, its all good since we should be loving Assad's military patrons, the Russians, right?
We should send Ed over to Syria so he can preach Technocracy to the masses.
Pretty sad, over 400K people killed due to our inaction.
pfftt... we could have killed way more than that.
A military presence to have prevented this would be another lifetime commitment for our military, as the differences between sides would never be resolved. I don't think Americans at the time were in any mood to make another long term military project with no end. You ignore the real reason for the bloodshed, the determination of the Russians to preserve their foothold in Damascus at any human cost.
Obama did everything except hold the door open for Putin.
You ignore the real reason for the bloodshed, the determination of the Russians to preserve their foothold in Damascus at any human cost.
You ignore the fact that Obama appears soft and passive to his foreign policies there, no strength. Red Line a big joke, his bluff was called. Should have taken out Assad's air force on that day. That is what empowers people like Putin, pussycats like Obama.
And what do you think your new king will do? Tell us what do you think we should have done to prevent this?
I guarantee Trump will lift the sanctions that Obama put in place against Putin.
Oh and BTW those weapons were destroyed the objective was met without involving ourselves in a bloody civil war.
I just mentioned taking out his air force. that would have been a good start.
Sanctions never work, not a big fan.
Taking out whose Air Force, Putins?
Assad's... right after he violated the "Red Line" threat. Planes were all lined up and ready to be destroyed. Sitting ducks.
And what do you think your new king will do?
The Trumpian response depends on how mean Vanity Fair is to him the day he has to make a decision on Syria.
Admit it. Don't you want to eat at the restaurant just to really know how bad it is?
Hey now. Don't go calling Obama soft and passive. He is threatening Russia!
Thanks to Obama it is officially FUBAR. Putin and Assad have won, game over. Old king (Obama) did nothing. Game frickin over.
I would visit it to witness its splendor, but I wouldn't eat there. If I'm going to get overpriced NYC food, I'm going to at least get good food.
Of course. He wants to leave us at war with Russia, or at least a renewed cold war. As big of shitpile that he can muster in the next month for Donald. That's ok. No crayons for him.
You need to think of this as a science experiment. Can food be that bad? Your followers want to know.
Your followers want to know.
The cucks' voice has been heard! For science!
Still not getting the use of that term.
Don't ask him to explain his jokes ****.
Just sit there and watch my jokes.
Joke = that tiny thing between your legs, right?
Your mom isn't that tiny.
Which is why she said she didn't feel anything.
Just like with your mom, it's not my problem if you finished.
I guess like my Mom, I failed to notice that you weren't.
At least your mom doesn't need to be told when to leave.
She didn't even know you began.
Getting the impression Steven and Brian D. are brothers.