Brian Stewart told people so. For four historically triumphant years, he contended that the Connecticut women’s basketball team was greater than the sum of Coach Geno Auriemma’s prize recruits, a conga line of achievers that included Stewart’s daughter, a once-in-a-generation talent by the name of Breanna.
Daddy Stewart — a recreational gym rat in his spare time from his job as a technician at a Syracuse hospital and a motivational conspirator in his daughter’s career — could foresee the Connecticut beat downs happening this season despite the exodus last spring of the players who would become the first three chosen in the W.N.B.A. draft.
He could even imagine that the Huskies, supposedly rebuilding after four consecutive national championships, would be where they are: 11-0, riding an 86-game winning streak, four victories shy of the N.C.A.A. record — women’s and men’s — that Connecticut established in 2010.
Well, he could almost imagine it.
Among the 11 victims are Florida State, Baylor, Notre Dame and Ohio State. All still ranked No. 12 or higher in last week’s poll. Next up: a visit on Thursday night to unbeaten Maryland, ranked No.3 in the USA Today coaches poll, and probably the last serious obstruction between the Huskies and the shattering of their own record.
“To do what they’re doing is a testament to the M.O. of the team and the program,” Stewart said.
Which is, in his informed opinion?
This season, unavoidably, is about Auriemma, about putting to rest the notion that his record 11 career Division I titles (again, for men’s and women’s basketball) have primarily been about charismatically pitching to recruits and their parents.
It has also become, at least thus far, a thumbs-down rejoinder to the women’s sports degraders, forever skeptical or outright dismissive of Connecticut’s dominance, based on the false presumption that the Huskies seldom had worthy competition.
What the critics have failed to grasp, Stewart said, is that the success is as much about how Connecticut recruits as it is about whom.
Before we go further, we must put comeuppance into proper UConn context.
Four rotation players did return, including Katie Lou Samuelson, the country’s highest-rated 2015 recruit; a solid veteran in Kia Nurse; and two skilled forwards in Napheesa Collier and Gabby Williams. The team also gained the nation’s top point guard prospect, the freshman Crystal Dangerfield.
Conversely, Auriemma had no preseason All-Americans, no front-line size which with to make the rim area a no-trespass zone and a bench that typically goes no deeper than two players. And his primary competitors, believed to be Baylor and Duke, were returning their most formidable players.
And that could certainly happen, because this Connecticut team is not universally feared in the way last season’s Huskies were.
In its opener at Florida State, Connecticut was one converted jumper from losing at the buzzer. The victory over Baylor required a breakout performance from the still froshlike, erratic Dangerfield. If the winning streak ends at Maryland, no one will be shocked.
Or devastated, in Auriemma’s stated case.
This, of course, was the coach playing it coy, having it both ways. Auriemma fully comprehends what another unbeaten season — or fifth consecutive championship — would mean for his already unmatched legacy.
Running the table would also raise the possibility of the patently ridiculous — given the return next season of Auriemma’s current core roster; the much-anticipated addition of Azura Stevens, a 6-foot-6 transfer from Duke; and the arrival of another heralded recruiting class.
But why speculate about the future when the present is so unfamiliarly gratifying? When Auriemma is, for now, still No. 1 and people, for once, are asking how.
The answers, in part, invariably point to him, and his M.O.
The Huskies hustle: “I watch the games, and you can see it plain as day — they’re running hard down the court when the other team is jogging,” Brian Stewart said.
They pass: “They move the ball better than any team in the country,” Jeff Mittie, the coach of Kansas State, said this month after the Huskies handed his team its first loss.
Intimidation: When DePaul visited Storrs on Dec. 1, the Blue Demons were ranked No. 15 — and trailed after one quarter, 37-6.
They would appear to be acing a Berlitz course in basketball leadership, but certainly realize they have done nothing yet except to reinstall a burden of championship expectation that they as players — along with their parents — will eventually feel.
Not Brian Stewart, who has been there, done that. These days, he keeps long-distance tabs on Breanna, who is playing professionally in China after her rookie W.N.B.A. season in Seattle, but he still routinely tunes in to watch the Huskies, as he did for the previous four seasons.
He is still confident of victory, just much calmer.
“I enjoy the games much more now,” he said.