Like salmon heading upriver to spawn, Noah and Alison got back on the boat to Block Island on Sunday’s night’s episode of “The Affair.” They had sailed this route before — in Season 1, Episode 4 — with momentous results: the consummation of their affair and the first complete account of the death of Alison’s son, the Eros and Thanatos from which everything in the show has flowed.
This time Alison said, “I’m not going to sleep with you.” And when they got off the ferry, the Dirty Squid boutique, where they had once groped each other in the changing room, had gone out of business, seemingly a metaphor for their broken relationship. After all, the only reason Alison agreed to take what was painted as a day trip was that Noah had promised to sign divorce papers in return. But — it’s “The Affair!” By the 55th minute, there they were, checked in to a hotel (the Narragansett this time rather than the Inn at Old Harbor) and getting naked.
The episode was an elegiac bookend to the earlier Block Island excursion, and it continued in the autumnal, prestige-picture style of last week’s Montauk-set hour. And like last week, it considered at length Alison’s mental state and her ability to care for Joanie. It was an Alison-Noah episode (about 57 percent Alison) but it was sequential rather than overlapping, so we didn’t see events from different points of view. The one really noticeable difference between the chapters was Noah’s mood — strangely giddy and typically juvenile from Alison’s perspective, subdued and thoughtful from his own.
The next morning he made eggs and brightly suggested Block Island, to which she responded by handing him divorce papers. Noah balked (“I don’t think I’m ready to give up on us yet”) and then Cole showed up. Awkward. In what played as a halfhearted attempt at farce staging, Alison hustled Noah out the back door while Cole came in the front. Cole — from her perspective — whined about his guilt over having recently slept with her and once again questioned her fitness as a mother.
On the boat and at the island, Noah, in Alison’s eyes, was irritatingly cheerful — whooping and forcing her to strike “Titanic” poses, loudly singing songs from “Camelot.” But he was also supportive, taking her side against Cole. Coming upon a house he claimed was closed for the season, Noah stripped — our first look this season at a naked Dominic West — and plunged into the suspiciously heated hot tub. As always, Noah’s wild child was starting to draw out Alison’s, and pretty soon she was naked in the hot tub too.
Now Noah took over the story, and because he fell asleep a couple times — first fully clothed, holding Alison’s hands, and later fully naked — we saw a couple of prison flashbacks, fleshing out his relationship to the sadistic guard Gunther and further explaining his post-traumatic stress. Gunther taunted Noah by saying whatever demeaning thing he could think of about Alison. Worse, he masturbated on a photograph of her (off camera, thankfully). Worse yet, he stole Noah’s only copy of the new manuscript he was working on, about a high school swimmer. That was what goaded Noah into a frenzy that got him beaten by riot-equipped guards.
Back in the present, after being spooked by another possible Gunther sighting, Noah supplied the episode’s big reveal.  So now we know why Noah and Alison are tortured-soul mates. “Why do I still love you so much?” he asked.  Lines don’t come much better than that, and it was just a hug, a kiss on the forehead and boom — tender, softly lighted sex that stood in contrast to the harsh up-against-the-wall coupling in Season 1.
Back in Montauk, Noah signed the divorce papers and it was understood that they wouldn’t see each other again, except that we know they will. Driving back to New Jersey, Noah stopped at a light and was violently rear-ended by a pickup truck. In his rearview he saw — or thought he saw — Gunther. Pursued by the truck, he wrecked the car the university had lent Juliette (which can’t be good) and ended the episode standing in the road, vainly looking for his tormentor.
• The show’s narrative continuity is always touch and go, but one disjunction in this episode was particularly noticeable. Noah asked Alison on the ferry why she hadn’t answered his prison letters, and she replied that she hadn’t received them while she was away in rehab. But then we saw that she had visited him in prison after her rehab. It’s inconceivable that Noah, even though distracted by his problems with Gunther, wouldn’t have asked her then about the letters, months before the ferry ride.
• And on the ever rewarding subject of the ambiguous Scotty Lockhart case: Alison asked Noah why they hadn’t just gone to the police after Scotty was killed. (If I were Noah, being asked this after I’d served my three years in prison might agitate me, but he took it well.) The answer, of course, is that Noah was covering for Helen, and Alison’s question confirmed that she still doesn’t know that Helen was the driver. But if that’s the case, why didn’t Alison just go to the police herself, which, as far as she knew, would have kept Noah out of jail? We can only wonder.
• And finally: Noah’s been in prison for more than two years and Gunther the guard doesn’t know what he was convicted of?