Four shows running through Dec. 23 at Mary Boone Gallery, 745 Fifth Avenue, and Mary Boone Gallery, 541 West 24th Street, Chelsea; Lisson Gallery, 504 West 24th Street, Chelsea; and Jeffrey Deitch, 18 Wooster Street, SoHo; maryboonegallery.com; lissongallery.com; deitch.com.
The Brooklyn Museum’s 2014 retrospective of the Chinese artist Ai Weiwei contained one of his best pieces: six half-scale dioramas documenting his 81-day incarceration by the Chinese government. It made unusually visceral his continual harassment by two guards, who either crowded him physically or interrogated him.
Now Mr. Ai is back, with four synchronized shows in Manhattan galleries — a Damien Hirst-like feat — presenting far more generic achievements of Conceptual sculptural spectacle, enabled one way or another by appropriation, whether of found objects, materials or other people’s troubles. Assorted monumental sculptures and installations backed by wallpaper dominate at the galleries of Boone and Lisson. The Deitch installation underscores Mr. Ai’s activist role, in which genuine concern tends to be tinged with opportunism.
Small found objects used to make something big is the prevailing installation-art convention at Mary Boone’s uptown gallery: a large circular field of 40,000 teapot spouts, all rejects from a Chinese porcelain factory that dates to the 12th century. Pale in tone, they at first suggest severed fingers — especially when you consider the wallpaper design of arms culminating in extended middle fingers. (It’s a reprise of an earlier Conceptual work by the artist.) But as you recognize the spouts, their sheer survival over the centuries — the durability of Chinese culture — becomes more impressive than anything Mr. Ai has done to them.
The best sculpture of the lot is at the Chelsea Boone: a magnificent twisting, almost cyclonic tree trunk whose massive branches are themselves bluntly attached tree trunks — an arboreal Frankenstein monster. The wallpaper here, patterned mostly with gold security cameras, provides a weak backdrop. Both Boone shows have smaller works that can be quite tacky, like a grid of four small Warhol-style self-portraits made of Legos.
At Lisson, the wallpaper improves, while the sculpture drops a notch. On one wall, long bands of black-and-white stylized friezes of battles, with lines of refugees and marching troops, recall Assyrian and Greek art but also depict the present. The floor at Lisson is held by seven raw iron casts of large tree trunks or root systems, dusty with rust. The size and obvious weight of these objects can’t help impressing; the forms and surfaces, too. But perhaps we’re due a moratorium on the exhausted strategy of casting large things in solid metal.
At Deitch in SoHo, the multipart installation “Laundromat” is more grounded in the real world, stressing Mr. Ai’s role as political activist and hunter-gatherer of materials and information. The piece is a result of trips to refugee camps in Greece, on the island of Lesbos and at Idomeni, near the Macedonian border, during which Mr. Ai or his assistants took the color snapshots that completely cover the walls.
When Idomeni was evacuated and bulldozed in May, the refugees, fleeing Syria and other trouble spots, left belongings behind. Mr. Ai had hundreds of pounds of clothing and shoes gathered and transported to his large Berlin studio. There they were mended, washed, ironed and organized by type on rolling racks: baby rompers, sweaters, men’s shirts.
At Deitch, 39 of these racks coalesce into a Goodwill store full — as they all are — of lifeless evidence of disrupted lives. Once more, we see that everyone in the world wears the same clothes, and also that anyone could suddenly find himself or herself vulnerable to war and displacement.
Ultimately, the hard facts are most gripping: A short video shows the refugees trying to establish a foothold, marching along roads and battling police officers and soldiers. Then the scene shifts to the privileged quiet of Mr. Ai’s studio, where his assistants prepare the garments for exhibition. More hard facts line the floor, which is papered with printouts of refugee-related news reports collected and disseminated by Mr. Ai and his studio. Some include Mr. Ai, the art-star activist and observer, tangentially involved, hoping to shine a brighter light on the refugees’ plight before moving on to his next crisis or exhibition.
Through Dec. 18. Gavin Brown’s Enterprise, 291 Grand Street, Lower East Side; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , gavinbrown.biz.
Rob Pruitt has made nearly 3,000 “Obama Paintings,” one for every day of the president’s administration. And each day until Jan. 20, he will continue to make these quick, expressive, mildly abstracted paintings, drawn from the day’s news or Mr. Obama’s private life.
Each canvas is airbrushed with a corner-to-corner fade from red to blue, onto which is projected a news photograph of Mr. Obama doing something — say, hanging a medal around a soldier’s neck, meeting a foreign head of state or eating a sandwich. Mr. Pruitt then sketches over the projection in white paint, with an adroitly businesslike hand.
Some of the paintings — which together constitute a single piece — hang unframed on the walls of Gavin Brown’s Grand Street gallery, and on two extra walls built down the length of the space. Most of them, though, wrapped in plastic and leaning one way or the other like LPs, are in the built-in shelves behind those two additional walls. They are in no particular order.
The installation illuminates both the strange power of repetition — how something as evanescent as flickering news images, by force of multiplication, can become immovable and overwhelming — and the washing, tidal action of historical memory. But what’s especially poignant is to see this particular black man, at this particular moment in history, painted over and over in whitewash.
Through Dec. 18. 47 Canal, 291 Grand Street, second floor, Lower East Side; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , 47canal.us.
Several of contemporary photography’s favorite arguments and concerns are addressed, either obliquely or directly, in Michele Abeles’s smart, seductive show “Zebra,” at 47 Canal. One is the difference between objects and images, which has been thrown into question by 3-D printing. Ms. Abeles sticks mostly to a 2-D format, but a couple of works here are encased in large white ceramic tiles, blurring the lines between photography and sculpture.
Another idea is the continuing encounter between images and text. Like the “Zebra” of the show’s title, which is neither black nor white, Ms. Abeles observes in a pleasingly cryptic news release that “Zebra is a word that reads like an image.” The gallery’s website includes the word “Zebra” emblazoned vertically down a screenshot of the New York Times home page, accentuating the way images and text work together to deliver messages.
Photography’s historical role as a commercial medium is suggested in photographs of retail worker’s hands, which Ms. Abeles uploaded to a tablet, applying hand lotion, water, paint or spit to the screen and rephotographing the images to achieve a painterly effect. Several of the image-objects here also feature large black spirals, suggesting the works as literal vortexes into which you might be pulled.
These “artistic” interventions imply the hand of the artist. After all, art, Ms. Abeles reminds us, is in competition with a universe of other images. It had better be wild, enigmatic and arresting. Ms. Abeles’s work continues to be.
Through Dec. 17. Paula Cooper Gallery, 521 West 21st Street, Chelsea; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , paulacoopergallery.com.
Paul Pfeiffer’s digital deconstruction of the spectacle of professional sports has been mostly visual: for example, isolating the image of a lone basketball player in a crowded arena, creating a mood of existential dread. In his newest work, “Three Figures in a Room,” Mr. Pfeiffer tackles the sound of the boxing match between Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Manny Pacquiao in Las Vegas in May 2015.
The fight unfolds on one large screen, but the sound is strange, loud and clean, with no ambient noise. It accents the violence of boxing, especially when the action shifts to slow-motion and deeper sounds.
A second, smaller screen synced to the first shows the fight on a computer monitor sitting on a desk in a messy room. The soundtrack jumps back and forth between screens. Gradually, we see that the room holds three Foley sound-effects artists who shuffle their feet and slam boxing gloves together in time to the boxers’ footwork and blows. The match is being dubbed — hyper-realized, made more movielike — for mass consumption. Joking among themselves, the men analyze and adjust the sounds; one requests “skin sound” for a punch that slides off a fighter’s abdomen. They are boxing connoisseurs skillfully pursuing a parallel craft that replaces conflict with camaraderie.
The show also includes three new boxing match videos from the artist’s “Caryatids” series. In each, Mr. Pfeiffer has eliminated one of the fighters; invisible punches rain down on the remaining man, his body and face bending and caving to their force. At times, the lone fighters seem to flagellate themselves. The show is a medium-specific, alternately beautiful and disturbing public service announcement on the dangers of boxing.