This is not just about Russian hacking of our election, but about cybersecurity in general. If Russia gets away with this because our president-elect doesn’t accept our intelligence agencies’ assessment, it’s open season for any foreign power to hack and disseminate information considered advantageous to its own welfare. This includes not only hostile regimes (Iran), but trading partners (China, India) and “friendly” governments (Israel) as well.
Our cybersecurity has been lagging behind technological advances for years. Rather than deride the intelligence that we are at risk, Donald Trump and the G.O.P. should be vowing to make ours the most cybersecure nation in the world. That is what would have happened had the Trump campaign emails been released, and Hillary Clinton been elected.
If Donald Trump can be so dismissive of the American intelligence community’s consensus, now made public, of Russia’s cyber meddling in our presidential election on his behalf, what happens after his inauguration when that intelligence community reports exclusively to him?
Put another way, what future intelligence will President Trump dismiss or withhold from the American public, however accurate and alarming, if he finds it politically inconvenient or personally embarrassing?
Extreme partisanship continues to erode the foundations of our democracy. It is up to our elected officials to work for the good of the people they represent, not for individual or party power. Republicans and Democrats must unite to investigate Russian interference in the 2016 election. A committee similar to the Watergate committee must be appointed and its hearings televised. The Russian hacking is an attack on our country, and regardless of political affiliation every American should demand a strong response. Where is the outrage? Let a nonpartisan investigation reveal the people involved and the extent of their criminality.
Ariel Dorfman eloquently argues that what Russia allegedly did in hacking the 2016 United States presidential election, the United States has often done to other countries, including his native Chile (“Now America Knows How Chile Felt,” Op-Ed, Dec. 17).
Mr. Dorfman is correct: If Russia helped Donald Trump win the White House, that undermines Mr. Trump’s legitimacy, but it must not be the occasion for retaliation. In the context of nuclear superpowers, retaliation would be extremely dangerous.
It is past time to recognize that cyber war is nothing less than war, with extremely serious consequences. This is the moment to press for a global agreement banning state-sponsored cyber war, whether attacks on a nation’s power grid or its electoral process.
While a treaty would not stop nonstate actors, it would help isolate perpetrators as rogues and reduce the risk that cyberattacks would slide into conventional or nuclear conflict.
President Obama said in effect that he did not want to give the appearance of meddling in the election. If the trade-off was between the president’s appearance of not meddling and the American people having to put up with four disastrous years, I think that the choice should have been clear.
Re “Obama Vows U.S. Reprisal for Moscow’s Meddling” (news article, Dec. 17): President Obama stated, “I think there is no doubt that when any foreign government tries to impact the integrity of our elections that we need to take action.” Yet in April 2016, President Obama tried to influence the Brexit vote by using scare tactics through his comment that Britain would be in the “back of the queue” with regard to any trade deal with the United States.
Clearly President Obama is being hypocritical with his recent comments. Governments consistently try to exert influence, whether overtly or covertly, and the United States is no exception.
Hillary Clinton is correct. The Russian hacking was an unforgivable attack against America, for which Russia must bear significant consequences.
But it is not true that a combination of the hacking and the F.B.I.’s letter about its review of additional emails were responsible for her loss. Mrs. Clinton lost the election by ignoring an important constituency of white Rust Belt voters who were really hurting and needed someone to pay attention to them. The election was hers to lose, and she did. She shouldn’t blame others for what was her own fault.
