VOORHEES, N.J. — Before Anthony Stolarz became the first New Jersey-born goaltender to play in an N.H.L. game, he had to stand through two national anthems because his Philadelphia Flyers were hosting the Calgary Flames.
He had waited a long time for this chance. What was another minute or two?
“I could feel my heart racing a little bit,” Stolarz said with a smile this week at the Flyers’ practice center.
Stolarz, 22, gave up a goal on the Flames’ second shot of the game, played Nov. 27, and two more goals later. But the Flyers won the game, 5-3, delighting a large group of Stolarz’s relatives and friends among the crowd of 19,408 at Wells Fargo Center.
Stolie the Goalie, as Stolarz is called, had his first N.H.L. victory. Two weeks later, he stopped all 28 shots by the Detroit Red Wings to post his first N.H.L. shutout in a 1-0 overtime victory. His two victories were part of a 10-game Flyers winning streak.
Stolarz, who was born in Edison, N.J., and grew up in Jackson, N.J., watched Philadelphia’s No. 1 goalie, Steve Mason, play the next four games before replacing him in the second period of Thursday’s, a 4-0 loss to the Devils in Newark. Stolarz, who rooted for the Devils as a child, made 12 saves and allowed two goals.
But watching seems to be fine with Stolie the Goalie, who said he still had a lot to learn.
“Right now, I’m just taking it day by day and learning on adapting to N.H.L. speed,” he said.
When the backup goaltender Michal Neuvirth returns from a knee injury, probably next month, Stolarz is expected to go back to the Flyers’ A.H.L. affiliate in Allentown, Pa., to get regular playing time. That is fine with him, too. He has already proved a point.
Stolarz said he was “shocked” to learn that he was the first New Jersey-born N.H.L. goalie. But Stolarz already knew that N.H.L. players from New Jersey were rare, and he did not take a common route to the league, with stops in Texas and Nebraska.
It was not a surprise that Stolarz became a goaltender; his older brother, Todd, played the position on the junior level in New Jersey. As a Devils fan, Anthony Stolarz grew up watching Martin Brodeur.
Seven years ago, Anthony Stolarz played for the New Jersey Devils under-16 youth national team. He played a season for the third-level squad of the Jersey Hitmen, a junior team in Wayne, N.J.
Stolarz sought to play for the Hitmen’s top team in 2011, but that team already had a goaltender, Chris Funkey, who is now playing at Penn State. Stolarz was offered a chance to play on the second-level team. He passed.
Stolarz, who at 6 feet 6 inches fits a trend of tall goalies in the N.H.L., was stung by the Hitmen’s decision.
Stolarz went to Albany to try out for a junior North American Hockey League team from Corpus Christi, Tex., the IceRays. He made the team, moved south and played well for a year.
Todd Stolarz said playing in Corpus Christi had helped his brother become mentally prepared.
Anthony Stolarz was then chosen by the Flyers in the second round of the 2012 N.H.L. draft and earned a scholarship to the University of Nebraska Omaha.
He played only eight games in Omaha before he dropped out to join the London Knights of the Ontario Hockey League. Stolarz posted a 38-8-4 record in two seasons and overcame two setbacks — a gash in his leg that needed 55 stitches to close, and an eight-game suspension for slashing Windsor’s Josh Ho-Sang, now an Islanders prospect, in the head with his stick.
After undergoing hip surgery, Stolarz joined the Lehigh Valley Phantoms, the Flyers’ top farm club, in 2014. In two seasons, he was shuttled back and forth between Philadelphia and Allentown six times because of injuries to Flyers goaltenders, but he never played in a game.
When Neuvirth was injured in November, Stolarz was recalled again — and watched Mason play six straight games. When Stolarz finally got a start on Nov. 27, his mother was there.
“I’ve been a goalie mom for over 20 years, so basically, I was thinking, ‘Just stop the puck,’” she said.
Stolarz will be a restricted free agent after the season, and while he said he would love to stay with the Flyers, he can show other teams what he can do.
Stolie the Goalie says he just wanted a chance.
