DAVE ATTELL at Carolines on Broadway (Dec. 28, 7:30 p.m.; Dec. 29-30, 7:30 and 10 p.m.). A stand-up comic for nearly two decades, Mr. Attell has had an eccentric career path, including a short stint as a writer at “Saturday Night Live,” a turn as a contributor on “The Daily Show With Jon Stewart” and time as the host of the late-night travel show “Insomniac With Dave Attell.” More recently, he’s hosted the Showtime series “Dave’s Old Porn” and the uncensored stand-up show “Comedy Underground With Dave Attell.” Highly respected as a comic’s comic for his unapologetically crude stand-up and his razor-sharp mind, his material is filthy but clever, and undeniably hilarious.
SANDRA BERNHARD at Joe’s Pub (Dec. 26-30, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.; Dec. 31, 9 and 11 p.m.). Ms. Bernhard returns to Joe’s Pub for her annual end-of-year run with her new show, “Sandra Monica Blvd: Coast to Coast.” For this one-woman show, she crisscrossed the country in search of “the soul of America.” With some help from a “soundtrack you might hear on an AM radio station you pick up from Oklahoma,” this cabaret comedy promises a mix of quick wit, heartfelt stories and catchy tunes.
FIFTY/CINCUENTA at UCB East (Dec. 28, 9:15 p.m.). A cast of bilingual improvisers from the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater — Andy Bustillos, Aileen Clark, Mariola Figueroa, Joanna Hausmann, William Martinez, Morgan Miller, Alexis Pereira, Glorilis Tavarez, Charlie Todd and Lui Vega — perform here in English and Spanish. The show will begin with an audience member sharing a story about “an experience they have had in a Spanish-speaking country or with a Spanish-speaking person.” The team will then create an entirely impromptu show, inspired by that interview, which will incorporate both languages.
SWIPE LEFT at Union Hall (Dec. 28, 8 p.m.). This monthly comedy show, which promises “sharp, acerbic, self-effacing” comedy that doesn’t “preach to the converted,” is hosted by the actor and presenter John Fugelsang, the writer and former “Mystery Science Theater 3000” host Frank Conniff, and the comedian and writer David Feldman. Performers for this edition include the delightfully surreal Jo Firestone and the sharp political stand-up Jordan Carlos. Proceeds from the show benefit the American Civil Liberties Union.
