It was the evening rush, but the kiosk at Grand Central Terminal was closed, its beer bottles and bags of peanuts tantalizingly out of reach in a clear case. And the bar carts typically stationed near the train tracks had vanished.
Sprinting commuters rushing to catch a train would have to ride home without their usual Brooklyn lager or India pale ale to take the edge off a long day.
The Metro-North Railroad shut down the bar carts this month amid an investigation into missing money among the vendors. For some riders, it was an ill-timed move, casting the agency as the Grinch who spoiled their commutes in the days leading up to Christmas.
“Bring my bar cart back,” Jon Friedman, a commuter from Westchester County, said on a recent evening as he rushed to catch his train. He was clutching a Budweiser can he had bought from a shop on his way to the train platform, but said the wheeled bar carts were more convenient.
Officials at the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs the railroad, say the beer carts — 18 of them, and two stationary “commissary counters” — are not returning until the investigation is over.
The episode is the latest setback for Metro-North riders who prefer to endure their long journey home with a drink in hand. The railroad’s special bar cars, where commuters could buy a beer on board and commiserate over their day, ended their run in 2014, though Connecticut has promised to bring them back.
Still, Grand Central and the trains departing its platforms have not exactly gone dry, though at least one of the authority’s board members would like to ban drinking on the railroad altogether. Commuters can still buy beer and wine at plenty of shops in the station, though the bar carts were the favored option for those arriving with only a few moments to spare.
At the Central Market counter on the lower level, alcohol sales were brisk on a recent evening. A sign advertised homemade sangria for $7.50 and a selection of draft beer. One man grabbed five beer cans in a plastic bag to go.
Sitting at a nearby table, Mike Mauriello sipped a Miller Lite tallboy he had bought from a Rite Aid upstairs. The authority’s ban on bar carts was drastic, he said, suggesting that officials could just monitor them more closely.
“Have supervision at each cart counting the money, counting the beers and the cash flow coming in and out,” he said.
Mr. Mauriello conceded that drinking could get out of hand on the trains. He calls the last train out of Grand Central early Saturdays the “vomit comet” because of the debauchery, though he is against a broader alcohol ban on trains.
The bar carts were shut down on Dec. 7 after an audit last month found financial irregularities, officials at the authority said. Three workers were removed from service.
The authority’s inspector general, Barry L. Kluger, who provides independent oversight of the agency, confirmed that his office was involved in the investigation, but declined to comment on the inquiry. John Feltz, the president of Transport Workers Union Local 2001, which represents the vendors, also declined to comment.
Mitchell H. Pally, an authority board member who represents Suffolk County on Long Island, has called for the commuter railroads to ban alcohol consumption on trains. He worries about the dangers of riders drinking on board and then driving home from the train station, as well as the bad behavior alcohol can cause.
Banning alcohol during celebratory occasions like SantaCon, when Santa-costumed visitors flooded parts of New York City this month, or St. Patrick’s Day was a step in the right direction, Mr. Pally said.
An online petition calling for the return of the bar carts described them as a “beloved and a vital part of the New York commuter experience.” The petition, which features a photo of the glamorous cast of the television show “Mad Men” holding cocktails, had more than 170 signatures this week, along with comments vouching for the longtime vendors.
Still, Briton Ryan, a commuter from Westchester County, said he would support a prohibition on alcohol on the trains. When he has found himself on the Long Island Rail Road in the past, the behavior has seemed particularly unruly.
