What Should I Watch With My 12-Year-Old Sons?
Are you trying to figure out what to watch next? (Or maybe what TV show to give up on completely?) Watching is here to help. Send your questions to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| We have twin 12-year-old boys with different TV tastes, and we are constantly struggling to find new or recyclable TV shows that they’re both excited to watch and that we’ll enjoy, too.
“Futurama.” You seek “Futurama”! It’s a comedy, and it’s sci-fi, and it’s fantastic, and you all will love it. Our hero is Fry, a pizza delivery guy who was accidentally frozen in 1999 and is unfrozen in 2999. It’s from the same creative team as “The Simpsons,” and it shares some of that show’s blend of high- and lowbrow. In my experience, 12-year-olds enjoy quoting things, so expect to hear “good news, everyone!” a lot.
You might also like “Adventure Time,” which might lean a little more to the sweetheart side than your kids currently like, but it’s also bold and silly and perceptive about the human condition. The episodes are very short, which makes it a good “can we watch one more?” kind of show.
In the British genre-dramas vein, “Merlin” is big and adventure-oriented, and — hallelujah — not bleak. There are 65 episodes, so that’s a lot to get through, but if either of your sons gets super into it, think of all the books he is suddenly going to want to read. There’s also “Primeval,” which involves dinosaurs and time travel. It’s a bit dumber than, say, “Sherlock,” but it’s more openly fun. If you’re feeling “Timeless,” “Primeval” is a good companion show.
Is it maybe time to watch “Lost” with them? Yeah, the end is bad, but that first season is still so good. There are abundant underdogs to root for (Team Hurley), and if everyone can handle the bleakness of “Sherlock,” then there’s no reason to fear the smoke monster.
A little further afield is maybe my most-recommended show: “Face Off,” a Syfy series that’s like “Top Chef” for special-effects makeup. (Unlike other reality-contest shows, everyone is helpful, thoughtful, supportive and collaborative.) It’s a little outside both of your kids’ exact zones, but that also means no one is “losing” the “I want to watch my thing” battle.
