WHILE rules for flexible health spending accounts have themselves become more flexible, some employees may still have a New Year’s deadline for spending their balances.
Flexible health spending accounts let workers set aside pretax dollars to pay for out-of-pocket costs not covered by health insurance, such as co-payments, deductibles and prescription drugs, said Lisa Greene-Lewis, a certified public accountant and tax expert with TurboTax, a provider of tax preparation software.
Most large employers who offer flexible spending accounts, or F.S.A.s, either give workers an extra two and a half months after year’s end to spend the money in their accounts or, increasingly, let them carry over part of their balance — up to $500 — into the next year, according to a 2016 report from Mercer, the employee benefits consultant.
But just under a quarter of big employers allow no wiggle room, Mercer found; workers must spend the balance in their accounts by the end of the year or forfeit the money.
So, if your employer sets a firm Dec. 31 deadline, this is a good time to check and see if there is any money left in your account, and what sort of care or health-related items you might need, so you do not leave money on the table, Ms. Greene-Lewis said. People in this position “should definitely consider taking advantage of any doctor’s appointments they have been putting off,” she said.
Account funds can also be used for eye care, hearing aids, dental and orthodontic treatment and a variety of other health-related items. These include thermometers, blood glucose monitors and test strips, athletic braces, contact lenses and solution, sunscreen and lip balm, according to FSAstore.com, a website that sells items eligible for purchase using flexible spending funds.
A companion site, HSAstore.com, targets users of health savings accounts, another kind of tax-favored health spending account. The accounts have different rules and contribution limits, but the eligibility criteria for purchases are the same, said Jeremy Miller, the president of both online stores.
The number of H.S.A.s has been growing in recent years, in part because they are paired with high-deductible health insurance plans that typically carry lower monthly premiums, said Sarah Grotta, director of the debit advisory service at Mercator Advisory Group, a payments consultancy. H.S.A.s may be offered independently, she said, as well as through employers.
In general, you cannot use money from either type of account to buy over-the-counter medicine, like ibuprofen — unless a doctor writes a prescription for the pills.
And wearable fitness tools, like Fitbits, generally are not eligible, according to FSAstore.com, with a possible exception for patients who obtain a letter of “medical necessity” from a doctor.
How much can I contribute to a flexible health spending account?
Individuals can contribute $2,600 to an F.S.A. for 2017. If your employer lets you roll over funds, you can still contribute the maximum — meaning that if you rolled over $500 and made the maximum new contribution of $2,600, you would have $3,100 available for next year, said Kara Johnson, a senior vice president at Discovery Benefits, which administers F.S.A.s and other types of accounts.
At one time the maximum F.S.A. contribution was $5,000, and the American Association of Orthodontists supports legislation to restore that limit, said DeWayne B. McCamish, the group’s president. Flexible spending accounts are especially useful for orthodontic treatment, he said, because braces can usually be planned for, and treatment fees range from $4,000 to $8,000 nationally.
Do H.S.A.s have year-end spending deadlines?
No. All of the money in an H.S.A. rolls over from year to year if you don’t spend it, and you can take the account with you if you change jobs.
Can I have both an F.S.A. and an H.S.A.?
If you have an H.S.A., you may not have an F.S.A. as well, unless the flexible health spending account is a “limited purpose” version, covering just dental and vision care. Using both is ideal, said Ms. Johnson, since you can use the F.S.A. for dentist visits and eyeglasses, but let the money in the H.S.A. grow for medical care when you need it.