The Tampa Bay Buccaneers have won five consecutive games. The Giants are 2-0 against the Dallas Cowboys, the N.F.C. team with the most wins. 
They are among the leading candidates for wild-card seats at the postseason table with three games to play. Ten of the 12 overall playoff spots remain unoccupied, and 24 teams remain eligible.
The Chiefs and the Titans have played their way into first-place ties in their divisions. Staying on top is a real migraine when a team is forced to play a fellow king of the mountain.
Say what you will about Chiefs quarterback Alex Smith, as long as you say he ranks third among all quarterbacks in wins (58-24-1) since 2011 — behind only Tom Brady and Aaron Rodgers. Smith is rarely exciting, but he is usually enough.
Titans running back DeMarco Murray is tops in the A.F.C. with 1,135 rushing yards, making him one of the choice free-agent signings of the year. Tennessee needs Murray to pierce the Chiefs’ unkind front for 100-plus yards to pull out a road win.
The Eagles have not won in Baltimore since 1978, when the Colts were still in residence. Philadelphia needs its rookie quarterback, Carson Wentz, to post 300 passing yards for a third consecutive week, because there is no running the ball against the Ravens, who have the most begrudging ground defense in the league.
The Ravens must win to have a believable chance at winning the A.F.C. North. If it comes down to a field goal, we always like their chances. Kicker Justin Tucker’s total of nine field goals of 50-plus yards is one short of tying the N.F.L. single-season record. That is how to make the most of an offense that stalls like a 1978 transmission.
Explore every team's path to the playoffs.
The Browns appear bent on being the second 0-16 team in league history. The return of quarterback Robert Griffin III did nothing to change their southbound course.
Griffin posted a 38.4 passer rating last weekend in his first start since the season opener — after taking a 0.00 rating into halftime.
The Bills are staring down a 17th consecutive year of playoff-free football, unless they win out and half of the conference acquiesces to their tiebreaker demands. They can still finish with at least a .500 record for the third consecutive year, which has meaning only when compared with the alternative.
The Packers have parasailed back into contention with three consecutive wins, saving their hottest play for the coldest time of the year. It is doubtful the coldest game in Soldier Field history will be enough to cool off Green Bay, given the current state of the opponent.
The forecast for kickoff is 1 degree with 15-mile-an-hour winds, one degree colder than the 2008 Packers-Bears game in Chicago. The Bears won that game, but that team was a 9-7 team in the making.
Steelers running back Le’Veon Bell missed the first three games of the season to suspension after violating the league’s substance abuse policy. Consider the lost time and yardage officially caught up.
Bell rushed past the 1,000-yard mark with a team-record 236 last Sunday in Buffalo. He has touched the ball 166 times in the last five games. What he would give to run through Cincinnati, the team that inflicted season-ending injuries on him the last two years.
The Bengals must do something about their 2-12 home record against Pittsburgh quarterback Ben Roethlisberger. The potential return of their injured receiver A. J. Green would help.
So what if the Texans have lost two-thirds of their games outside their division and been outscored over all by 274-229 this season.
They are 4-0 in the A.F.C. South and have won nine straight against their divisional bunk mates, which is why they are tied with the Titans for first, with all the primary tiebreakers at their back.
The Jaguars have dropped eight consecutive games, fast-tracking Coach Gus Bradley to a 14-47 career record. To allow him a fifth season of this punishment would be as cruel as it would be unusual.
These player rankings from the Sablich brothers are for standard scoring formats and will be updated each week.
Forget about the potential return of the Pro Bowl running back Adrian Peterson from a September knee injury. The real Vikings headline is that quarterback Sam Bradford leads the N.F.L. with a 71.2 percent completion rate. He isn’t conquering the world, but he isn’t throwing the season away, either.
The Colts erased any straight line to an A.F.C. South title with last week’s home loss to Houston. Their season, in a sentence: Indianapolis leads the division in scoring, but it has given up more points than it has gained.

The Lions are four one-score losses away from being 13-0, and eight single-score wins removed from being 1-12. Living on that edge may not be the best plan of action against these Giants.
Lions quarterback Matthew Stafford will play with a dislocated middle finger on his right hand. A forecast of rain and winds up to 20 m.p.h. means he will need a hand from a Detroit defense that has not allowed more than 19 points in any of the Lions’ five consecutive wins.
Giants receiver Odell Beckham Jr. has nine touchdowns in his last nine games. He should maintain his status as New York’s go-to player.
The slow fade continues for these two teams, who are trending their way out of postseason possibility.
The Saints are a defeat away from a third straight losing season, in part because their 16th-year quarterback, Drew Brees, is finally showing some age. He has been limited in practice, just for the sake of getting rest, after throwing a total of six interceptions in two consecutive losses.
Why pay attention to the Cardinals as they drift into the off-season? Running back David Johnson. He can become the first player in N.F.L. history to open the season with 14 straight games of 100-plus scrimmage yards.
Falcons quarterback Matt Ryan is registering career bests in passing yards per game (311.5), yards per attempt (9.2) and passer rating (113.2). This would be a good week to give his arm some rest.
The 49ers own the rushing defense of least resistance at 170.8 yards per game. Falcons running back Devonta Freeman can already imagine undefended grass as far as the eye can see.
With a franchise-worst 12 straight losses, the 49ers continue to apply pressure on the winless Browns in pursuit of the No. 1 overall draft pick in 2017. The loss of receiver Torrey Smith (concussion) and tight end Vance McDonald (shoulder) should keep San Francisco in hot pursuit.
Pity Patriots quarterback Tom Brady. With Peyton Manning retired, this is the first season in which Brady will not face his greatest rival after 17 duels since 2001.
Brady has enough to play for, including a 52nd win in the month of December, which would break Brett Favre’s record for quarterback victories in any calendar month. There is also the matter of clinching an N.F.L.-record eighth consecutive divisional title.
The last time Denver, the defending Super Bowl champion, lost at home to Brady was 2011, when Tim Tebow was at quarterback. It is the only team with a winning record against Brady. None of that counts for points in this A.F.C. championship game rematch.
The Chargers can’t win the A.F.C. West, but they can decide who gets crowned.
San Diego has lost by a combined 9 points on the road to Oakland and Kansas City, and it draws both co-leaders in the last three games. Wins against Denver, Tennessee and Houston show what the Chargers can do against teams with grander postseason designs than their own.
A win would put the Raiders in the playoffs for the first time since 2002. Home-field advantage is going to require outside assistance. Maybe San Diego can import snow to prepare the Raiders for potential playoff trips to New England, Pittsburgh or Kansas City.
The Cowboys aim to clinch their second division title in three seasons. The Buccaneers hope to secure their first winning season since 2010. One team will have to kick its goal to another week.
The Cowboys’ rookie quarterback, Dak Prescott, lost last week for the first time in 12 games, and people are asking about the status of the starter-turned-backup Tony Romo.
The Buccaneers have won five straight games, including two against current divisional leaders. If he beats Dallas on national television, Jameis Winston will be the quarterback everyone wants to talk about on Monday morning.
