How exactly did Alec Baldwin construct his mischievously exaggerated, hyper-gesticulating, searingly funny portrayal of Donald J. Trump on “Saturday Night Live”?
In the latest episode of “The Run-Up,” he explains at length, switching in and out of the president-elect’s character as he describes his comedic craft.
BALDWIN: The stage manager took me to the edge of the stage ... and I stood there and I go, I don’t know what I’m gonna do. I mean, we’re about to do it. And I just remember, eyebrow down, eyebrow up ... masticate the words as much as you can.  And really, really masticate the words ... and then the hands … wax-on, wax-off. And you put together like three or four beats and then that’s it.
I spoke with Sarah Maslin Nir, my colleague who conducted (and, thankfully, recorded) the original conversation with Mr. Baldwin, his first interview about the comedic role.
BALDWIN: You just pick these three or four beats physically, and to me, I don’t spend a lot of time thinking about what’s going on inside him ... I see a guy who seems to pause, to dig for the more precise and better language that he wants to use and never finds it.
But is the performance an act for the sake of comedy or an act of political rebellion?
As a satirical version of Mr. Trump, Mr. Baldwin now deals with an unexpected dilemma, for him, anyway: Is his portrayal making the new president more human, and thus, more sympathetic? Ms. Nir asked him about that, too.
That’s the fake Mr. Trump. The real Mr. Trump had a busy and consequential week, grappling with fast-moving global affairs in Germany, Turkey, Russia and Syria that are challenging a presidency focused on domestic economic revival.
What did we learn about his interest and influence over international events? I put that question to the White House reporters Maggie Haberman and Mark Landler.
President-elects almost always remain silent on foreign policy until their inauguration, to avoid confusing the world about who, exactly, is commander in chief. On this, Mr. Landler and Ms. Haberman agree: Mr. Trump, and his very active Twitter account, have no interest in abiding by that practice.
“He doesn’t subscribe to the old idea that the country has one president at a time,” Mr. Landler says.
From a desktop or laptop, you can listen by pressing play on the button above.
Or if you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series.
2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “The Run-Up” and select it from the list of results.
3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.
4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.
2. Search for the series. Click on the magnifying glass icon at the top of the screen, search for the name of the series and select it from the list of results. You may have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.
3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, click on the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone free.
4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, click on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.