U.S.|Los Angeles Drivers on the 405 Ask: Was $1.6 Billion Worth It?
Los Angeles Drivers on the 405 Ask: Was $1.6 Billion Worth It?
LOS ANGELES — It is the very symbol of traffic and congestion. Interstate 405, or the 405, as it is known by the 300,000 drivers who endure it morning and night, is the busiest highway in the nation, a 72-mile swerving stretch of pavement that crosses the sprawling metropolis of Los Angeles.
So it was that many Angelenos applauded when officials embarked on one of the most ambitious construction projects in modern times here: a $1 billion initiative to widen the highway. And drivers and others put up with no shortage of disruption — detours and delays, highway shutdowns, neighborhood streets clogged with cars — in the hopes of relieving one of the most notorious bottlenecks anywhere.
Six years after the first bulldozer rolled in, the construction crews are gone. A new car pool lane has opened, along with a network of on- and offramps and three new earthquake-resistant bridges.
But the question remains: Was it worth it?
The cost of the Sepulveda Pass project was supposed to be $1 billion. It has now reached $1.6 billion, after transit officials approved $300 million in new expenses last week.
Peak afternoon traffic time has indeed decreased to five hours from seven hours’ duration (yes, you read that right) and overall traffic capacity has increased. But congestion is as bad — even worse — during the busiest rush hours of 4:30 to 6:30 p.m., according to a study by the county Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
The aftermath of the 405 project has emerged as a cautionary tale for Los Angeles, as well as for President-elect Donald J. Trump, regarding ambitious public works construction. On Election Day, voters here approved a sales tax surcharge that over the next 40 years will pay for $120 billion in spending on highways, subways and bus lines, also overseen by the county transportation authority. Mr. Trump has said a vast national infrastructure project will be one of his first priorities upon moving into the White House.
For many in Los Angeles — a city which, for all its many pleasures, is in no small part defined by traffic congestion — one outcome of this closely watched endeavor was disappointment.
Zev Yaroslavsky, a former member of both the county Board of Supervisors and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, said the work “made a difference on a number of fronts,” but he called it “the most disruptive project” he had seen during his 40 years in public life here.
Transit officials were quick to defend the 405 project, saying it was an essential part of a crucial campaign to expand the transportation network in a city notorious for traffic congestion. It was extraordinarily complicated, they said, because the highway remained open while the work continued, and contractors had to grapple with moving hundreds of miles of utility pipes and lines discovered only after ground was broken.
Still, the price was high — in inconvenience as well as dollars.
And on two occasions it stopped much of Los Angeles cold. For nearly an entire weekend on two occasions, in 2011 and 2012, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority closed down a 10-mile stretch of the 405. It was one of the more aggravating chapters of the project connecting the Los Angeles basin with the San Fernando Valley.
Bob Anderson, an engineer from Sherman Oaks who was on the community advisory board for the project, said his neighborhood was disrupted for nearly five years. And with the construction over, now all he sees are long lines of cars trying to enter or exit the highway.
The sentiment voiced by Mr. Anderson is not unanimous. Richard Close, 73, who has lived in Sherman Oaks for 43 years, said his daily commute to Santa Monica has become easier, and with the construction crews gone, he has come to appreciate the new 405. He said he leaves his office after 7 at night, to miss the worst of rush hour, and it takes about 75 minutes to go 15 miles, which he said saved him 15 minutes a night on his old commute.
The latest cost overruns were announced three weeks after Election Day. Some residents and officials, including Mr. Yaroslavsky, questioned whether details of the final settlement had been withheld pending the election out of concern that voters might have otherwise rejected the transportation tax, which required a two-thirds vote. Measure M, as it was known, passed with about 70 percent of the vote.
Transit officials said the cost overruns were announced as soon as they were approved by the board. And Mr. Washington argued that voters, struggling with the daily burden of traffic here, would have supported it if they had known of the latest $300 million overrun. “Timing was not a factor,” Mr. Washington said.
Whether all this money and work achieved the central goal for most motorists is a more difficult question to answer.
The work began amid an economic downturn, when fewer cars were on the road. The economy is now thriving, which can be seen in the skyline of cranes, as well as in the crowded roadways from Venice to downtown Los Angeles. And improving the capacity of a highway tends to encourage more people to use it instead of, say, making their way across the pass on local streets.
“If you go out there at 5 p.m. on a Friday and look at the delay, anyone in my business could have told you that adding the capacity that they added to the corridor would have little or no effect on delays during that period,” Brian D. Taylor, the director of U.C.L.A.’s Institute of Transportation Studies, said.
Kajon Cermak, a native of Chicago who has for the past 13 years chronicled traffic for KCRW, a public radio station in Santa Monica, said there has been little difference. Not that she ever expected much. Ms. Cermak, who lives in the San Fernando Valley, decided long ago to spend two or three nights every week on a 38-foot trawler anchored in Marina del Rey, rather than endure the agony of an hour commute back home.
