New York City on Monday formally asked that the federal government reimburse it for the cost of providing security for President-elect Donald J. Trump at his New York home and offices, a figure that officials estimated would reach $35 million by the time of Mr. Trump’s inauguration on Jan 20.
The $35 million figure is based on roughly $500,000 a day in security costs for the period from the presidential election through Inauguration Day, when Mr. Trump, a Republican, is expected to move to Washington, Mayor Bill de Blasio said at a news conference on Monday that was unrelated to the request.
Securing Trump Tower, where Mr. Trump and his family live and where his transition efforts are based, has presented the New York Police Department with “unprecedented” challenges, Mr. de Blasio wrote in letters to President Obama and members of Congress.
In a letter to President Obama, Mayor Bill de Blasio asked for federal reimbursement for expenses related to protecting President-elect Donald J. Trump and his family at his New York residence and offices until his inauguration on Jan. 20.
The 58-story tower, on Fifth Avenue just off 57th Street near Central Park, is in an area dotted with major landmarks and crisscrossed by transit stations, delivery trucks and a steady flow of both cars and throngs of sightseeing pedestrians.
Foot and vehicle traffic is now frequently snarled by barriers and closed streets in the area, where the prospect of seeing Mr. Trump or another national political figure is a lure for visitors and a headache for high-end shops on the surrounding blocks.
“It is a high-density neighborhood and street traffic easily obstructs pathways to and from the building, making it profoundly challenging for the NYPD to establish a secure perimeter,” Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, wrote, noting that the challenges affected not only Mr. Trump, but other residents of Trump Tower as well as the crowds that pass nearby.
The mayor said the number of officers involved in the round-the-clock security operation — from traffic agents to uniformed officers — was “classified,” but that most were working on overtime, at an extra cost to the city.
The letters, which Mr. de Blasio held up at the news conference — whose primary focus was a monthly police statistics briefing — did not include figures for the cost of security because, a spokesman for the mayor explained, the request would also include continuing security for Mr. Trump after the inauguration and for his wife, Melania, who plans to remain in New York City at least until the couple’s 10-year-old son, Barron, finishes the school year.
In a letter to members of Congress, Mayor Bill de Blasio requested new federal spending for security expenses in protecting President-elect Donald J. Trump and his family in New York City, noting that the city is not reimbursable under existing federal law or programs.
In the letter to Congress, Mr. de Blasio requested new federal spending to cover the costs related to providing security for Mr. Trump, observing that New York City is not reimbursable under existing federal law or programs. In the letter to the president, Mr. de Blasio said the federal government has traditionally reimbursed the city for the costs associated with foreign dignitaries and missions and during major national events, like the 2004 Republican National Convention.
Neither the White House press office nor a spokesman for Mr. Trump’s transition team responded immediately to emails seeking comment on the letters, which were also signed by the City Council speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, a Democrat.
Mr. de Blasio said at the news conference that he had also discussed the security costs with Steven Mnuchin, a Wall Street financier and Mr. Trump’s choice to head the Treasury Department, during a 10-minute call. “He was quite aware of the concern and looked forward to working on it,” the mayor said. “I have not had any sense of pushback in any conversation” with the Trump team.
Mr. de Blasio, asked by a reporter whether he or police officials hoped that Mr. Trump would move his transition out of Midtown Manhattan, said he would not second-guess the president-elect. “He has to do what he thinks will allow him to put together the team to govern this nation,” he said.
