If there is a limit to how much a team can rely on 3-pointers to drive its offense, the N.B.A. has yet to find it.
A season after seven teams cracked the top 10 for most team 3-pointers attempted per game in a season, it appears that the list will be rewritten yet again. While the uptick is universal, with the league at 2.5 more 3-point attempts per team per game than last season, the most amazing thing might be that three teams are in line to surpass the record for 3-point attempts per game — and none of them are the Golden State Warriors.
On Thursday night, the Warriors will travel to Brooklyn to face the Nets, and they are in the odd position of squaring off against a team that attempts 3s more often than they do.
The Nets’ average of 33.3 attempts a game is beating the season record, 32.7, set by the 2014-15 Houston Rockets. But the Nets entered Wednesday only third in the N.B.A. in that statistic, behind the Rockets (38.9) and the Cleveland Cavaliers (33.6).
The Warriors, who last season set the record for most successful 3-pointers, were fourth (31.2).
It is not exactly a case of zigging when everyone else zags, but Golden State has increased its offensive efficiency, and its overall scoring, despite averaging 0.4 fewer 3-point attempts a game than it did last season. The addition of yet another marksman, Kevin Durant, to a roster that featured Stephen Curry and Klay Thompson has, for whatever reason, resulted in the team attempting more 2-pointers, with greater accuracy.
Accuracy has been foreign to the Nets. While they have attempted a lot of 3s, they are making only 32.9 percent of them, which was good for 27th in the 30-team league.
It is realistic to estimate that Thursday’s game will have 60 or more 3-point attempts between the teams, an unthinkable number in the recent past. But both teams pale in comparison with the Rockets, who attempted a record 61 3-pointers in a game last week and seem determined to establish themselves as the high-volume shooters of the N.B.A.
From a baseball player turned hit man to the amazing ability of Simone Biles, a look at some of the most compelling stories of the year.
Reborn under Coach Mike D’Antoni, Houston has solid leads in successful 3-pointers per game (14.6) as well as attempts. And unlike the record-setting 2014-15 Rockets, this season’s team has gotten a lot closer to the Warriors than the Nets have in terms of accuracy, with a success rate of 37.5 percent, which helps explain the team’s sterling 21-8 record through Tuesday.
For his part, D’Antoni does not seem to think the team is doing anything unusual. He chalks up the frequency to simply taking advantage of the shots available.
The style of the modern game, and its reliance on 3-pointers, may not be pleasing to the Charles Barkleys and Phil Jacksons of the world, but with the Warriors, the Spurs, the Cavaliers and the Rockets on board with this way of playing, and with teams (other than the Nets) continually proving that accuracy can be maintained even as frequency increases, the N.B.A. has probably not reached its peak in 3-point shooting. So for the foreseeable future, it would be wise to just enjoy the show and list all the shooting records in pencil.