NORMAN, Okla. — Oklahoma Coach Bob Stoops said on Wednesday that the star running back Joe Mixon would be off the team if he had punched a woman now instead of two and a half years ago.
In 2014, Stoops was criticized sharply after he suspended Mixon for a year after Mixon punched an Oklahoma student, Amelia Molitor, at a Norman, Okla., restaurant. Mixon returned last season and helped the Sooners reach the College Football Playoff, and he has been a standout again this year for No. 7 Oklahoma.
Stoops said in 2014 that he believed Mixon, who was 18 at the time, could redeem himself. On Wednesday, Stoops said that times had changed and that society now had a no-tolerance policy on violence. He said that was a good thing.
Mixon entered an Alford plea at the time, asserting his innocence while acknowledging that there was probably enough evidence to convict him of misdemeanor assault. He did not serve time in prison but was ordered to perform 100 hours of community service and to undergo counseling.
Videos released recently by the Norman police and Mixon’s lawyers have put the case back in the spotlight. In a video released by the police on Tuesday, Mixon sat stone-faced as he, his mother and police officers watched footage of the punch, which broke Molitor’s jaw and cheekbone.
The video of Mixon telling his side of the story was recorded three days after the July 2014 occurrence. The department released that video less than a week after Mixon’s lawyers released video showing the attack.
Stoops said he had been shaken by the video of the punch.
Stoops said the amount of time it had taken for the video of the punch to come out had created problems.
In the video released Tuesday, Mixon said a friend of Molitor’s had unintentionally blown smoke in his face, and that Mixon had stood up to avoid the smoke. He then said Molitor had walked up and intentionally blown smoke in his face. He told Michiah Quick, a teammate at the time, that Molitor was being “hella disrespectful” for blowing smoke in his face.
According to Mixon, Molitor was rude to several of Mixon’s teammates.
Later, Mixon said, a male companion of Molitor’s directed a racial slur at him, and Mixon responded with an antigay slur. Mixon said Molitor had dropped her purse and hit him. He said he had then lunged at her and said, “Watch out.” He said she had hit him again, hard enough for his face to start ringing, and he had then punched her.
Mixon acknowledged to the police that he should have left the situation before it escalated but said that once the racial slur was used, he lost focus. He said that after the punch, his thought was, “What I got myself into?” and started thinking about his future.
Stoops said Mixon had been struggling since video of the punch was released as the Sooners prepared for the Jan. 2 Sugar Bowl against Auburn.
