NEW DELHI — The governing party of the southern state of Tamil Nadu said on Saturday that nearly 300 of its followers had committed suicide or died of shock and despair upon learning of the death of the party’s leader, Jayalalithaa Jayaram.
Ms. Jayaram, 68, a former movie star known to her admirers as Amma, or Mother, died on Monday night of cardiac arrest after dominating state politics for four decades and serving five times as the state’s chief minister.
A party spokesman, Chinnakutti Ponnaiyan, said reports continued to come in from far-flung regions about followers who had committed suicide or died when they heard the news of Ms. Jayaram’s death.
“We are in grief, deep grief,” he added.
Political activists in Tamil Nadu are known for ritual displays of loyalty to their leaders. Ms. Jayaram, a charismatic leader behind several popular welfare programs, inspired particularly frenzied emotions.
Over the years, various followers had taken such demonstrations to extremes by chopping off fingers, fashioning her portrait out of blood, shaving their heads or having her image tattooed on their body.
Two years ago, when she was briefly jailed on corruption charges, some of her admirers doused themselves with gasoline and set themselves on fire.
Critics say such acts are encouraged by the party, the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, which offers large compensation packages to the families of followers believed to have died or committed suicide out of loyalty to its leaders. Deaths from natural causes, especially heart attacks, are often counted as expressions of loyalty in party accounts.
Mr. Ponnaiyan said that 280 families had received monetary compensation of 300,000 rupees, or about $4,445, after Ms. Jayaram’s death, and that the final number was likely to exceed 300. He said the party would also extend various forms of assistance to the families of the dead, providing funding for the education and weddings of their children.
Hundreds of thousands of mourners have converged on Chennai, where Ms. Jayaram was buried on Tuesday. Twenty-nine years ago, after the death of Ms. Jayaram’s mentor, the matinee idol Marudhur Gopalan Ramachandran, mourning crowds surged toward his funeral procession and the police opened fire with tear gas and live ammunition. There have been few reports of violence this time.