WESTLAKE VILLAGE, Calif. — When Guillermo del Toro was 11, he and his friends would explore the vast sewer system below his hometown, Guadalajara, Mexico. Although he never found anything too fantastical on his subterranean forays, the idea of vast cities and civilizations beneath our own has entranced him ever since.
Mr. Del Toro, the director of “Pacific Rim” and “Crimson Peak,” returns to the underworld with “Trollhunters,” a 26-episode DreamWorks Animation series on Netflix, starting Dec. 23. The series is set in Arcadia, a fictional American suburb, as well as the secret subterranean city beneath it. In the first episode, a magical amulet chooses Jim Lake Jr. (voiced by Anton Yelchin), a kindhearted and lovelorn high school student, to become the Trollhunter, a protector of good trolls and a scourge of the evil ones.
While Mr. del Toro has made his name on scarier, creepier fare like “Pan’s Labyrinth” (a fairy tale populated by sadistic military officers and sentient stickbugs in 1944 Spain), “Hellboy” (an action fantasy film about a demon spawn called up from the netherworld by Nazis) and “The Strain” (a horror TV series starring vampires with stinging, prehensile tongues), “Trollhunters” is decidedly more family friendly.
“I wanted to do a series that I could imagine watching with a glass of milk on the couch with my dad and my brothers,” he said.
Besides those early trips through Guadalajara’s sewers, Mr. del Toro drew inspiration for the series from cultural references high and low: Jonny Quest cartoons. The early work of Hayao Miyazaki, “back when he was animating for Toho.” Irish folklore and Arthurian legend. Kids movies from the 1980s, like “The Goonies.” Asked about a scene involving a gnome and a dollhouse, he admitted with a laugh that, yes, it did indeed come from the 1963 “Twilight Zone” episode “Miniature,” starring Robert Duvall.
Here are four of the magical elements from “Trollhunters,” and a few of the bits of string that informed them.
To summon his magical armor and sword, the Trollhunter calls upon a mystical golden talisman, which serves as both a source of his power and a symbol of his high office. Visually, the amulet is “a cross between an Arabian astrolabe and a clock”; its spinning gears evoke “a kind of Arthurian steampunk,” Mr. del Toro said.
To make the thing work, its master must speak the magic words, much like Ali Baba’s “Open Sesame,” or Green Lantern’s overly wordy, battery-charging oath. “Every talisman needs an incantation,” Mr. del Toro said. The Trollhunter’s oath — “For the glory of Merlin, daylight is mine to command” — is, of course, straight out of Arthurian legend. “It also hints at some of the deeper origins that we’re going to explore in the series,” Mr. del Toro said.
One particularly nasty trait of goblins is their habit of stealing human babies from cribs and replacing them with “changelings,” tiny creatures that look like babies but aren’t. In the olden days, iron horseshoes were hung near an infant’s crib to prevent the swap, and a magical horseshoe figures in “Trollhunters,” as well. Their insectlike movements are pure del Toro (reminiscent of the stick insect/fairy in “Pan’s Labyrinth”); their creepy tendency to skitter up walls and ceilings evokes memories of Japanese ghost movies. “It’s very much like yokai,” he said, referring to Japan’s famous and centuries-old spooks.
The visual heart of the series, Troll Market is a subterranean metropolis pulsing with energy and jewel-fueled light, where trolls eat, fight and down brews in pubs straight out of Viking lore. The works of the comic book artist Richard Corben inspired the city’s grand scale and purple-and-orange color scheme. “There is a pulp energy to Richard Corben that no one else gives me,” Mr. del Toro said.
Every del Toro creation has an underworld, be they cellars (“Crimson Peak”), labyrinths (“Pan’s Labyrinth”) or monster-infested sewers (“Hellboy”). As a child, Mr. del Toro was entranced by the underground treasure troves of “The Arabian Nights”; later, he fell in love with the 1973 made-for-TV movie “The Night Strangler,” which featured scenes shot in downtown Seattle’s famed network of tunnels and passageways.
