Sunday Review|My Family Was Interned. Now They’re With Trump.
My Family Was Interned. Now They’re With Trump.
When I was growing up my family simply called it “camp,” like the summer retreat I would escape to as a kid. Both places tended to have wood cabins, tight rows of beds and a large mess hall. My grandmother, or Baachan as I called her, used to say the baseball diamonds at her camp would draw huge crowds for every game.
In reality, the place my grandmother was describing was a prison.
My great-grandparents and their 10 children, all of whom were born in the United States, were among the first wave of Japanese-Americans torn from their homes and thrown into internment camps built at the height of World War II. They were forced to abandon the family farm just as the strawberries had ripened on the vines. For nearly three years they lived within the confines of a barbed-wire fence.
Still, they called it “camp,” with little evident resentment.
In the decades after they were released, they continued to play down the enormity of their experience. When I prodded them for details, I heard stories that lacked even hints of anger or bitterness. Instead there was a fierce resolve to forgive the country that had imprisoned them.
Even so, I was shocked, though not entirely surprised, to learn that some of my relatives who endured the internment also voted for Donald J. Trump.
“I’m thinking more highly of him lately,” my great-aunt Lillian told me weeks after marking Mr. Trump’s name on her ballot.
A rapid assimilation into American culture defined how my family responded to their years in confinement. While they were Americans on paper even before the war, afterward, they were willing to make any sacrifice to prove it. For my relatives who were interned, that assimilation, and love for this country, found a new expression in supporting Mr. Trump.
To prove their loyalty decades earlier, my great-uncles joined the Army, some fighting for the 442nd Infantry, a unit of Japanese-Americans that was one of the most highly decorated units in American wartime history.
My grandfather and his siblings had names like Akira, Atsusa, Takashi and Satoru.
A generation later their sons were given unmistakably Western names: Richard, Steve, David and Glenn.
My dad, an all-American-as-possible star on the high school football team, never learned to speak a word of Japanese. Though his grandparents lived until he was in his teens, he couldn’t communicate with them without an interpreter.
I never heard any of my interned relatives complain. They accepted their experience as their sacrifice for the country they adored. The absence of anger then is just as apparent now in my great-aunt Lillian. She is a devout Christian and a reliably Republican voter. She and her siblings accepted their internment as a necessary sacrifice, an experience they played down so much that it certainly hasn’t led to finding solidarity with Muslims who face similar proposals of broad discrimination. Lillian supports this president-elect, who casually talks about barring Muslims from entering this country, but it’s not because she has forgotten what happened to her.
She remembers the mass evacuation of Bainbridge Island, Wash., with the same innocence as when she experienced it at age 12. Going to Seattle was always a treat, she said. Her father loved taking the kids to see the city’s Fourth of July parade.
But on the day they had to leave their homes, they themselves were part of a parade, a procession through Seattle of the first Japanese-Americans to be sent to the Manzanar internment center in California. Huge crowds watched.
The stoic faces of my great-grandparents, leading their children to the train south, were captured in an image that ran in the Seattle newspapers.
Many of my relatives now have a framed copy of that photograph hanging in their homes, a chilling reminder of our family history and a low point in our nation’s history.
Recent events have proved how easily the present can mirror the past.
Within days of Mr. Trump’s victory, a prominent supporter of his argued on television that the president-elect could justify discriminating against a broad class of people in the name of national security. Just look at the internment of the Japanese, he said: It seems to provide a legal precedent for Mr. Trump to create an immigrant registry.
It is a stunning historical moment to think back to, considering that President Ronald Reagan formally apologized for this chapter in American history. By the time he did that only half of the 120,000 people interned, nearly 70 percent of whom were born in the United States, were still alive.
Even today the United States and Japan are still struggling with the legacies of the era. President Obama became the first sitting president to reflect on the trauma caused by the American atomic bombings by visiting the Hiroshima Peace Memorial this year. Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan is to return the symbolic gesture later this month when he visits the Pearl Harbor memorial.
Though my relatives’ Japanese heritage dictated how they were treated in the United States, the degree of separation from their ancestral homeland was already great. My grandfather had never set foot in Japan.
I was even further removed. As a mixed-race kid with thick wavy hair, I was more likely to be asked if I were Hispanic than Japanese. Yet it was a cultural identity that I tried to cling to.
Baachan, my grandmother, took me on Sundays to visit her Buddhist temple in the suburbs of Seattle. For my sixth birthday she bought me a red silk kimono to wear for the annual Bon festival, a celebration that includes a dance to welcome the spirits of the dead. She cinched the obi sash around my waist until I could barely breathe. The final touch was an ornate hairpiece, made up of delicate wire and fabric cherry blossoms, fastened to my head.
She and my grandfather were not yet married when both of their families were interned. Not long before her death in 2002, we visited what was left of her “camp” at Heart Mountain in Wyoming. We were there for only a few minutes — our road trip in the family minivan was dedicated to my brother’s American Legion baseball tournament — but there was little left to see. The buildings were razed. All that was standing was a pile of stones stacked like a chimney to serve as a memorial.
I remember seeing Baachan tear up at the vast nothingness; it was as if her history had been erased. But she never said a word of anger or reproach. Because, of course, she wouldn’t.