It’s a hip, fast-growing sector of the economy, filled with headline-grabbing companies: Uber, Lyft, Airbnb, Task Rabbit. But there’s a gnawing problem: People aren’t sure what to call it. Many critics dislike the term most commonly used, the “sharing economy,” because there often isn’t much actual sharing going on. Others prefer to call it the on-demand economy, peer-to-peer economy, crowd-based economy, gig economy or collaborative economy.
Uber, Lyft and other e-hailing companies love to say they are “ride-sharing companies,” signaling that they are collaborative and not crassly capitalistic. These companies maintain that their drivers share their cars with passengers and use apps to share information about where they are. But many academics and workers in this sector assert that the business model seems less like sharing than like traditional corporate profit-making that happens to use an app.
Her point: If you’re living in San Francisco and you want to drive to Palo Alto and take a friend with you (perhaps splitting the cost of gas), that’s ride sharing. But if you take an Uber to get to Palo Alto, that seems more like a taxi ride.
Arun Sundararajan, author of the new book “The Sharing Economy: The End of Employment and the Rise of Crowd-Based Capitalism,” said he chose that term for his title because so many people use it. Yet Mr. Sundararajan, a professor at New York University’s Stern School of Business, actually prefers “crowd-based capitalism,” because a crowd of consumers obtains services by connecting, via a platform, with a crowd of suppliers.
In the early 2000s, the sharing economy generally referred to people with underused assets — whether automobiles, homes or vacuum cleaners — who let others “share” them, usually for a fee. Such sharing was viewed not as a business but as a way to promote sustainability.
Ms. Botsman added that some companies can legitimately be called sharing companies, like Turo (previously called RelayRides), which enables car owners to rent out their unused cars, and BlaBlaCar, which connects riders with car owners planning to drive from one city to another.
With the term “sharing economy” under scrutiny, experts are casting about for substitutes. Miriam A. Cherry, a St. Louis University law professor, recommends the “on-demand economy,” but critics say that isn’t exact enough, because ordering a pizza by phone can be considered part of an on-demand economy. Others prefer “gig economy,” but some assert that phrase isn’t suitable for 21st-century app-based companies because gig workers — think jazz musicians — have been around for decades.
Shelby Clark, founder of RelayRides and chief executive of Peers, which advises on-demand companies, prefers “peer-to-peer economy” because individual consumers use a platform to connect with “peer” service providers. But as Professor Sundararajan noted, illegal music and video sharing were once described as peer-to-peer, giving that term a bad connotation.
Some embrace “platform economy,” but Geoffrey G. Parker, an engineering professor at Dartmouth and the author of “Platform Revolution,” says that name is too broad because it includes giants like Google, Facebook and YouTube. Others like the “app-based on-demand economy” (the Abode economy), the “gig on-demand economy” (the GOD economy) or the “platform on-demand economy” (the POD economy), whose workers could be called pods.
Despite the criticism that “sharing economy” is inaccurate and sounds like corporate spin, Professor Sundararajan says we might be stuck with that description because corporations and the public so often use it. When Silicon Valley and Madison Avenue latch on to a phrase, it’s not easy to shake it off.