BLUE HERON at Corpus Christi Church (Dec. 18, 4 p.m.). This festive recital from Boston’s superb early-music choir is the thinking listener’s Christmas program. Moving from Advent to Christmas to the New Year, it features chant, motets and songs by Du Fay, Josquin, Obrecht, Brumel and more.
CHAMBER MUSIC SOCIETY at Alice Tully Hall (Dec. 16 and 20, 7:30 p.m.; Dec. 18, 5 p.m.). As reliably as Christmas comes around, so the Chamber Music Society plays Bach’s Brandenburg Concertos in the middle of December. In years past, the performances have been consistently appealing.
THE LITTLE MATCH GIRL PASSION at the Met Breuer (Dec. 20, 7 p.m.). David Lang’s masterpiece, based on the Hans Christian Andersen story, is given a staging by Rachel Chavkin in the lobby of the Met’s newest site. Ekmeles, one of our best choirs in contemporary music, does the singing.
METROPOLITAN OPERA Four productions on the bill this week, including a continuation of Kaija Saariaho’s important “L’Amour de Loin” (Dec. 17 at 8 p.m., Dec. 21 at 7:30 p.m.), in a brightly illuminated production by Robert Lepage. Strauss’s unnerving, bloody “Salome” continues, too (Dec. 17 at 1 p.m.), with Patricia Racette in the title role, Zeljko Lucic as Jochanaan and Gerhard Siegel as Herod. Johannes Debus conducts. Elijah Moshinsky’s staging of “Nabucco” (Dec. 16, Dec. 19 and Dec. 22 at 7:30 p.m.) is notable for the reappearance, wise or otherwise, of Plácido Domingo in another baritone role, and perhaps more so for Liudmyla Monastyrska’s Abigaille. James Levine has the baton. And last, “The Magic Flute” (Dec. 20 at 7:30 p.m.) begins its run as a holiday production, in Julie Taymor’s abridged production, and in English. The cast is young, but Christopher Maltman will be a marvelous Papageno.
TRINITY WALL STREET at Alice Tully Hall (Dec. 19, 7:30 p.m.). This week alone you can hear Handel’s “Messiah” from the New York Philharmonic at David Geffen Hall, the Oratorio Society of New York at Carnegie Hall and Apollo’s Fire at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. But they will all do well to come close to the emotional punch, the spiritual turmoil and the sheer passion of Julian Wachner’s Choir of Trinity Wall Street and the Trinity Baroque Orchestra. Their church performances in Lower Manhattan are long sold out, but they also perform at Lincoln Center.
