One Saturday night this month, as the audience queued up to enter “The Grand Paradise,” an immersive theater piece in Bushwick, Brooklyn, the Tony-winning actress Andrea Martin stood in line with the rest of us. On a video monitor overhead, cast members costumed like flight attendants explained what to expect.
“You will be separated from your party and other members of your group,” one of them said, hitting “will” with particular emphasis. Ms. Martin looked up at her companion with widened eyes.
Immersive productions, which drop spectators into the center of the action, can be anxiety-inducing that way. But their refusal to let us remain at a comfortable remove is also part of what makes them ideal for New Year’s Eve: Out with the old, in with the new, adventure required, passivity pretty much not allowed.
Here are four immersive productions that are doing it up with panache on the last night of 2016.
Irish hospitality is on warmly elegant display every night at this Irish Repertory Theater production, staged in the stately Fifth Avenue home of the American Irish Historical Society, just across the street from the Metropolitan Museum of Art. On New Year’s Eve, the audience for the 8:30 p.m. performance is welcome to linger later, for post-show Irish music and dancing, and more of the drink that flows generously throughout the evening.
Whether to take a glass of whiskey or sherry is, in fact, the first choice you make after Lily, the maid, shows you upstairs and you’re thrust into the party — an annual affair held by the Morkan sisters, Kate and Julia, with songs on piano and violin. There’s also a big sit-down dinner for the family and their guests, including all 40 or so audience members.
The setting makes the performance a great deal more upscale than the affair James Joyce describes in his short story “The Dead,” from “Dubliners,” yet this adaptation, by the poet Paul Muldoon and Jean Hanff Korelitz, is scrupulously faithful in many of its details. The Morkans’ favorite nephew, Gabriel (Boyd Gaines), and his wife, Gretta (Kate Burton), do conveniently stay the night instead of repairing to a hotel, but that’s only so we can trail them to their bedroom for the final scene, after we’ve had our port.
The production is gentle with its audience, though you will be chided if you try to chat over the actors — who will, by the way, take part in the post-show festivities on New Year’s Eve.
A lot of theaters near Times Square will be dark on New Year’s Eve, and no wonder: It can be a bear to navigate the crush of crowds and the metal barricades that line the streets before the ball drops. But “Drunk Shakespeare” — fortified, perhaps, by liquid courage? — will plow ahead with evening performances at Roy Arias Stages, on West 43rd Street.
In that spirit, spectators aren’t the only ones drinking as a loose and giddy performance of a Shakespeare play ensues, peppered with dance numbers and celebrity impressions. One cast member, too, will become increasingly disinhibited, downing a few shots to start with, and more as the show goes on. Audience participation may include beer chugging.
You will get more actual Shakespeare from “Drunk Shakespeare” than you will from this long-running, “Macbeth”-tinged design extravaganza — but this is the granddaddy that inspired the current immersive vogue.
Every performance of this sprawling, site-specific production by the British company Punchdrunk is something of a costume party, with audience members roaming the floors of the McKittrick Hotel (a complex of old warehouses in Chelsea) in spooky white Venetian masks. Whether spectators are finding their way through a blue-lit forest labyrinth, galloping down a hallway in hot pursuit of a character from the play or watching from the sidelines as dancers take the floor in the ballroom, they are as much a part of the look of the production as any other element.
Of the productions noted here, this is the only one where you’re likely to be pulled into a room by a friendly stranger and given an astonishingly relaxing mini-massage while you lie on a table with your eyes closed. My emphatic vote? More theater should include massage.
So it is quite frankly a bummer that “The Grand Paradise” — Third Rail Projects’ surprisingly seductive immersion into a tropical resort vacation, circa the late 1970s — will end its 11-month run on New Year’s Eve. It will, however, do so in style, with more alcohol than usual flowing during the sold-out performance, and the whole ingeniously designed Brooklyn space remaining open for a big post-show party.
This paradise, where the air is warm and spicy-smelling and the ground is sometimes made of sand, asks visitors to temporarily let go of their everyday baggage while prodding them gently to ponder the nature of memory, the passage of time and the topography of a life. In a map room, one of many small chambers scattered through a pleasingly disorienting environment, they may be handed a compass and instructed to consider the geography of desire.
