The first German edition of the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo, which was the target of terrorist attacks nearly two years ago in Paris, hit newsstands in Berlin.
BERLIN — The first German edition of the French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo arrived on newsstands Thursday, nearly two years after an attack on the publication’s headquarters in Paris killed top editors and contributors. The edition is a response to significant German interest in Charlie Hebdo after the attack, editors said this week.
Mr. Biard said the paper had been the subject of numerous exhibitions, awards and news coverage in Germany since the attack on Jan. 7, 2015, in which two brothers, Saïd and Chérif Kouachi, stormed the offices in the 11th Arrondissement of Paris with assault rifles, leaving 12 dead.
With an initial print run of 200,000, the new edition will be available across Germany every Thursday. It will consist mostly of translated material from the French version, but with some original content for its German readers.
Charlie Hebdo has been a lightning rod in the debate over balancing free speech and religious and cultural sensibilities. The newspaper was targeted by jihadists after it published cartoons depicting the Prophet Muhammad, but it also regularly takes aim at the Vatican and the European political establishment.

The newspaper’s “Survivors” edition, published a week after the attack on its offices and once again depicting Muhammad, sold 70,000 copies in Germany, editors said.
Ms. Schneider, 33, who supervises a staff of 12, mostly translators in the Paris office, said that security was not the primary reason for concealing her real name. “It’s really because I just want to focus on the journal, rather than fielding emails,” she said.
The first German issue, with 16 pages, features a four-page travel feature by the cartoonist Laurent Sourisseau, who uses the pen name Riss, depicting people he met across Germany and their thoughts on cultural heritage, national identity and the influx of hundreds of thousands of refugees, most of them Muslims, in the last several years.
Charlie Hebdo’s brand of satire tends to be harsher and darker than German counterparts like Titanic and Eulenspiegel. The editors acknowledge the challenge of appealing to a German audience but said the timing of the new edition was opportune.
If Charlie Hebdo is less concerned about causing offense than are most German publications, that may be a good thing, Mr. Biard suggested.
