When the Chinese billionaire Ng Lap Seng was arrested in New York on bribery charges in 2015, a judge allowed him to await trial not in a jail cell but in a spacious apartment in Midtown Manhattan, with GPS monitoring and 24-hour armed security guards — all at Mr. Ng’s expense.
The case, in which prosecutors strongly opposed bail, is one of several in New York that have spurred debate over whether rich defendants are treated differently if they are able to persuade a judge that they will use their resources to ensure their appearance at future court hearings. In June, for example, another New York judge rejected such a request from a Turkish gold trader, saying the proposal helped to “foster inequity and unequal treatment in favor of a very small cohort” of extremely wealthy defendants.
The prosecutors have also suggested that Mr. Ng’s living conditions are not as harsh as his lawyer contends. They wrote that he resides in “a multimillion-dollar, 3,000-plus-square-foot, four-bedroom apartment, in a luxury building,” and that he was recently granted access to the building’s gym and has regular visits from a masseuse.
It was in July when one of Mr. Ng’s lawyers, Hugh H. Mo, asked that his client be allowed outside with his guards three times a week during daylight hours, for up to eight hours a day. A prosecutor, Daniel C. Richenthal, objected, and Judge Broderick denied the request.
In October, Mr. Mo made what he called a “more modest request,” saying that Mr. Ng had fully complied with his bail conditions and should be allowed outside, accompanied by guards, once weekly during daylight hours.
Prosecutors objected, noting that Mr. Ng, with his guards, had visited his lawyers “nearly every weekday” since his arrest. In November, they said, he was even seen entering a restaurant in Chinatown, ordering and waiting about 20 minutes for his food. Restaurant visits were not permitted, prosecutors said.
Mr. Mo offered one last proposal: When Mr. Ng was returning to his apartment after visiting his lawyers, could he stop and pick up Chinese food?
