One style of history documentary — vintage clips plus reminiscences plus talking heads — is so common that it’s easy to forget that there are other options. “The Lost Tapes,” a series the Smithsonian Channel introduces on Sunday night with an episode on Pearl Harbor, effectively employs an alternative that really ought to get more use, especially for history that falls within the era of film and sound recording.
The program consists of just clips and still images with an occasional caption. No academics in office-chair interviews interpret things for you. No survivors grow weepy while dredging up their decades-old memories. No narration intrudes. The idea is to come closer to putting you in the historical moment, to give you a sense of what people experienced and felt at the time.
It works quite well for the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, whose 75th anniversary is Wednesday. The episode begins not on the date that continues to live in infamy, but 14 months earlier, with a remarkable internal White House audio recording in which President Franklin Delano Roosevelt notes a Japanese demand that the United States demilitarize on Midway Atoll and Wake Island and in Pearl Harbor.
As the program creeps closer to Dec. 7, an odd combination of ominousness and business-as-usual is apparent. A radio broadcast in Hawaii on the evening before the attack makes the place sound as if it were the world’s best vacation destination.
The bombs don’t start falling until a third of the way into this hourlong program. Once they do, the clips recreate the confusion about the severity of the raid and the terrifying uncertainty over whether more attacks were on the way.
Tom Jennings, the producer of the series, used the same technique successfully for a 2012 documentary about the death of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., “MLK: The Assassination Tapes.” Here he includes an array of rarely heard or seen materials in his reconstruction — a recording of a live radio broadcast from Manila during the attack there on Dec. 8, for instance.
The approach is well suited to Pearl Harbor, a cataclysmic event that had foreshadowings and, of course, immediate consequences. Later, more diffuse subjects in “The Lost Tapes” — the Patty Hearst case, the Son of Sam murders, the 1992 Los Angeles riots — may be trickier to pull off; history lovers should be eager to see how Mr. Jennings and his team handle them.