On Sunday, as baseball’s winter meetings begin outside Washington, a Hall of Fame committee will consider a new slate of candidates. Bud Selig, who was Major League Baseball’s commissioner for more than two decades, seems likely to be elected. But a sliver of his wide-ranging legacy has now been undone.
After the 2002 All-Star Game in Milwaukee — his hometown — ended in a tie, Selig acceded to Fox’s wishes and pushed for a rule giving home-field advantage for the World Series to the league that wins the All-Star Game. Under the new collective bargaining agreement — the first with Rob Manfred as commissioner — that link has been eliminated.
Now the World Series team with the better record will host Games 1, 2, 6 and 7, a common-sense solution that ends the charade of tying the outcome of an exhibition to the sport’s signature event. If the teams have identical records, the first tiebreaker would be head-to-head record; the second, divisional record.
Those wrinkles were some of the many that have emerged from interviews with people briefed on the agreement since it was completed late Wednesday. The people were granted anonymity because the deal must still be formally ratified.
The deal seems generally similar to the last one, with adjustments on luxury-tax rates and thresholds, the entry method for international amateurs, and free-agent compensation. One new provision will give the Yankees a significant break on their revenue-sharing bill by eliminating the “performance factor,” an artificial multiplier on revenue based on market size and prior revenue rankings.
Fans may notice other changes more. The scourge of smokeless tobacco is being phased out, with incoming players banned from using it. The primary disabled list will be reduced from 15 days to 10. The season will start four days earlier, creating more off days in the long schedule. The league also has the right to schedule regular-season games in England, Mexico and Asia.
All are practical, progressive changes, yet none fit that description better than the removal of the link between the All-Star Game and home-field advantage for the World Series. The idea that it would add sizzle to the game, and thus spark ratings, was misguided from the start.
The events themselves have continued in that vein: It’s hard not to have fun at the All-Star Game. But ratings for the 2016 game, in San Diego, were the lowest ever. Managers’ main motivation is to give a slice of the action to as many players as possible. The games tend to move briskly, because hitters rarely work deep counts. Players would prefer to win, of course, but there has been little noticeable difference in the intensity of competition.
Even near the start, the link was an afterthought for the players. The retired closer Brad Lidge, now a host on MLB Network Radio, pitched in his first All-Star Game in 2005, the third year in which the winning league received home-field advantage. He said he had not thought about it at all.
The National League lost that game, and Lidge’s Houston Astros wound up representing the N.L. in the World Series. Even then, he said, he didn’t actively think about why they opened on the road. The Chicago White Sox had been 10 games better than the Astros in the regular season, anyway, and Lidge said it only seemed right that they would host.
Three years later, at Yankee Stadium, Lidge had a different All-Star experience that showed a downside of the link. Before the game, N.L. Manager Clint Hurdle told Lidge he would be the closer for the game, which dragged on for 15 innings. Lidge was forced to warm up five times, he said, essentially risking his health for an exhibition that somehow counted.
By then, Lidge was pitching for the Philadelphia Phillies, and he again reached the World Series that fall. That time, teammates playfully teased him about losing the All-Star Game and forcing them to start on the road, at Tampa Bay. But nobody dwelled on it.
Lidge said the All-Star Game should count for something, but he was not sure what — certainly, he added, nothing as important as home-field advantage in the Series. For now, pride should be enough.
When the 2002 tie embarrassed baseball, the league and Fox overreacted with a remedy that never quite worked. The All-Star Game is again a pure exhibition, a midsummer showcase for an industry now into its third decade of labor peace.