Computers, long a symbol of the digital age, are now moving into a more earth-friendly future: California’s state energy agency voted unanimously Wednesday to approve new regulations for energy efficiency in desktop computers and monitors.
The rules, passed by the agency, the California Energy Commission, are the country’s first attempt to regulate the energy use of desktop computers and represent another step in the state’s efforts to drastically lower its greenhouse gas emissions to address climate change.
Computers use more energy than many other consumer electronics — the electricity used to power all of the computers in the country is the equivalent of the output of 30 large power plants emitting 65 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent every year, according to estimates from the Natural Resources Defense Council.
The new standards, some parts of which go into effect Jan. 1, 2018, would ultimately reduce carbon dioxide emissions in California by an estimated 730,000 tons, less than 1 percent of total statewide emissions, and save consumers about $370 million on electric bills annually, based on the most recent emissions data. The energy commission projects that the standards will save about as much electricity as 350,000 households use in a year.
California is leading the country in its efforts to fight climate change, and this represents an important step, officials said. Gov. Jerry Brown pledged earlier this year to cut California’s emissions 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030.
Because the state is home to one in eight Americans, standards put in place could become de facto standards for the entire country, and, when it comes to international brands, the global market.
About 6 percent of desktop computers and 14 percent of monitors meet these standards, and the commission expects that all of the computers and monitors currently in use will be replaced in California. If the standards were to be adopted nationwide, it would mean savings of about $3 billion on consumers’ electricity bills, according to Mr. Delforge, and a reduction of about 14 million metric tons of carbon pollution annually.
The process of creating these standards began in 2012, when the energy commission established the first set of rules for computer energy efficiency. Consumer advocates, environmental groups and industry representatives helped devise the new rules.
Much of the savings come from altering how much energy computers and monitors use when they are off or not being used, sometimes referred to as idle or vampire power. The regulations will reduce idle power in these devices by 50 percent over the next four years.
Some of the measures also affect the devices when they are operational by improving power supply.
Environmental advocates say that changing how much power computers and monitors use in idle mode can cut greenhouse gas emissions without requiring consumers to change their behavior.
During a news conference on the adoption of the standards, Mr. Delforge spoke of the rules’ economic savings for consumers, improved efficiency for products and the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. “What’s not to like?” he said.