President-elect Donald J. Trump is following in Fidel Castro’s footsteps.
At least, as far as visiting the New York Times headquarters.
Mr. Castro came to New York in October 1995 for the celebration of the United Nations’ 50th anniversary. On the final day of his five-day trip, he spent more than two hours at The Times, which was then at 229 West 43rd Street.
Times executives and employees are well accustomed to V.I.P. visits, but they are usually given days — if not weeks — of advance notice. Jay McKillop, the company’s security director, had 14½ hours to prepare for Mr. Castro.
World leaders were not typically brought into The Times by its conspicuous main entrance, but through an adjoining truck bay, which was connected to the lobby by a path in the mail room. A tall partition would be installed in the lobby to block views of the elevators closest to the mail room door, allowing guests to be escorted upstairs in privacy.
Newspapers were still being printed at the headquarters building in 1995. On any day, The Times consumed so much newsprint that deliveries of fresh rolls were made every 10 or 20 minutes. But 43rd Street had to be closed to traffic during Mr. Castro’s visit. “Someone needed to figure out where we were going to stash a few hundred tons of newsprint,” Mr. McKillop said in a 1995 interview with the house organ, Times Talk.
With seconds left to avoid a diplomatic crisis, Mr. Keller materialized as Mr. Castro got out of his vehicle.
“It looked perfect,” Mr. McKillop said.
His attire, however, seemed to be the only accommodation he cared to make. “He showed no signs of bending his political will to suit others, defending his rule in Cuba as a form of democracy that enjoys deep public support,” Lizette Alvarez reported. Mr. Castro acknowledged that his government was holding about 600 political prisoners, but added that Mexico, Argentina, France and China were among other countries that jailed opponents of the state.
Mr. Castro also gave his listeners a sense of how cunningly he manipulated the press, even in his early 30s.
He recalled a famous interview in 1957 with Herbert L. Matthews of The Times at his hiding place in the Sierra Maestra, while he was an outlaw whom the world believed to be dead. Mr. Castro said he had ordered the same small bunch of rebels to march back and forth within eyeshot of The Times’s correspondent.
“We tried to give Matthews the impression that there were more of us,” Mr. Castro said.
Unlike most V.I.P.s, he was not content to end his Times visit in the polished confines of the executive floor but asked to be shown the workers’ quarters. That meant the newsroom — a dark, claustrophobic, overcrowded, ill-ventilated, cheesily decorated and poorly maintained space.
“It looks as though you could use a union,” Mr. Castro said, through an interpreter, when he saw the space.
“He seemed very attuned to his surroundings and interested,” she wrote in an email this week.
Joseph Lelyveld, who was then the executive editor, was asked this week whether he thought the day’s events had been surreal. No, he replied.
