EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — In a nationally televised game at Green Bay two months ago, the Giants lost for the third consecutive week, dropping their record to 2-3. The team was in disarray, hapless on offense and toothless on defense.
Player frustration was boiling over. When Ereck Flowers, the mammoth left tackle who had played a humbling game, was asked about his performance, he ended up pushing a reporter in the locker room.
Ben McAdoo, the Giants’ new head coach, was hectored with postgame questions about whether the problem was his play-calling, since his team had managed just three offensive touchdowns in three weeks.
“We need to regroup,” McAdoo said.
Six games later, the Giants have the fourth-best record in the N.F.L., at 8-3. McAdoo could be a contender for coach of the year. His Giants are an odds-on favorite to earn a wild-card playoff berth and are still within striking distance of the N.F.C. East leaders, the Dallas Cowboys, who will bring their league-best record to MetLife Stadium on Dec. 11.
How did the 2016 Giants go from vexed, bewildered and embattled to resourceful, efficient and ascendant?
It began with the littlest of things.
McAdoo is a something of a computer geek. He began his coaching odyssey as a part-time assistant, a cerebral guy in eyeglasses who passed painstakingly meticulous reports to the full-time coaches.
Fifteen years later, and about a month into his first season as a head coach at any level of football, McAdoo turned to his systematic roots to figure out how his Giants had lost their way.
The subsequent changes did not amount to an overhaul, but McAdoo, 39, had hardened his resolve to make the team younger. It would no longer be cast in the image of Tom Coughlin, the former coach who won two Super Bowls with the Giants and left at the end of last season, when he was 69.
The transformation McAdoo has planned may not entirely take shape until next season, but his research has backed up his belief that the Giants should follow a leaguewide trend of putting more rookies and second-year players into critical roles.
The Giants, who will face the Steelers (6-5) in Pittsburgh on Sunday, look strikingly different from the team that opened the season.
The best example of their transformation is a player who established himself during the losing streak: Andrew Adams, the rookie free safety.
Adams was an undrafted free agent who was waived by the Giants and assigned to the practice squad. Injuries elevated him to the active roster in the third week of the season, but he appeared to bungle the opportunity when he committed a careless unnecessary- roughness penalty while the Giants were blocking a fourth-quarter punt deep in the Washington Redskins’ territory. It was the most memorable play in a crushing Giants defeat that began their tailspin.
Many coaches in the N.F.L., especially in the past, would have cut Adams the next day, if only for the statement it would send to the rest of the team. Undrafted rookies tend to be especially easy fodder for such displays.
Instead, McAdoo gave Adams his first start the next week. Adams has not been dislodged from the job since then.
Granted, an injury had made a new starter at safety necessary. But last year’s Giants would have signed an aging free agent to fill the job. The team did give tryouts to four veteran safeties after the Redskins game, but ultimately they gave the job to Adams.
“It’s not about time of service; it’s not about when you were born,” McAdoo said.
Seated at his locker Wednesday, Adams said he did not fret that he would be released after his costly penalty.
Adams said his coaches treated him the next week as they normally had. He has responded with 33 total tackles, one interception and the trust of the Giants’ defensive coordinator, Steve Spagnuolo, whose frequent late-game blitzes put substantial extra pressure on Adams, the team’s last line of defense.
As the Giants’ winning streak grew week by week, their lineup was infused with new, young faces. After the team’s bye week in late October, when McAdoo and his assistants had time to thoroughly reconsider the team’s personnel, there were significant changes.
Will Tye, a second-year player, became the starting tight end. His backup was not the fourth-year player he replaced, Larry Donnell, but Jerell Adams, a rookie.
Another rookie, wide receiver Roger Lewis, was suddenly on the field in situations that had been previously reserved for the esteemed Victor Cruz. Lewis caught a first-quarter touchdown pass against Philadelphia in the Giants’ first victory after the bye.
Over the Giants’ first five games, Paul Perkins, the Giants’ fifth-round draft pick this year, had a total of four carries and three receptions. In the next six games, Perkins had 39 rushing attempts and 10 receptions. His patient running style and field vision have given the Giants a subtle dimension that had been missing since an early-season injury to the veteran running back Shane Vereen.
The inexperience on the Giants’ evolving roster has required adjustments from certain veterans. Quarterback Eli Manning, for example, spends more time teaching in games and practices.
But Manning acknowledged receiving a boost from the youngest Giants, a group that includes the rookie wide receiver Sterling Shepard and strong safety Landon Collins, whose performance in his second season merits Pro Bowl consideration.
The Giants owe their turnaround to more than a youth movement, however. First and foremost, whenever they consistently getting the football to Odell Beckham Jr., they usually win. Beckham had one touchdown catch through the first five games this season and has seven since.
Defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul has flashed his old dominance, while his newly acquired colleagues on the defensive line, Olivier Vernon and Damon Harrison, have made it difficult for teams to double-team him.
The Giants have also been fortunate in their schedule, which in recent weeks has matched them with teams enduring difficult seasons. Their last six opponents have a combined record of 20-46-1. But beginning with the Steelers on Sunday afternoon, the Giants’ next five opponents have a combined record of 35-20-1.
And the winning streak has not cured all of the Giants’ failings. They still, for instance, are second-to-last in the league in rushing yards per game.
But McAdoo’s early-season maneuvering has helped set the course for a Giants revival, and he said on Friday that he was not worried about second-guessing.
