Sports|Christian McCaffrey to Leave Stanford for the N.F.L.
Christian McCaffrey to Leave Stanford for the N.F.L.
After gaining more than 6,000 yards the past two seasons, setting an N.C.A.A. record and finishing as the runner-up last year in the Heisman Trophy balloting, running back Christian McCaffrey announced Wednesday that he would skip his senior season at Stanford and enter the N.F.L. draft.
McCaffrey, the son of the longtime N.F.L. receiver Ed McCaffrey, said he had talked extensively with his father and other family members, as well as Coach David Shaw, before making his decision.
Despite his numbers in college, some doubters have questions about whether the 6-foot, 200-pound McCaffrey can handle the rigors of the N.F.L. as a featured back.
NEW COACH AT OREGON Oregon has hired Willie Taggart, who spent the last four seasons as head coach at South Florida, to take over the Ducks following the dismissal of Mark Helfrich.
Odell Beckham Jr. said he regretted having complained about the officiating after the Giants’ recent loss in Pittsburgh, but at the same time, he disparaged the officials anew and suggested they had been biased against the Giants.
Brook Lopez scored 24 points, Sean Kilpatrick had 22, and the Nets held off the Denver Nuggets for a 116-111 victory at Barclays Center. The Nets led by as many as 29 midway through the third quarter, but Denver closed to 103-99 on Kenneth Faried’s layup with 4 minutes 31 seconds left. Bojan Bogdanovic and Kilpatrick each made two free throws.
Brenton Scott made one of two free throws with 0.8 seconds left and finished with 25 points to help host Indiana State upset No. 16 Butler, 72-71.
TAR HEELS PREVAIL Justin Jackson matched his career high with 27 points and hit a career-best seven 3-pointers for as No. 7 North Carolina defeated visiting Davidson.
Sevilla and F.C. Porto grabbed the final two spots in the round of 16 in the Champions League, while Juventus and Borussia Dortmund ended up as group winners.
A late equalizer by the substitute Marco Reus earned Borussia Dortmund a 2-2 draw against Real Madrid and first place in Group F.
F.C. Porto breezed into the knockout phase with a 5-0 rout of Leicester, which had already secured the top spot in Group G.
Gonzalo Higuaín ended his scoring drought as Juventus beat Dinamo Zagreb, 2-0, to win Group H.
GUILTY PLEA IN FIFA SCANDAL Julio Rocha, the former head of the Nicaraguan soccer federation, pleaded guilty to racketeering conspiracy and wire fraud in federal court in New York in the corruption scandal that has engulfed FIFA, the sport’s governing body.
Two days before the release of a new report into Russian doping, the International Olympic Committee extended the provisional sanctions imposed on Russia over allegations of systematic cheating and cover-ups.
The I.O.C. executive board said the measures imposed on July 19 had been extended “until further notice.” The sanctions were originally designed to apply until the end of this year.
John Scott, the N.H.L. enforcer who made an unlikely run to the All-Star tournament last season, has retired. Scott, 34, had two goals during the midseason showcase in Nashville and was named the most valuable player of the three-on-three tournament.
CAPITALS HANG ON Nicklas Backstrom scored 1 minute 36 seconds into overtime, helping Washington beat visiting Boston, 4-3, after squandering a three-goal lead.