When Mr. Deller approached Iggy Pop with the idea 10 years ago, he refused. He was worried a museum would reject the resulting drawings. But you can see why he’d be concerned, since, on one level, the project feels like a perverse joke. Life drawing is a conservative practice, dating to the Renaissance, when artists wanted to draw from nature, and Iggy Pop (born James Newell Osterberg Jr.) is the antithesis of conservative. Even Mr. Deller, a product of post-conceptual art education, acknowledges in the catalog that this was only his second time in a life drawing class.
Moreover, traditional artist’s-model bodies were supposed to look like Greco-Roman statues: smooth, muscular and young. Iggy Pop is known for his sinewy, androgynous body banged up by decades of rough performance (and early, compulsory rock ’n’ roll drug use). The project also overturns the usual equation in which artists are the masters and their models are known only through the art. (Think of Andrew Wyeth’s Helga or any of Picasso’s women.) Wouldn’t it be belittling to have an aging rock star pose for a bunch of unknown art students? Or kind of great?
Iggy Pop finally consented to Mr. Deller’s plan — partly because, having grown up in working-class Detroit, he liked the Brooklyn Museum’s “proletarian roots.” (In the catalog, he criticizes the Metropolitan Museum for being all about “fashion, fashion, fashion, fashion.”) And “Iggy Pop Life Class” soars on multiple levels, including the decision to present the class drawings alongside a selection from the museum’s not-very-proletarian collection of art depicting the male nude.
Twenty-two art students and their instructor, Michael Grimaldi, were chosen to participate in the four-hour class, which took place in February at the New York Academy of Art. Ranging in age from 18 to 80, the students included a military veteran, a pharmacist and people trained in computer animation, psychology, photojournalism, textiles and fashion. One woman had made her first drawing the night before the class.
The 53 drawings at the Brooklyn Museum, chosen out of just over 100, are all over the map. In some, with his long hair and with posed stillness, Iggy Pop looks like an American Indian chief. In others, he resembles a cyborg or a ready-for-Pixar character. One artist homed in on the genitals; another a hand. (Or, I think it’s a hand.) Most of the drawings were made with graphite pencil on white paper, but a few artists got fancy, using white chalk on black paper. One, made with tiny hash marks, looks almost like an etching.
A 1982 Robert Mapplethorpe photograph that is part of the exhibition shows a new approach to academic nudes — one born in the same post-’60s period of sexual liberation.
What you see in the gallery, however, is not just a single life-drawing class but millenniums’ worth of ideas about male bodies and the sense that Iggy Pop represents a shift. What does it mean to be male as we head into postgender territory? Or into the “posthuman” era in which people are neither at the top of nature’s hierarchy nor, with all their surgical and genetic tweaks and augmentations, pure “human” in the biological sense.
In a catalog chained to a bench inside the exhibition, there are several photographs of the actual life-drawing class, with Iggy Pop at the end of the class, wrapped in a sheet but still partly nude. This image stopped me. If Iggy Pop’s career has been based on shock value — the “Lust for Life” model — this might be the most shocking image of all: Iggy Pop sitting at the center of the group, grinning like a first grader, the happiest kid in the class.