At a time of growing criticism and waning support from the paying public, Joakim Noah found some solitude before Tuesday night’s game against the Indiana Pacers.
Madison Square Garden was mostly empty when Noah, the Knicks’ starting center, strode onto the court about an hour before the opening tip. After stretching on the baseline, he went through his pregame shooting routine, catching pass after pass from the team’s player development coach, Dave Bliss.
Noah shot midrange jumpers, each with his signature sidespin. Without defenders, he drove to the basket for one-handed dunks. He lofted free throws and shot runners off the glass. When he drifted to the 3-point line, he heard from the Pacers’ Al Jefferson, who was leaving the court after his own workout. Noah, it should be noted, is not renowned for his long-distance shooting — or for any type of shooting.
They embraced and wished each other well.
For Noah, 31, it almost seemed like a public form of therapy. Nobody groaned when he missed. Nobody complained about his contract. Several fans who arrived early even voiced their support. After cramming nearly 150 shot attempts into 19 minutes, he departed for the locker room.
The game provided more good vibes for Noah, a rare occurrence this season. In a semitriumphant return to Coach Jeff Hornacek’s rotation, Noah collected 11 points and 11 rebounds as the Knicks outlasted the Pacers for a 118-111 victory. In 35 minutes of action, Noah rummaged for loose balls, pounded his chest and reveled in an evening free of misery.
Still, Noah’s performance was the confetti of small sample sizes: One game does not make a season. And few in that locker room sounded more aware of that than Noah, who has been accessorizing his hair bun with a perpetual scowl. He dismissed a question about the team’s improved defense against the Pacers.
Noah is in a difficult spot, measured by his past feats with the Chicago Bulls while his future earnings weigh on him like a steamer trunk. The Knicks signed him as a free agent over the summer for four years and $72 million. The team was banking on the hope — the hope — that Noah, despite being hindered by injuries in recent seasons, could at least resemble the man who took the court in 2013-14, when he was the N.B.A.’s defensive player of the year.
The Knicks are 28 games into that experiment, and Noah is averaging 4.7 points, 7.8 rebounds and 2.6 assists in 21.5 minutes a game. On the team’s recent trip to the West Coast, he sometimes appeared to labor to get up and down the floor. Against the Denver Nuggets on Saturday, Hornacek gave more time to the first-year center Willy Hernangomez, who had 17 points and 10 rebounds, than to Noah, who finished with 2 points and 4 rebounds in 11 minutes. The Knicks lost.
If Noah were making less money, his lack of production would be less alarming. But it is impossible to ignore his contract — not when the Knicks are tied to him until 2020, and not when he is consuming a significant chunk of their space under the salary cap. It is also too early to come to any firm conclusions.
On Tuesday, Noah had another opportunity. When he missed three of his first four shots, the crowd grumbled. When Kyle O’Quinn reported to the scorer’s table to replace him in the first half, the crowd cheered. But Noah eventually returned and played hard, helping the Knicks erase a late 15-point deficit.
Noah even made three of four free throws against the Pacers, a bonus given that he is shooting 35 percent from the line this season. By the end of the game, he was the most vocal player on the floor. “It felt good,” he said afterward.
The yelling, the rebounding, the defending, the cheerleading — the Knicks thought those qualities were deserving of all those millions they committed to him in the summer, and perhaps they still do.
Hornacek has some difficult choices ahead, particularly when it comes to the team’s logjam at center. O’Quinn has emerged as an unexpected source of stability off the bench, and Hernangomez is full of promise at 22. That much was clear against the Nuggets over the weekend.
And then there is Noah, who is searching for his old magic. For now, if not forever, the Knicks need to see if their investment was worth it.