Both productions offer a more-or-less traditional take on the story, roughly based on the 1816 tale “Nussknacker und Mausekönig,” by E.T.A. Hoffmann. At a family Christmas party, the young Clara (called Marie in some productions) is given a Nutcracker doll by her godfather, Herr Drosselmeyer, a magician. After she falls asleep, the Nutcracker and a regiment of toy soldiers come to life and battle marauding mice, led by a fearsome Mouse King, whom the Nutcracker must vanquish. Clara helps the Nutcracker win the battle, and their reward is a journey through the Land of Snow to the Kingdom of Sweets, where they are entertained by dances from different countries.
Choreographers have loved to tamper with this scenario, originally drawn up by Marius Petipa in 1891, but choreographed by his assistant Lev Ivanov. The 1892 premiere, when “The Nutcracker” was paired with Tchaikovsky’s opera “Iolanta,” was not a great success, but the ballet’s endurance through countless settings — Nureyev’s Freudian state of mind, Matthew Bourne’s Dickensian orphanage and John Neumeier’s ballet school among them — is probably mostly due to its glorious Tchaikovsky score. The English National Ballet and Royal Ballet versions are no exception to the choreographic desire to mess about, even if they do keep the period setting of a prosperous 19th-century German household and the basic structure of the plot.
Unless you have discovered this in the £7 ($8.60) program for the current production, there is little probability of understanding why Drosselmeyer is gazing longingly at a portrait of a young man in his study, or whether the perky ginger-haired assistant has anything to do with this (she does not), or that Drosselmeyer gives the Nutcracker doll to Clara in order to free his nephew from his wooden imprisonment. What’s more, the breaking of the spell needs the love of a young girl as well as the Mouse King’s defeat. Why the king, then, if the queen had cast the spell?
Although Act 2 takes place in a lovely cream-and-gold setting, Clara, played by a grown-up dancer in this production (a very good Anna Rose O’Sullivan last Saturday), and Hans-Peter (James Hay, excellent) never stop thrusting themselves into the divertissements. These are all conjured up by the annoyingly ubiquitous Drosselmeyer (Thomas Whitehead, good cloak flourishing), which in effect undercuts the stateliness and mystery of the grand pas de deux, the one bit of Ivanov choreography that survives in Mr. Wright’s ballet.
Drosselmeyer’s reunion with his nephew ends the ballet; we haven’t lived through a child’s magical dream, but an adult soap opera.
I may be griping — I confess loyalty to George Balanchine’s logical, child-focused, yet poetic version for the New York City Ballet — but London audiences and the British dance critics love Mr. Wright’s version.
Many equally admire Wayne Eagling’s idiosyncratic treatment for the English National Ballet, first seen in 2010. The company, now directed by Tamara Rojo, has a notably less extravagant production. The tree barely grows; the scenery (designs are by Peter Farmer) looks a bit sparse. But the production does have its virtues, among them an opening ice-skating scene and a charming Christmas party. Then it goes awry with an odd battle sequence that features adult-size mice doing jazzy, hip-jutting, tap-dancing routines. These could be funny, but they instead play oddly against the mice’s scary skeleton heads.
The Mouse King (a valiant James Streeter on Thursday) just can’t be killed, which rather obviates the reward trip to the land of sweets, and he doesn’t stop popping up in Act 2 until he is — with a strange lack of theatricality — put to rest offstage. And then there is the fact that Clara is a child in Act 1, but changes into an adult dancer (the wonderful Alina Cojocaru) halfway through; and Drosselmeyer’s nephew (Cesar Corrales, a new star) and the Nutcracker (James Forbat) incomprehensibly keep switching places as they partner her.
Nonetheless, under Ms. Rojo, the English National Ballet seems to be improving from production to production; the performance sparkled, and the Act 2 divertissements, which can feel rote, were delivered with real panache. The same was true for the Royal Ballet on the day before Christmas; the dancers seemed to genuinely love performing the ballet, and the audience responded with corresponding warmth and enthusiasm. Perhaps the truth is that everyone’s favorite “Nutcracker” is the one you grow up with.