The sport of ice swimming, done in water about 41 degrees or less, is attracting interest in spite of its dangers, or perhaps because of them.
BURGHAUSEN, Germany — Burghausen Castle, perched on a hill high above this scenic Bavarian town, was still bathed in a white morning fog when the first swimmers of the day approached the Wöhrsee, a sickle-shaped lake that curls along the medieval fortification’s western flank.
It was 29 degrees outside, and as the seven women descended a set of ladders to touch the water, their clipped exhalations — “Whew, whew, whew!” — sliced through the quiet on the jetty. Moments later, there was an electronic beep, then a collective splash, and with a spurt of cheers from a few dozen spectators, the first meet of the International Ice Swimming Association’s new season was underway.
Out here, on the first Saturday of December, cold became a remarkably variable concept. Onlookers wore heavy coats and knit caps pulled low and clasped their palms around steaming drinks. Around them strolled the 50 or so swimmers, ages 12 to 65, wearing swimsuits and flip-flops. They would be plunging into water measured at 39 degrees.
To an uninitiated observer, ice swimming, as it is called, can seem deeply peculiar. From afar, in the absence of snow or ice, it resembles normal swimming in any lake. But lakeside, stooped and shivering in a parka, flexing your toes inside multiple layers of socks and witnessing groups of half-naked people splashing into the frigid water of their own accord, your mind naturally struggles to comprehend why.
In the first event, the women’s 1,000-meter freestyle race, Julia Wittig, a 37-year-old schoolteacher, was positioned in the center lane in a black swimsuit and cap, earplugs and goggles — the only equipment allowed in competition.
Wittig, who moved to Burghausen at 15 to train as an indoor competitive swimmer, had biked to the lake at 10:30 a.m., with an Ikea bag stuffed with her swimming gear. Like the handful of other serious competitors at the lake, Wittig was treating the event as a trial run for the I.I.S.A.’s second world championships, which take place next month in the same lake.
With refined, powerful strokes, Wittig skimmed across the water, finishing the race in 13 minutes 7.56 seconds to set a new I.I.S.A. world record. When she climbed out, her skin was bright red, as if she had fallen asleep on a beach.  She said nothing, her gaze fixed on the ground. Someone draped a towel over her shoulders. Sandals were slipped under her stiff feet.
After about a minute, she cracked her first small smile. Five minutes after that, she began to shiver uncontrollably.
Ice swimming has deep roots in Europe, particularly in Eastern European and Nordic countries, where many believe it provides restorative health benefits. But only within the last decade have organizations like the I.I.S.A. and the International Winter Swimming Association, which was established in 2006, begun formalizing these rituals, arranging them in competitive settings and, in some cases, taking them to new extremes.
Ram Barkai, 59, of Cape Town, founded the I.I.S.A. in 2009 after partaking in a couple of revelatory swims: First was a one-kilometer swim in 34-degree water in Antarctica, made in about 20 minutes. Then he completed a 1.4-mile swim in 39-degree water in Switzerland in 43 minutes.
At official I.I.S.A. events, like those in Burghausen, the longest swims are 1,000 meters. But the organization is also known for certifying “Ice Miles,” swims of a mile or more in temperatures of 41 degrees — the threshold to call it ice swimming — and below. As of this week, 243 people worldwide have done one. Barkai compares the feat to climbing Mount Everest.
The swashbuckling attitude of Barkai and the I.I.S.A. has attracted many critics, including the I.W.S.A., which hosts considerably bigger and more inclusive events and does not allow swims longer than 450 meters at those temperatures.
The risk to the body is real.
Sudden contact with cold water can cause hyperventilation and sudden increases in blood pressure. Prolonged exposure can lead to hypothermia. Death can occur when the core body temperature drops below 82 degrees, though fatalities in cold water typically occur from heart attacks upon entering the water.
In March 2014, at the I.W.S.A.’s world championship event in Finland, a Russian man competing in a 450-meter race in the 70- to 74-year-old group went into cardiac arrest in the snowy pool and later died in a hospital.
Ice swimmers train rigorously in indoor pools to build endurance and carefully acclimate to cold water with progressively longer swims in rivers and lakes. Many of them have or develop an insulating layer of body fat.
“It’s the one time it’s great to be fat,” he said.
Still, there is debate among ice swimmers on how far to take the sport.
Donal Buckley, a 50-year-old engineer and avid outdoor swimmer from Ireland, has written a series of critical posts on his swimming blog, LoneSwimmer.com, about his own Ice Mile experience (two years ago, in 37:46 in 38 degrees) and what he called the “ego-driven culture” of ice swimming.
Buckley said in an interview that he went off a “mental cliff” in the final couple of hundred meters of that swim. He said he was hallucinating, thinking there was black rain falling from the sky. He said he would not have been able to recall his own address, and he did not remember leaving the water or the 20 minutes after the race. He wants people to be aware of the risks of hypothermia and long-term nerve damage.
“One of the dilemmas that I find about talking about Ice Mile swimming, if I start talking about it being dangerous, that attracts people,” Buckley said.
That hasn’t stopped ice swimming enthusiasts from dreaming that one day the sport will be considered for Olympic competition, but today it remains a labor of love for the band of swimmers, mostly in Europe, who have acted as its main ambassadors and evangelists. The races, other than a stray few, offer no prize money and attract few sponsors.
Under his insistence, and with funding from a local company, stadium lights and lanes were added to the swimming area at the Wöhrsee three years ago. Today, the pool and sauna there are open to the public year round, and the local school, where Wandratsch teaches, offers ice swimming as an elective course.
His schedule the day before the event provided a glimpse of the commitment and preparation required in the sport.
He awoke at 4:45 a.m. for an hour-and-a-half-long workout at a warm, indoor pool. After a break at home, he headed to a tributary of the Salzach River, which separates Germany from Austria, and swam loops for six minutes as a light rain pocked the 42-degree water. Then he toweled off, dressed and went to work. That night, he joined another swimmer at the lake for a quick workout, spending about 10 minutes in the 40-degree water.
Under the guidance of his coach, Stefan Hetzer (who also coaches Wittig), Wandratsch begins the acclimatization process in September, swimming an hour and a half in 68-degree water. When the water temperature drops to 50 degrees, they reduce the workout to 45 minutes. These days, in water 40 degrees and below, they train for 20 minutes at most.
Hetzer, who coached the East German swim team at the 1988 Olympics (a team widely suspected of doping), has encouraged his cold-water swimmers to try unusual conditioning methods. Whenever possible, for example, Wandratsch goes sockless in the winter. He takes frequent cold showers. His friends rib him about his reluctance to turn on the heat at his house. He did not, however, heed Hetzer’s suggestion to sleep outside in his garden.
In ice swimming, perhaps counterintuitively, slow swimmers are often considered more “hard core” than speedy ones.
It became clear why in the second race of the competition — a mixed men’s-women’s race with those on the slower end of the one-kilometer spectrum — that was in some ways its most intense.
After finishing the race in a brutal 29:00.06 — the single longest stretch in the water of anyone that afternoon — Mark Koitka, of Radolfzell, Germany, was puzzled that the pinkie finger on his right hand kept splaying rebelliously to the side, no matter how hard he tried to keep it still. But otherwise, he was oddly unruffled. He was lucid, cracking jokes in the rewarming tent with a thin towel draped over his knees.
On the other side of the tent, though, Bernhard Hauser, 40, of Burghausen, was hunched over, eyes peeking out from a stack of blankets, offering monosyllabic utterances through clattering teeth as three paramedics kept close watch. The difference between the two men was remarkable. Hauser had finished 27:55.46, ahead of Koitka, but his body had a much stronger reaction to the cold.
When asked how this could be, Koitka deadpanned that he produced his own natural neoprene, the synthetic rubber used in wet suits. “It’s beer-o-prene,” said Koitka, 38, slapping and jiggling the flab on the midsection of his 243-pound frame.
Hauser, still shivering, eventually walked under his own power to the sauna. Later, he said he was surprised at the hubbub around him. He said he mostly felt fine — just cold. “I know my body and my physical constitution very well, and I am not a kamikaze swimmer,” he said, conceding that he could have used more training time.
Officials must be extra careful at these swims. They pay close attention to swimmers’ split times, monitoring signs of fatigue. Paramedics do not hesitate to pull someone from the water. The observation does not stop back on land: Swimmers’ bodies continue to cool after emerging from water, and swimmers sometimes reach their coldest body temperatures 30 minutes to an hour after they are done.
Monahan, 37, completed an Ice Mile this past May in Reykjavík, Iceland, in 35 minutes in 37-degree water, entering a record book full of eye-popping figures. Last February, a man and woman in Ireland, swimming in 40 degrees, lasted 2.05 miles in 57:45 and 2.06 miles in 54:49. In December 2012, a pair of men in Russia each spent over an hour in 32.5-degree water swimming more than 1.3 miles.
The first question ice swimmers receive, then, is why.
As in many extreme sports, participants embrace the opportunity to learn about themselves. You may catch a surprising glimpse of some unfamiliar corner of your psyche. For a fleeting moment, you may experience the intoxicating feeling of defying your fundamental instincts. The pleasure of doing it seems to pale in comparison to the feeling of having done it.
“I’m being honest, when it’s over, the euphoria is incredible,” said Rena Demeo, who finished an Ice Mile two years ago in Boston.
For others, it has everything to do with the joy of competition.
On Saturday at the Wöhrsee, in the shadow of Burghausen Castle (of some renown as one of the world’s longest castles), a D.J. spun tunes — “Ice Ice Baby,” of course — as the events unfurled. Students selling baked goods behind a foldout table paused to swim short relays. The sauna at times seemed as packed as a rush-hour train car.
Ten minutes after winning her first race, Wittig dunked herself in the wood-fire hot tub behind the pier. Her shivering was so pronounced that she struggled to raise a cup of tea steadily to her lips. But by then she was smiling and laughing. After racing in her youth, she had spent 15 years out of competition. Now here she was, thriving in a different, quirkier sport. She talked about breaking the 13-minute barrier in the 1,000-meter race next month.
Wittig did four more races, four more plunges into the ice water, before the afternoon was done.