Rob York was no more than 11 years old when he realized how terrible his father was when it came to buying gifts for his mother. One Christmas, it was a camera. The next, a handbag. He got used to watching his father’s awkwardness and his mother’s disappointment.
Mr. York vowed to do better. But each year, he finds himself trying to find exactly the right thing for friends and family, which, he said, has put a strain on him.
In the stereotype, indifference or ham-handed ineptitude is at the root of a man’s difficulty when it comes to the ritual of gift giving. But no one wants the reaction Homer Simpson got when, in the first season of “The Simpsons,” he gave his wife, Marge, a bowling ball — with his name etched on it — for her birthday.
For men like Mr. York, who try to do the right thing, the very idea of giving and receiving gifts can spur feelings of failure and self-doubt.
That kind of thinking is typical for Adam Dorn, 46, a jazz musician and composer in Los Angeles. Last Christmas, he bought his wife a necklace from Tiffany, which led to a response he said he has gotten before: That was nice; now let me have the receipt so I can get something I really want.
While his wife always shrugs off the whole thing, knowing he has good intentions, Mr. Dorn still fears her disappointment, even when there isn’t any.
Nestor Gomez has a different problem when it comes to gifts. During childhood Christmases, he and his three siblings, who along with their parents had immigrated from Guatemala to Chicago, received clothing or other practical items. The notion of tearing open wrapping paper to find something from Hasbro or Sony was not part of his experience.
Steve Ellis, a 45-year-old graphic novelist, has come to realize he is tone-deaf when it comes to gift giving. His go-to present for his wife used to be flowers, which seems nice — if you ignore the fact that she has made her living as a gardener and landscape designer.
Part of the problem, he said, may have to do with his profession. He works alone and must live inside his own head, which can leave him disconnected from the real world. He added that he is also ill at ease when receiving presents.
Tom Parker, a 50-year-old art dealer in Brooklyn, had the misfortune of finding gift-giving success from the start. When he started dating the woman who would become his wife, she told him about an outfit that she loved but had left behind in a cab. After much homework, he managed to track down the same one and give it to her for Christmas.
Over a decade later, he makes it a point to pay attention to her style and taste. But sometimes he feels as if he is chasing the ghost of his younger self.
“Back then I had nothing but time,” Mr. Parker said. “Thirteen years into a marriage, with two kids, we are tired, and all the extra money is going to the kids, and that kind of romance is a little more elusive. You are just trying to do something nice for your spouse, but you don’t have that opportunity to be your best self.
Same with the paper shredder from Staples.