DAVE HARRINGTON AND FRIENDS HOLIDAY SPECTACULAR at Brooklyn Bowl (Dec. 18, 8 p.m.). Mr. Harrington — a multi-instrumentalist who performs in the electronic duo Darkside — is assembling a top roster of indie-rock musicians for a third-annual “pan-denominational holiday party concert,” which will benefit the Harlem School of the Arts. Members of the New York bands Yeasayer, the Walkmen, Real Estate, Cibo Matto, Vampire Weekend and around a dozen more guests will pop in for straightforward and quirky takes on holiday classics.
KRISTIN HERSH at Rough Trade (Dec. 17, 8 p.m.). Ms. Hersh is perhaps best known as the frontwoman of the 1980s indie punk band Throwing Muses, which she formed at 14 with her stepsister, the singer-songwriter Tanya Donelly. While Throwing Muses released an album in 2013, titled “Purgatory/Paradise,” Ms. Hersh has also continued exploring music as a solo artist and with the band 50FootWave; last month, she released “Wyatt at the Coyote Palace,” a collection of essays and strummy, complex art-folk tunes. Expect a set list that’s heavy on recent material, along with a few fan favorites from her three-decade career.
MISTER SATURDAY NIGHT at Silent Barn (Dec. 17, 10 p.m.). The D.J.s Justin Carter and Eamon Harkin have been hosting this New York City dance-party institution for years, and each bash features a terrific playlist of dance and pop classics from the last four decades. An evening’s set may feature disparate music choices like the Afropop master Fela Kuti, the psychedelic group Silver Apples and obscure disco stylists from the 1970s, but it’s all brought together by Mr. Carter and Mr. Harkin’s talent for reading a room to find the best hip-shaking groove of the moment.
RONNIE SPECTOR at City Winery (Dec. 20-21, 8 p.m.). One of the finest voices of the girl-group era, Ms. Spector recorded indelible pop classics like “Be My Baby” and “Baby, I Love You” with the Ronettes in the 1960s. Ms. Spector — who worked largely with her husband at the time, the troubled but groundbreaking producer Phil Spector — was also a featured performer on Mr. Spector’s 1963 album “A Christmas Gift for You,” a seminal record that no holiday playlist is complete without. Ms. Spector will perform many of those tunes (including “Frosty the Snowman” and “I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus”) at this annual show, now in its third decade.
KENNY BARRON at the Village Vanguard (through Dec. 25, except Dec. 19; 8 and 10 p.m.). Mr. Barron is a jazz pianist with more than 50 years of recorded excellence in his rearview, and on “Book of Intuition” — somehow the first album ever by his longtime working trio, featuring the bassist Kiyoshi Kitagawa and the drummer Johnathan Blake — he delivers a postbop statement at once aglow with insight and bursting with vital energies. He leads the trio this weekend, expanding to a quintet next week with the addition of two more veteran collaborators, the saxophonist Dayna Stevens and the vibraphonist Steve Nelson.
GARY BARTZ: COLTRANE RULES at Smoke (Dec. 16-19; 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m.). An alto and soprano saxophonist whose career has taken him through postbop, jazz funk and free jazz, Mr. Bartz continues to draw connections in his music. In this engagement — inspired by the music of John Coltrane, one of his primary totems — he’ll lead a working quartet with the guitarist Paul Bollenback, the bassist James King and the drummer Francisco Mela.
FREDDY COLE QUARTET WITH HARRY ALLEN at Birdland (Dec. 20-24, 8:30 and 11 p.m.). Not so long ago, the first thing to say about the jazz singer and pianist Freddy Cole was that he had a sound and identity apart from his incandescently famous brother Nat King Cole. (He boiled down the issue perfectly with the title of one of his albums: “I’m Not My Brother, I’m Me.”) But on his new release, “He Was the King,” Mr. Cole pays fraternal tribute with an appreciation refreshingly untinged by awe. He has a special guest here in Mr. Allen, a saxophonist of unflagging assurance.
DUDUKA DA FONSECA AND HELIO ALVES FEATURING MAUCHA ADNET at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (through Dec. 18, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Da Fonseca, a drummer, and Mr. Alves, a pianist, are Brazilian jazz exemplars who have carved out a strong niche together, in each other’s bands and on each other’s albums. They’re revisiting a successful premise, samba jazz and the music of Antonio Carlos Jobim, with regular partners: Ms. Adnet, a singer originally from Rio de Janeiro, and Anat Cohen, an Israeli clarinetist and saxophonist with an affinity for Brazilian folkloric music.
VIJAY IYER AND WADADA LEO SMITH at Harlem Stage and National Sawdust (Dec. 19, 7:30 p.m.; Dec. 20, 7 p.m.). On “A Cosmic Rhythm With Each Stroke,” the pianist Vijay Iyer and the trumpeter Wadada Leo Smith work with a common language of improvisation, austere and illuminating. The album’s title has to do with the geometric abstractions of Nasreen Mohamedi (1937-90), an Indian artist who has been recognized as a major figure in modernism. Mr. Smith and Mr. Iyer performed this spring at the Met Breuer, in conjunction with a Mohamedi retrospective; they reunite on Dec. 19 at Harlem Stage and Dec. 20 at National Sawdust.
JULIAN LAGE TRIO at Bar Lunatico (Dec. 20, 8:30 p.m.). Mr. Lage is a guitarist with spring in his step, the sort of improvising musician who radiates ease and good feeling, even on tricky terrain. And he’s in emblematic form on “Live in Los Angeles,” a new digital EP. Recorded in June, it features Mr. Lage’s sterling trio, with Scott Colley on bass and Kenny Wollesen on drums — the same band heard on “Arclight,” an appealing studio album released in March. Rather than an acoustic or hollow-body guitar, Mr. Lage works here with a Telecaster, which brings more grit and bite — but no less grace — to his sound.
MATT WILSON’S CHRISTMAS TREE-O at the Jazz Standard (Dec. 20-21, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Wilson, a drummer and composer with a knack for buoyancy, has spent most of this month on tour with the saxophonist and clarinetist Jeff Lederer and the bassist Paul Sikivie, drawing from their exuberant and clever 2010 holiday album, “Matt Wilson’s Christmas Tree-O.” This booking has become an annual tradition — and so has the appearance of special guests, like the guitarist Bill Frisell, the singer Kurt Elling and the pianist Jason Moran.
