MILLBURN, N.J. — The stage version of “The Bodyguard” isn’t the worst musical made from the boiled bones of a movie. In fact, I’m not sure it would make the top five (or do I mean bottom five?), although aside from a couple of shudder-worthy disasters, memory has expunged the details of many such shows.
Nor is the musical, adapted from the 1992 vehicle that marked Whitney Houston’s movie debut, opposite Kevin Costner, one of the gobbling turkeys in the jukebox-musical sweepstakes. It falls into this none-too-prestigious category, too, because in addition to songs from the movie soundtrack (notably the turbocharged version of Dolly Parton’s “I Will Always Love You,” which was Houston’s biggest hit), the musical squeezes in a fistful of songs from her other albums.
But the show, which is making its American premiere at Paper Mill Playhouse here after opening in London in 2012, doesn’t exactly make you want to rush out and dance with somebody. The story — pop star falls for the fellow she hires to protect her from a dangerous stalker — fails to generate much suspense, even if you haven’t seen the movie. (I caught up with it only after attending the show.) The characters have minimal dimensions — not that they are Rubik’s cubes of psychological intricacy in the film — and the musical numbers mostly seem detached from the plot, since they were written to top the pop charts, not to move along a story or define a personality.
Deborah Cox, a Canadian songstress with a silken, rangy voice as well as the requisite belting power, plays Rachel Marron, who, as in the movie, finds herself saddled with a stalker just as she’s basking in the glory of an Oscar nomination. Corralled into her entourage, somewhat unwillingly, is Frank Farmer (Judson Mills), a crack bodyguard who’s soon glued to her side, in more ways than one.
Still, Ms. Cox impresses with her variously energetic or emotive renditions of the Houston songs. Most are lung-busting ballads like “All the Man That I Need” or “Greatest Love of All” or “One Moment in Time.” The emotions expressed in them tend to be as generic as their titles, unfortunately, and heard one after another, they begin to blend together into a soup of soaring melody.
The up-tempo songs are mostly shoehorned in as we see Rachel in performance. One medley, set at a nightclub, includes “I Wanna Dance With Somebody” (later used as an encore) and “So Emotional.” I was, I’ll admit, a little disgruntled that one of my favorites, the bouncy “How Will I Know,” was recast as a duet for Rachel and her young son, Fletcher, although at the performance I caught, Kevelin B. Jones III gave it his all and then some.
As the title character, Mr. Mills mostly stands around looking manly and stern, much the way Mr. Costner does in the movie. As the Stalker, as he is called, Jorge Paniagua does much the same, with a sprinkling of menace on top.
Incidentally, or maybe not, both go shirtless at one point, as do the male dancers, presumably as a treat for the many gay men who are Houston fans and would seem to be a primary target audience. During intermission, the friend I took marveled at the absence of body fat on view among the principal characters and dancers. But when you’re calculating body-fat percentages at a musical, it’s probably because the show itself is on the thin side.