Jessica Lappin, president of the Alliance for Downtown New York, among the city’s largest business improvement districts, has a long history with Lower Manhattan. While she now calls a two-bedroom co-op in Midtown East home, in 1993 she was in the first graduating class of Stuyvesant High School’s Lower Manhattan campus. “Lower Manhattan was a ghost town on nights and weekends,” she said of the early 1990s. Since then, it has become one of the fastest-growing neighborhoods in the city. Ms. Lappin, 41, lives with her husband, Andrew Wuertele, 42, the chief administrative officer at East River Medical Imaging, and their sons, Lucas, 9, and Miles, 5.
PODS, PAPER I usually wake up around 6:45. My oldest son, Lucas, and I are up early together. He’s a big reader of fantasy adventure — right now it is “Ranger’s Apprentice” — so he will sit in a chair by the window and read while I make myself coffee. We have a Nespresso machine with all the different colored pods, which I’m addicted to, and a milk frother. I’ll check email and Twitter and read the Sunday Times.
MORNING MILES Then I’ll go for a run. I like to run in Central Park. Running is definitely my private time to clear my head and think things through. I like being outside and in nature. I ran the marathon in 2014, which was the first time I had done anything like that. Unfortunately, last year I broke my ankle in three places playing soccer with the kids, and I wasn’t sure I would be able to run again. But I just did the Staten Island Half Marathon. While I run I listen to pop music. I have my own Spotify playlist that I update periodically. So I’ll do around eight to 10 miles, a good 60 to 90 minutes.
A LOT OF LOX When I get back from my run, Andy will go to Tal Bagels and pick up breakfast. I have a whole wheat everything bagel, as does he, and the boys get cinnamon raisin with lox. Not just a little bit of lox, either. My kids consume a large amount of lox. And cream cheese, of course. I’ll also throw something easy in the slow cooker for later in the afternoon. Andy’s parents are from Colorado, and there are these Hatch green chilies that they can get only once a year, so I will use them to make green chili or chicken enchiladas or pork tacos.
ROOSEVELT RIDE Since the spring, Lucas and I go on long bike rides. His birthday was in March and he got a new bike; it’s a neon-green Specialized. It is really fun to map out routes. We often do Roosevelt Island. We live close to the tram, so we will take that over. They have a loop you can bike around, which is great for kids because you are separate from the cars and it isn’t too crowded with people.
TEAM LOYALTY When we get back, it’s football time. Andy grew up playing high school football in Nebraska and he’s an avid University of Pittsburgh football fan, while I was raised on the Jets. We’ve adopted each other’s teams. I have one of those old-fashioned air popper popcorn makers and we’ll eat whatever I made in the slow cooker. At halftime Miles will get antsy, so we will bake something. I’ll measure all the ingredients, and he will put everything into the bowls; he especially likes to work the stand mixer. We have a few standards, like a quick banana or zucchini bread. Or he might successfully lobby for cookies. He has a particular Thomas Keller chocolate cookie with chocolate chunks that he likes.
SUSHI SUNDAYS On Saturday nights I tend to cook and make something more elaborate, so on Sundays I like to take a break. We order a lot of sushi. Our go-to is Fusha. Having dinner as a family has always been a priority for us. It is a nice way to end the week.
LAUGHTER BEFORE SLEEP We tend to eat around 8:30, so then it is bedtime: pajamas, brushing teeth, story and then lights out. Then Andy and I have some quiet time together. We will map out the week ahead, who is going to drop-off each morning and who will be home each evening. Then we will zone out in bed, usually to comedy shows that we have on our DVR from earlier in the week. It is usually “Modern Family,” and until recently, it was “S.N.L.” Andy would also watch “Game of Thrones,” but I need comedy before bed.