This may sound like an awkward line, but this introduction to an introduction is a precise encapsulation of his self-satirizing and fluid aesthetic, drawing attention to its own artifice, perpetually shifting gears and blurring the lines between setup and punch line. But it’s also a joke on how stubbornly he resists categorization. What kind of weird comedy is this? His answer: Here it is.
With its cheesy theme song and laugh track, “Crowe’s Nest” satirizes 1970s television (“Improvised in front of a live studio audience”), but this comedy isn’t so much mocking the world as creating its own. This is a show that never stays still, a deliberate mess that shifts moods and genres, tossing together tap dancing, beatboxing and multiple costume changes with the anything-goes spirit of vaudeville.
Mr. Watts can seem more delighted by words than ideas, and yet he might be most tickled by sounds. During his show he clicks his tongue, speeds up a story so it’s incomprehensible, adopts multiple accents. Sometimes these shifts serve a joke or a satiric point. But just as often, Mr. Watts aims for the pure childish pleasure of gibberish.
But to the extent that Mr. Watts is making fun of anything, he’s doing it gently. For an artist with experimental tendencies, he isn’t aiming to confront or tear anything down. His mood is welcoming, just messing around, without an ounce of anxiety. It’s infectious. At the end, he dresses up as Don Cornelius from “Soul Train,” a disco ball appears and his audience dances.
This raucous celebration brings to mind a recent live show by another oddball experimentalist. At last month’s New York Comedy Festival, Tig Notaro, who after becoming famous for a stand-up set about her cancer diagnosis, returned to her more abstract roots, ending her performance by repeatedly introducing the Indigo Girls to the stage. They didn’t show up, again and again, turning this into a bit about introductions, before, finally, the band walked onstage and played.
Generally, comics try to end their set with surefire jokes that will get big laughs, but as anyone who has seen a musical knows, to reach a certain emotional peak, sometimes you need to move into song. For a comic to do so, however, means the goal is something other than just laughter. In these rousing finales, performers skip past funny and head right toward happy.