■ Representative Peter T. King meets with President-elect Donald J. Trump, and emerges afterward to suggest a national surveillance program modeled on one that ran afoul of the law in New York City.
■ Mr. Trump was back on Twitter on Thursday morning, questioning Russia’s involvement in the election; targeting an old nemesis, the magazine editor Graydon Carter; and defending his business interests.
■ The transition team is considering the Navy’s first four-star female admiral to be secretary of veterans affairs.
Congressman proposes national surveillance effort like New York’s. Targeting Muslims?
Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York, after meeting with the president-elect in Trump Tower, proposed that Mr. Trump adopt a national counterterrorism strategy based on the surveillance efforts of Ray Kelly, the former New York police commissioner.
If it takes up the suggestion, the Trump administration will need some good lawyers.
The Kelly-era method of intelligence gathering was accused of targeting Muslims and has been the subject of years of litigation. A federal judge recently ruled that the New York Police Department had shown a “systemic inclination” to ignore rules protecting free speech and religion. Under Mr. Kelly, the city put its police intelligence division under the leadership of a retired C.I.A. officer and sought to build a domestic intelligence-gathering operation in that mold.
Among its contentious tactics, the department labeled mosques as potential terrorist organizations, allowing officers to tape entire sermons and collect information about anyone who attended prayer services. Plainclothes detectives hung out in restaurants and cafes in Muslim neighborhoods, eavesdropping on conversations and keeping notes about how customers felt about drone strikes, foreign policy and politics.
“They were very effective for stopping terrorism, and they should be a model for the country,” Mr. King said.
He did not mention that an attempted car bombing in Times Square was thwarted only by a bad design, or that the most significant Al Qaeda plot against the city since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks slipped through the department’s net.
In that case, the department had no intelligence on Najibullah Zazi, a trained Qaeda operative living in Queens and visiting the very businesses and mosques that were under surveillance. He was identified by the National Security Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation before he could bomb the city’s subway system.
President-elect still doesn’t believe Russia meddled in election.
The president-elect returned to Twitter on Thursday, again questioning the Central Intelligence Agency’s conclusion that Russia inserted itself into the election to help him win.
In point of fact, virtually everything in the post is misleading — including the spelling of “wait,” which he later corrected.
On Oct. 7, the Obama administration formally accused Russia of being behind the hacking of the Democratic National Committee, of stealing emails from Democrats including Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman, John D. Podesta, and of leaking them to the public through WikiLeaks and other outlets.
In diplomatic parlance, that was an “attribution.” The action that was taken at the time was a private conversation between President Obama and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, warning of retaliation if he took the cyberattacks further.
The administration said it would respond proportionately. The criticism that the response has not been robust enough has been bipartisan.
Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner to the White House, after all.
A senior adviser to Mr. Trump on Thursday indicated that his oldest daughter, Ivanka, and her husband, Mr. Kushner, are likely to take formal roles in the White House, saying the transition team believes there’s an “exception” to the anti-nepotism law.
“The anti-nepotism law apparently has an exception if you want to work in the West Wing, because the president is able to appoint his own staff,” said the adviser, Kellyanne Conway, who was Mr. Trump’s final campaign manager, on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” program.
Ms. Conway said that whichever children went into the White House would need a “complete distinction and separation” from Trump business ties, which she called a “sacrifice” for them.
“These young men and women are at the top of their earning game,” Ms. Conway said.
Democrats are unlikely to accept at face value the notion of a carve-out in the nepotism laws.
Transition eyes female admiral to head V.A.
Mr. Trump’s transition team is looking at Adm. Michelle J. Howard, the first woman to become a four-star Navy admiral, as a potential choice to lead the beleaguered Department of Veterans Affairs, a person close to the transition process said.
Admiral Howard would bring a lengthy and detailed résumé of service in the armed forces to an agency that was plagued by controversy during President Obama’s tenure. She would fit with Mr. Trump’s affection for military officers — he has named two generals to his cabinet so far and one as his national security adviser. She would also be the second African-American to join the cabinet.
Aides to Mr. Trump said that they were getting many suggestions and that the pick for the V.A. would take some time. Mainline veterans groups have asked the president-elect to keep the current secretary, Robert A. McDonald, a former Procter & Gamble chief executive. He is seen as turning the agency around after a series of scandals under his predecessor, Gen. Eric K. Shinseki.
But people in the Trump circle like the idea of a military figure with management experience.
Another Fox commentator for the N.S.C.?
Monica Crowley, the Fox News commentator who worked with President Richard M. Nixon on his last two books, is likely to be named as a strategic communications adviser to the National Security Council, according to two people close to the transition.
The appointment would put Ms. Crowley in the sphere of influence led by Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, the president’s pick for national security adviser. Ms. Crowley had been mentioned as a possible pick for White House press secretary early in the process.
She would join K.T. McFarland, another Fox personality, who has been chosen to be General Flynn’s deputy.
Trump tweets. Decades-long vendetta continues.
He may be about to become the leader of the free world, but Mr. Trump still holds a grudge against Graydon Carter that started in the days of Spy magazine and that continues with the magazine Mr. Carter now edits, Vanity Fair.
After holding his fingers back for a few days, the president-elect went on Twitter again Thursday.
There was no immediate word of what set off the soon-to-be commander in chief, but it could be that Vanity Fair suggested that Trump Grill in New York might be the worst restaurant in America.
Donald Trump is “a poor person’s idea of a rich person,” Fran Lebowitz recently observed at the Vanity Fair New Establishment Summit. “They see him. They think, ‘If I were rich, I’d have a fabulous tie like that.’ ” Nowhere, perhaps, does this reflection appear more accurate than at Trump Grill (which is occasionally spelled Grille on various pieces of signage).
Or the insult of the Trump inaugural committee’s choice of singer for the national anthem.
President-elect defends his business interests — sort of.
While he was posting on Twitter, Mr. Trump threw in some commentary about the news media’s scrutiny of possible conflicts of interest that come with the president-elect of the United States owning business interests around the globe.
Just what that is supposed to mean is unclear. The president-elect owns hotels, resorts and golf courses in Brazil, India, Ireland, the Philippines and Scotland, among other places. They are potential targets of terrorism. Their value depends in part on the actions of the governments of those countries, governments that have a lot of involvement with the United States. And Mr. Trump has already shown that his company wants to expand its reach, offering foreign governments the opportunity to extract favors, and the president a chance to press his own agenda.
The Center for American Progress, which appears to be establishing itself as the anti-Trump think tank, released a report Thursday spelling out its case that come Jan. 20, the president of the United States will be violating the Constitution.
“As it stands, Trump will be in violation of the Constitution the day he takes office because a key anti-foreign corruption provision, the Emoluments Clause, bars the president from receiving payments or things of value from foreign states or their agents. As America’s founders understood, if foreign governments can give payments to federal officials, then those federal officials can be bought.
Well, the bar is low.
According to a CBS News poll, expectations for the Trump presidency will not be too difficult to meet.
With Inauguration Day a little over a month away, just over a third of Americans (34 percent) think President-elect Donald Trump will be a good or very good president, and an additional 23 percent think he will be average. Meanwhile, 36 percent think he will be a poor president. But expectations are strongly influenced by partisanship: 60 percent of Democrats expect him to be a poor president, while seven in 10 Republicans think President-elect Trump will be a good or very good president.
That could be a reflection of Mr. Trump’s low approval ratings, but it is more likely an image of a polarized nation — a third of the country hates their incoming president, a third love him and a quarter cannot be bothered.
Trump’s son is said to have dismissed front-runner for interior secretary.
The short-lived candidacy of Representative Cathy McMorris Rodgers of Washington for interior secretary was described by two people close to the transition team as stemming from concerns that the president-elect’s eldest son, Don Jr., had with her.
The Department of the Interior is one of the few agencies that the younger Mr. Trump has shown an interest in — he is an avid hunter — and he is said to have highlighted negative comments Ms. McMorris Rodgers made about the president-elect during the campaign. As the chairwoman of the House Republican Conference, she would have given the Trump cabinet a voice from congressional leadership — and another woman, currently in short supply.
Others familiar with the situation said that the elder Mr. Trump was put off by seeing Ms. McMorris Rodgers characterized in news reports as the expected choice — a reminder that getting ahead of announcements by a president-elect comes with risks, particularly with this one.
Mr. Trump formally tapped Representative Ryan Zinke, Republican of Montana, for the post on Thursday.
And environmentalists may be heartened by Mr. Zinke’s response.
Senate Democrats try to force Trump to sell assets.
Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and several of her Democratic colleagues said they would introduce legislation requiring the president and vice president to divest any assets that create a financial conflict of interest.
Under the legislation, money from divesting assets would go into a blind trust that would be managed by an independent trustee.
The senators — Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, Chris Coons of Delaware, Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, Jeff Merkley of Oregon and Ms. Warren — announced their proposal at the same time Mr. Trump had planned to hold a news conference to discuss his plans to leave his real estate business.
But that news conference has been delayed until January, even though Mr. Trump said on Monday that “no new deals will be done” by his business while he is in office.
But that pledge did little to mollify lawmakers worried about his existing financial ties and the global reach of his business.
