KANSAS CITY, Mo. — Tyreek Hill had touchdowns on a reception and on a punt return, and the Kansas City Chiefs defense made life miserable for Oakland quarterback Derek Carr in a 21-13 victory over the Raiders on a frigid Thursday night to take control of the A.F.C. West.
Charcandrick West also had a rushing touchdown for the Chiefs (10-3). Kansas City moved into a first-place tie with Oakland (10-3) but holds the tiebreaker with wins in both games between the two teams this season.
Carr completed 17 of 41 passes for 117 yards, though the poor stat line was not entirely his fault.
Seth Roberts dropped just about everything thrown at him, Amari Cooper could not adjust to a long throw for a would-be touchdown early in the fourth quarter, and several more passes were dropped to the hardened turf of Arrowhead Stadium on a night when the wind chill factor approached single digits.
Alex Smith threw for 261 yards with a touchdown and an interception for the Chiefs, who beat Oakland in their return home from back-to-back road wins. It was Kansas City’s seventh win in its last eight games against Oakland.
Hill did not seem bothered by the cold, scorching the Raiders for a 36-yard touchdown reception before taking a punt back 78 yards for another score. It made him the first rookie since Gale Sayers in 1965 with touchdowns on the ground, through the air, and on punt and kickoff returns in a single season.
It was still 21-3 when the Chiefs lost linebacker Derrick Johnson to an Achilles’ tendon injury, and that seemed to briefly deflate the team. Oakland proceeded to march 92 yards for a touchdown just before halftime.
But the Raiders kept coming up empty with their chances in the second half.
Smith threw an interception on the second play of the third quarter, but Oakland had to settle for a field goal on the ensuing drive. And when Smith was strip-sacked by Khalil Mack on the next play from scrimmage, the Raiders again had to try a field goal — only this time, the holder, Marquette King, could not get the snap down.
The Raiders’ last chance came with about two minutes left, when a questionable pass interference penalty and a fourth-and-4 conversion enabled them to drive deep into Kansas City territory. But after the Raiders committed a false start on fourth-and-1, a pass by Carr toward the end zone was batted away.
The Chiefs went on to pick up the first down they needed to put the game away.