Our guide to film series and special screenings. All our movie reviews are at nytimes.com/reviews/movies.
CURATORS’ CHOICE at Museum of the Moving Image (Dec. 30-Jan. 8). This series offers another chance for moviegoers to catch some of the most offbeat releases of the year, like Ryusuke Hamaguchi’s Japanese drama “Happy Hour” (Dec. 31), which runs more than five hours and observes the lives of four close friends in Kobe. Proudly discursive, the movie does not hesitate to devote long stretches of screen time to a trust-building class or to an author’s reading. The program also includes Chantal Akerman’s final feature, “No Home Movie” (Jan 1.). Manohla Dargis, who named it the best film of 2016, wrote in a review for The New York Times that “like any number of Ms. Akerman’s other movies, this one revisits some of her preoccupations — home, exile, memory, identity, bodies, specifically the female body, on- and offscreen space — through the prism of Natalia,” her mother.
ORIGINAL MOTION PICTURE SOUNDTRACKS: THE ’90S at the Alamo Drafthouse Downtown Brooklyn (Jan. 2-30). This Drafthouse program highlights movies from the 1990s that are ostensibly known for their soundtracks — as opposed to movies that have soundtracks of ’90s music, which would rule out “Velvet Goldmine” (Jan. 4), Todd Haynes’s wild attempt to fuse “Citizen Kane” with a fictionalized glam-rock biopic. Other selections include “Pump Up the Volume” (Jan. 17) and “New Jack City” (Jan. 30). Some screenings, like the showing of “Wayne’s World” on Jan. 2, have what’s being billed as an interactive party component, for viewers who can’t resist to bopping along to Queen with Wayne, Garth and company.
MARCEL PAGNOL’S MARSEILLE TRILOGY at Film Forum (Jan. 4-12). Often remade and revisited but never equaled, Pagnol’s Marseille trilogy — consisting of “Marius” and “Fanny,” Pagnol plays that were made into films by Alexander Korda in 1931 and Marc Allégret in 1932, and the straight-to-screen “César,” directed by Pagnol himself in 1936 — remains a classic of poetic French cinema. With cumulative emotional force, the three films tell the story of a gentle bar owner, César (the hulking, powerfully moving Raimu); his son, Marius (Pierre Fresnay), who loves Fanny (Orane Demazis) but can’t resist the siren call of the world away from home; and the widower Panisse (Charpin), a sailmaker who wishes to marry Fanny.
