Once is happenstance, twice is coincidence, three times and it’s a pattern: On the strength of the third excellent “Empire” episode in a row, it’s now safe to declare the show on a hot streak.
The reasons are intriguing. Yes, this episode had an outrageous, if interrupted, sex scene between Lucious Lyon and his wife-of-convenience Anika, in which actor Grace Byers seemed to have more fun in her role of the femme fatale than ever before. (At least until Lucious’s mother, Leah, walked in on them rolling around on the dining room table and shouted: “Y’all humpin’ on the table like yard dogs? That’s where I eat!”) It also featured an intriguing development in which Leah, seemingly her own son’s worst enemy, serves as his secret spy in her dealings with his half brother and nemesis, the F.B.I. agent Tariq Cousins. Finally, it benefited greatly from the fabulous presence of Gina Gershon as Helene Von Wyatt, a viciously snobby fashion designer whose upcoming show is a chance for the Lyon family to prove its upper-crust bona fides to Cookie’s new boyfriend, Angelo DuBois, and his elitist mother.
But even more promisingly, the episode continues to build up important structural elements for the show as a whole. In Andre Lyon, it has a villain worth reckoning with. It addresses the thorny intersection of race, entertainment and commerce with an unsparing eye that it’s not afraid to turn on itself. And it directly addresses the season’s biggest flaw: Wouldn’t they all be better off without Lucious? Well … yeah.
Going point by point, Andre’s heel turn is working beautifully. When Cookie chews him out for missing the big family dinner with Angelo and his imperious mother, Dre gets emotional, explaining that he was meeting Nessa’s family instead. Cookie’s anger is frozen in its tracks as her beloved son, tears in his eyes, says that he finally feels like he can move on from his late wife, Rhonda, and find happiness with someone else.
Andre’s act was so convincing I was literally taking notes about how well the scene conveyed Cookie’s and her sons’ unshakable love for one another when I realized it was all a ruse —- designed to maneuver Nessa into taking Tiana’s place in the big fashion show. In the arms race against his rivals for power, particularly his father, feigned emotional vulnerability is a weapon in Andre’s arsenal that few others can match.
The ensuing story line is “Empire” at its most ruthlessly entertaining — a dizzying mix of pop-culture references and sociopolitical button-pushing. Nessa “accidentally” torches the couture dress Tiana is supposed to wear during the show, setting off a furious tirade from the more seasoned star about the designer’s racism — that the up-and-comer surreptitiously films and leaks to the internet. Nessa may not have pushed Tiana down the stairs to take her place, but the connection to Gershon’s fate in the camp classic “Showgirls” is crystal clear.
With Tiana out of the picture, Andre pitches Nessa as a replacement and gets a double-barrel blast of Helene’s “I’m no racist, but …” rhetoric in person. “A preference is not a prejudice,” she says regarding her use of straight-haired, stick-thin white models. “You people expect change overnight.” Dre responds, quite shockingly, by going after Helene’s 8-year-old daughter, in a comically meanspirited “Godfather” spoof. Instead of waking up to a severed horse’s head, the daughter finds herself surrounded with the chopped-off locks of her own long, straight hair. (This is at least one meaning of “The Unkindest Cut” from the episode’s title, one of the first times in recent memory that the show’s deliciously over-the-top titles actually had some tangible connection to the events depicted therein.) Suddenly, not only is Nessa in the show — her hair most definitely not straight — she’s also singing a paean to the beauty and power of African-American women called “Black Girl Magic.” After sitting through Helene’s skin-crawlingly realistic bigotry, it’s a joy to watch and hear.
Of course, it’s also the culmination of Andre and Nessa’s whole cynical scheme. The two are far from the first characters on the show to use valid social-justice rhetoric for personal gain — remember Cookie staging the “Free Lucious” rally, railing against the disproportionately sky-high incarceration rate of black men as a ploy to exonerate a man she knew to be guilty of murder? “Empire” has always cared too much about the political and cultural issues it tackles to let their commercialization and exploitation by compromised corporations like Empire — or, one supposes, Fox — go unexamined.
More unexpected and almost as welcome is the show’s evident acknowledgment that Lucious is the root of all evil. In a zanily tech-heavy twist, Jamal’s trauma counselor uses a virtual-reality crowd simulator to see how the singer will respond to the stress of performing in front of a large audience again. But it’s only when Jamal’s father shows up unannounced to browbeat the kid about his gunshot-induced stage fright that the younger Lyon’s pulse skyrockets. It’s a eureka moment. “Lucious is your PTSD trigger,” the counselor says. “Man, Lucious is everybody’s PTSD trigger,” Jamal half jokes.
But the truth comes out in jest. In the episode’s final scene, Jamal gathers the family and confronts his father with a song that itemizes the man’s many crimes in explicit detail, from faking his own mother’s death to letting Cookie do a 17-year prison term in his stead. Is Jamal grateful for all the advantages of fame and fortune his father has provided to him and his brothers? Yes, but. “If you ain’t gonna lead us anywhere but heartache, then we’re gonna have to leave you behind,” he tells Lucious. It’s about time somebody said so.