In her profile picture, the girl is seated at a tidy, wooden desk, a sweet smile spread across her face, her brown eyes gazing up from a picture book and straight into the camera. Her long, brown hair is neatly tied back and topped with a delicate pink bow. The face is that of Bana al-Abed, according to the person posting to the Twitter account, who identifies herself as Fatemah, Bana’s mother.
Around the time the account appeared, a new offensive had been launched in Aleppo by Syrian forces, backed by Russian support, in the government’s latest bid to retake rebel-held areas. As airstrike after airstrike pounded these neighborhoods, still inhabited by thousands of people, the account set up in Bana al-Abed’s name tweeted the daily fears, hopes and frustrations of the girl and her family.
Soon, tens of thousands of people, myself included, were following her tweets. I quickly reached out to the person behind the account with a simple message asking for more information. Fatemah, who told me she was Bana’s 26-year-old mother, got back to me.
I was interested to hear her story, as she was one of a handful of English-language sources tweeting about the city.
We began chatting regularly, though limited cell service in eastern Aleppo meant we spoke on WhatsApp messenger, both through text and voice messages. Her insights proved vital for a piece I was working on about hunger and deprivation for civilians in Syria.
Fatemah shared scenes from inside their home for the piece myself and a colleague, Yara Bishara, produced about the ever-growing hunger crisis.
“Hello my friend, Miss Megan” she began her voice memos, describing in polite but halting English how she was able to provide for her family despite limited access to food. She shared videos of Bana stirring pasta on the stove and filmed as she made bread by hand for her family of five.
Alongside these private conversations I was having with Fatemah, Bana’s account was offering the public a look at the family’s day-to-day. Fatemah, who is a fluent English-speaker, said she taught her daughter the language, and kept having her read and speak English even after her school was shut.
Fatemah’s tweets gave a look into the life of her child, living in the midst of conflict, providing a face and a name for people to identify with a war that has often become too gruesome to fully grasp. Here, followers could see photos and videos of Bana reading books or showing off a recently lost tooth.
But there were moments of darkness too. Clips showed Bana and her two siblings walking between the spectral remains of bombed out buildings, or gazing at the night sky as blasts rang out in the background.
The tweets also forced journalists like myself to ask tough questions about the veracity of the information being shared. I have little doubt that the family is in eastern Aleppo and that Bana’s mother is the woman that I spoke with. I also believe that Bana’s mother is the driving force behind the account, something she makes very clear on the Twitter, though there is no way to know if she has written every tweet.
I was able to geolocate many of the videos shared on her account to a specific cluster of buildings, cross-verify photos with other scenes showing the aftermath of bombings in the Al Shaar district, and dig up clips showing the family sitting alongside well-known Aleppo-based opposition activists.
In some of the shared clips, Bana recites rehearsed messages calling for an end to the bombing. These feel disconnected from a few other gruesome images shared on the account — children lying dead in the street, disembodied arms holding backpacks — which offer little explanation and were not originally taken by Fatemah.
Some of the clips appear to show Bana being prompted from off camera, leading some to question the tone of the account. When @AlabedBana was deactivated for a short time last weekend, this skepticism kicked into high gear.
The family faced allegations from supporters of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad that they are functioning as a mouthpiece for local opposition fighters. Some questioned the veracity of the information being shared, and the agenda of those sharing it. The fact that Bana appears to be coached and prompted from the other side of the camera sparked comments from critics about her being used as a propaganda tool.  Others have called into question if the family even exists. Meanwhile, well-known activists living in east Aleppo have staunchly defended the family.
I messaged Fatemah again last week. She described ongoing shelling in the opposition-held area where they had taken shelter, but said all three of her children were safe.
I asked her why she had decided to set up the Twitter account in the first place and what inspired her to open it in Bana’s name. Her answer was simple.
Fatemah said the decision to temporarily close the account came when their neighborhood was recaptured by the Syrian army.
I asked if the family was looking for ways out of the besieged city.
“Of course, we are so desperate but we need assurance & safety,” said Fatemah, alluding to fears that opposition activists face in entering areas under government control.
Bana is a child caught in the middle of a conflict that has become increasingly complicated in the years it has dragged on, and this is the complexity that came into play when I was reporting on her. The story of the family is not a simple one — but in times of conflict, few stories are.