Baltimore health officials say it was an out-of-state investment company that entered into a rent-to-own lease with the unemployed Ms. Bennett to take the home in 2014 “as is” — chipping, peeling lead paint and all.
Ms. Bennett, 46, and the children moved out, but they should never have been in the house at all. City officials had declared the house “unfit for human habitation” in 2013.
These investors, however, often put no money toward renovation, or for fixing lead paint problems. The low-income buyers and renters are forced to make all repairs. When there are serious problems with the homes, victims can be required to sign confidentiality agreements to keep them quiet in a settlement after they have been compensated, as happened in Ms. Bennett’s case.
“Unfortunately they have this contract which removes the actual owner of the home from the liabilities of fixing the home and requires these people who have no money to fix their own home,” said Dr. Jennifer Lowry, chief of toxicology in the pediatrics unit of Children’s Mercy Hospital in Kansas City.
“What I care about is this kid who has elevated blood levels and yet I can’t get anybody to fix the home,” she said.
Vision failed to register the property with Baltimore housing officials after buying it in 2014 from Fannie Mae, the government-controlled mortgage finance firm. It then ignored the city’s previous building code violation, according to public records reviewed by The New York Times.
The details of Ms. Bennett’s situation were pieced together through interviews with public officials, court records and documents provided through public records requests to various city and state agencies. Some of the documents were redacted to protect the privacy of the children.
A representative for Vision said that the company “does not comment on the specific details of matters pertaining to tenants or properties” and that noted the matter with Ms. Bennett had been resolved.
When it came to fixing the lead issues in Ms. Bennett’s home, Vision did not respond to the city’s request in late 2015. The company has argued its contracts put all responsibility for repairs on its tenants.
Jason Hessler, deputy assistant commissioner for Baltimore Housing, said, “The house was in violation at the time it was sold by Fannie Mae to Vision and was supposed to be unoccupied until approved by the building department.” But he added that unless it was obvious that someone had moved into a house without the department’s permission, building inspectors might not know.
For many poor families who want to own a house and cannot get a mortgage, nontraditional housing transactions like Ms. Bennett’s have become their only option. Some do not understand what they are signing.
“Pretty much everything is on me,” said Ms. Harrell, who works as a cashier at a local Home Depot.
Now she worries about the chipping paint on the banister in the home, which was built in 1915, adding that her son had tested positive for lead while living in another house. “I figured maybe I could try to get someone out to break off the paint and paint over it,” she added.
In New York State, some grants provided to residents in rural communities to eliminate “critical health and safety threats” from homes, including lead paint, specifically exclude anyone buying a home with a contract for deed.
In Ms. Bennett’s case, Baltimore’s health department sued a limited liability company tied to Vision in December 2015 for failing to promptly comply with an order to eliminate the lead paint condition in the home.
Many of Vision’s homes were bought cheaply from Fannie Mae and had been empty for years. Vision bought the house at 524 Loudon Avenue from Fannie for about $5,000.
Maryland’s environmental agency says some 1,100 children age 6 or younger tested positive for elevated lead levels in the city of Baltimore in 2015.
“This is something that everyone has an obligation to fix — certainly the landlord has an obligation as well,” said Dr. Leana Wen, Baltimore’s health commissioner.
In 2012, legal aid lawyers in Minnesota sued Vision on behalf of a couple with four children and two grandchildren, contending the company knowingly sold them, through a contract for deed, a home in Minneapolis that the city determined had a “severe” lead paint problem. Conditions in the home, which Vision bought from Fannie Mae, were so bad that the city posted a “do not occupy” warning notice on the house.
Ms. Norton’s group is proposing that government housing agencies be required to eliminate dangerous lead conditions in vacant and foreclosed homes before putting them on the market.
“We should not allow houses to go on the market that will poison children,” said Ms. Norton, whose organization provided assistance to Ms. Bennett.
