The Golden Globes have a recent history of confounding expectations (“Mozart in the Jungle”) and latching on to buzzy new shows (“Mr. Robot”) in their TV nominations. This year’s nods feel less adventurous. Even though four new shows made the field for drama series, none of them was unexpected. With so much new TV to process all the time, it becomes more difficult for existing series to break through the chatter. Witness “Mr. Robot,” gone from the drama nominees after winning in its first season.
Breaking through with a drama-series nomination at the Emmys didn’t help “The Americans,” which was left out of that category once again. At least the FX series broke its Golden Globes jinx — no nominations through its first three seasons — with acting nods for Keri Russell and Matthew Rhys.
NBC’s “This Is Us” was a non-surprise surprise in the drama-series category — its nomination was widely predicted, given the tear-jerker’s ratings success. But it’s not a show anyone would have expected to see on this list when the fall season began.
HBO’s “Divorce” hasn’t moved the needle very far with critics or viewers, but it was a dark-horse favorite for a comedy-series nomination because its star, Sarah Jessica Parker, has long been a favorite of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (as shown by her nomination for lead actress).
The Epix political comedy “Graves” got very little attention, but apparently someone noticed Nick Nolte’s gruff performance as an apologetic former president. Or maybe they just wanted an excuse to invite him to the awards party.
FX’s “Atlanta” drew expected nominations for comedy series and for Donald Glover as lead actor. But its breakout star, Lakeith Stanfield, who plays a rapper’s zoned-out (but wise) assistant, didn’t make it into the supporting actor field. Will the Globes be treated to a Kanye West-style acceptance-speech-bomb like the one Mr. Stanfield pulled at the Critics’ Choice Awards on Sunday?
Starz’s “The Dresser” beat out some heavy hitters in the limited-series or movie category, including HBO’s “All the Way” and “Confirmation” and Netflix’s “Gilmore Girls” revival.
It’s hard to imagine that “The Dresser” would have received any consideration if not for its stars, Ian McKellen and Anthony Hopkins, so it’s puzzling that neither of them was nominated for an acting award.
