I felt like I had the wind knocked out of me, a sensation I had not experienced in decades — maybe even since I was a kid playing soccer (terribly).
It happened as I watched the beautifully realized Broadway revival of the 1992 musical “Falsettos,” by William Finn and James Lapine. In the middle of the second act, two of the central characters, the gay men Marvin, played by Christian Borle, and Whizzer, played by Andrew Rannells, have reunited after breaking up at the end of the first.
The song captures the overriding tone of the show, to this point: tart and antically funny, even as it explores the complicated, sometimes antagonistic yet loving relationships among the principals. But just a few scenes later — while we’re watching Marvin and Whizzer, Jewish men who can play racquetball play racquetball — Whizzer suddenly begins to fight for air, and eventually collapses. “I can’t go on anymore,” he manages to say.
It was then that I lost my breath, too. Suddenly I remembered what was coming: The musical is set in 1979 and the early 1980s, when a mysterious illness, whose origins were still unknown, began to claim lives by the dozens, then the hundreds and thousands, mainly gay men. I had actually seen “Falsettos” more than two decades ago, in Los Angeles shortly after it played Broadway. In the intervening years, I had forgotten the details of its plot, but in that instant I knew that this buoyant musical comedy was taking an inexorable turn toward heartbreak. There would be no happy ever after for Marvin and Whizzer.
The scene, acted with beautiful simplicity by Mr. Rannells and Mr. Borle, whose Marvin rushes to Whizzer’s aid, affected me as no other in the theater this year — as did the concluding, devastating scenes of the show — because it was like being thrust in a time capsule and brought back to the terrible years when the AIDS epidemic was at full force. I was living in Los Angeles in the late 1980s, in my 20s, and, as a gay man with many gay friends, existed in what can only be called a constant state of mortal anxiety: anxiety for my health but also that of so many people I knew, and many more that I didn’t.
I was among the lucky. By the time I reached college, much was known about AIDS and its transmission. I lost only one good friend to the disease — one too many of course, and, cruelly, one of the kindest people I have ever known — but many acquaintances.
Watching Marvin, Whizzer and their extended family, including Marvin’s neighbors, a lesbian couple, one of whom is a doctor who has begun treating men with this unnamed new disease, grapple with Whizzer’s illness, was on one level unbearably sad. But measuring and mirroring the sadness in life is among the theater’s — and art’s — purposes. Giving audiences a chance to relive, or for younger audiences, experience for the first time, the anguish and uncertainty of the years when AIDS ravaged the gay community, is as necessary as bearing witness to the world’s current ills (as, for instance, Lynn Nottage’s powerful play “Sweat,” which moves to Broadway this spring, does).
Moreover, when we watch sad or tragic events unfold onstage, we are in the company of hundreds of fellow theatergoers. The sense of shared compassion evoked — and sometimes expressed, through cathartic tears or a collective hushed silence — can in itself provide solace, binding us together in a feeling of shared humanity.
Of course this revival is not the first time the New York theater has revisited this time period. Larry Kramer’s full-throated polemical drama “The Normal Heart,” first produced at the Public Theater in 1985, was revived by the same theater in 2004, and another production opened on Broadway in 2011. Tony Kushner’s majestic epic “Angels in America,” first seen on Broadway in 1993, was revived by the Signature Theater Company in 2010. But both of those plays are almost entirely about the epidemic, the cultural clashes it inspired, and its impact on the lives of its characters. And while both are leavened with wit, they are fundamentally serious plays.
In other words you know what you are getting when you go in, whereas “Falsettos” — even the title has a bright chime about it — is in many ways a traditional musical comedy, a genre that does not regularly encompass the dark realities of death and disease. I suppose that’s why Whizzer’s sudden fit of wheezing hit me so hard. I was having such a good time commiserating with the characters’ comical neuroses and their attempts to achieve emotional equilibrium, in songs featuring music and lyrics that often have the peppery charm of light operetta, that I was blindsided by the onset of Whizzer’s illness.
