WASHINGTON — President-elect Donald J. Trump plans to nominate Vincent Viola, the billionaire founder of a high-frequency trading company, as secretary of the Army, the Trump transition office said.
Mr. Viola, a retired Army major and graduate of West Point, is the owner of the National Hockey League’s Florida Panthers, former chairman of the New York Mercantile Exchange and founder of Virtu Financial.
He is worth $1.8 billion, according to Forbes, making him one of the 400 wealthiest Americans. He joins a growing list of billionaires selected by Mr. Trump for senior administration positions.
If confirmed by the Senate, Mr. Viola, 61, would be the Army’s senior civilian leader, succeeding Eric Fanning, the highest-ranking openly gay person at the Pentagon. Mr. Fanning has been helping to guide the country’s largest military service as it undertakes a sweeping integration of women into combat roles and lets openly gay soldiers serve.
Mr. Viola would report to Gen. James N. Mattis, Mr. Trump’s choice for secretary of defense, if the Senate confirms General Mattis, a retired four-star officer in the Marines.
A person familiar with Pentagon appointments for the transition said that General Mattis had reached an agreement with Vice President-elect Mike Pence that the new defense secretary would choose who would fill the top policy jobs at the Pentagon — like under secretary of defense and general counsel — while the White House would select the service secretaries, like Mr. Viola.
Mr. Viola, a native of Brooklyn, graduated from Ranger School and served in the 101st Airborne Division. He holds a degree from New York Law School.
Mr. Trump has continued to meet with a series of high-profile figures. On Saturday, after holding the final “thank you” rally of his transition, he met with Carlos Slim, the Mexican billionaire, for dinner at his Mar-a-Lago resort, a representative for the transition said on Monday.
The meeting, reported by The Washington Post, was notable because Mr. Trump has vilified Mexico, and at times Mr. Slim, for illegal immigration and the loss of American manufacturing jobs.
As a candidate, he also used Mr. Slim as a target in his frequent assaults on the news media, because Mr. Slim is a major shareholder in The New York Times Company.