NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. — After several failed attempts to improve their roster this week, the Washington Nationals sent a large package of top prospects to the suddenly rebuilding Chicago White Sox on Wednesday for the standout outfielder Adam Eaton.
The Nationals talked to the White Sox about the ace starter Chris Sale, but the Boston Red Sox won the bidding for him. They discussed acquiring a former National League most valuable player, outfielder Andrew McCutchen, from the Pittsburgh Pirates but balked at the price. And they made a bid for the All-Star closer Mark Melancon, but the San Francisco Giants made a more lucrative offer.
So to fill a hole in center field — and allow them to move the budding star Trea Turner back to his natural position, shortstop — the Nationals shipped three of their top 10 prospects, including the much-heralded Lucas Giolito, to Chicago. All three are pitchers.
At first glance, that seemed like a lot to give up for Eaton. But Mike Rizzo, the Nationals’ general manager, has a track record of success in trades and got a player who is coming off perhaps his best all-around season in the major leagues.
Eaton was an excellent defender after moving from center field to right field in 2016 and hit .284 with a .790 on-base plus slugging percentage, 14 home runs and 14 stolen bases.
Still, it seemed as if the White Sox had capitalized on the Nationals’ desire to improve their lineup immediately.
Giolito was the Nationals’ first-round pick in 2012 and one of the top prospects in baseball, but this year he took a step back in the minor leagues and struggled in his first foray in the majors. Still, to get Eaton, it also took Reynaldo Lopez (the Nationals’ third-rated prospect) and Dane Dunning (the team’s sixth-rated prospect and a 2016 first-round pick).
Even with Giolito’s regression, the knee-jerk reaction to the trade across baseball was best described as mild shock.
Over the past two days, the White Sox, who have not reached the playoffs since 2008, have traded Sale and Eaton for seven prospects, five of whom are pitchers. For Sale, the White Sox received infielder Yoan Moncada, viewed by some as the top prospect in baseball, in addition to the hard-throwing prospect Michael Kopech, outfielder Luis Alexander Basabe and pitcher Victor Diaz.
“When we go through this process, part of it is going to be about accumulating as much potential impact talent as we can,” Hahn said.
The Nationals, on the other hand, have won three National League East titles over the past five years but have yet to advance past the first round of the playoffs. They addressed their hole at catcher with a trade for Derek Norris last week. Now they have done the same in center field with Eaton.
Eaton, 28, is under team control for the next five seasons for $38.4 million. That is a bargain for a player who has been worth 12.7 wins above replacement, an advanced statistic that calculates how much a player is worth over an average Class AAA fill-in, since 2014, according to Fangraphs.com.
With the Nationals, Eaton, a left-handed batter, is expected to move back to center field, which would allow Turner to return to shortstop after filling in in the outfield last season. The money the Nationals did not spend in free agency on an expensive outfielder could be used for a closer, and the All-Stars Aroldis Chapman and Kenley Jansen are still available.
“It puts us in a position to do a lot of things,” Rizzo said.
Eaton was not the only center fielder who found a new home Wednesday. Ian Desmond, the Nationals’ former shortstop, agreed to a five-year, $70 million deal with the Colorado Rockies, pending a physical exam, to play first base and some outfield after a bounce-back year with the Texas Rangers in 2016. The Rockies gave up the No. 11 pick in next summer’s draft to land Desmond, who had rejected the Rangers’ qualifying offer.
Desmond learned left field and center field on the fly last season, and he excelled. He will be replaced in center by Carlos Gomez, who rebounded over the final month and a half with the Rangers after being jettisoned by the Houston Astros for his struggles there. Gomez landed a deal worth $11.5 million for one year.