SETTING: This house is in Urban Reserve, a development of about 50 contemporary, architect-designed houses in North Dallas. Developed about 11 years ago with an emphasis on green building, the neighborhood requires each house to be LEED certified, and irrigates using water collected in two retention ponds.
A trail along White Rock Creek passes just outside the development and winds five miles through a lush greenbelt to White Rock Lake, which covers more than 1,000 acres. Route 75, which cuts through to downtown Dallas, about 10 miles south, is a mile away; the DART train stops nearby, too.
INDOORS: The single-story cement-and-stucco house was built in 2006. It was designed by Brent A. Brown, an architect and the founding director of Building Community Workshop, a nonprofit design center in Dallas.
The interior is crisp but muted, with clean lines, stone and concrete floors, and walls of glass. The front door opens to a foyer paneled in Brazilian ipe wood.
The slightly sunken living area, with 14-foot ceilings and a fireplace with a metal accent, and the dining room are open to each other, separated by a couple of steps.
The dining area has a wall of cabinets and a built-in sideboard from Studio Becker, which specializes in sustainable woods and recyclable materials. The room’s large Ingo Maurer chandelier is made from overlapping sheets of gold leaf. Surfaces in the kitchen are reconstituted granite, while the island is Corian. Both the kitchen and the living-and-dining area open to the large side patio and yard.
Bedrooms are toward the back of the house. One opens to a small secondary courtyard; the other two — including the master suite — open to the side patio and yard. The master bathroom has a floating walnut vanity and a glass shower. A two-car garage is attached.
OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is a quarter acre, landscaped with elm, cypress, bamboo and perennials, with a green side yard and a gravel walkway.
SETTING: Gambrills is a rural community of about 2,800 residents, roughly between Baltimore and Washington. This 1936 neo-Classical style house, with elements of Federal and Greek Revival design, was the first in a small subdivision developed in the late 1930s. It has six wooded acres. A commuter train stops a few miles away in Odenton; it takes around 30 minutes to get to either Baltimore or Washington. Annapolis, Md., is 15 miles away.
INDOORS: The house, a white, beadboard-sided structure with gabled roofs and a two-story pedimented porch, is part of the Maryland Historic Trust. Renovated about 10 years ago, the interior is mostly original, including red-oak floors, woodwork and several crystal chandeliers. It has two full stories, plus a finished attic and basement.
Common areas are anchored by a large living room paneled floor to ceiling in American chestnut, with a vaulted, 14-foot ceiling and windows on three sides facing the gardens and woods. At one end of the room is a fireplace with an imposing chestnut mantel. A screened porch addition that mirrors the dimensions of the living room was designed by Walter Schamu, a Baltimore architect.
The formal dining room has paneled wainscoting and a corner hutch; the first floor also has a library paneled in gumwood. Adjoining the library is a small sitting room. The kitchen has granite countertops and abuts a breakfast area with picture windows overlooking the gardens.
Three bedrooms, including the master, are on the second floor. The fourth is at the top of the house, in the finished attic. The lower level is finished as a family room, with access to the two-car garage. Finished space over the garage is used as an office and artist’s studio. Also on the property is a small, single-room playhouse with electricity and a fireplace, built for the original owners’ daughter.
OUTDOOR SPACE: The area around the house is landscaped, with brick patios and more than 2,600 azaleas, as well as a fenced parterre with roses and vegetable beds. A little more than half of the acreage is wooded, with trees including pecan, walnut, beeches, maples and a dawn redwood.
RIVER FALLS, WIS.
SETTING: River Falls is a city on the border between Wisconsin and Minnesota, about 35 miles from downtown Minneapolis. This cottage is in a quiet, wooded area overlooking the St. Croix River, with 150 feet of waterfront, surrounded by land protected as part of a National Scenic Riverway. Most nearby services are in Hudson, about eight miles up the river, toward Minneapolis.
INDOORS: The two-story frame house was built in 2010, using some parts of an existing cabin. It was designed by SALA Architects, a Minnesota firm specializing in gently contemporary takes on Arts and Crafts and timber-frame design.
The interior is clean-lined and bright, with extensive light wood trim and beams, and walls of glass facing the river. Common areas are on an open floor plan on the entry level, with white oak floors and cedar trim.
A sleek fireplace in the living area is flanked on one side by neat birch cabinets and a birch bench seat with storage underneath. French doors in a wall of glass open to a large deck on the river side. The dining area has a set of built-in birch cupboards and an Artemide chandelier.
Kitchen cabinets are birch; countertops are granite. The perimeter of the great room is accented by indirect lighting near the ceiling, set into cedar frames.
The bedroom, upstairs, is a large, bright room with a riverside balcony, a study area with a built-in desk and a Murphy bed. Its en-suite bathroom has ceramic countertops, slate floors and a river rock shower, with a slate and glass surround.
The guesthouse is a single story with a vaulted, wood-paneled ceiling and a loft with a small cupola. An open-plan space with Craftsman-style elements, it has a leaded-glass chandelier over the dining area, separated from the kitchen by a small hutch. The living area has a Vermont Castings wood stove. The cabin is air-conditioned and winterized.
OUTDOOR SPACE: The property is 1.4 acres, with 150 feet of waterfront on a rocky beach. There is no dock, but a chain system is in place for taking in a dock during winter. The lot is sloping and green, with firs, spruces, hemlocks and lodgepole pines.
