One of these days, the selectors ought to get real and vote George Steinbrenner into the Baseball Hall of Fame.
At times he seemed like the worst person in the world — firing managers willy-nilly, ridiculing his own players, breaking the laws of the land as well as those of baseball. However, in that same epoch, the Yankees regained their ancient status, which is to say (with homage to George Orwell), spiked shoes on the neck of the American League.
Known as The Boss, Steinbrenner transformed the Yankees via a ton of television and turnstile money along with the new condition called free agency, plus his own brand of gall. Now his pungent blend of sour and sweet may be keeping him from the Hall, where character is said to be important.
On Sunday, the Hall announced that the former owner and commissioner Bud Selig had been selected by a special veterans committee, as had the longtime executive John Schuerholz, but not Steinbrenner, six years after his death at 80 and the third time he was on the ballot.
For that matter, Marvin Miller, the leader of the players’ association who merely forced baseball into an era of unimagined star power and wealth via free agency, was not even under consideration after being rejected six times. The absence of Miller, who died at 95 in 2012, is one of the great scandals of the Hall.
So the classic insider made it, the classic outsider was shunned again, and The Boss remains in his personal limbo.
Selig, retired and vibrant at 82, deserves the Hall, if only because he actually does know and love the game, and has from childhood, when his mother took him from Milwaukee to New York to watch Joe DiMaggio and Jackie Robinson. His Brewers won a pennant in 1982 and later he became commissioner, having one World Series canceled when he locked up with the obdurate Donald Fehr, Miller’s successor at the players’ association. Later Selig did a long, slow waltz with Fehr while a generation bulked up on performance-enhancing drugs. Nobody’s perfect. Still, Selig deserves to be in the Hall for bringing labor peace and prosperity, as does Miller.
For his own reasons, so does Steinbrenner, who in this bombastic age is looking more layered and more cultured all the time. People recall how the tyrant wielded a verbal cat-o’-nine-tails on his minions: One pitcher “spit the bit” in a crucial game; Dave Winfield, a future Hall of Famer, was “Mr. May” because of his October struggles; the vulnerable Billy Martin was jerked around, as were more lovable managers; general managers — grown men — were sometimes forced to stay in their hotel rooms after a loss.
The Boss also bought a landmark franchise with dry rot and took advantage of free agency when Miller and Curt Flood forced the relaxing of baseball’s reserve clause. Steinbrenner won four pennants from 1976 through 1981 and seven more from 1996 through 2009. Happy days were here again. Well, sometimes.
By the 1980s, The Boss seemed to have lost his fastball and the Mets dominated the city. In 1986, I wrote a column suggesting he sell the Yankees to a brash New York builder with a penchant for slapping his name on all kinds of stuff. The Boss, however, was in it for the long haul. I’ve often wondered what became of that real estate guy.
In July 1990, Commissioner Fay Vincent suspended Steinbrenner for making a $40,000 payment to a confessed gambler, Howard Spira, for damaging information about Winfield, the expensive star who had disappointed Steinbrenner.
But should these acts by Steinbrenner keep him from the Hall? The New York Times prohibits employees from voting for any honors, but my feeling is that Steinbrenner is a more important figure than many people in the Hall, including Tom Yawkey of the Boston Red Sox, a Southerner who shunned Robinson and all other black players until scandalously late; Charles Comiskey of the Chicago White Sox, who was so cheap that a nucleus of his team dumped the 1919 World Series; Connie Mack, a player-manager-owner of the old Philadelphia Athletics who sold his good players to richer teams; and Clark Griffith of the old Washington Senators, who underpaid players and did not mind finishing in the A.L.’s lower depths.
The Boss was also lucky. During his second suspension, the general manager, Gene Michael, declined to sell off the best young players in the farm system, as Steinbrenner often did. When The Boss came back, he enjoyed a generation of Bernie Williams, Derek Jeter, Mariano Rivera, Jorge Posada and, for a lot of years, Andy Pettitte.
People remember other things about The Boss, like his tendency to talk about reading the ancient Chinese military strategist Sun Tzu. I remember him crying around reporters after the Yankees swept the San Diego Padres in the 1998 World Series and how, as an elder, I felt it was my duty to put an arm around him until the tears subsided.
People still talk about his impulsive generosity: medical bills for people he hardly knew; befriending a street kid named Ray Negron, who has had an interesting life because of The Boss; putting Joe Pepitone on a retainer the moment Pepitone got out of Rikers Island from a short stay for possession of drugs; finding work for Darryl Strawberry and Dwight Gooden — former Mets — after jail and chemical slippages. The Boss said he understood addiction and human frailty — and he backed it up with money and acts.
The Yankees have not reached the World Series since 2009, when the old baron was fading before our eyes. Under the stewardship of his two sons, the Yankees are just another rich, big-market organization that doesn’t win. There was only one Boss, ever, and even with his complicated character, he belongs in the Hall.