The nomination of Exxon Mobil's chief executive, Rex Tillerson, as secretary of state is disturbing on so many levels. Like Donald Trump, Mr. Tillerson has no experience in the delicate and sensitive art of diplomacy. Instead, both men’s entire professional careers have been myopically devoted to expanding their own business empires.
Both have a financial stake in closer ties to President Vladimir Putin. Mr. Trump and Mr. Tillerson are both experts at disinformation. Mr. Trump picked Steve Bannon, who famously traffics in propaganda and fake news, as his chief strategist. Mr. Tillerson established a propaganda machine to support climate change denial.
Lastly, Mr. Trump and Mr. Tillerson both use their power to crush ordinary citizens. Trump businesses declare bankruptcy to avoid paying wages of working-class contract laborers. Likewise, when people lost their livelihoods to the Exxon Valdez oil spill disaster in 1989, Exxon Mobil could have paid damages to its victims. Instead, it tied up courts for years to appeal judgments until claimants were forced to accept pennies on the dollar.
How can either one honestly claim to represent the interests of all Americans? Do men with these characteristics truly represent our nation to the world?
What galls me about the nomination of Rex Tillerson — as much as his business ties to the very leaders he will be making political deals with — is that someone without a shred of diplomatic experience is now expected to manage our relationship with China, ponder our involvement in Middle East wars, discuss drug smuggling with leaders of South America and prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
The business leaders whom Donald Trump is putting in his cabinet would never, ever hire a deputy who had no business experience. They would be laughed out of town. The fact that they believe they can run huge swaths of our government with zero experience not only reveals a dangerous sense of hubris but also a deeply mistaken belief that a government can be run like a business.
Hey guys: It can’t.
Rex Tillerson has no government or diplomatic experience, has disturbingly close ties to Vladimir Putin and has enriched himself by selling an environmentally destructive product while lying about how destructive it really is.
In other words, he is a perfect fit for Donald Trump’s cabinet.
Why? Just look at who else is in there. Mr. Trump’s choice for energy secretary wanted to abolish the department. His education secretary is a threat to public education. His attorney general opposes the Voting Rights Act. His housing secretary opposes the Fair Housing Act. His health and human services secretary wants to restructure Medicare. His Treasury secretary helped cause the financial crisis, then profited from it. His E.P.A. chief is a climate change denier who has spent much of his career fighting the very agency he was appointed to lead.
You can’t make this stuff up. Choosing Mr. Tillerson for secretary of state should cause a scandal. But it won’t. We have come to expect nothing less (and nothing more) from Mr. Trump.
But each of these events occurred under President Obama’s watch without any effective American response. As to Mr. Tillerson’s experience, how much diplomatic experience did Hillary Clinton have?
While most of Donald Trump’s cabinet nominations so far range from bad to appalling, there is one that, for the sake of future generations, must be blocked.
I do not refer to the Russophile Rex Tillerson, who, if he were to become secretary of state, would merely threaten world peace and order. But if Scott Pruitt were to take over the Environmental Protection Agency, that would threaten the planet itself, and the lives our grandchildren and their children will lead on it.
It is inconceivable that two willful, scientifically ignorant Americans — Donald Trump and Scott Pruitt — should actually have the power to reverse the small but vital steps that nations have now made toward limiting, and eventually reversing, human-made global warming.
If Mr. Pruitt does indeed take over the E.P.A., that could foreclose humankind’s last, best hope of saving the only home we will ever have in the universe. It is up to Senate Democrats to find a handful of responsible Republican colleagues and block this potentially catastrophic nomination.
