NYON, Switzerland — In another edition of a one-sided Champions League rivalry, Bayern Munich will play Arsenal in the round of 16 for the third time in five seasons.
Bayern ousted Arsenal in back-to-back seasons in the first knockout round in 2013 and 2014, and also in 2005. Still, they traded home wins in the group stage last season, and Arsenal is seeded this time, so it will host the return match on March 7.
“Arsenal are a strong team, and I think currently they are better than in previous years,” Bayern goalkeeper Manuel Neuer said.
In other news from Monday’s draw, the defending champion, Real Madrid, will host Napoli first, on Feb. 15, and Barcelona will travel first to play Paris St.-Germain, on Feb. 14.
Madrid set a club record streak of 35 games unbeaten on Saturday, and is aiming to be the first team in 25 years of the Champions League format to retain the European Cup trophy.
One of the most balanced round of 16 draws in recent years — with Bayern and Madrid unseeded as runners-up in a group — was also dominated by the elite. All 16 teams come from leagues ranked in Europe’s top six when the season started.
Leicester City is the only round of 16 newcomer, and was drawn to play first at Sevilla, the Europa League winner for the past three seasons.
Other pairings are Manchester City versus Monaco; Benfica versus Borussia Dortmund; F.C. Porto versus Juventus; and Bayer Leverkusen versus Atlético Madrid.
The Man City-Monaco pairing will pit the underachieving defense of Coach Pep Guardiola’s team against the highest scorers in any of the top European leagues. Monaco is averaging three goals a game in the French league.
The first legs will be played from Feb. 14 to 22, with return matches from March 7 to 15.
The final will be June 3 at Millennium Stadium in Cardiff, Wales.
UEFA will pay clubs 5.5 million euros, or about $5.8 million, for playing in the round of 16. Each team has already earned 16 million to 20 million euros, or about $17 million to $21.2 million, in prize money and results bonuses during the group stage.
Manchester United will play St.-Étienne in the round of 32 in a pairing of Pogba brothers.
The France international Paul Pogba leads Man United’s midfield. His older brother Florentin, a Guinea international, is a St.-Étienne defender.
Also in Monday’s draw, the Turkish club Besiktas, whose stadium in Istanbul was targeted by a deadly bombing on Saturday, will first play in Israel at Hapoel Be’er-Sheva.
Italian clubs were given tough draws: Roma will first play at Villarreal, and Fiorentina will travel to Borussia Mönchengladbach.
Among Champions League clubs switching to the Europa League, Tottenham is at Gent and Legia Warsaw hosts Ajax.
The first legs will be played on Feb. 16, with return matches on Feb. 23.
The final will be played in Stockholm on May 24. The winner will gain entry to next season’s Champions League.