These findings also reveal the spiraling and often unseen effects of mass deportations, a point that is no longer purely academic as President-elect Donald J. Trump weighs whether to make good on his campaign promise to deport millions of undocumented immigrants.
Previous research suggests that Hispanic households, like black ones, were disproportionately victimized by subprime lending schemes that eventually pushed families into foreclosure. But the fact that foreclosure rates among Hispanics surpassed those among blacks points to something else going on.
Mr. Rugh and Mr. Hall note that Cuban immigrants and Puerto Ricans — two groups not targeted for deportation because of their special immigration protections and citizenship status — didn’t suffer the same high foreclosure rates.
To get at the link between foreclosures and deportations, they looked at counties that signed agreements with ICE under the 287(g) program deputizing local law enforcement officers to interrogate, arrest and detain people suspected of violating immigration law. The program, originally part of the 1996 immigration bill, was seldom used until the mid-2000s, when it became a vehicle not just for targeting terrorism suspects and convicted criminals, but also for rounding up undocumented immigrants en masse.
Before those counties joined the program, there was no difference in Hispanic foreclosure rates between places that eventually participated and those that didn’t. But where counties signed on to the deportation effort, foreclosure rates in the following years were significantly higher — by the equivalent of about 22,000 additional Hispanic foreclosures each year across 42 counties.
Such sizable effects are possible because of an often-overlooked dynamic in Hispanic households: Many undocumented immigrants live in — and contribute income to — households with legal residents. In those 42 counties, for example, the researchers estimate that nearly three-quarters of the 1.2 million households with at least one undocumented adult immigrant also contained a documented adult household member. And about a third of all undocumented immigrants in those counties lived in owner-occupied homes.
In a broader sense, this also means that mass deportations risk undermining gains that American citizens of Latin American descent have made in assimilating into the United States economy. The research also reveals the pressure that the deep-seated American suspicion of immigrants (which long predates Mr. Trump) exerts on the American value of homeownership and all its associated virtues like responsibility and stability.
Homeowners need Hispanic buyers.
