If there is such a thing as a hockey gene, Bob Johnson surely had it.
Twenty-five years after his death, Johnson’s influence extends from the N.H.L., where he helped pave the way for American college players and coaches in a league then dominated by Canadians, to N.C.A.A. hockey, which he endlessly promoted.
Johnson died of brain cancer at age 60 on Nov. 26, 1991, six months after leading the Pittsburgh Penguins to their first Stanley Cup in his only year as coach.
Yet his signature saying, “It’s a great day for hockey,” is still painted above the stick rack outside the team’s locker room at PPG Paints Arena, which opened in 2010. It also hangs from a banner at Honnen Ice Arena at Colorado College, where Johnson started his coaching career in 1963.
Johnson built Wisconsin’s modern program beginning in 1966 and led the Badgers to three national titles from 1973 to 1981. His impact is felt in women’s college hockey, too, where his son Mark has coached the top-ranked Badgers to four national titles since 2002. And the youth hockey camp Bob Johnson started with Art Berglund in Aspen, Colo., in 1964 is still thriving, now run by Johnson’s sons Mark and Pete and his grandson Scott McConnell.
Johnson’s importance remains larger than games and championships won. Much of what he did beginning 50 years ago was greeted with rolled eyes and guffaws, but is now commonplace throughout the sport: an emphasis on conditioning, fundamentals practiced in on- and off-ice drills, and a creative, up-tempo style reliant on one-touch passes and carrying the puck into the offensive zone.
Jeff Sauer, who played for Johnson at Colorado College and succeeded him as coach at Wisconsin, remembers him emphasizing nutrition, even scrapping the traditional pregame steak dinner for toast, honey and chocolate milk so his players would have energy in the third period. 
Phil Bourque had played more than 200 N.H.L. games over six seasons before Johnson took over a veteran Penguins team in 1990. Bourque, a color commentator on the team’s television broadcasts since 2000, said Johnson often had the Penguins work on the most basic skills.
“Now, if I see a coach doing a real simple drill, I think of him,” he said.
“Ahead of his time” is how many describe Johnson, whose heartfelt belief that hockey should be fun and his embrace of innovation defined his coaching style. Exposed to the European game during his years coaching United States national teams, Johnson filled notebooks with drills and plays he witnessed, especially from the Soviet coach Anatoly Tarasov.
Those notebooks now reside with Mark Johnson, who said he had dipped into them for ideas over the years.
Back when there was much less emphasis on the power play, Johnson borrowed from the Europeans and created a juggernaut at Wisconsin. The Badgers converted on 37 percent of their chances during the 1977 title season.
Jack Parker, a former Boston University coach, whose teams competed against Johnson’s in the 1970s, said he had copied from Johnson and created a potent power play for his team. Parker went on to win three national championships in 40 years with the Terriers.
Johnson taught high school history using a hockey stick as a pointer, earned his master’s degree and Ph.D. in physical education from Minnesota, his alma mater, and left Wisconsin as a tenured professor.
“He was always hungry to learn,” said George Gwozdecky, a player on the 1977 Wisconsin title team, who later won two N.C.A.A. championships as a coach at Denver University.
Nicknamed Hawk by his early Wisconsin players for the prominent nose that he tugged constantly, Johnson picked up the sobriquet Badger Bob from his players on the 1976 United States Olympic team for his love of Wisconsin hockey and his rah-rah style.
“No human being who ever lived had a more positive attitude than Bob Johnson,” Alley said.
Always eager to be challenged, Johnson left Wisconsin after the 1982 season to coach the Calgary Flames. Goalie Wayne Thomas, who went on to play nine seasons in the N.H.L. after playing two for Johnson at Wisconsin, said it had taken “a lot of courage” for him to leave the college game.
“For a United States college coach to go to Canada when there was a much greater divide between the Canadian and American game took a lot of nerve,” he said.
His Flames made the playoffs every season and reached the Stanley Cup finals in 1986 after beating the Edmonton Oilers in the Smythe Division finals, the only time the Oilers did not win the Cup from 1984 to 1988. Along the way Johnson acquired American college players like Joe Mullen from Boston College, the former Badgers Mike Eaves and Gary Suter, and Joel Otto, who had played at Division II Bemidji State.
When Johnson joined Calgary, only a handful of former American collegians played in the N.H.L. Last season, former college players made up 30 percent of the league. And Dave Hakstol jumped from a college job to the N.H.L. when the Philadelphia Flyers hired him last year.
Nowhere is Johnson’s legacy more alive than in Pittsburgh, even though he spent only a short time there. Johnson took over a veteran team that had finished fifth in the Patrick Division the year before and, adding players like Mullen, Ron Francis and Ulf Samuelsson along the way, beat Minnesota in six games for the Stanley Cup.
Despite Johnson’s success in Calgary, when he arrived in Pittsburgh, “we still thought of him as a college guy,” Bourque said.
Johnson brought along his unusual techniques, including having players lie on the floor of a hotel ballroom and close their eyes while he conducted a visualization exercise. Or outlining a rink with tape on the locker room carpet and explaining plays by moving around pucks, his players denoted by their pictures on the pucks.
“You just didn’t get coaches like that at the N.H.L. level back then,” Bourque said.
In the team’s recently released 50th anniversary documentary, “Pittsburgh Is Home: The Story of the Penguins,” Lemieux praised Johnson for teaching him how to approach the game, and how to win.
Such was Johnson’s impact that his name was engraved on the Stanley Cup after his death, when the Penguins won again in 1992 with many of his same players.
Bourque said much of the way the organization operated was still a reflection of Johnson’s ideals and passions.
