‘ALMOST IBSEN’ at Barrow Street Theater (Dec. 9 and 10, 8 p.m.). Three members of Det Andre Teatret (the Other Theater), from Oslo, improvise an entire play in the style of Henrik Ibsen. Having closely studied the characters, themes and style of Ibsen’s work, Torgny G. Aanderaa, Camilla Frey and Nils Petter Morland request an “Ibsenesque title” from the audience, then create a “poetic and tragic yet playful” story on the spot. These shows are part of the group’s American tour, supported by the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, during which they will perform with other improvisers in New York, Atlanta, San Francisco and Los Angeles.
‘COME TO PAPA’ at the Comedy Cellar at the Village Underground (Dec. 14, 8 p.m.). Tom Papa records an episode of his SiriusXM show in front of an audience at the Comedy Cellar’s new space. A throwback to classic radio variety shows, the episodes feature skits, stand-up, music and live sound effects in an eclectic, unpredictable mix. In this special seasonal edition, Mr. Papa will be joined by the comedians Sam Morril, Dave Hill, Robert Kelly and Colin Quinn, with music from Helio Alves and the Come to Papa Trio.
‘HOLLY DOLLY CHRISTMAS’ at the Cobra Club (Dec. 11, 9 p.m.). Jo Firestone, Josh Sharp and Aaron Jackson, three New York comics with a love of eclectic, interactive comedy shows and enthusiastic musical tributes, host another edition of their “hastily written” jukebox musicals. (Former editions have included “Houston: We Have a Whitney” and a thriller called “Tinker Taylor Swifter Spy.”) This holiday-themed show will string together songs of the country music legend Dolly Parton, and audience members will be invited to join the performers onstage to play various roles.
‘RIGHT NOW!’ at Union Hall (Dec. 15, 9:30 p.m.). Carolyn Castiglia hosts this live talk show, which each month explores a different theme. For December, the show will revolve around religion, with a panel of comedians — Subhah Agarwal, Lux Alptraum, Mo Fathelbab and Akaash Singh — gathered to discuss religion and the coming holidays. She will also interview the stand-up comedian Brooke Arnold, who was raised in a fundamentalist Christian organization. Jordan Carlos, formerly of “The Nightly Show With Larry Wilmore,” will perform a stand-up set, and there will be music by Erin and Her Cello as well as Rebecca Vigil and the Righteous NOW! The comedian Katie Hartman will offer surprises.
