The concept of in-game interviews with N.B.A. coaches was still fairly new when Doris Burke, a respected sideline reporter and broadcaster for ESPN, had an unfortunate experience.
The interview was not broadcast live — it was recorded during a commercial break — and Burke is fuzzy on the details. She thinks she asked Popovich something about Shaquille O’Neal, who was then playing for Phoenix. Regardless, as she was retreating to her courtside seat, Burke’s producer reached her on her headset. He wanted to know if she would be O.K. if the network chose not to air the exchange.
“And my response was, ‘Thank you for not humiliating me,’” Burke said.
Burke has since become far more adept at handling these interviews, which are almost always broadcast for public consumption now — no matter how awkward they get. Part nuisance (for the coaches), part high-wire act (for the sideline reporters) and part spectacle (for the viewers at home), the in-game interview has become a staple of the N.B.A.’s national broadcasts.
“It’s just abnormal,” said Doc Rivers, the coach of the Los Angeles Clippers.
“I never even spent one second thinking about what I was going to say,” said Kevin McHale, the former coach of the Minnesota Timberwolves and Houston Rockets.
A flash of insight? A burst of banter? Those are considered monumental successes in the in-game interview genre, which tends to consist of 15 to 20 seconds of improvisational theater. The interviews are typically recorded between quarters — the visiting coach goes at the end of the first quarter, while the home coach has his turn before the start of the fourth — and are aired once the broadcast resumes.
Popularized by personalities like Craig Sager, the longtime sideline reporter for TNT, the interviews are the sole province of the league’s national broadcast partners: ESPN, ABC and TNT. Everyone hopes for the best. There are no do overs.
Some coaches are more invested in the process than others, or at least do a better job of faking it. Burke knows, for example, that Stan Van Gundy, the coach of the Detroit Pistons, is likely to give her a frank assessment of his team’s play since he generally wears his emotions like a rumpled blazer.
“You’re going to feel every bit of Stan Van Gundy’s frustration if his team had a tough quarter,” Burke said.
Then there is Rivers, the coach of the Clippers, who acknowledged that he barely listens to the questions. His default response, he said, is to say something along the lines of “We need to play better.” Still, the league’s sideline reporters appreciate his diplomacy.
One of the goals with any telecast, said Craig Barry, the executive vice president and chief content officer for Turner Sports, is to bring viewers as much access as possible. In-game interviews, he said, help deliver a richer narrative. For that reason, said Lisa Salters, a sideline reporter for ESPN, she feels it is important to use her own access to inform her questions.
“Some of the best stuff happens from overhearing the huddles,” she said.
But Salters and her colleagues also need to be concise. By agreement, the sideline reporter is permitted two questions. Sometimes, Burke said, she will tell a coach beforehand that she intends to ask only one with the hope that it will generate a more thoughtful response. But there are times when she can sense that the coach is just not in the mood for a chat.
The one-question method can backfire. During Game 3 of the N.B.A. finals last season, when the Golden State Warriors found themselves trailing the Cleveland Cavaliers by 17 points after the first quarter, it was left to Burke to sift through the wreckage by asking Steve Kerr, the usually affable coach of the Warriors, what he had seen from his team.
“Not a whole lot,” Kerr said.
That was the sum total of their interaction.
It could have been worse. During Game 4 of the Western Conference finals in 2014, David Aldridge, a sideline reporter for TNT, asked Popovich how he thought the Spurs had played in the first quarter. Popovich responded by staring at Aldridge for a full seven seconds, at which point Aldridge deemed it necessary to remind Popovich that they were on live TV.
“Seven seconds of silence,” Aldridge recalled in a telephone interview.
Aldridge sees value in most of these exchanges — “You’re giving people a sense of what it’s like to be there,” he said — but he can also understand why coaches would feel annoyed.
And there is, of course, the Popovich problem. Popovich, by all appearances, does not enjoy in-game interviews. His mood generally ranges from perturbed to exasperated. But people like to watch. His interviews have almost become performance art.
Karl, who most recently coached the Sacramento Kings, considers himself philosophically aligned with Popovich when it comes to in-game interviews. (“Not a big fan,” Karl said.) And while Karl always tried to come across as accommodating, he set out with one clear objective.
Karl recalled the in-game interview’s genesis. In September 2007, he said, the league’s coaches gathered in Chicago for an annual meeting. David Stern, the commissioner at the time, made an appearance with executives from the league’s broadcast partners.
The N.B.A. had recently renewed a contract with ESPN, ABC and TNT for eight years and $7.4 billion. As a part of that agreement, Stern explained, the league wanted to introduce in-game interviews with the coaches during national broadcasts. The networks were paying the league a lot of money, Karl recalled Stern’s saying, and it behooved the league to make them happy.
The coaches in the room were not, for the most part, thrilled with this development.
Sam Vincent, who was then the coach of the Charlotte Bobcats, said the consensus was that the interviews would be another irritation for coaches who already had enough to deal with during games. But most coaches have since come to realize that the interview itself is far from the most taxing part of their responsibilities.
McHale, now an analyst for TNT and NBA TV, said that when he was coaching he always forgot when he was slotted to be interviewed. It was left to one of his assistant coaches to remind him with a tap on the shoulder.
But unlike some coaches, McHale said he was glad that the networks had added the interviews. They help fans feel more connected to the action, he said. And depending on the coach’s willingness to cooperate, they can add depth to the game. Then again, that level of cooperation varies.
