PHOENIX — Eric Bledsoe scored on a driving, left-handed layup with 30 seconds left in overtime to put the Phoenix Suns ahead for good in a 113-111 victory over the Knicks on Tuesday night — the Knicks’ second loss in eight games.
Bledsoe scored 8 consecutive points late in the extra period and finished with 31, his third consecutive game with at least 30 points.
Kristaps Porzingis scored 34 points for the Knicks, 1 short of his career high, before fouling out with 1 minute 34 seconds left in overtime.
Carmelo Anthony finished off a 3-for-15 shooting night with an air ball that resulted in a 24-second clock violation with 5.9 seconds left in overtime.
Devin Booker’s two free throws with 5.2 seconds remaining increased the lead to 113-110, and the Suns, coming off an overtime home loss to New Orleans on Sunday night, held on from there.
Derrick Rose did not play in the second half because of back spasms.
Kyle O’Quinn, who scored 22 points for the Knicks, made the first of two free throws to cut the lead to 113-111 with four seconds left, then intentionally missed the second. Lance Thomas’s tip attempt did not go in, and P. J. Tucker grabbed the ball for Phoenix.
Tucker missed two free throws with 1.2 seconds left, but it did not matter in a victory that spoiled the return to Phoenix for Knicks Coach Jeff Hornacek, who was fired as the Suns’ coach 10 months ago.
Tyson Chandler, a former Knick, grabbed a season-high 23 rebounds for Phoenix, giving him 44 in his last two games. The rookie Marquese Chriss had 14 points, 12 rebounds and a soaring block of Justin Holiday’s layup in overtime.
Neither team scored in the final 1:46 of regulation.
The game grew contentious in the third quarter, when a scuffle resulted in four technical fouls and a flagrant-1 foul. It began when Porzingis ran over Bledsoe, and then Chriss threw Porzingis to the floor. Porzingis got up, and there was some shoving between the two teams.
Chriss drew a flagrant-1 foul and a technical. Technicals also were called on Bledsoe, Porzingis and Brandon Jennings.
A Knicks fan behind the scorer’s table was ejected for his heated reaction, aimed at Chriss, to the commotion.