NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. — After a season in which they were undermined by their bullpen, the San Francisco Giants went to extraordinary lengths to find a solution. In the hope of addressing their ninth-inning woes, the Giants lured Mark Melancon, one of the All-Star closers available this winter, with a record-breaking deal Monday.
Melancon’s contract, according to two people with direct knowledge of the deal, was for four years and $62 million, shattering the previous record amount for a closer, set by Jonathan Papelbon — four years and $50 million — before the 2012 season.
That mark may not last long as a record — or even through this winter. Aroldis Chapman, the former Yankees and Chicago Cubs closer, and Kenley Jansen, the former Los Angeles Dodgers closer, are both free agents this off-season, and both are younger and throw harder than Melancon.
Melancon, 31, will help shore up a shaky Giants bullpen that led the majors with 32 blown saves in 2016. He did the same for the Washington Nationals’ imbalanced bullpen during the final two months of the season, after he was traded by the Pittsburgh Pirates. The Giants and the Nationals pursued Melancon this winter, but the Giants’ offer was better, Nationals General Manager Mike Rizzo told reporters Monday, the first day of baseball’s annual winter meetings.
The Giants’ bullpen nearly cost them a playoff spot as they limped into October. Santiago Casilla, who notched 31 saves in 2016, blew a major league-high nine saves and was removed from the role late in the season.
San Francisco still managed to secure a berth in the National League wild-card game against the Mets. The Giants won, 3-0, but fell to the Cubs in an N.L. division series in which their bullpen blew a three-run lead in the ninth inning of Game 4.
Remedying that issue proved to be costly. Not only did Melancon’s deal break contract records for relievers (and force the Giants to buck their own recent philosophy of not spending big money for outside closers), it also included an opt-out clause after the second season and a full no-trade clause.
Melancon, a former Yankees prospect, has relied on elite control to thrive as a closer, having learned his standout cutter from one of the best ever in that role, Mariano Rivera. Melancon has been named to the All-Star Game three times, and his 131 saves since 2014 are the most in the majors.
Over the past four years, Melancon has averaged 72 innings, 67 strikeouts and 11 walks a season while posting a 1.80 E.R.A. Last season between the Nationals and the Pirates, Melancon recorded 47 saves and a 1.64 E.R.A. over 71 ⅓ innings.
The Nationals’ failure to bring back Melancon may be only a temporary setback. The N.L. East champion last season, Washington has been linked in trade talks to starter Chris Sale of the Chicago White Sox and the former M.V.P. Andrew McCutchen, a Pirates outfielder.
The Nationals have also had interest in Chapman in the past. Jansen, on the other hand, is tied to draft-pick compensation if he does not re-sign with the Dodgers.
The Nationals’ investment in Melancon was intended to fill a void at the back end of their bullpen after past issues with closers Rafael Soriano, Drew Storen and Papelbon. To acquire Melancon, they sent reliever Felipe Rivero and the prospect Taylor Hearn to the Pirates at the trading deadline. Now without an obvious replacement internally, the Nationals will have to find another alternative.
The Giants’ best seasons have been defined, in part, by bullpen stability. Four relievers — Jeremy Affeldt, Sergio Romo, Javier Lopez and Casilla — were all on the Giants’ World Series-winning teams in 2010, 2012 and 2014. Each title run featured a different closer — Brian Wilson, Romo and Casilla — as Manager Bruce Bochy leaned on the hot hand each time.
But a slightly different bullpen faltered in 2016. Affeldt retired before the season, Lopez had a limited role, Casilla was particularly shaky in the second half, and Romo was limited by an elbow injury for part of the year. Lopez, Casilla and Romo are free agents this off-season. The Giants reinvested that money into Melancon, and Jansen and Chapman may see the benefits later this winter.