SADKI-STROYEVKA, Ukraine — A cold wind whips through the streets. Vehicles that enter must drive through a foot-deep, moatlike bath of disinfectant, lest their tires track in disease. Computers raise and lower the levels of light to match circadian rhythms.
For a blend of economic and political reasons, Ukraine built a singular capitalist achievement after the fall of Communism: enormous, technologically advanced chicken farms that are among the largest in the world.
At its peak, Avangard had space nationwide for 30 million laying hens. Thanks to cheap grain and low labor costs, it is able to produce billions of eggs annually at a low price. The wholesale price of an egg in Ukraine is 4 cents, compared with 25 cents in Poland and 35 cents in Germany.
Here in the hardscrabble farming town of Sadki-Stroyevka, birds far outnumber people. Each henhouse houses around 100,000 clucking, pecking, egg-laying birds. Cages stretch for as far as the eye can see. The buildings, which reek of disinfectant and manure, form extraordinarily efficient egg-producing machines.
Feed flows in on one set of belts, eggs out on another. The light brightens and dims automatically to maximize the birds’ biological clocks. So many eggs tumble along the main collector belt that it resembles a burbling, brown brook.
The opportunities were so plentiful that Mr. Bakhmatyuk, colorfully nicknamed Ukraine’s Egg King, plowed a fortune made as an executive in a natural gas company into farming.
By 2013, Avangard had been listed on the London Stock Exchange, and it was still adding capacity. Its prospects looked good.
The same year, Ukraine’s president at the time rejected a trade pact with the European Union, choosing a deal with Russia instead. Pro-European citizens took to the streets in Ukraine’s capital, Kiev, in protests that led to a revolution.
In 2014, the country’s new government pivoted back to the European deal, signing what was known as the Association Agreement. The pact held great promise for this country of about 42 million people, and Europe’s political leaders encouraged Kiev’s pivot to the West.
The agriculture industry was, however, given short shrift. The sector is often a sensitive topic during trade negotiations. Not only is it typically a major employer that countries view as strategically important, but it is also sensitive to price, fueling fears of cheap food flooding the market.
The sector accounts for about 40 percent of Ukraine’s exports. But tariff-free quotas for most agricultural products, under the trade deal, are tiny. Allocations for honey, for example, were so low that they were filled in the first six weeks of the year. Quotas to export eggs to the Europe Union equate to around 1.5 percent of just Avangard’s annual output, let alone that of the entire sector.
The deal itself was not particularly favorable to the agriculture sector, but there were other consequences as well. When the agreement was signed in March 2014, it almost immediately triggered conflict with Russia, Ukraine’s powerful neighbor. Moscow annexed Crimea, and Russian-backed separatists took control of parts of eastern Ukraine.
As if to compound Avangard’s problems, unrest in the Middle East also hit the company’s bottom line.
Iraq was one of the company’s major customers, buying 800 million eggs from Kiev producers as recently as 2013 — equivalent to around 15 percent of Avangard’s total output. But then Islamic State militants took control of the northern Iraqi city of Mosul, and much of the rest of the country, in the summer of 2014. After that, sales to the embattled country fell off drastically.
Problems are piling up for Ukraine, Mr. Bakhmatyuk said.
The European deal has not, however, been uniformly negative for Ukraine. Many businesses have benefited.
The western edge of the country, near the Polish, Hungarian and Romanian borders, has drawn investment. European and Asian auto-parts suppliers have opened or announced plans to establish small factories to export products to Europe. Niches like a ski-manufacturing industry have done well.
And even Ukraine’s farmers have reaped some rewards, albeit indirectly. By signing on to the pact, Ukraine has agreed to meet European Union standards for food quality. That has eased the way for exports to other markets, such as China.
It is to those areas that Mr. Bakhmatyuk is now looking. Avangard has shifted its strategy to selling lower-margin egg powder, which goes into products like commercial baked goods and pasta, to China. The company expects to close deals to do so next year.
But the future of the agreement is nevertheless cloudy.
The election of Donald J. Trump, who has suggested patching up relations with Russia, has raised questions over American support for Ukraine. And even within Europe, support for the pact is lukewarm — two-thirds of Dutch voters urged their government in April to rescind the deal in a nonbinding referendum.
Investors have been asking, “When will you sell to Europe?’” said Vyacheslav B. Kotsun, the director of an Avangard farm.
