Opinion|It’s Trump’s Economy Now. What Will He Do With It?
It’s Trump’s Economy Now. What Will He Do With It?
The November jobs report, released on Friday, is a snapshot of the economy that President-elect Donald Trump will inherit from President Barack Obama. According to the report, the economy added 178,000 jobs last month. In November 2008, as Mr. Obama prepared to take office, the economy lost 769,000 jobs.
The latest report also shows an unemployment rate last month of 4.6 percent and an underemployment rate of 9.3 percent. In November 2008, those were 6.8 percent and 12.6 percent, respectively.
Mr. Trump should be thanking Mr. Obama and the legislators (almost exclusively Democrats) who backed Mr. Obama on fiscal stimulus, the auto bailout and health care reform, all of which laid the foundation for the improved economy that now awaits him.
Instead, he is on a “thank you” tour, reprising his campaign themes about making America great again.
The last several years have seen steady if modest growth in jobs; more recently, job growth has begun to translate into wage gains. But there is still considerable slack. The percentage of people working or actively looking for work remains at a historic low of 62.7 percent, which indicates that human capital is being wasted. At the current pace of job growth, it would take about another year for the labor market to be hitting on all cylinders.
In the meantime, however, the Trump economic agenda, if enacted, will tilt conditions against working people. Mr. Trump wants to give huge tax cuts to the rich, which won’t put money in workers’ pockets. He wants increased spending on infrastructure, but would rely mainly on private investors rather than public financing, an approach that tends to enrich investors at the expense of the taxpayers. Taken together, those polices would increase the budget deficit, which would mean either higher national debt or deep federal spending cuts. It would be reasonable to increase the debt to boost the long-term health of the country, but tax cuts for the rich and subsidies for private investors won’t do that. Federal spending cuts would harm working people because they would reduce the support the government provides directly in areas such as health, education and anti-poverty initiatives, as well as the support it supplies to the economy and society through environmental protection, scientific research, bank regulation and law enforcement.
The Trump agenda, if enacted, could boost growth in the near term. But that growth would be likely to enrich those at the top of the economic ladder and leave everyone else no better off.
Mr. Trump is inheriting a steady if unspectacular economy. He seems intent on transforming it into something that is spectacularly unsteady.