290 pp. Harper/HarperCollins Publishers. $25.99.
Trick question: what do the Bayeux Tapestry, the British Antarctic Survey’s research station on the Weddell Sea, multiple sightings of comets and a family of ghosts dating back to the 11th century have in common?
More than you’d think, in the world of Helen Sedgwick’s unusual debut novel, “The Comet Seekers.” I’m not sure just how to describe this book: It’s not exactly a ghost story or a gothic or a paranormal romance. Unlike with Henry James’s “The Turn of the Screw,” the reader can’t doubt the sanity of those perceiving the ghosts or the reality of the ghosts themselves. A fluid narrative voice, pointedly lyrical and without a trace of irony, gives equal weight to the perceptions of both ghosts and living characters. And, as in the work of contemporary fabulists like Kelly Link, Helen Oyeyemi and Audrey Niffenegger, the real intersects matter-of-factly with the supernatural.
In the very near future — the novel starts and ends in 2017 — Roisin, an Irish astrophysicist, and François, a somewhat younger French chef, meet at the Halley VI research station in Antarctica, which is “elevated above the floating ice, a strange caterpillar of research labs and sleeping quarters with a central red hub where they all meet to talk and wait for snowstorms to pass.” She’s there to observe a comet, he to cook for the staff. Both are haunted metaphorically by the recent loss of a loved one. But they’re also haunted literally, even if they don’t know it: They’ve been brought together partly through the actions of some ghosts, ancestors of François who have a connection to Roisin’s family.
Like all good literary ghosts, these appear and disappear according to particular rules.  One rule we learn early on is that the ghosts appear only when a comet is visible to a living member of François’s family — in particular his mother, Severine. As a girl, she first hears about the ghosts from her beloved granny. Later she’s able to perceive them herself, and in her company we slowly unravel the mystery of each ghost’s identity. The chapters, arranged nonchronologically but dated and named after particular comets — “1759: Halley’s Comet,” for example; “1994: Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9” — alternate among scenes of François’s and Roisin’s lives before arriving in Antarctica and brief glimpses, often at the moment of death, of Severine’s ancestors.
Many of this novel’s pleasures have to do with teasing out the implications of Sedgwick’s intricate pattern, which substitutes for a traditional plot and, sometimes, for a deeper engagement with character. This web of associations, spun by recurring images and figures, lends a different spin to the idea of a love that’s meant to be.