There is invariably extra electricity when the Rangers and the Blackhawks meet, especially since they play each other only twice a season.
The latest matchup — four days after the Rangers won, 1-0, in overtime in Chicago — happened with both squads near the top of the standings and the Rangers coming off two straight shutouts and five wins in seven games.
Toss in the unusual circumstance of the backup goalie Antti Raanta starting a fourth straight game in place of a healthy Henrik Lundqvist, plus the return of Jonathan Toews, the Blackhawks’ captain, after a nine-game absence, and there were many ingredients for drama at Madison Square Garden.
In the end, the former Ranger Artem Anisimov made the difference, as his goal late in the second period gave the Blackhawks their margin of victory in a 2-1 win over Raanta and the Rangers.
Thanks to Raanta’s recent sharp play, including a 2-1 win at Winnipeg last Thursday and a 5-0 win over the Devils on Sunday, he was given the start Tuesday.
Raanta was tested early by Patrick Kane and later by Richard Panik as the fleet-skating and crisp-passing Blackhawks fired 11 shots his way in the first. All of them were turned aside.
The Blackhawks scored first at 5 minutes 18 seconds of the second period when defenseman Trevor Van Riemsdyk took a pass from Artemi Panarin and beat Raanta with a low shot for his first goal of the season.
Rangers right wing Jesper Fast tied the score at the 8:15 mark in the second when he batted the puck out of midair past Blackhawks goaltender Scott Darling, who made his sixth straight start since Corey Crawford had an appendectomy this month.
Then Anisimov, left alone in front of Raanta, received a pass from defenseman Brian Campbell before snapping the puck into the net at 18:51 for his 13th goal to put Chicago ahead. Anisimov has three goals in his past four games, and each has been a game-winner.
The brisk pace and narrow margin were no surprise. Since Dec. 11, 2002, all 18 games between the Rangers and the Blackhawks have been decided by no more than two goals.
Darling, a backup to Crawford the past three seasons, made 33 saves over all.
Raanta’s winning streak ended, but Vigneault had indicated he would like to limit Lundqvist’s workload this season to 55 to 60 games.
Raanta, 27, played parts of two seasons for the Blackhawks before joining the Rangers in a June 2015 trade. His recent strong play has put Lundqvist, the longtime starter, in an odd spot, as an observer — sitting out four straight games for the first time in his career.
Raanta, who is 8-2-0 this season, was not discouraged after the loss, choosing to credit his former teammate in the opposing crease.
The Rangers were without Rick Nash (groin) for a fourth straight game, although he took part in the team’s morning skate. … Ryan McDonagh, the Rangers’ captain, was a late scratch because of the flu.