1 hr. and 20 min.
Harlem Stage at The Gatehouse, 150 Convent Ave.
A fierce tide of feeling — rage and despair, love and hope and exaltation — courses through “Can I Get a Witness?,” an almost indefinable work of music theater created by the performer and musician Meshell Ndegeocello, and inspired by “The Fire Next Time,” James Baldwin’s incisive polemic about race in America, first published in 1963.
Produced by Harlem Stage, where it runs through Sunday, the performance is subtitled “The Gospel of James Baldwin,” and indeed it mimics the format of a religious service. Some audience members sit in pews, and we are each given the “order of service.” A few performers wear costumes, inventively designed by Abigail DeVille, that look vaguely ecclesiastical — but with flashes of color and brocade and even gaudy jewels. Ms. Ndegeocello, who plays bass and presides loosely over the proceedings, wears a priestly robe of silver and blue. Several segments incorporate call-and-response; there’s even a moment when we are given small glasses of water to drink, although there’s no suggestion that it’s particularly holy.
One wonders what Baldwin, who was a preacher in his teenage years but later took a dim view of organized religion, would think about a tribute to his work styled this way. Then again, the production, created in collaboration with and directed by Charlotte Braithwaite, is equally a rousing musical performance, with the band mostly performing in the center of the space and the audience surrounding it.
It’s also an old-school consciousness-raising session, intended to exhort the audience to reckon with (and to act against) the precarious, problematic state of race relations today. “How are you surviving 2016?” is asked near the top of the show, and yes, reference is made to Donald Trump, with an expletive added as his middle name.
Copies of Baldwin’s book are placed on each seat (you return them on the way out), and Paul J. Thompson, a New York City high school principal (formerly a musician and composer), leads us through passages, almost as if the book were a liturgical text. Various segments in the show draw directly on Baldwin’s fierce commentary about the indignities suffered by black Americans at the hands of white Americans. A video projection of Baldwin giving a talk or an interview is screened on the walls, and a painting of him looms over one end of the space.
In addition to Ms. Ndegeocello, the musical performers (or “testifiers”) include Justin Hicks, whose smooth voice and quietly impassioned delivery recall Marvin Gaye; and Toshi Reagon, who ratchets up the passion in her fiery delivery of the moving “Love (as a State of Grace),” one of the less incendiary passages in the show.
 They are both the epigraph to Baldwin’s book and its final words. But it is another quotation, from “Notes of a Native Son,” cited in the show that haunted me as I left the theater: “Hatred, which could destroy so much, never failed to destroy the man who hated, and this was an immutable law.” Like so much in Baldwin’s work, the words seem to have as much sorrowful pertinence today as they did then — and probably will 50 years from now.