In the fall of 2014, CBS served up a terrible drama called “Stalker” that followed a Los Angeles police unit assigned to cases involving stalking. It was exploitative and ugly and lasted only one season. On Sunday, the network proves that television never learns from past mistakes when it introduces “Ransom,” a series that, at least from the premiere, appears to have the same problems.
The show is about a team of hostage negotiators led by Eric (Luke Roberts), a cool customer who tries to get inside the heads of the criminals and resolve crises without violence. He and his crew are not police officers; they’re brought in on cases that require a more delicate or low-profile approach than the police can provide.
The group also includes Zara (Nazneen Contractor), a former detective, and Oliver (Brandon Jay McLaren), a psychological profiler. In the premiere, they are joined by Maxine (Sarah Greene), who had been rejected for a job with the team but forces her way onto it anyway.
There are, no doubt, back stories for each of these characters that will emerge in subsequent installments (though henceforth on Saturday nights, a television dead zone that the series moves to with its Jan. 7 episode). By the end of the premiere, only Maxine’s history has been teased, and barely.
Instead, what is supposed to bring us back to this series is the prospect of regular doses of hostage-taking and hostage-saving, a sort of clickbait of TV plotting. Is there a bigger cliché in law enforcement television than the “put the gun down,” ”take your finger off the detonator,” etc. standoff? The premiere opens with hostages in a church who are about to be blown up, then makes its way to a child-in-jeopardy plot, so that by its end two boxes have already been checked on the guaranteed-pulse-pounder list.
Maybe the appetite for shows that probe the psychology of participants in the criminal justice system is endless. Certainly CBS has done well with the show that helped establish the genre, “Criminal Minds,” a staple of its lineup for more than a decade. “Bull,” a series the network introduced in September about an outfit that profiles potential jurors, has been enjoying a decent first season.
That show, though, has a star, Michael Weatherly, who brought with him an abundance of audience good will from his long stint on “NCIS” (a hit show that was also the “Bull” lead-in on Tuesdays). “Ransom,” although it is billed as being “inspired by the real-life professional experiences of the world-renowned crisis negotiator Laurent Combalbert and his partner Marwan Mery,” seems thinner somehow. Its premise is built for adrenaline-rush moments, not for the long haul.