’Tis the season for giving really nice things you actually want for yourself — like these new tomes, handpicked by the editors of T.
“The common denominator in all mazes and labyrinths is that they play off of our relationship with mystery and the unknown,” Francesca Tatarella writes in the preface to “Labyrinths & Mazes,” her curiously captivating book that collects documentation of 50 mazes in both classical and contemporary styles. “They deal with questions such as, ‘Should I even start a journey if I don’t know where it will take me? Will I get lost if I head down an unknown path?’” With ancient roots in religious rites and as a space for contemplation, the labyrinth has more recently become an expressive medium for land artists, from Robert Irwin to Yoko Ono and Arata Isozaki. There is an impressive variety of materials and styles on display here, from the sinuous, curved labyrinths Motoi Yamamoto constructs of sea salt on gallery floors to Jeppe Hein’s trippy mirrored interference in a Korean forest to more traditional hedge mazes like the one at Hever Castle in Kent, England (pictured above), created in the Renaissance tradition. The book is a pleasure to — dare we say it? — get lost in. $40, papress.com.
“Christian Dior loved color, celebrated and championed it,” writes Jerry Stafford in the introduction of “The Art of Color,” a new book that pays tribute to the house’s use of color in its beauty department over the last several decades. Peter Phillips, the current creative and image director for Dior Makeup, as well as former creative directors Tyen and Serge Lutens, celebrate 12 beauty shades (including yellow, silver and, of course, bright red) that have been important to Dior — and illustrate them with both works of art and stunning archival images. $84, Amazon.com.
At a time when backstage photography at fashion shows is practically ubiquitous, “Blind for Love” stands out. All of the images in this glossy photo book were shot by the artist, photographer and frequent Alexander McQueen collaborator Nick Waplington, at Gucci’s recent cruise show, held in Westminster Abbey. Waplington chronicles the atmosphere behind the scenes as Alessandro Michele gets models ready for the show. There are shots of the designer at work, intricate dresses juxtaposed against the Abbey’s stained-glass windows — and, true to fashion, piles and piles of accessories. $95, Assouline.com.