NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. — No pitcher in baseball history has gotten the final out of the World Series for two different teams. Wade Davis closed out the 2015 championship for the Kansas City Royals. In the master plan of the Chicago Cubs, he will soon do the same for them.
The seventh month, often so cruel to the Cubs, was glorious in 2016. Even when their closer, Aroldis Chapman, blew a save opportunity in Game 7 of the World Series in Cleveland, the Cubs fought back to win in 10 innings. After going 108 years between championships, they want to stay on top for a while.
So Davis heads to Chicago, outfielder Jorge Soler goes to the Royals, and Chapman has found a home in free agency with the Yankees. The Cubs had the money to sign Soler from Cuba in 2012 and had the lineup depth to trade him for an elite pitcher on Wednesday.
In that way, this deal strongly echoed the Tuesday blockbuster between the Red Sox and the White Sox, in which Chris Sale went from Chicago to Boston for a four-prospect package headlined by Yoan Moncada. Hoyer and Theo Epstein, now the Cubs’ president for baseball operations, built the Red Sox a decade ago by using that precious combination: lots of money and high-impact prospects. With both, you can do almost anything.
For the Cubs, that meant the freedom to choose how to best finish games. In July, they overwhelmed the Yankees in a trade for Chapman, giving up the top shortstop prospect Gleyber Torres even though Chapman was facing free agency. Now, instead of giving Chapman a record deal for a closer, they used a past investment to get a more sensibly priced star.
The Red Sox used the same strategy, giving up Moncada, who cost them $63 million in 2015, for Sale and his bargain contract. For the Cubs, it meant parting with Soler, who signed for $30 million in 2012, to get Davis, a two-time All-Star signed for $10 million in his final year before free agency.
Davis, 31, has been overpowering for the Royals, with a 1.18 E.R.A. across the last three seasons. He converted 27 of 30 save chances last season, but his strikeout rate declined, and he missed much of the summer with a forearm strain. He passed his physical for the Cubs, who expect Kris Bryant, Anthony Rizzo and the gang to give him many leads to protect.
“The beauty of having a really good core of young players is that we know what we’re bringing back, and what we’re bringing back offensively is very similar to what was on the field in November,” said Hoyer, who has also added outfielder Jon Jay and reliever Brian Duensing.
Dayton Moore, the Royals’ general manager, has a roster full of players facing free agency next off-season: Lorenzo Cain, Danny Duffy, Alcides Escobar, Eric Hosmer, Mike Moustakas. Yet he said it was clear, even before the winter meetings, that Davis would command the most attention.
The Royals have shown the value of bullpen depth in their deep postseason runs, and the Cubs and the Indians expanded on the model; no starter collected an out past the seventh inning in the World Series. Kelvin Herrera will become the closer for the Royals, who slipped to .500 last season but will try to cling to contention.
Soler, 24, was a spare part in the postseason, lost in a glut of Cubs outfielders and designated hitters that included Ben Zobrist, Kyle Schwarber, Jason Heyward, Chris Coghlan, Albert Almora and Dexter Fowler, who is likely to leave as a free agent. But Soler starred in the 2015 playoffs and has 27 home runs in 682 career at-bats. The Royals’ single-season record for homers (still just 36, by Steve Balboni in 1985) could be within his reach.
The Cubs would be happy to see it happen, as long as they keep winning championships. Whatever Torres does for the Yankees — and he is off to a fast start, as the most valuable player of the Arizona Fall League — the Cubs got just what they wanted by trading him for Chapman.
