Sunday Review|What Does It Mean to Acknowledge the Past?
What Does It Mean to Acknowledge the Past?
By the time I flew home, after a month there, I’d witnessed at least a dozen of these acknowledgments, and one called a “welcome to country,” in which a member of the local indigenous community provided remarks. I learned that although the practice was relatively new in mainstream settings, the tradition itself had been an indigenous custom for centuries. In just a few weeks, I heard these remarks in places as modest as a classroom and as grand as the Sydney Opera House.
My mother accompanied me for this month Down Under and we got into the habit of doing real-time evaluations, all nonverbal, of these opening remarks. Were they heartfelt, or perfunctory? A smile, head shake or eyebrow raise might pass between us. Did we detect an extra layer of euphemism, or was our own American cynicism to blame? Some speakers used the phrase “traditional custodians of the land,” which was admirable for eschewing the concept of ownership, but also had a janitorial ring to it.
One statement, before an event at the end of a long day, was given in the same tone a flight attendant might employ when pointing out emergency exits. Another, at a community arts center in a working-class suburb of Melbourne, came closest to frank historical accuracy: The speaker described the land as stolen, and mentioned a continuing fight for restitution. This audience of about 60 people included the highest concentration of nonwhites I saw during my travels — indigenous, South and East Asian, African and Arab. Perhaps the speaker, who was white, spoke so plainly because she thought this audience could handle something closer to the truth.
When my mother and I returned home in the fall, we discovered a United States newly interested in the way we begin our own public events, incited by the football player Colin Kaepernick’s decision to kneel during the national anthem in protest of police brutality toward African-Americans. 
Why, I thought, bother with any of it? Why can’t we just get started with a speech or a football game without playing an anthem? The aftermath of the presidential election has changed my thinking.
Gathering together to listen to speeches and watch performances is one way civilizations share values. These events can foster community as well as breed animus, as we saw Donald J. Trump so successfully accomplish in his campaign rallies.  In this political climate, the words we use and the traditions we champion matter more than ever.
I was still struck by what the Australians did: begin symphonies and lectures and talks among writers with a succinct acknowledgment that their country had a complicated past. What would it be like to consider something like that here? What good did it do there?
The response from indigenous writers was more complicated. They saw value in the acknowledgments as restoration of their traditions, and separate from the myriad ways the government of Australia has failed them.
Ellen van Neerven, a poet and novelist, mentioned witnessing similar acknowledgments delivered in the United States, in Charlottesville, Va., and Austin, Tex. I remembered the last time I was in Charlottesville, a town that owes much of its existence to Thomas Jefferson. I could imagine a speaker at an event in that city acknowledging a particular Native American tribe as the traditional inhabitants of the land, yet omitting mention of the slave labor that contributed significantly to the area’s development, and the wealth of its university’s famous patron. That would feel wrong to me, a descendant of slaves, some of whom were from that state. How do we determine which details are worthy of acknowledgment when a piece of land carries so much fraught history?
I came to understand that for indigenous Australians, the tradition is not so much about revisiting a nation’s past sins as it is about restoring the oldest of ceremonial gestures to a place, returning a bit of context to where it was once violently stripped away.
I saw the value of restoring context on a recent trip to the new National Museum of African-American History and Culture, or the Black Smithsonian, as I’ve heard folks call it. There, a stone’s throw from a White House built by slaves, was an acknowledgment of our contributions to this country — both our struggles and triumphs, and even our quotidian customs, down to the pomade we put in our hair. The museum is a giant symbol full of smaller symbols presented as artifacts, and it moved me. I’ve thought about that pomade tin many times since my visit, and about the forethought of the curator who included such a mundane item. One thing context can highlight is the basic fact of a group’s humanity.
What might it look like for us to devise a new ritual for commencing our events? To recognize the most marginalized among us, simultaneously celebrating their traditions and keeping alive a more accurate story of our origin? It might take the form of an explicit acknowledgment, as the Australians have done, or it could be more implicit: a song or dance that fosters inclusion.
Whatever the ritual, it would be complicated and imperfect, as all symbolic gestures are. Given the rise of rhetoric designed to make many of us feel excluded, the effort would be worth it.