BERLIN — Germans traditionally ring in the new year with a din of pyrotechnics and revelry, but the buzzword for this weekend’s celebrations is security.
For the first time, there will be cameras monitoring citizens as they set off firecrackers and light up the night sky with sparkling rockets at midnight on Saturday. Parties from Munich to Berlin will be secured by additional police officers, as Germans bid farewell to a year when terrorism reached their homeland.
On New Year’s Eve a year ago, roving groups of men, most of them from migrant backgrounds, took advantage of a chaotic scene in Cologne, in northwestern Germany, and in other cities to harass, grope and sexually assault women. This month in Berlin, a man who had professed allegiance to the Islamic State drove a truck into a Christmas market, killing 12 people in the country’s worst terrorist attack in decades.
In light of those crimes, and in response to the continuing concern about security and terrorism, Germany has taken the new precautions in advance of this weekend’s celebrations.
The police and prosecutors had scrambled to find video from people who might have been filming at the time of the Berlin attack. Anyone who might have captured the attack on a smartphone or another device was urged to share it to aid in the hunt for the suspected attacker because the market was not under video surveillance.
The proposal would also make it easier for officials to gain access to the recorded materials. Parliament is expected to pass the bill.
Germany’s history with governments that have abused surveillance and security to remain in power, instead of ensuring the safety of its citizens, has left the nation wary of data collection and public cameras. But after about 1,200 women reported being attacked in Cologne and elsewhere by gangs of mostly immigrant men — the majority of whom were of North African origin who had arrived as refugees — there is an increased willingness to place security over personal privacy.
A final report summarizing the attacks has not yet been released, but Cologne is working to ensure there are no repeats of last year’s events. There will be 1,500 police officers on duty there on New Year’s Eve — more than triple from last year. Cameras have been installed on the central square outside of a cathedral and the main train station next to it where last year’s attacks occurred.
