Maria Bruno’s strength and her desire to give back to her community were inspired by her mother, Laura Andrews. “She was a wonderful person,” Ms. Bruno said. “When you were down and you spoke to her, she had the power to lift you up.” Her home was a safe haven for other children in their Brooklyn neighborhood. When Ms. Andrews suddenly died two years ago at the age of 50, Ms. Bruno fell into a deep depression. At the time, she was attending college and working as a counselor for people living with H.I.V., but all of that became overwhelming. She lost her job and dropped out of school. Her three young children were struggling to cope as well.
A few months later, Ms. Bruno was referred to Brooklyn Community Services, one of eight organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, where the family received therapy provided by the East New York Family Center.
“Once I started to express my feelings and my children saw that it’s O.K. to talk about how they feel, everything started to fall into place,” she said.
Though the therapy sessions have ended, Ms. Bruno is keeping her family focused on the future. Mya, 13, is a dancer and hopes to attend the Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts next year. Eva is 10 and enjoys running track. And Donnell, who is 8 and has special needs, participates in a local youth football team.
Knowing how important education was to her mother, Ms. Bruno, now 31, decided to return to school and is working toward a bachelor’s degree in health services management. “Eventually, one day, I would like to open my own nonprofit organization to help support women in need,” she said.
All donations made to the Neediest Cases Fund go to one of eight charities: Brooklyn Community Services; Catholic Charities Archdiocese of New York; Catholic Charities Brooklyn and Queens; the Children’s Aid Society; Community Service Society of New York; Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies; UJA-Federation of New York; and the International Rescue Committee. To help, please make checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund and send them to P.O. Box 5193, New York, N.Y. 10087. Donations may be made with a credit card at |||PHONE_NUMBER|||  or online at nytimes.com/neediest.