All hail our greatest punch line rapper, 2 Chainz, who never met an evocative image he couldn’t upend and extend. On “Castro,” from Yo Gotti’s upcoming album, he has a lot of competition: Kanye West’s tossed off lines are amusing, and Big Sean and Quavo mask cleverness with slickness. But when 2 Chainz arrives, promising to “take your girl like a painkiller,” the show is stolen, not to be returned. J.C.
Boogarins, from Brazil, hark back to the spirit and fuzztone of tropicália, the Brazilian psychedelia that resisted a dictatorship; they’re also kindred spirits, at least in this song, to the Mexican experimenters Café Tacvba. “Elogio a Instituição do Cinismo” sets its melody bouncing against walls of distortion, pitting the supple and catchy against the abrasive. The song title translates as “Praise for the Institution of Cynicism,” and the lyrics — with English subtitles in the video — are a broad-spectrum, almost metaphysical protest. “Everything is ephemeral,” they sing. “Only creation proves existence.” J.P.
It’s lovely, as usual, to see Gucci Mane in high spirits and good cheer on this installment of NPR’s Tiny Desk concert series. Certainly, he’s the only performer ever to have done this show and mention his “two AK-47s and a blowtorch.” But they want you to thrill at the cognitive dissonance caused by this very unlikely performance in a space that looks like a college radio station circa 1995, so let’s not give them what they want. Instead, look past Gucci Mane to the piano, where his longtime producer Zaytoven is sitting, enthusiastically playing some roadhouse soul, maybe a little jazz, and oodles of sprightly little fills. J.C.
“New Song” feels, actually, like an old song: something from the end of the 1970s when punk, disco and Minimalism found common ground in repetition, simple chords and a danceable thump, and when women were seizing their place as musicians and songwriters as well as singers. The four-woman band Warpaint sees and echoes the allure of those more innocent times. In “New Song,” their multiplied, overlapping voices and guitar lines float over three chords and a thumping beat. “Dancing to you all night long/you’re a new song,” they sing, capturing the infatuation of music merged with romance. J.P.
On “All On Me,” BJ the Chicago Kid’s voice is, as always, mouthwateringly tender. He’s a sensitive singer, and a patient one too — he never sounds as if he has any priority apart from the notes before him. “All On Me” is a standout from his new mixtape, “The Lost Files: Cuffing Season,” actually a collection of older material that predates his strong 2016 album “In My Mind.” J.C.