This year The Times published over fifteen groundbreaking virtual reality films that allow you to experience a range of stories, from standing on the surface of Pluto to the battle to retake Falluja from ISIS this past summer. Below are some of our favorites. Download the NYT VR app on iPhone or Android to watch these films on your smartphone.
Kristen Stewart, Natalie Portman, Don Cheadle, Ruth Negga and others star in classic film-noir scenarios, with a virtual reality twist. In each short, the stars were instructed to play their scenes with the V.R. camera as a character, speaking to it, singing to it, firing a gun at it. The result is a strange and thrilling new experience that places you, the viewer, within each scene.
Set foot on an alien world, three billion miles from the warmth of the sun. Fly over Pluto’s rugged surface and smooth heart-shaped plains. Stand on icy mountains as the moon Charon looms on the horizon. Touchdown in a frost-rimmed crater, billions of years old. Out there in the void, an icy world awaits.
When the renowned adventurer and filmmaker Jimmy Chin looks at the New York skyline, he doesn’t just see tall buildings; he sees a mountain range. One afternoon in April, Chin, equipped with a virtual reality camera rig, made his ascent to the top of the 408-foot-tall spire of 1 World Trade Center. Climb alongside him to see what the world looks like from the top of New York’s tallest building.
Ben C. Solomon, a New York Times video journalist, embedded with Iraqi forces this past summer. Experience firsthand the battles endured to retake the city of Falluja from ISIS.
After he went blind, Dr. John Hull used sound to rediscover a rich sensory universe. Experience a re-creation of his journey through blindness.
The killing of a 16-year-old Mexican in October 2012 raises troubling questions about the militarization of the U.S. Border Patrol. Travel to Nogales, a town divided by the United States/Mexico border, to hear the story and investigate the scene of the crime.