Construction workers who dug the tunnels. Leaders who pushed for funding. East Siders who yearned for an easier commute.
Many New Yorkers never lived long enough to witness this bit of history — the opening on Sunday of the first section of the Second Avenue subway.
But for longtime supporters and the many skeptics in their golden years, it is a joyous moment that took a very long time to arrive. As the project dragged on for nearly a century, they lost spouses and colleagues. They watched New York City decline and flourish, and plans for the Second Avenue line start up again.
Now they will make a pilgrimage to the Upper East Side in the new year for a ride some thought they might never take on a subway that has been dreamed of since the 1920s.
Felice K. Shea worked on planning for the line in the 1960s as a member of her local community board. There were drawings of stations. Groundbreakings commenced. Then the funding fizzled.
Ms. Shea, who later became a State Supreme Court justice and moved to Greenwich Village, will miss the inaugural ride on New Year’s Eve because she will be at a wedding in Maine. But she plans to ride the line when she comes back.
New York City has its share of historical slights and unfinished business. The Second Avenue subway is surely near the top of the list, along with the demolition of the old Pennsylvania Station and its poorly reviewed replacement; the long-delayed cleanups of Willets Point in Queens and the Gowanus Canal in Brooklyn; and the fact that the subway has never reached Staten Island.
The wait for the Second Avenue line was nearly as long as the plight of Chicago Cubs fans, some of whom lamented that relatives died before they could see the team win the World Series in November. Their drought started in 1908. The idea for a Second Avenue line came 12 years later.
Each push to build the subway failed, even after officials held three groundbreakings in the 1970s and started to dig the tunnels. Finally in 2007, construction began in earnest on the current segment, which extends the Q line to three new stations at 72nd, 86th and 96th Streets at a cost of $4.4 billion.
As the years passed, two former chairmen of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority — William J. Ronan and E. Virgil Conway, both advocates for the line — died. So did Gary Russo, a construction worker known as the Second Avenue Sinatra, who sang for crowds in front of the construction site.
But the project required many champions over the decades, and some will attend a New Year’s Eve party on Saturday night to take part in an inaugural ride with Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and the authority’s current chairman, Thomas F. Prendergast. The line is scheduled to open to the public at noon on Sunday.
The new stations have escalators and elevators to make the trip a bit easier for older visitors like Lothar Stelter, 85, who witnessed another historic subway moment in 1955. He rode the final train on the Third Avenue elevated line with his wife, Josephine, who died in September. Now his son is trying to figure out when to bring his father to visit the line from his home in Queens.
Mr. Stelter, whose son Lawrence published a book of his photos from the elevated line, has several other artifacts, including a sign from its 53rd Street station. He said he was disappointed that the Second Avenue line was so short, but he wanted to see the new artwork.
He asked if the line would ever extend to the Bronx, as originally planned.
“On the map, it looks so limited in what it can do,” he said.
While the Bronx is no longer on the drawing board, the authority does plan to extend the line to 125th Street in East Harlem, though it will take many years and cost billions of dollars. Proposals to bring the line to Lower Manhattan are even less certain. How many current subway riders will be around when (or perhaps if) the line is extended remains to be seen.
Peter S. Kalikow, the real estate developer who helped revive the Second Avenue subway when he served as authority chairman until 2007, said he was excited about the opening, though he would miss the inaugural ride on New Year’s Eve because he had already accepted an invitation to a dinner in Florida. Mr. Kalikow, now 74, who lives on the Upper East Side, said he would visit in the New Year.
The turning point in the project’s star-crossed fate, he said, was a critical funding agreement with the federal government in 2007.
But plenty of people had doubts. In a 1971 letter to the editor in The New York Times, William A. Perlmuth warned of the “extraordinary length of time (nearly a decade) it would take to build the Second Avenue subway.” He argued that it would be faster and cheaper to improve bus service with a dedicated lane.
“I knew in my heart that it would take them a very long time, and it has,” Mr. Perlmuth, who is 87 and lives on the Upper East Side, said in an interview.
Still, Mr. Perlmuth said he was glad the subway was finally opening, even if he was irritated by the many inconveniences during construction.
