Paul Elvstrom, whose prowess at sea brought him four consecutive Olympic gold medals in sailing and international standing as one of the sport’s greatest competitors of the 20th century, died on Wednesday at his home in Hellerup, Denmark. He was 88.
Dan Ibsen, the executive director of the Royal Danish Yacht Club, confirmed the death.
Nicknamed the Great Dane, Elvstrom also won 13 world championships in a sailing career that began when he was a boy sailing on the Oresund, the strait separating Denmark from Sweden. He went on to build a vast international sailmaking and sailing products company that became a leader in design, engineering and performance.
Nowhere was his influence felt more than in Olympic sailing. His dominant run in the Games, in which he won gold from 1948 to 1960, helped create a legacy that can still be seen in the strength of Denmark’s small but remarkable Olympic sailing team, which ranks sixth in sailing medals.
Elvstrom, whose racing career lasted at least 60 years, was only 20 when he made his first Olympic appearance, in the London Games of 1948. Sailing for the first time in the Firefly class, involving a dinghy with two sails, he emerged the surprise victor of a blustery series off the coast of western England. He popularized the technique of leaning back over the side of the boat from his knees — almost parallel with the water — to add power, stability and speed.
Elvstrom’s Olympic record of four consecutive gold medals was matched by the British sailor Ben Ainslie at the 2012 London Games when he won in the Finn class, which is considered sailing’s most physically challenging event. Elvstrom’s final three gold medals were won in the Finn, involving a single-handed dinghy with no crew.
Elvstrom, a superbly conditioned athlete, then explained to Bank that he had extended his body over the water from his knees for 12 to 15 minutes — a feat requiring tremendous leg and core strength.
Elvstrom was the first to take the technique to such extremes.
He won his final gold medal at the Rome Olympics in 1960, but by then the pressures on him had mounted. In addition to competing, he had coached King Constantine II of Greece at the same Games. (The king won gold in the Dragon class, involving a three-person keelboat.) Experiencing stress, Elvstrom, not yet 33, decided to postpone his Olympic career and focus on his family and the sailmaking business, which he had recently started.
Paul Bert Elvstrom was born on Feb. 25, 1928, in Hellerup, north of Copenhagen, where he would live all his life after buying his childhood home from his parents. Growing up along the Oresund, he was given a small dinghy as a schoolboy and quickly became consumed by sailing.
Later, while employed as a bricklayer, he became a sought-after sailor at the Hellerup Sailing Club. He cut his first sails for club members in his basement in 1958, and Elvstrom Sails was born.
Fueled by his restless drive to improve every aspect of racing and his keen engineering and marketing mind, his business grew rapidly. By the 1970s, the Elvstrom name was stamped on sails, masts and boats around the world.
Elvstrom’s victories on the world stage helped elevate his innovative boathandling techniques and products. Ibsen, who had sailed and raced with Elvstrom over the last 30 years, said the Elvstrom company’s ratcheting “winch” blocks, auto bailers (which drain water from dinghies while they sail) and fast-acting line cleats were groundbreaking developments in the 1960s.
“Today the Elvstrom Bailer is still the only functional bailer on Olympic dinghies and boats around the world,” Ibsen said.
Elvstrom returned to the Olympics in 1968, 1972, 1984 and 1988 but did not win medals. In his two final Games, he competed alongside his daughter Trine Elvstrom-Myralf in a high-speed Tornado catamaran.
She survives him, as do three other daughters, Pia, Stine and Gitte, all with the surname Elvstrom; nine grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren. His wife, Anne Elvstrom, died before him.
In addition to winning design awards for his products, Elvstrom was Denmark’s sportsman of the century in 1996 and, in 2007, an inaugural inductee into the International Sailing Federation’s Hall of Fame.
He continued to sail in his later years until Parkinson’s disease began to slow him down. As recently as 2009 he was sailing his Dragonfly trimaran — solo — to visit Gitte and her family on the east coast of Sweden, 600 miles from his home.
Elvstrom was known to be a model of sportsmanship.
