Sunday Review|Should I Lie About My Beliefs to Get Health Insurance?
Boulder, Colo. — HERE’S an ethical dilemma. If you could save your family more than $8,000 next year simply by signing a statement affirming belief in principles you find repugnant, would you?
I support the Affordable Care Act. Before it took effect, my husband was once denied coverage on the grounds that he’d seen a doctor for a sinus infection; I was charged hundreds of dollars above the quoted rate because of a long-ago surgery with no lasting health impacts. I know people whose lives the Affordable Care Act has transformed, friends with pre-existing conditions that had made them uninsurable but who now can get the coverage they need. My support for the law comes from a belief that access to affordable health care should be an undeniable right. But the battle to get it passed produced a deeply, perhaps fatally, flawed law — and on a personal level, my quality of life has declined under the A.C.A.
There are now a growing number of theoretically less expensive health care options that don’t comply with the Affordable Care Act. I could, for instance, join a local membership-based primary care provider clinic — around $200 a month for a family of three — and combine it with a similarly priced catastrophic-coverage plan. But these options still leave gaps in your coverage, and subject you to a fine for not carrying proper insurance — up to 2.5 percent of your adjusted gross income.
But in practice, the ministries serve much the same function as insurance. Members pay a monthly contribution, they are subject to an annual deductible (in this case, $1,000 per person) and their doctor submits a claim and is reimbursed by the plan.
Faith-based plans do not adhere to the same rules as Obamacare insurance plans. They don’t have to pay for preventive care, they may not insure smokers, they may not cover pre-existing conditions, and they may deny you admission based on your weight. If you are a 5-foot-6 woman and weigh more than 230 pounds, for instance, Altrua HealthShare won’t offer you membership. Unlike the other non-A.C.A.-compliant options, though, health care sharing ministries are actually exempt from the law. (These organizations have to meet certain requirements, and must have been in existence continuously since 1999.) That means if you sign up for one, you aren’t subject to the fines.
While some health sharing ministries require membership in a Christian congregation, Altrua HealthShare does not. My family’s doctors all participate in its extensive network. According to its guidelines, membership “is based on a religious tradition of mutual aid, neighborly assistance and burden sharing.” Sounds promising. Membership, Altrua’s brochure continues, “is specifically tailored for individuals who maintain a healthy lifestyle, make responsible choices in regards to health and care, and believe in helping others.” I bike, hike and practice yoga; I’m a longtime vegetarian; I’ve never smoked. And who doesn’t believe in helping others?
I disagree with each of these. And the last I checked, premarital sex, same-sex marriage and abortion were legal in the United States. Still, I considered consenting to the “standards” for the sake of my family’s financial situation. Imagine if we could put money away for college tuition, or pay down our credit card debt, instead of sending thousands to a giant corporation. What if I swallowed my principles and sent a contribution to Planned Parenthood as penance?
But in the end, I simply couldn’t do it. Much like many of these ministries’ members, I believe certain principles are sacred. (Altrua won’t pay maternity benefits if the pregnancy arose through “adultery or fornication by the member.”) For those on the religious right, their beliefs grant them exemption from federal law, and access to decent affordable health care. Unfortunately, there’s no such loophole for clean-living, charitable nonbelievers.
So next week, I will sign up for a plan that costs nearly $1,200 a month and that will still pay for next to none of my family’s medical needs. I will have to part ways with the O.B. practice whose doctors saw me through a complicated pregnancy and delivered my son healthy. Because I hold one set of beliefs about right and wrong, I am subject to federal law. If I subscribed to a different set of morals, I would be exempt from its clutches.
