Inara Verzemnieks wrote about the Americans who are excluded from the Affordable Care Act and the physical and psychological toll of being uninsured.
It’s not Obamacare’s dead zone. It’s the Republican dead zone created by Republican refusal to implement Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion in Republican-dominated states. Yes, a few Republican governors, including Vice President-elect Pence, have implemented the expansion. But nowhere where Democrats hold sway is it blocked. Yet not once in this piece is the word “Republican” even mentioned.
How these dead zones formed is not a matter of “unanticipated consequences” but the deliberate consequence of a full frontal assault along partisan lines. The Supreme Court ruling exploiting a minor glitch in the drafting to make the expansion optional for states was in clear contradiction of the law’s obvious intent. But it doesn’t stop states from adopting the expansion; only Republicans do that. Judith Silverstein, Berkeley, Calif.
People living in A.C.A. “dead zones” are getting health coverage the single most expensive way: panicked visits to the E.R.  What has happened in those states is the same ol’, same ol’: The hospitals, and then the insurance companies, raise their prices on the paying and insured patients to cover the uninsured.
Kwame Anthony Appiah counseled a letter writer who wasn’t sure whether to intervene after witnessing a parent treat her child badly.
Kwame Anthony Appiah couldn’t be more wrong. I can’t believe he wrote this last paragraph. If that poor child has nothing but callousness from his mother and everyone else, of course that will be his view of the world. How can the kindness of strangers, and even the intervention of strangers, not affect how he sees the world? At the very least, if he ever needs it, he would know that there is help outside his family — concerned strangers, teachers, institutions — places he can go to get intervention and support. Sandra Elliott, Claremont, Calif.
Having been a nurse in a pediatric hospital, I’ve seen and heard everything. I would absolutely go to the child, as it’s essential he knows that someone cares enough to check for any injuries, as well as to offer caring and concern. It conveys the message to the child that he has value and deserves attention and kindness.
That being said, a kind attitude toward the mother is important. When parents call their kids names — in front of me! In a pediatric health care setting! — one can only imagine what happens out of earshot.
I learned to say to parents in a gentle, nonconfrontational voice, “It never helps to call a child names” or “Shaming a child never helps.” And, if possible, empathize with something along the lines of “This situation is very stressful.” 
One can be a role model for a parent who perhaps knows no other way to cope.
