WASHINGTON — An inescapable fact of American elections is that a new president’s mug may soon be in your face, nonstop. For Donald J. Trump, a corollary is that he, like all newcomers to office, can keep company with the mugs of his choosing, decorating the Oval Office with presidential portraits — typically the official ones in the collections on view at the White House and the National Portrait Gallery.
Portraits in the Oval Office are largely inaccessible to the public. But you can see those in other parts of the White House during a public tour, as you are moved briskly down ill-lit halls, past roped-off reception rooms. The artworks are distant and dim, and given the low visual recognition value of most presidents past — would you know Millard Fillmore if you met him? — they could be of anyone.
Another impression: These portraits aren’t, for the most part, masterpieces, which doesn’t mean they’re uninteresting. And there are some outstanding ones, like the high-polish oil sketch of George Washington by Gilbert Stuart that became the source of many other images, including the sour, sidelong-glancing Washington on the $1 bill. The Stuart sketch isn’t on view now, but other pictures are. And one, on loan from the Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art in Bentonville, Ark., is a departure from type.
Painted in 1782 by Charles Willson Peale, it’s a three-quarter-length portrait of a prepresidential Washington, in his warm-up role as commander in chief of the Continental Army. He’s just come from the battlefield, which is behind him, but his cream-colored uniform, with its blue silk sash, is spotless. He’s relaxed, one hand on hip, the other leaning on a cannon. He has a very faint, knowing, measuring smile, as if at some thought he’d just had, possibly about you. A comparison with the Trump portrait would not be unrealistic, which is something to think about it.
We Americans preach populism, but when it comes to voting, we often go for leaders with money and some sort of fame. Washington — celebrity warrior and gentleman farmer, owner of hundreds of slaves — had both. So did our third president, Thomas Jefferson, who also owned slaves and didn’t pretend to be a man of the people in a mingling sense, yet drafted one of the world’s primary egalitarian documents. You sense the contradictions in a 1786 portrait done when he was the American minister to France. In Mather Brown’s depiction, he’s all bouffant wig and ruffles, encased, it would seem, in an elitist bubble. Yet the year the picture was made, one of the most important civil rights bills he ever wrote, the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom — forbidding discrimination against the practice of any faith — became American law.
Concepts of how presidential power should look and act change with eras, artists and personalities (and with scholarly assessments of leaders, which are constantly being revised). Andrew Jackson, elected in 1828, engineered a kind of populist revolt. Playing up his Southern backwoods roots, his military career and his disdain of the political establishment, he treated politics as a form of performance art. He played the role of Mr. Manifest Destiny, a loudmouth bully who took what he wanted — Western land, Native American lives — on behalf of the People.
He put on a feisty show. He threatened to lynch a pesky opponent, and when Congress squelched an appointment he wanted to make, he shouted, “I’ll smash them!” His fans ate it up. And he found the right artist to paint him, the rough and ready Ralph E. W. Earl, who depicted Jackson life-size, majorly coifed and draped like a king, or maybe Liberace, in a floor-length, scarlet-lined cloak.
Other, later presidents also benefited from visual spin. An 1859 portrait by the skilled George P. A. Healy transformed John Tyler, an officeholder short on charisma and executive savvy, into a lofty Romantic star. Healy’s gift for flattery was rewarded with commissions to paint four additional presidents, the last of them Abraham Lincoln.
Healy’s Lincoln portrait was conceived in the 1860s but executed some 20 years later. This famously tall and ungainly president sits scrunched up in a chair, legs crossed, hand to chin, thinking hard. It’s a glam shot. This Lincoln is young, pink-cheeked, blow-dried, kind of cute. To see him as he really was at the end, seek out the so-called “cracked plate” photo by Alexander Gardner, taken two months before Lincoln’s death. (There’s a modern print in the National Gallery.) Only 56, he was clearly worn to the bone.
Lincoln had one of the great faces, one of the great presences. It was impossible to make him anything but extraordinary. Less prepossessing leaders needed help from art. Rutherford B. Hayes, President No. 19, didn’t get much. In the furiously contested 1876 election, he squeezed out victory by the tiniest of margins, and the malicious phrase “His Fraudulency” shadowed him throughout his term. In his portrait by Eliphalet Andrews, he’s a haunted, worried man.
The bulky, bulldoggish Grover Cleveland got a diversionary assist from his brilliant portraitist, Anders Zorn, who turned Cleveland into a still life and made virtuosic brushwork the real subject of the painting. Warren G. Harding’s stint in office was corruption-riddled; every aspect of it seemed up for sale. Worse, his grasp of matters of state was nil. (A listener described a speech by him as “an army of pompous phrases moving across the landscape in search of an idea.”) The Republican Party had put him forward, it was said, because “he looked like a president.” If so, the Smithsonian portrait of him by Margaret Lindsay Williams may be assumed to define the winning executive brand, circa 1923: Mike Pence matches it to a T.
Official portraiture is about advertising, and therefore about invention. Calvin Coolidge spent much of his time in office doing little and saying nothing. Yet, in a portrait by Joseph E. Burgess, he’s a pugilist ready to spring. An unfinished 1945 painting of Franklin Delano Roosevelt by Douglas Chandor is most notable for including studies of that leader’s expressive, pencil-holding hands. These are the hands that wrote the New Deal into existence. They are also the hands that signed the order to confine Japanese-American citizens to internment camps during World War II, a racist act that some say is echoed in the current call for a ban on Muslims.
As for more recent presidential images, they don’t add up to much: stuffed suits, basically. Richard M. Nixon lucked out in a 1968 Norman Rockwell portrait that makes him a nice, normal guy. Bill Clinton was less fortunate in a 2006 Chuck Close painting that turns him into a grinning clown.
Maybe the Clinton picture represents a new brand of presidential portraiture, for a time when politics and entertainment are indivisible, heroes and rogues indistinguishable. Mr. Trump’s apple-juggling 1989 promo shot fits in here.
A few of these portraits will just be fun for Mr. Trump to have around: James Buchanan looking like a dandy, Chester Arthur with his elaborate mutton chops. But the images of the presidents also form a kind of national document: a pictorial history of American arrogance, aggression, persecution and moral confusion, with a balancing one of sobriety, self-discipline, just action and restraint.
