The manuscript of a string quartet by Beethoven that failed to sell at Sotheby’s last month after a scholar publicly questioned the assertion by Sotheby’s, and its experts, that the work was written in Beethoven’s hand.
When a 232-page handwritten score of Mahler’s epic Second Symphony (“Resurrection”) sold for $5.6 million at Sotheby’s in London last month, it shattered a nearly 30-year record for the highest price paid at auction for a musical manuscript.
But a less important score that failed to sell that same day has since transfixed the music world. A brief Beethoven work for string quartet went unsold when, before the auction, a scholar publicly questioned the assertion by Sotheby’s, and its experts, that the work was written in Beethoven’s hand — igniting an acrimonious debate in the generally staid, tweedy precincts of musicologists and manuscript dealers.
While it is not uncommon for experts to differ on such matters — Is that painting by the old master or the school of the old master? — the Beethoven episode raised questions about transparency in auctions, even as classical musical manuscripts have become a big international business.
In July, for example, Christie’s sold the third-highest-priced musical manuscript at auction: Bach’s Prelude, Fugue and Allegro for lute or keyboard in E flat (BWV 998), for $3.34 million.
Such works rarely come on the market, but when they do, they attract bidders from all over the world. In the initial run-up to the auction last month, most of the attention was on the Mahler score, an important manuscript given by Mahler’s widow, Alma, to the conductor Willem Mengelberg, and later bought by the financial publisher Gilbert Kaplan, who developed an unusual sideline conducting the work with numerous orchestras.
Then came the dispute over the score attributed to Beethoven.
The score has 23 bars of music: his Allegretto in B minor for string quartet, a recently rediscovered work. The listing in the Sotheby’s catalog, below a high-resolution photograph of the score, was unequivocal: It described the work as an “autograph manuscript,” meaning it was in Beethoven’s hand, and stated that it was a copy that Beethoven had made of the piece, which he had composed the day before, as a gift for a visiting Englishman. (An inscription on the score, thought to have been added around the time of its creation, reads: “composed & written by Beethoven himself November 29th 1817 at Vienna.”) The score was expected to sell for up to $248,000.
In an interview with The New York Times, he said that he and another scholar had previously told Christie’s that they did not believe it was genuine, and questioned why Sotheby’s, which knew Christie’s had passed on the chance to sell the score, did not acknowledge in its catalog that there was a difference of opinion about the document.
“I think Sotheby’s really should have indicated that there was some doubt about the manuscript, since they knew there was,” Dr. Cooper said.
Dr. Maguire said Sotheby’s had relied on the opinions of experts it trusted — including Nicholas Marston, a professor of music at King’s College, Cambridge, and Otto Biba, director of the archive of the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde in Vienna, two highly respected scholars.
“They gave the all-clear, they said this was genuine, and they have maintained that opinion since, as well,” he said.
He faulted Dr. Cooper for passing judgment on the manuscript without inspecting it personally. “Barry Cooper seems to think that he has a sort of hotline to Beethoven in heaven, and that he can judge a thing without seeing the original,” he said.
Dr. Cooper said that he did not need to inspect it in person, since his doubts centered on the handwriting, including the way the natural signs and double bars were formed, and a handful of notes that differed from a widely embraced manuscript of the work that Sotheby’s experts discovered in 1999.
Ronald D. Spencer, a lawyer who has worked on authentication cases in the art world, said that such disputes were hardly unusual — and highlighted the need for buyers to do their own due diligence.
