Perhaps only in the world of the Golden Globes would “La La Land,” critical darling and a front-runner in the awards race, face off for best musical or comedy against “Deadpool,” which is about a neurotic, motor-mouthed superhero. Or would the fashion designer-turned-director Tom Ford beat out Clint Eastwood, Martin Scorsese and Jeff Nichols for a spot in the best director category.
But so it goes with the Hollywood Foreign Press Association and its 85 or so members, who dole out the Globes each year.
Their nominations came early Monday, and while “La La Land,” “Moonlight” and “Manchester by the Sea” landed the most, there were, as always, notable performances and films that were shut out.
— Martin Scorsese’s passion project, “Silence,” about Jesuit missionaries in 17th-century Japan, left empty-handed.
— So did the Tom Hanks picture “Sully,” about the Miracle on the Hudson plane landing.
— The much-anticipated “Hidden Figures,” which stars Taraji P. Henson as a black female mathematician who helped American astronauts get into orbit, collected just two nominations — for best supporting actress (Octavia Spencer) and best score.
While the Globes’ nominees can be predictive of Oscar nominations, the foreign press group gets to divide the baby because it has two categories each for best film, best actor and best actress: in a musical or comedy or in a drama. So the fact that such end-of-the-year films as “Silence” and “Patriots Day” (the Boston Marathon bombing film from Peter Berg) received no Golden Globes love does not necessarily augur an Oscar shutout. The nominees were also unveiled more than a month before the Academy’s, set to be announced on Jan. 24.
The films probably hurt by their Globes showing are “Loving” and Denzel Washington’s “Fences,” which collected two nominations apiece for acting, but not best picture. Mr. Washington, however, was given the group’s lifetime achievement award early this year, so, in their eyes, he might have already gotten his due.