Voters in the tiny West African nation of Gambia cast marbles on Thursday in an election that is widely expected to keep the country’s ruler of more than two decades in power, despite a unified challenge from the opposition.
Polls closed at 5 p.m., and election workers were expected to work late into the night tallying results.
Earlier in the day, after voting with his wife in the capital, Banjul, President Yahya Jammeh predicted a decisive win.
“This will be the biggest landslide in the history of the country,” said Mr. Jammeh, who was met with cheers as he walked toward a sport utility vehicle that whisked him away from his polling site. He refused to comment when asked whether he would concede in the event of defeat.
His challenger, Adama Barrow, said he believed Gambians were ready for change after more than 20 years of rule by Mr. Jammeh.
“He is not going to be re-elected — his era is finished,” Mr. Barrow said.
In a statement on Thursday, rights groups criticized the circumstances under which the vote took place, especially the blocking of internet service and international calls.
All internet service was cut around 8 p.m. on Wednesday, Human Rights Watch said.
Voters refused to comment on which candidate they were backing. “I have to be careful of what I say,” said one, Victor Clayton-Johnson.
Mr. Jammeh came to power in a coup in 1994 and then swept elections in 1996, 2001, 2006 and 2011 after a 2002 constitutional amendment removed presidential term limits. Critics say those elections were not free and fair, and they accuse his government of corruption and flagrant human rights abuses.
The president’s supporters praise his efforts to promote economic development in Gambia, which is dependent on tourism and agriculture.
While the United States government praised the election for “high voter turnout and generally peaceful conditions,” it cited areas of concern.
“In the run-up to the election, we did have some concerns about undue pressure, intimidation” and the disruption of internet access, phone services and other factors that may have limited the flow of information to voters, Mark Toner, a deputy State Department spokesman, told reporters on Thursday.
Mr. Barrow, a former businessman and United Democratic Party leader, emerged this year as the candidate for an alliance of eight opposition parties. The former ruling party deputy Mamma Kandeh ran for the Gambia Democratic Congress, the only opposition party not in the coalition.
More than 880,000 voters were registered to participate at more than 1,400 polling stations, where they were asked to place a marble in a green, silver or purple drum, depending on their choice.
The African Union sent a handful of observers to this country of 1.9 million, but there were no observers from the European Union or the West African regional bloc Ecowas because the Gambian government did not grant them accreditation.
