Some people will go anywhere in search of the perfect holiday drink where a single taste, à la Proust, summons warm memories of Christmases past. For Puerto Ricans celebrating with coquito, a fortified coconut eggnog, their quest took them this month to The South of France.
That is not a region, but a bar that is closer to the south of the Bronx than it is to the Riviera (though it is right off Beach Avenue). There, under the tracks of the No. 6 train, revelers packed the spot after work to judge a qualifying round of the Coquito Masters tournament, which seeks to find the best coquito in the region. The warm aroma of Puerto Rican food, the sounds of classic salsa music and scores of coquito-filled shot glasses arrayed on a table turned this neighborhood bar into the island’s northernmost outpost.
And that is really the reason for the season: to celebrate a drink that for Puerto Ricans is as synonymous with Christmas as pasteles, pernil, Santa Clo and the Willie Colón and Héctor Lavoe Christmas album.
She has clearly cornered the market for Nuyorican nostalgia: Since starting the tastings in 2001, she estimates that about 15,000 people have attended her events as either competitors or judges. Yet, perhaps like the community that supports it, the contest started out modestly, in Ms. Quiñones’s living room. She had faced the prospect of a coquitoless Christmas that year when a family friend who had long supplied her with coquito died.
Determined not to be deprived, she invited friends to bring their own versions of the drink to her house for a contest (her hidden agenda was hoping they would leave a few bottles behind to serve as her holiday stash). The idea took off, going from an East Harlem senior center and bar at the beginning to qualifying rounds across the city (and in New Jersey).
At its most basic, the drink consists of coconut milk, coconut syrup, condensed milk and spices like clove, cinnamon, nutmeg and allspice. Some add eggs, others blanch at the suggestion (the egg base limits shelf life). Some use clear rum, others go for the dark stuff while others reach for 151, the higher proof. Sticklers for tradition grate fresh coconuts rather than rely on the canned stuff. There are fusion versions flavored with pistachio, chocolate and even salmon.
Chef Julio has definite opinions on how to make coquito, from the ingredients to the order in which they are mixed. The spices should be blended with the egg yolks, canned coconut should be heated gently so it mixes better and the rum should give you a kick but not knock you down.
Of course, everybody has a personal take. Rosemary Colòn, the reigning New York State champion, refuses to use eggs, but swears by 151-proof rum. Apparently, few people complained because since October she has sold about 300 bottles of the stuff, which she whips up in her Bronx kitchen and pours into elegant, decorated bottles.
Indeed, for all the recipes handed down by grandmothers, love is one ingredient that contestants say is the secret to good coquito. In some cases, love must have a high proof, since a few winners forsook the nuances of creamy textures, flecks of spice and grace notes of anise and went straight for the heat of extra-powerful rum. Ms. Quiñones often reminds people that it’s a tasting contest, but she also knows holiday habits are hard to break. (One qualifying round that drew 48 contestants to El Museo del Barrio soon turned into a rum-soaked party).
Her own search for the spirit of coquito past continues.
