The news that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority may soon raise subway and bus fares by 25 cents — to $3 — has given urgency to an idea gathering support in the City Council. Why not subsidize half-price fares for New York City residents who live at or below the poverty line?
The proposed fare increase would mean little to wealthy and middle-class residents, who can take advantage of commuter tax breaks and the discount that comes with buying an unlimited monthly card, which now costs $116.50. But it would compound the existing hardship for people who earn too little to pay income taxes and cannot afford the cash outlay needed to buy a monthly pass. Even at current rates, low-income workers and college students are often shut out of the system.
This problem is illustrated in a report released this year by the Community Service Society, a nonprofit group that aids the poor. One commuter featured in the report was Darius Jones, a 22-year-old student who had been walking from his West Harlem home to classes in the Bronx, even in bad weather, because he could not afford the fare.
Had he resorted to jumping turnstiles, he could have landed in criminal court, where a conviction would lead to a permanent criminal record (making it much more difficult to find a job and housing). Mr. Jones, however, was lucky: The service society helped him obtain a subway card during the cold weather months.
Transit costs have risen steeply over the last several years, even as incomes have stagnated for low-income workers, the group said. It estimated that the current cost of a monthly MetroCard for use on subways and buses would eat up nearly 12 percent of the annual income of a single earner living at the federal poverty level.
The resulting financial strain has undermined the promise represented by the city’s transit system and made it difficult for the poor to get to jobs, classes, doctors’ offices or other essential appointments.
 And in New York, the elderly and people with disabilities already receive half-price cards. The new study estimates that a similar subsidy for poor passengers, underwritten by the city, would help about 360,000 New Yorkers at a cost of about $194 million a year.
Supporters argue that the money could be found in the $82 billion city budget. Moreover, they say subsidies would allow the city to save some of the estimated $50 million it spent last year prosecuting fare beaters, as well as the additional costs of detention at Rikers Island jail.
There is wide and growing support in the City Council for a transit subsidy. Many New Yorkers will be relieved if lawmakers, who are still researching the issue, work quickly to draft a bill and bring relief to impoverished commuters as soon as possible.