Most New Yorkers would rather not relive the mind-numbing disappointment that can come from navigating the city’s real estate market. They would rather forget that awful landlord, or that apartment they can’t afford, or that condo that replaced all the shops on their block. But where most people see only stress and angst in the face of rapid gentrification, some artists find inspiration.
A real estate broker desperately trying to sell an apartment in a Trump high-rise makes for a surreal short film. Over-the-top amenities at a new condo seem doubly absurd when they’re drawn as cartoons with quirky captions. And, somehow, the story of a landlord trying to force a grizzled New Yorker out of his rundown Hell’s Kitchen walk-up is something to laugh about when it’s a television show. For these artists, such events are not a source of despair. They are fodder for creativity.
Artists often hold up a mirror so the rest of us can better see the world around us. At the moment, the image reflected back is of a city undergoing a rapid, and sometimes disorienting, transformation. And it is no wonder artists have taken an interest in gentrification — they are often its bellwether. When artists arrive, developers often take it as a signal that a neighborhood is ripe for investment. Longtime residents, meanwhile, get the message that displacement is not too far behind. But artists are not immune to the effects of gentrification, either, so why shouldn’t it find its way into their art?
Not that gentrification is new terrain for artists. But the tenor has changed as the scale of development has become ever larger and more frenzied.
Among the new entries is “The Holdouts,” a comedy series created by Stephen Girasuolo and Dan Menke. The show, which is in production, centers on a classic New York situation: a lease buyout. In the pilot episode, “Change Is Bad,” a disheveled New Yorker named Kevin refuses to relinquish his grimy one-bedroom, even after his landlord offers him $500,000 to leave. He’d rather wait for the return of a bygone era.
“I look forward to the day when I can raise pigeons on my roof again, when I can grill in a vacant lot,” he tells his roommate, Jayce, a schoolteacher who is trying to put on a tie so he will look respectable when he meets the wealthy parents of his students.
At one point, Jayce takes Kevin to see a $7,000-a-month two-bedroom in a new development in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, with “wool-brushed” stainless-steel appliances and a separate “poor door” to the building’s subsidized units. “I’m having an allergic reaction,” Kevin says.
Unlike Kevin, though, Mr. Girasuolo did not hold out. He gave up his crummy apartment in 2011, even though it was rent-stabilized, equivalent in New York to a winning lottery ticket. But, as luck would have it, he eventually found another rent-stabilized apartment, a one-bedroom in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, which he shares with his wife, Nina Phuong Ha. He walked past his old apartment building a few weeks ago. It still had evacuation notices on the door.
Kevin’s apartment on the show, with a bathtub in the living room and a hanging sheet for a bedroom door, actually belongs to someone, the avant-garde composer Elliott Sharp. The show’s producer, Christopher Pike, found the place by sitting on stoops of old apartment buildings in the East Village and accosting tenants in the hope that someone would agree to let the crew use his or her apartment as a set. When Mr. Sharp emerged from his apartment, on East Seventh Street between Avenues B and C, Mr. Pike followed him for three blocks, pleading his case. By the third block, Mr. Sharp agreed to let him see the place.
“Elliott’s was perfect because he had all these old CDs, albums, analog equipment,” Mr. Girasuolo said.
While “The Holdouts” spotlights the grittiness of New York tenements, “Broker,” a short film by Jennifer and Kevin McCoy, rubs some of the veneer off a spotless three-bedroom on the 77th floor of Trump World Tower at 845 United Nations Plaza.
Gillian Chadsey, an actress, spreads out glossy Trump Organization promotional brochures and recites marketing strategies with statements like: “Emphasize unique qualities to increase the perception of scarcity.” In a monologue stuck on an increasingly frenetic loop, she hawks glazed herringbone parquet floors and white Caesarstone countertops over and over again. By the end, it is not only the luxe bed that has become undone. The film was screened recently at Postmasters Gallery in Lower Manhattan.
The McCoys never thought Mr. Trump would win the election, an outcome that inadvertently gave the film a more political tone.
Ms. McCoy began thinking seriously about luxury apartments when she and her husband spent a year living in one in Abu Dhabi in 2010. “We found it almost impossible to be creative in that space,” she said of an apartment that seemed sterile.
When the couple returned to New York in 2011, Ms. McCoy began visiting open houses to see how brokers sell homes. She would dress up as a wealthy apartment hunter, wearing jewelry and heels, “like someone who didn’t have to walk too far,” she said. She would make up stories about why she was there — she needed more space, or she wanted to live closer to the children’s school. Secretly, she recorded the sales pitches on an iPhone hidden in her purse.
David Ostow, 37, an illustrator and cartoonist, is quite familiar with high-end finishes. In his day job as an architectural designer, he works with design teams on luxury residential developments, designing palatial amenity floors and selecting quartz countertops, lacquered cabinets and fancy faucets for the kitchens.
Riding the train through Brooklyn from his home in South Slope to work in Bushwick, Mr. Ostow was often struck by the industrial Brooklyn skyline, grim and yet unexpectedly beautiful. That contradiction defines the Brooklyn brand — you know, distressed furniture and hanging Edison bulbs in the lounge area, but, paradoxically, a pet spa and a golf simulator on the amenity floor.
Artists often play an uncomfortable role in real estate and gentrification. Someone has to paint those graffiti walls in the condo lobbies, but few artists can afford to actually live in such places. Instead, artists often live on the fringes of hot neighborhoods — until developers discover those areas, too.
Last May, Ms. Dalton and the artist William Powhida, 40, of Bushwick, organized Month2Month, a monthlong series of events held in private homes that focused on “whether housing is a right or a privilege.” An exhibit about Month2Month is on display through February in “Home(ward),” a show organized by More Art at the Nathan Cummings Foundation in Manhattan.
One event, “a night of experimental improvisational comedy” was called “The Rent Is Too Damn High So We Took Away Its Weed.” Another, called “Gentrifiers Anonymous” encouraged participants to confess their gentrifying sins. “Who Stole the House” was a murder mystery involving a Brooklyn home in the clutches of a limited liability corporation.
The hotel has been undergoing renovations for years. Mr. Hamilton and his wife have managed to hold onto their tiny room on the eighth floor, continuing to live there despite the construction, and its attendant plastic sheeting, all around them. Mr. Hamilton sees gentrification as not just a literal event, but also as a metaphor for growing old. 
Last year, Mr. Hamilton wrote “The Chintz Age” (Cervena Barva Press, 2015), a collection of short stories and a novella about artists trying to survive in a changing city. The novella is called “The Retro-Seventies Manhattan Dream Apartment.” In the story “Highline/Highlife,” the narrator, a writer unhappily married to an heiress, is living in his wife’s luxury apartment overlooking the High Line. Trapped in a glass home, he is both a voyeur and an exhibitionist. Eventually, he goes crazy in his fishbowl.
