A white-tailed deer that went from being a minor celebrity in Harlem to a cause célèbre after its capture, died in captivity on Friday, moments before it was to be driven upstate and released.
Around 4 a.m. Thursday, the buck jumped a fence into the courtyard of the Polo Grounds Towers, a public housing complex north of the park. The police were called, and they tranquilized and captured him, calling him a danger to traffic and public safety.
The city announced plans on Thursday afternoon to kill the deer, citing advice from state wildlife officials.
The city initially spurned the governor’s offer, saying that after the deer’s time in captivity, it would not be able to survive.
But Mr. Cuomo then took to Twitter, posting a statement from the state Department of Environmental Conservation saying, “We want to do everything we can to save the Harlem deer.” And just before noon came word that officials from the conservation department were coming to get the deer, and that the city would not stand in the way.
For Mr. de Blasio’s supporters, the state’s intervention seemed to be yet another instance of Mr. Cuomo’s penchant for attempting to outmaneuver and undermine Mr. de Blasio on his own turf.
Last year, for example, Mr. Cuomo took credit for bringing universal pre-K to the city, one of the mayor’s signature programs. Mr. Cuomo directed a campaign to support protections for charter schools even as Mr. de Blasio was pledging to cut their space. The mayor has accused the governor of a “vendetta” against him.
The life of one white-tailed deer is not normally something the state values highly.
Deer have overrun the state in recent years, including on Staten Island, where the animals now numbers many hundreds and regularly cause car accidents. The state endorses various plans to reduce the deer population, including “bait and shoot,” and last year, New York State hunters legally killed more than 200,000 deer.
But the Harlem deer was no ordinary deer. He was beloved, a holiday-season gift to a beleaguered city, a surrogate reindeer camped out just a block from St. Nicholas Avenue.
As he languished on death row on Thursday, the outcry for him to be saved grew louder. And the barrage of statements from the city and state took on a confounding, tennis-match quality.
The deer could not be moved out of densely populated Harlem — “Bottom line is the options are release back into Harlem or euthanasia,” a state biologist wrote to a city parks official Thursday afternoon — until suddenly he could. He could not be moved across county lines, then he could.
After Mr. Biederman’s brief news conference in front of the shelter, a worker from the shelter came into the lobby, seemingly exhausted.
“It’s been a long day,” she said.