As divided as the American public may seem, there are still some things on which most people agree.
No matter age, party or gender, Americans overwhelmingly believe that the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, played a dominant role in shaping the history of the country, according to a survey conducted by the Pew Research Center with A+E Networks’ HISTORY.
“We don’t think so much about history, but we know that’s one of the things that impacts the way people feel about any modern debate we’re having,” said Claudia Deane, vice president of research at Pew and lead author of a report on the study.
Sept. 11 came to mind most often, by a long-shot. President Obama’s election followed distantly, with 40 percent including it in their list. The tech revolution was next, followed closely by the assassination of President John F. Kennedy and then the Vietnam War.
The survey found that Americans were primarily united by their age.
“Like people, generations have distinctive identities that are linked, in part, to singular events that occurred during their members’ formative years,” Ms. Deane wrote with co-authors and Pew colleagues, Rich Morin and Maeve Duggan.
While Sept. 11 dominated each generation’s list, the other entries varied by age.
The so-called “silent” and “greatest” generations, identified as Americans 71 and older, were united by the import they placed on World War II. For baby boomers — adults 52 to 70 — it was the assassination of John F. Kennedy and the Vietnam War that unified them. Millennials and members of Generation X, the groups including those 18 to 51, were united in the importance they placed on Mr. Obama’s election.
Views on history differed by race, too.
Black people were the only demographic group for which Sept. 11’s primacy was challenged. Approximately 3 in 5 blacks identified the attacks as having had an impact on the country, about the same share that cited Mr. Obama’s election. For whites and Hispanics, Sept. 11 was first, by far, followed by Mr. Obama’s election.
The researchers found limited and often only subtle differences by party, gender or region. The same was true of education and income level, though as either rose, so too, did views on the prominence of the tech revolution.
While Pew did not ask respondents to qualify the impactful events as positive or negative, it did separately ask them to describe a time or event in their lives when they were proudest or most disappointed in America.
The response to Sept. 11 topped the list of positive moments, with 19 percent of respondents citing it as the moment they felt proudest of the country. Mr. Obama’s election or presidency followed with 14 percent.
His election or presidency also topped the list of most disappointing moments, with 11 percent citing it, followed closely by 10 percent who cited the Donald J. Trump’s campaign as the event which made them most disappointed in the nation.
The survey was conducted between June 16 and July 4, with 2,025 participants. Responses were weighted to match the demographic makeup of the population.