WASHINGTON — After a federal judge unsealed a search warrant this week that the F.B.I. had used to examine emails related to the previously closed inquiry into Hillary Clinton’s private server, some of her backers said it proved their contention that the warrant should never have been sought because it would not have changed the outcome of that investigation.
The decision by the bureau’s director, James B. Comey, to make the new email examination public in the presidential election’s closing days was a “stain” on his legacy and amounted to an “extraordinary impropriety,” Mrs. Clinton’s supporters said. Mrs. Clinton herself has said that Mr. Comey’s move cost her the election.
But while the F.B.I. ultimately did not find anything to alter its decision in July not to pursue criminal charges against Mrs. Clinton or her aides, agents believed they needed to examine the emails to be certain there was nothing new in them. This is common procedure for the bureau, whether the case involves a former secretary of state like Mrs. Clinton or anyone else.
In seeking the warrant, agents told the judge there was reason to believe the new emails might contain classified information. The emails were found on the laptop of Anthony D. Weiner, the estranged husband of Huma Abedin, a top Clinton aide. The laptop was not authorized to store classified information. The judge said there was sufficient probable cause and signed the warrant on Oct. 30.
The renewed inquiry into Mrs. Clinton’s email server started after agents began investigating allegations that Mr. Weiner, a former congressman, had sent illicit text messages to a 15-year-old girl in North Carolina. When agents took possession of his laptop this year, they found thousands of emails that belonged to Ms. Abedin and could see that she had used her clintonemail.com and Yahoo.com email addresses.
In its previous investigation, the F.B.I. had determined that both of those private email addresses had been used to send information that was later deemed to be classified. The F.B.I. also knew that Mrs. Clinton and Ms. Abedin had exchanged more than 4,000 emails from 2009 to 2013.
The F.B.I. said that because Ms. Abedin, using those two email accounts, had exchanged classified information with Mrs. Clinton in the past, agents had reason to seek a search warrant.
“There is also probable cause to believe that the correspondence between them” on the laptop “contains classified information which was produced by and is owned by the U.S. government,” according to the F.B.I.’s search warrant.
The warrant said the bureau believed that the 1917 Espionage Act might have been violated, a surprising possibility given that such crimes are felonies that can carry up to 10 years in prison. Mr. Comey said in July that the F.B.I. had investigated two possible violations of the Espionage Act, but had found nothing to support charges. Before Mr. Comey said that, it was believed that the F.B.I. was focusing primarily on the potential mishandling of classified information, a misdemeanor.
One of the possible crimes referred to in the warrant was gross negligence under the Espionage Act, a charge that Mr. Comey himself had said was rarely used. “No reasonable prosecutor would bring the second case in 100 years based on gross negligence,” Mr. Comey told Congress in July.
Agents were also concerned that any classified information on the computer could have ended up in the wrong hands. They said a forensic analysis would be needed to determine whether the computer had been hacked.
Shortly after the warrant was unsealed on Tuesday, Mrs. Clinton’s supporters took aim at Mr. Comey and the F.B.I.
“Whenever Comey departs F.B.I., this episode will be in first graf of any assessment of his tenure. It is stain on his personal legacy & on F.B.I.,” Mr. Fallon said in another post.
Mr. Comey has said he had no choice but to inform Congress because he had pledged to do so if the bureau found new information related to the email investigation. Mr. Comey was convinced that if Congress found out that agents were essentially reopening the investigation, his job would be in peril, and the reputation of the bureau would be tarnished.
Some officials have argued that both of those things happened anyway.
John D. Podesta, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign chairman, recently wrote in The Washington Post that the F.B.I. had been wrongly fixated on the email case. As the Russians were meddling in the election, he said, the F.B.I. was basically wasting time investigating what Mrs. Clinton’s supporters call the inadvertent mishandling of information that was deemed classified after it was sent.
“Comparing the F.B.I.’s massive response to the overblown email scandal with the seemingly lackadaisical response to the very real Russian plot to subvert a national election shows that something is deeply broken at the F.B.I.,” Mr. Podesta said.
Glen Kopp, a former federal prosecutor, said Mr. Podesta’s argument was not a fair comparison. The warrant was legitimate, he said: The F.B.I. was investigating potential criminal conduct, and a judge approved it.
