It’s the yearly office conundrum: What do you get your colleague for Secret Santa? Our Op-Ed columnists agreed to participate in a virtual Secret Santa this year. Some knew what their gifts would be immediately. Others stressed about it for days. Many procrastinated about their selections until the very end.
Maureen Dowd wants to help Paul Krugman prepare for the apocalypse. David Brooks plans to equip Charles Blow for the resistance, while Charles has extended an invitation to Nicholas Kristof to join him in the resistance. Gail Collins would like to rectify a glaring omission in Frank Bruni’s new cookbook. David Leonhardt drew upon a shared love of maps for Roger Cohen’s present, while Roger kept it topical and Russian for his gift to Andrew Rosenthal.
What would your gift to the columnists be?
Charles took the Trump ascendancy even harder than the rest of us, so my first impulse for the Secret Santa would be to give him a Nov. 7, 2016 — over and over again. He could wake up every day and Hillary Clinton would be up by four percentage points and the whole Trump nightmare would be almost over! But even Secret Santa knows there is no escaping history. I think of Charles as the leader of the resistance. For this he needs to be even more physically fit than he is now. So I’d start by getting him the Master of Muscle WOD Whipper Jump Rope. This is no normal jump rope. This power cable has a fast-spin, 90-degree handle turn that doubles your jump rate without kinking! (I’m going on hearsay — I don’t know this from personal experience.) I also think Charles needs the full resistance get-up. Yes, I’m talking the full on Humphrey-Bogart-at-the-end-of-Casablanca, “I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship” trench coat, complete with matching fedora.
O.K., since David has written eloquently about the importance of humility, I offer the services of an actor dressed as the Roman slave who, it’s claimed, would be assigned to stand behind a general celebrating a triumph, continually whispering “Sic transit gloria mundi” in the hero’s ear to remind him that he was, all the same, just a mortal man. We Op-Ed columnists probably need the same reminder.
Happy holidays! We're already looking forward to 2017. O.K., not every single thing about 2017, but in February, we'll all be able to buy your new book, “A Meatloaf in Every Oven,” which you co-wrote with our Times colleague Jennifer Steinhauer.
Let me say not everybody can be an expert on American politics, higher education, football, Oscar nominees and meatloaf. That’s why I love having your office so near mine. I can ask you about everything.
But about my present. Your new book has recipes from celebrities and talented friends. It does not, however, have one from me. I'm sure that was a complete oversight. And I know that the book is done, but I figured if, say, Nancy Pelosi had to retract hers for some reason, at least you'd have a backup. So here's a contribution. It's the only thing I can make without cream of mushroom soup.
One of my favorite mapmakers is Tunison’s, which created beautiful atlases in the late 19th century and early 20th. It is no longer in business, so finding its maps delightfully requires sifting through a shop or an online trove. Tunison’s maps of American states have bright colors that pop off the page and distinguish one county from another. My wife and I have two of the western United States hanging on a wall at home.
As your Secret Santa, I'm giving you an 1883 Tunison’s map of Kentucky (from the Philadelphia Print Shop West). It’s in honor of your clairvoyant September column, about the mood of much of the country, from Paris, Ky., in Bourbon County. You'll find Bourbon near the top of the map, in Tunison’s version of bright green. Enjoy. And here’s to a better 2017 than 2016.
I’m delighted to present my pal Gail with a brand-new Lamborghini with a built-in dog kennel on the roof. She has made such fun of Mitt Romney strapping his dog Seamus (in a crate) to the roof of his car for a 12-hour drive, citing the incident in dozens of columns. But despite this naysaying, I’m not sure that she has ever tried this arrangement with her dog, Frieda. Oh, and the reason for the Lamborghini? The drive will now take just four hours!
To Nick Kristof I give an invitation to the resistance, and a uniform to boot.
Nick, in your Nov. 9 column, you wrote: “Today, having lost, we owe it to our nation to grit our teeth and give President-elect Trump a chance.” Normally, I would agree — the presidency swings back and forth between our major parties like a pendulum. Treatment of every new president sets a precedent, for good or ill, and as such decorum highlights the ultimate strength of our democracy.
But this man is not normal. America owes no measure of civility and decorum to someone who has broken all norms of civility and decorum. He is a menace and must be treated as such.
While it is true that we don’t know what Trump will do in office, we know all too well what he has done. It is committed to history. It is past. And one of the profound beauties of the past is that it is immune to alteration. It can only be changed by flawed recording or retelling, both afflictions to which we both strive mightily to make ourselves immune. Nick, my friend, Donald Trump has shown us who he is. It would behoove us to believe him.
For my colleague Paul Krugman, who believes the “fools” who voted for Donald Trump have messed with the very “fate of the planet” and put us on a path to what “may end up being a civilization-ending event,” my gift is a packet of seven movies about civilization-ending events. It's best to be prepared, Paul.
Because we are allowed, with these presents, to dabble in fantasy, I give to David something that doesn’t exist but should, representing a union of his famous genius for numbers — the man has an applied math degree from Yale, for crying out loud! — and his fugitive interest in cooking. It’s a book of favorite dishes (at least in my imagination) of history’s foremost mathematicians and economists. It contains recipes for Euclid’s Geometric Spanakopita, in circular and trapezoidal as well as triangular shapes; Isaac Newton’s apple cobbler (and his apple crisp too!); and three versions of Karl Marx’s Revolutionary Borscht, one with bacon, one without and one vegan. Titled “The Algorithms of Appetite,” it comes with a spice rack that doubles as an abacus.
