Pope Francis’ silence in response to the four cardinals who questioned his apostolic exhortation “Amoris Laetitia” (“The Joy of Love”) is out of neither fear nor anger.
Rather, Francis is trying to restore the local churches’ role in applying church teaching that is suitable for their people. He is moving away from a top-down approach and retrieving the original Christian community’s way of dealing with moral dilemmas.
Recall the early church’s resolution of whether converts needed to be circumcised. No. And this allowed the church to grow.
Welcoming divorced and remarried couples in long-term, stable marriages can heal many hurts, and Francis sees that healing is best served by local churches. The four cardinals and their supporters lack charity toward the People of God and especially toward Pope Francis.
Like many divorced and remarried Catholics, I refused the annulment process out of conscience.
The heartbreak the annulment process causes has been well documented in the Jesuit magazine, America. In 2005, Anonymous wrote of the distress caused to his wife and her family when she sought an annulment.
Fripp Island, S.C.
Ross Douthat’s column exemplifies the frustration that many faithful conservatives feel about ambiguity.
One of the defining hallmarks of Catholic thought has been a perceived sense of order, with the assurance of the pope as the bedrock of that security. This era, in which the “nones” are the fastest growing group in religious classifications, points out that this time of change will call for new approaches to ways of dealing with faith and doubt.
Perhaps Pope Francis is indirectly teaching all to look less to him or to doctrine for security but instead to commitments to love, service and concern for our environment and the world’s poor.
It is an unsettling time for all, but it is a change in this new era of communications and worldwide connectedness that will redefine the world’s religious and cultural affiliations and definitions.
We are in for a wild ride, and Pope Francis is still a pretty good guide about what is important in an increasingly irreligious society.
The writer is a former priest.