Updated, 8:19 a.m.
Good morning on this mixed Wednesday.
Harrison Coll is only 22. But on the day I met him, he became six decades older.
It was a Sunday morning, and he was getting into costume for the New York City Ballet’s production of “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker.” Mr. Coll, in his 12th year with the show, is dancing this year as Herr Drosselmeier, the mysterious entertainer who makes the nutcracker dolls.
I joined him backstage at a matinee to see what it’s like between call-time and the moment the curtain rises.
He warmed up at a barre at the David H. Koch Theater just before 11 a.m., wearing a one-piece jumper that his mother knitted for him when he first danced as the nutcracker prince at age 12.
In the makeup room, where the walls were lined with elaborate hair pieces, Mr. Coll transformed into Drosselmeier as he glued a long, handmade gray wig over his wavy blond hair.
While Mr. Coll is also dancing this season as Mother Ginger, a candy cane and the cavalier of the Sugarplum Fairy, Drosselmeier is a particularly unusual assignment because it is typically performed by dancers near the end of their careers, he said.
Just before noon, Mr. Coll left the makeup room sporting a dramatic mustache curling out to his dimples. The makeup artist had bushed up Mr. Coll’s eyebrows, etched wrinkles into his forehead and added bags beneath his eyes.
He had aged 60 years in 60 minutes.
He emerged minutes later in costume — a waistcoat, breeches, tights and a top hat. With the snap of his eye patch and the swoosh of his cloak, he headed toward the stage where he began pacing, pantomiming and repeating his entrance on an endless loop.
He was nervous, he told me; this matinee was only his fifth time performing as Drosselmeier, a part he began rehearsing in October.
From the side of the stage, I saw the crew lowering a larger-than-life Christmas tree used in an earlier performance during which it had “grown” toward the ceiling.
And then in came the sound of strings.
He pursed his lips and hummed to match the tone.
It was just before 1 p.m., and a dozen children arrived in costume. Their ballet master, Dena Abergel, was running through corrections from the night before as they swarmed around Mr. Coll’s legs, the girls’ ringlets bouncing beneath their bonnets.
In his costume, Mr. Coll looked as though he could be their great-grandfather, but he behaved more like a cool older brother. He practiced lifting the 10-year-old female star, and looked around for the 10-year-old prince.
At 1:08, places were called: performers to stage, conductor to pit.
The lights went off, the dancers fell silent, and the overture began to crescendo.
If only we could spend all day backstage.
Or anywhere that would distract us from the cold. And with central heating, please.
A brisk commute is on tap. It will feel like the mid-20s this morning.
Still, today’s second act offers a pleasant surprise: Patchy sun and a high of 46 this afternoon.
• Scoreboard: Predators devour Devils, 5-1. Islanders poach Bruins, 4-2. Penguins stomp Rangers, 7-2. Knicks knock Pacers, 118-111. Raptors rip Nets, 116-104.
Winter begins today.
To honor the occasion, we share with you some colorful — even poetic — coverage of winter solstices past published by The New York Times.
Now it’s your turn: How would you describe the winter solstice in prose? Tell us in the comments.