EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The transition of power came awkwardly, one more fumbled moment as a coda to a long night of them.
Ryan Fitzpatrick stepped to the podium near midnight in a makeshift news conference room at MetLife Stadium, just having learned he was no longer the Jets’ starting quarterback. After two seasons, one that nearly ended in a playoff berth and another that turned him into a laughingstock, Fitzpatrick was now a backup, having been told a few minutes before by an offensive coach in the locker room. Bryce Petty, the new starter, found out just before he followed Fitzpatrick on stage. Todd Bowles announced the switch in his postgame remarks but had not told either player.
There was nothing clean or unjumbled in the process, but the Jets had been ugly and sloppy Monday; why stop at the christening of their new starter? They were beaten down by the Indianapolis Colts, 41-10, on “Monday Night Football,” embarrassed before a national audience. Fitzpatrick was benched, then usurped, with Bowles having decided before the game that Petty would start the last four games of the season regardless and having tacked on the second half of this loss as well. At 3-9, the Jets are playing out the season, trying to maintain the dignity they could not muster against Indianapolis and looking forward after being officially eliminated from the playoffs.
There was no sugarcoating the performance. Bowles dropped 13 expletives in six minutes in describing it. Muhammad Wilkerson used a few jagged words, too, not so subtly questioning the effort of some of his teammates.
The onslaught against the Jets began early — not from the Colts, but from the Jets’ own fans. With a nationally televised game and a viewing window all to themselves, this was an opportunity for the team’s followers to air their grievances to a wide audience, lest anyone focus on the team itself.
It took just 54 seconds for the initial boos to descend onto the field. The Colts had not yet scored a point, but an incomplete pass by Fitzpatrick was the initial trigger. After a three-and-out on the opening series, there was no delaying the inevitable.
If it was premature, the Jets set out to prove that the cynicism was not unwarranted. Pinpointing a trouble spot was harder than just pointing to them all. Perhaps the hardest hit laid by the home team was by a New Jersey state trooper tackling one of two fans who ran onto the field in the third quarter. The only time Jets supporters seemed happy was when Petty took the field and Fitzpatrick went to the bench. That so few could roar so loud — the arena was half full at kickoff, and tickets could be had for $5 on the secondary market — was a testament to the fans’ disgust.
Indianapolis quarterback Andrew Luck carved through the Jets’ defense. The Jets’ coverage was punctuated with blown assignments and holes. Their lack of discipline was dumbfounding, with three unnecessary-roughness penalties. On Twitter, Joe Namath, the team’s most famous alumnus, peppered away with potshots and criticism.
So it was for the Jets: Their Hall of Fame quarterback antagonized them online, and the Colts’ star quarterback outgunned them on the field. It was a poignant juxtaposition. Since Namath left, the Jets have mostly wandered the N.F.L. desert, looking for a capable heir. Indianapolis bottomed out for one year, and that was all it took to switch from Peyton Manning to Luck, and a renewed offense.
Luck, back after missing a game with a concussion, completed 22 of 28 passes for 278 yards and four touchdowns — three of them to tight end Dwayne Allen — as the Colts ran roughshod over the hosts. Luck sat out most of the fourth quarter.
“I just thought we got it handed to us,” Bowles said.
Colt’s sterling performance lifted the Colts to 6-6 and into a three-way tie with Houston and Tennessee for first place in the A.F.C. South.
Meanwhile, whatever promise Fitzpatrick, the Jets’ one-year wonder, offered last season had long since faded. After Fitzpatrick’s ugly first half — his last pass of the game, and perhaps of the season and his Jets career, was an interception — Petty took over to start the third quarter. Fitzpatrick completed 5 of 12 passes for 81 yards and an interception, his 14th this season, which tied him for second most in the N.F.L.
Petty was not particularly inspiring. He lacked a deft touch on several deep passes to Robby Anderson until he finally connected on a 40-yard touchdown in the fourth quarter. Petty completed just 11 of 25 passes for 135 yards, and he threw two interceptions.
But the starting job is now his to keep. With four games remaining, the Jets, and Petty, are simply playing for respect.