SEOUL, South Korea — There were euphoric cheers from the crowd outside the National Assembly on Friday when its speaker announced the outcome: By 234 to 56, South Korean lawmakers had voted to impeach President Park Geun-hye for her role in a corruption scandal that has paralyzed the country for two months. Her powers have been suspended, and Prime Minister Hwang Kyo-ahn has taken over as acting president.
The impeachment had been supported by an overwhelming majority of the electorate and long overdue. But it doesn’t solve South Korea’s endemic corruption problem. There is little sense that government officials high and low will suddenly clean up their act. Or that the other powerful parties to the scandal — some of South Korea’s major corporations — will suffer serious consequences, if accusations that they bribed the president and her friend prove true.
Since Ms. Park was first implicated in the scandal over connections to her longtime confidante, Choi Soon-sil, South Koreans have been stunned by the mountain of allegations against the duo. They include extortion, bribery, abuse of power, leaking classified documents and violating the Constitution.
The removal of a tainted, recalcitrant leader from power has brought joy and relief to many South Koreans. But Ms. Park and Ms. Choi are only two among the South Korean elite who behave with impunity. Holding the two accountable is important, but it doesn’t go far enough to solve the larger issue.
Corruption has been a long-running problem here. In a recent example that shook the nation, when the Sewol ferry sank in April 2014, claiming the lives of more than 300 people, many of them teenagers, questions were asked about inadequate government oversight in the maritime industry and the cozy relationship between officials charged with supervision and the ferry companies.
It’s not just low-level officials who are susceptible to corruption. In 2015 a construction tycoon left a suicide note implying that he had bribed eight high-level figures, including Ms. Park’s former chief of staff and the prime minister, who then resigned. The rest of the investigation went nowhere.
In comparison to the national economy’s size, South Korea’s ranking on Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index is poor, coming in at only 37 (in a ranking with 1 as least corrupt). This is a country where inviting people for meals, giving gifts and attending (and making cash offerings at) funerals and weddings have been used as forms of soft bribery for so long that the government had to pass a law last year aimed at curbing these practices.
The most pernicious and corrupting influence, however, comes from the big conglomerates, called chaebols in Korean. As if it is not enough that many chief executives have committed embezzlement and other crimes, the chaebols make a habit of helping the government out in return for private gains, in a practice widely known as “jeonggyeong yuchak,” which translates as collusion between politicians and businesses.
Just in the last year, the Federation of Korean Industries — the main chaebol lobby — was caught paying elderly men to stage pro-government rallies. The son of the ailing Samsung chairman, Lee Kun-hee, is now suspected of having taken over the family’s business empire by paying Ms. Choi to influence the National Pension Service, a large shareholder in Samsung subsidiaries.
Some of those company heads, including the Samsung heir, were at the National Assembly on Tuesday to deny criminal complicity in the scandal. Under stern questioning by opposition lawmakers, they all said they gave money to the foundations controlled by Ms. Park’s friend without expecting anything in return. And without evidence to challenge those statements, there is little hope they will pay a significant price.
Ms. Park and Ms. Choi are going down, but the rulers of the nation’s economy look set to get away with their pretense of innocence.