BEREA, Ohio — Joe Thomas, the Browns’ Pro Bowl tackle, has seen quarterbacks come and go over the past decade. Only a few have stuck around Cleveland for more than a year. Robert Griffin III could be a keeper.
As the team remains in search of its franchise quarterback, a quest that has befuddled the organization since 1999, Thomas says he believes Griffin, who has been limited by injuries in his first season with the Browns, might be the long-term answer.
“We’ve got a limited amount of film on him so far,” Thomas said Wednesday, “but I think the things we’ve seen in meeting rooms, on the practice field, in some of the games, I think you’ve seen franchise-level talent for sure, and I wouldn’t write him off by any stretch of the imagination.
The Browns (1-14) will use a portion of the off-season evaluating Griffin, who remains in concussion protocol and could miss Sunday’s season finale at Pittsburgh. Coach Hue Jackson said he expected to know more about Griffin’s status on Thursday and remained hopeful that Griffin could make his fourth straight start.
Griffin was injured in the fourth quarter of Sunday’s 20-17 victory over San Diego, knocked from the game when he was sacked for the seventh time. The rookie Cody Kessler, who replaced him against the Chargers, will start against the Steelers if Griffin cannot.
Jackson, though, seemed hopeful that Griffin would start, giving the Browns more information before they have to make some tough decisions.
Cleveland could have the No. 1 overall pick in the N.F.L. draft, and after having passed up a chance to take one of the top college quarterbacks this year, it could have another chance to find its future starter.
Thomas has a close relationship with Jackson, so his comments about Griffin could indicate that is the direction the Browns are leaning.
One of Cleveland’s biggest concerns about Griffin is his durability, one of the reasons Washington released him in March after four seasons.
Griffin broke a bone in his left shoulder in the Sept. 11 opener against Philadelphia and missed 11 weeks. He had made three straight starts — showing improvement in each one — before sustaining the concussion Saturday while picking up his first win with the Browns.
Jackson conceded that Griffin would have to show that he could stay healthy. The Browns have switched quarterbacks six times this season because of injuries.
“It is hard to play in this league when you are not out there playing,” Jackson said. “He did everything to help us have a chance to win the game. He played better in some areas, but you have to find a way to stay out there.
