1. For nearly seven months, the Democratic National Committee ignored an F.B.I. agent’s warnings that its computer systems had been hacked, our reporters found in their meticulous reconstruction of how Russian agents carried out a cyberattack aimed at disrupting America’s presidential election.
President Obama defended his administration’s restrained response — he pulled President Vladimir V. Putin aside at a conference and told him to “cut it out” — and said he is considering retaliatory actions.
2. The Electoral College’s 538 members will cast their votes on Monday. President-elect Donald J. Trump has 306 pledged votes, and needs 270 to become president.
3. How sharp is America’s partisan divide?
In North Carolina, outrage and raucous protests broke out on Friday after the Republican-controlled legislature approved a package of sweeping restrictions to curtail the power of the incoming Democratic governor-elect, Roy Cooper. Mr. Cooper, the state’s longtime attorney general, threatened to sue over the changes.
Syria’s nearly six-year-long civil war took another brutal swing last week as attempts to evacuate Aleppo, a city that government forces are poised to recapture, repeatedly broke down. Warplanes bombed insurgent-held areas as trapped residents tried to flee in a chaotic and dangerous relocation effort.
5. Bayan Mohammad is 10. Her family escaped from Syria and resettled in Canada, where Bayan and her siblings are learning to ice skate, trick-or-treat and navigate the childhood rituals of a new culture.
Her parents are watching, with both pride and alarm, as their Syrian children transform into Canadians. Something as simple as a school field trip can become a flash point: For refugees torn away from a world they loved, adapting to a new one without losing their identities is a fraught balancing act.
6. The slow burn of climate change is driving West Africans to cross the Sahara, risking their lives, to find a new place where they can earn a living — away from the droughts and heat that have blighted land where crops once grew.
Nearly half of Niger’s young children are malnourished. The continent is growing hotter, wreaking havoc on food supplies, but those who try to leave have nowhere to go. As wary nations close their borders to migrants, policy makers see little chance that refugee protections will be expanded to cover the climate’s casualties.
7. Dr. Henry J. Heimlich, the inventor of an antichoking technique that has saved an estimated 100,000 lives, died Saturday at age 96, after a heart attack.
Just seven months ago, Dr. Heimlich used his maneuver to save an 87-year-old woman at the senior residence in Cincinnati where he lived.
An avid popularizer, he became a celebrity through his medical advocacy.
8. Looking for a book to curl up with? Our critics, who reviewed nearly 250 books this year, winnowed the list down to their favorites.
The stories they recommend include tales of a 19th-century whaling expedition, a literal Underground Railroad, the Dublin Murder Squad’s crime investigations and the secrets of a small mining town.
If you’re in the mood for nonfiction, follow along as authors explore America’s low-cost housing crisis, hillbilly culture, a childhood in Syria, Queen Victoria’s reign and a terminally ill neurosurgeon’s final months.
Hearing those words, from an elementary school girl he was tutoring, jolted Naivon Lake Jr., 20, into reconsidering his aimless adulthood.
With financial support from the Community Service Society, one of several organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, he enrolled in community college and is majoring in commercial photography.
Now in its 105th year, the fund provides direct assistance to struggling residents in New York and beyond. Their stories illustrate how items as simple as a recliner, a graduation dress and a MetroCard can have life-altering effects.
10. Do you have the next big story?
If you think you have a credible tip, our newsroom wants to hear from you.
Click here for secure, encrypted ways to share messages and materials with our journalists.
