Theater|A New Day for Gay Plays?
A New Day for Gay Plays?
No one would argue that gay men and women continue to face the kind of discrimination they did back in 1968, when Mart Crowley’s “The Boys in the Band” cracked open the closet door onstage, shining a stark light on what was then a topic rarely explored in popular culture.
Mr. Crowley’s was the first play explicitly about gay men’s experience to break through to the mainstream, logging more than 1,000 performances Off Broadway, racking up mostly positive reviews in major outlets, being published in a mass-market edition and eventually becoming a film.
The play has remained a landmark — both derided as rife with stereotypes and embraced for its honesty about the internal battles gay men faced at a time when homosexuality was still considered a psychiatric disorder.
Just this season features at least three examples. In Adam Bock’s “A Life,” seen at Playwrights Horizons this fall, David Hyde Pierce portrayed a gay man in his 50s who in the play’s opening scene laments at great length his inability to find a lasting relationship. A few scenes later, he drops dead, in a macabre twist that almost seems to suggest that being single and gay and on the wrong side of 50 can be fatal.
In Drew Droege’s scorchingly funny solo show “Bright Colors and Bold Patterns,” ending its run at the Barrow Street Theater on Friday, Dec. 30, Mr. Droege plays a gay man whose savage tongue could do battle with any of the cattier characters in Mr. Crowley’s play. After exhausting himself with (hilarious) riffs on pop culture — as did the characters in “The Boys in the Band” — Mr. Droege’s character, who takes a dim view of gay marriage as a step backward in the fight for happy gay flag-flying, reveals that (sigh) under the bitchy bravado beats a heart yearning for connection.
And in the spring, Joshua Harmon’s “Significant Other,” first produced by the Roundabout Theater Company Off Broadway in the summer of 2015, will open on Broadway. Although much lighter in spirit, it explores similar territory from the point of view of a millennial, played by Gideon Glick, who watches in muted sadness as, one by one, his best girlfriends get engaged or marry, while he continues his own unavailing search for companionship.
Drew Droege in a scene from his play when it appeared at the Barrow Street Theater in 2016.
Portraits of gay life in mainstream culture are no longer rare; they have been proliferating for decades. As a result, no one play (or movie) bears the burden of either seeming to affirm, or attempting to negate, stereotype. You might argue that it’s a sign of progress that these writers felt no compunction in writing about troubled, lonely gay characters. Nobody seeing any of these plays today would come away assuming it represented the sum total of gay men’s experience.
The opening up of gay culture to the world over the past 50 years, and the gradual but now solidified acknowledgment of homosexuality as not a chosen “lifestyle,” has been reflected in innumerable plays and movies. A play about gay men’s relationships is no more seen as an “issue” play than one about straight people’s relationships.
One play this fall, at the Labyrinth Theater Off Broadway, even had the cheek to use a once-and-still derogatory term for gay men in its title. Jordan Seavey’s “Homos, or Everyone in America” was a daringly frank and funny comedy-drama about, yes, gay men looking for lasting companionship, and finding the terrain rocky. Its two principal characters date and fight and break up and get together again — much like straight characters might — but the subjects of some of their squabbles are more specific to gay experience: whether or not the use of poppers (a sexual stimulant) is inimical, or monogamy is a requirement of a lasting relationship.
Seen today, William Finn and James Lapine’s richly funny musical seems prescient about the changing mores of the culture. It depicts an unconventional family that, strangely shaped though it is, is very much a family. Christian Borle and Andrew Rannells play Marvin and Whizzer, a gay couple who remain closely tied to Marvin’s ex-wife, Trina, played by Stephanie J. Block.
All three qualify as parents to Jason, as does Trina’s therapist-turned-lover, Mendel (who happens to also be Marvin’s therapist, too). The tone might be described as peppy-neurotic, at least until it darkens into heart-rending in the second act, when Whizzer comes down with a mysterious illness — not yet named — that we know is AIDS.
After rereading “The Boys in the Band” and reflecting on gay-themed plays today, I of course noted the glaring differences. What’s most crucially changed is that the men depicted in the newer plays, even dating back to “Falsettos,” are not huddled in a subculture walled off from the rest of society. In Mr. Crowley’s play, the arrival of a central character’s straight college buddy sends him into a frenzy of anxiety — something that would seem absurd in a play set today or even 20 years ago.
Another element entirely, and happily, missing from today’s plays is the boiling self-hatred that practically seared my hands as I read Mr. Crowley’s play. It climaxes, in fact, with a speech in which one character denounces another’s vicious behavior toward his friends as an expression of the contempt he feels for himself, merely for being who he is.
The characters in “A Life” and “Homos,” “Bright Colors” and “Significant Other” and “Falsettos,” may still battle inner demons that result from growing up with an instinctive sense of their “otherness.” But they have not internalized it as self-hate and self-doubt; it’s simply a psychic burden that plays little role in the struggle to find fulfilling lives and relationships.
Still, the onstage persistence of the loveless gay man probably reflects some hard truths, even in a much-evolved America.
Although the Supreme Court has ruled in favor of gay marriage, gay men and women continue to endure subtle (and not so subtle) burdens that heterosexuals do not. Some, particularly the young, still regularly feel the sting of stigma, resulting in introversion or isolation that, later, makes it harder to connect with others.
The recent election season has illustrated, in sometimes lurid colors, that not all Americans feel that all Americans are equal, and that misogyny, racism and homophobia continue to exist, hiding in plain sight or not. It was just six years ago that Tyler Clementi, the Rutgers college student, killed himself after his roommate used a webcam to spy on his sexual encounter with another man. And in the days after this fall’s fraught election, I was dismayed to see posts on my Facebook page from gay men who were victims of harassment. On the streets of New York.
Maybe that’s why Mr. Seavey’s “Homos” has continued to haunt me. Although it is primarily a play about two men forging a romantic relationship, a traumatic turning point comes when one is the victim of gay-bashing while walking through his Brooklyn neighborhood.
Reports of hate crimes have clearly spiked since November. Are storm clouds gathering? Dramas about gay men’s and women’s lives written in the next few years may reflect a more embattled era, trading tales of rocky relationships for subjects more sinister.