The de Blasio administration announced on Friday it had hired a former spokesman for Bernie Sanders to run its day-to-day media strategy.
The former spokesman, Mike Casca, 27, will become Mayor Bill de Blasio’s communications director, helping to shape the approach of a media operation that has gone through several rounds of reshuffling and has been at odds with reporters over its decision to scale back traditional mayoral news conferences to one a week.
His predecessor in the position, Andrea Hagelgans, will become a senior adviser to the mayor focused on communications, and one of the highest-ranking women in City Hall. Advisers to Mr. de Blasio have credited Ms. Hagelgans, 38, with pushing a focus on television and social media as well as creating in-person events for the mayor aimed at drawing maximum media attention.
The hiring of Mr. Casca, who grew up in Ventura County, Calif., is the latest sign that the mayor is embracing the strategies and tactics of Mr. Sanders’s unexpectedly strong though ultimately failed White House bid. In September, officials with Mr. de Blasio’s 2017 campaign said they had hired the digital fund-raising team that helped Mr. Sanders, a Vermont senator, attract small-dollar donations to his presidential campaign.
The success of that firm, Revolution Messaging, in raising money for Mr. de Blasio’s campaign is not yet clear. A spokesman for the campaign declined to provide fund-raising figures, saying they would be publicly disclosed in January.
Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat who supported Hillary Clinton in the Democratic primary, said in an interview broadcast over the weekend on “Eyewitness News” that he believed that Mr. Sanders’s message and focus on income inequality would have been successful against Donald J. Trump in the general election.
Mr. Casca will work under Ms. Hagelgans and will be in charge of executing City Hall’s media strategy, which originates with the mayor himself. The task has at times been difficult during Mr. de Blasio’s tenure so far; the mayor has lashed out at some outlets, most notably The New York Post, which he described as “propaganda” with “fabricated” front-page stories.
Before working for Mr. Sanders, Mr. Casca started his career with Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota, who in 2007 became the first Muslim elected to Congress. Mayor de Blasio on Wednesday endorsed Mr. Ellison to be the next chairman of the Democratic National Committee.