NEWARK — In the end, the most anticipated Seton Hall-Rutgers game in at least a decade proved worthy of its hype.
Despite an ugly first half in which Seton Hall did not score for the first five minutes Friday night, the Prudential Center crowd pulsed with energy. As Seton Hall chipped away at a 9-point deficit, the fans grew more raucous, reaching a deafening level when Angel Delgado (19 points and 16 rebounds) gave the Pirates a 42-41 lead with 12 minutes 15 seconds left.
The teams exchanged leads throughout the next six minutes as the mostly pro-Seton Hall crowd roared before Ismael Sanogo’s layup with 6:01 left gave the Pirates a 54-53 lead they would never relinquish. Seton Hall cruised through the final minutes in a 72-61 victory.
Seton Hall (10-2) is coming off its first appearance in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament since 2006. Rutgers (11-2) is off to its best start since 1975-76, when Eddie Jordan helped the Scarlet Knights to an undefeated regular season and a trip to the Final Four. Rutgers has not made the N.C.A.A. tournament since 1991, and its last N.I.T. appearance was in 2006.
Before Friday night, the game had not mattered for both teams in at least 10 years. In fact, college basketball around the state has not mattered much, either. Both teams hope that may be changing, in ways that might help both programs once again make inroads into the fertile recruiting grounds of New Jersey and New York City.
Some recent trends can back up Williams’s statement. New Jersey Institute of Technology, which had a 51-game losing streak from 2007 to 2009, when it had no conference affiliation, now has a new complex and is a member of the Atlantic Sun Conference. Monmouth, in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference; Fairleigh Dickinson, in the Northeast Conference; and Princeton, in the Ivy League, are seen as favorites to win their league titles this season.
That is good news for coaches like Pikiell and Seton Hall’s Kevin Willard as they try to recruit the talent in their own backyard.
“I think it’s great that Monmouth and Princeton are really good,” Willard said. “Those are two good basketball teams. I watched that game the other night, and that was a great atmosphere.
For both programs, the optimism accompanying Friday night’s matchup is a long way from the atmosphere of a year ago. Back then, Seton Hall was a season removed from a fractured locker room, with reports of infighting among upperclassmen and freshmen. Several players transferred out. Willard was on the hot seat.
At Rutgers, Jordan was failing as the head coach. He was brought in to clean up the program after Mike Rice was fired when a videotape surfaced showing him hurling basketballs and homophobic slurs at his players, but Jordan never got things turned around. He was 29-68 in three seasons, including a 7-25 finish last season, which prompted Pat Hobbs, the Rutgers athletic director, to make a change.
“As we build this rivalry and we have some of those exciting moments on the floor, that keeps kids home,” Hobbs said. “That gets kids growing up saying, ‘I want to play for Rutgers,’ or ‘I want to play for Seton Hall.’ And that’s good for everybody.
The obvious difference is that Duke-North Carolina would sell out Madison Square Garden. Friday night’s game at Prudential Center was announced as a sellout only because curtains covered the seats in the upper decks.
“We’re going to play in front of 11,000 people,” Pat Lyons, Seton Hall’s athletic director, said this week.
“Maybe someday this game will get to the point where we actually raise the curtain at the Rock and play in front of 17,000 people,” he added, using Prudential Center’s nickname.