One of China’s richest men, the eccentric taxi driver-turned-financier Liu Yiqian, has a new place to display some of his trove of art.
Mr. Liu, an avid collector and the chairman of the Sunline Group, a Shanghai holding company with interests that include financial services, real estate and chemicals, officially closed on a 62nd-floor aerie at One57, the vitreous Midtown Manhattan residential tower popular among his wealthy compatriots.
Mr. Liu’s pied-à-terre purchase was one of the most notable closed transactions in November — others involved the screenwriter Robert Mark Kamen; the reality TV star Bethenny Frankel; and the wife of the “Man of La Mancha” composer Mitch Leigh, among others — but it certainly wasn’t the most expensive.
Three apartments at 432 Park Avenue, near East 57th Street, the tallest residential tower in the Western Hemisphere and, like One57, part of Midtown’s so-called Billionaires’ Row, closed above $30 million.
The priciest of the trio, and the month’s most expensive sale, at $31,840,509, was unit 70A, a 4,019-square-foot apartment with three bedrooms, four full baths, one half-bath and a library, in addition to panoramic views of Central Park, the Manhattan skyline and the Atlantic. Monthly carrying charges are $16,109. Jacky Teplitzky of Douglas Elliman Real Estate brought the buyer, 432 Park 70A LLC; Macklowe Properties Sales and Douglas Elliman Development Marketing represented the sponsor.
The two other closed apartments, of similar size and also bought by unidentified buyers, were just a floor below: No. 69B sold for $31.47 million and 69A for $30.95 million.
MR. LIU’S MANHATTAN HOME, 62A at 157 West 57th Street, near Seventh Avenue, has three bedrooms and four and a half baths over 4,483 square feet, according to the listing with Douglas Elliman. The well-lit apartment, with floor-to-ceiling windows, has a 26-by-15-foot gallery leading to a commodious living room/dining area with nearly 12-foot ceilings — ideal for hanging paintings.
Though out of reach for mere-mortal home buyers, the price of this apartment was a drop in the bucket when compared with the cost of some of the artwork in Mr. Liu’s portfolio. In November 2015, he paid $170.4 million, including fees, at Christie’s New York for Amedeo Modigliani’s “Nu Couché” (Reclining Nude).
Mr. Liu — whose net worth is estimated at $1.4 billion, according to Forbes — was born into a working-class family in Shanghai and drove a taxi for a living before making his fortune in the Chinese stock market in the 1990s, when state-owned companies began issuing shares. He and his wife, Wang Wei, among China’s biggest art collectors, have opened museums in their country and showcase some of their collection.
ROBERT MARK KAMEN, whose work includes the “Karate Kid” and “Transporter” movie franchises, as well as the “Taken” thrillers, and his wife, Lorna, sold their apartment at 910 Fifth Avenue, a prewar co-op near 72nd Street, for $11 million. The buyers were Kenneth S. Aschendorf, a principal of APF Properties, a real estate investment company specializing in office buildings, and his wife, Wilma.
The sprawling unit, 8CD, with partial Central Park views, has five bedrooms, six full baths and two powder rooms, according to the Douglas Elliman listing, along with 67 (yes, that’s correct) closets.
BETHENNY FRANKEL, who appeared on “The Real Housewives of New York City” and founded the Skinnygirl brand that includes cocktail mixers, was also on the selling end last month. The spacious TriBeCa apartment that she had shared with her former husband, Jason Hoppy, and where she filmed a spinoff show, “Bethenny Ever After,” sold for $6.95 million.
Ms. Frankel bought the four-bedroom three-bath unit, 5B, at 195 Hudson Street, for nearly $5 million in 2011, in the name of an assistant, Molly Hayden. The fully renovated loftlike apartment has 3,275 square feet and includes private parking and storage.
THE ARTIST ABBY LEIGH, the wife of Mitch Leigh, the Tony-winning composer of the Broadway show “Man of La Mancha,” who died two years ago, sold her townhouse at 49 East 68th Street for $20.4 million to the limited liability company Automation Townhouse. She had wanted as much as $38 million when first listing it with the Corcoran Group last year.
The brick-and-limestone house, near Park Avenue, is 25 feet wide and has around 12,500 square feet over five levels that includes six bedrooms and 10½ baths. An elevator was installed for easier maneuvering. The home also features a landscaped roof terrace and a half basketball court in the basement, where Ms. Leigh, whose abstract paintings have been shown in places including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, had stored her work.
AMONG THE OTHER NOTEWORTHY TRANSACTIONS, the philanthropist Laurie Tisch, whose family made its fortune in Loews movie theaters and is now an owner of the New York Giants football team, paid $14.6 million for unit 5C at 834 Fifth Avenue. At 50 Central Park South, Susan Carmel Lehrman, a philanthropist, sold her apartment, No. 24B, for $20.5 million to Yizheng Zhao, the founder of RedStone Haute Couture, a Chinese luxury brand management company.
And the celebrity stylist Jill Swid Rosen and her husband, Eric S. Rosen, a money manager, sold their fully overhauled co-op apartment, PHAB, at 791 Park Avenue, for $22.5 million.