MOON BOOTS at Output (Dec. 26, 10 p.m.). As his stage name implies, the D.J. and producer Pete Dougherty makes out-of-this-world disco and house music that’s rooted in pop structures; he is equally deft at creating earwormy electro jams and stretching out on inventive remixes for artists like Nile Rodgers and Robyn. He will serve up both on Dec. 26; as an added bonus, Output’s top-tier sound system offers an undeniable impetus for a post-Christmas twirl on the dance floor.
PHISH at Madison Square Garden (Dec. 28-31, 7:30 p.m.). These jam band kings return to the Garden for their annual New Year’s Eve celebrations. And although the Dec. 31 show is typically the most anticipated — audiences on that night are treated to an extended, three-set concert complete with over-the-top, confetti-covered theatrics as the ball drops — Phish has historically delivered notable performances for its lower-profile shows as well. The group is known for changing its set list every night, but it’s safe to expect stretched-out, improvisational journeys that touch on space disco, funk and blues-based rock grooves; occasional covers (the Velvet Underground, Talking Heads, the Rolling Stones); and one of the most engaging, eye-opening light shows in rock ’n’ roll. As for the blissed-out hippies dancing gleefully in the aisles, that’s all part of the fun.
KURT VILE AND THE VIOLATORS at Terminal 5 (Dec. 28, 8 p.m.). If the post-holiday blues get you down, you could do worse for aural Xanax than seeing the singer-songwriter Kurt Vile in concert. Mr. Vile, a Philadelphia-based guitar virtuoso, makes woozy, psychedelic music that splits the difference between Pink Floyd’s spacey explorations and Neil Young’s quieter acoustic balladry. He is something of an enigma when he sings in his deadpan drawl, but closer inspection of his confessions reveals a thoughtful man who thinks deeply about his weird and wonderful world. With Woods and Nathan Bowles.
ERIC ALEXANDER-HAROLD MABERN QUARTET at Smoke (Dec. 22-Jan. 1). Mr. Alexander, a tenor saxophonist with a taste for smartly surging hard bop, has a productive history with Mr. Mabern, a well-traveled and soulful pianist. The lineup of their bands will shift a few times between now and the New Year, featuring partners like the veteran drummers Jimmy Cobb (Dec. 22-23) and Louis Hayes (Dec. 24-25), the trumpeter Eddie Henderson (Dec. 27-28), and the trombonist Steve Turre (Dec. 29-30). On New Year’s Eve they’ll welcome an unnamed guest vocalist — possibly even someone from Mr. Mabern’s recent album “Afro Blue,” whose roster includes Gregory Porter, Jane Monheit and Norah Jones.
THE BAD PLUS at the Village Vanguard (Dec. 27-Jan. 1, 8 and 10 p.m.). This hyperintelligent and crashingly heroic trio — Ethan Iverson on piano, Reid Anderson on bass, David King on drums — revives some proven old strategies on “It’s Hard.” The album, released this year, deftly reimagines familiar songs by popular figures ranging from Prince to Johnny Cash to the Yeah Yeah Yeahs. This engagement, which includes a now-customary New Year’s Eve show, will also incorporate some questing originals, by every member of the band.
CÉCILE MCLORIN SALVANT AND THE AARON DIEHL TRIO at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (Dec. 26-30, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.; Dec. 31, 7:30 and 11 p.m.; and Jan. 1, 7 and 9 p.m.). Ms. Salvant, 27, is the most fervently acclaimed jazz singer of her generation, and on her most recent album — “For One to Love,” which won a Grammy this year — she deepened her game with a bouquet of original songs. She performs as usual with a trio led by Mr. Diehl, a fastidious and swinging pianist who has been her musical director for the last several years.
JOHNNY O’NEAL at Mezzrow, Smalls and Ginny’s Supper Club (Dec. 23, 11 p.m.; Dec. 25, 7:30 p.m.; Dec. 29, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). A pianist in the Art Tatum and Oscar Peterson lineage, and a singer of gruff erudition and charisma, Mr. O’Neal, 60, has been enjoying a late-career comeback possibly sweeter than his ostensible prime. He plays the late shift, from 11 p.m. to 1 a.m., every Friday at Mezzrow. He will spend Christmas evening across Seventh Avenue at Smalls. And on Dec. 29 he will venture farther uptown, to Ginny’s Supper Club.
MARTA SÁNCHEZ QUINTET at Cornelia Street Café (Dec. 23, 9 and 10:30 p.m.). Ms. Sánchez is a Spanish pianist whose most recent album, “Partenika,” also shows her to be an intriguing composer. She draws partly from that album — and partly from her next recording — with her New York quintet, which features an articulate front line of Roman Filiu on alto saxophone and Jerome Sabbagh on tenor saxophone.
DR. LONNIE SMITH OCTET at the Jazz Standard (Dec. 28-30, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Soul jazz is often misconstrued as the product of an era, when it’s really the refinement of a disposition. Dr. Lonnie Smith, the Hammond B-3 organist, has spent the last 50 years moving around within the style, like a pioneer who never settled. “Evolution,” his most recent album, makes this point implicitly, positioning Dr. Smith as a wise elder among fierce younger talent like the saxophonist John Ellis and the drummer Johnathan Blake, who rejoin him here in a turbocharged octet.
