Giannis Antetokounmpo, the resident wunderkind of the Milwaukee Bucks, has an offer from Holger Geschwindner, the personal shooting coach of the Dallas Mavericks’ Dirk Nowitzki, to join him in Germany next summer for a master class in the art of the long-range shot.
“That’s a nice invitation right there,” Antetokounmpo said.
Imagine the possibilities. Antetokounmpo, 21, who is popularly known as the Greek Freak, already has a way of fashioning his 6-foot-11 frame into the perfect vehicle for so many tasks. He can consume acres of real estate with his loping strides. He can contort himself past defenders for leaning runners. He can post up, soar for rebounds and whip passes to teammates with his impossibly long arms.
Against the Nets on Thursday night, Antetokounmpo collected 23 points, 8 rebounds and 8 assists in a 111-93 victory at Barclays Center. He sat out the fourth quarter. It somehow qualified as a humdrum effort for him. He was two days removed from scoring 34 points in a win against the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Given his vast assemblage of skills, it might be easy to forget how new he is to all of this and how much room for growth remains.
No kidding. If he were to add a reliable 3-point shot? Well, this is where things actually get tricky. The Bucks would prefer that he remember his obvious strengths. Consider the case made by Steve Novak, a veteran teammate who has made his career as a 3-point specialist. There is no question, Novak said, that Antetokounmpo’s outside shooting is improving.
Antetokounmpo is coming to define a novel position — point center — with the Bucks. He brings the ball upcourt. He orchestrates for teammates. Opposing centers have no idea what to do with him. He is averaging 22.8 points, 8.5 rebounds and 6.1 assists while shooting 52.5 percent from the field, all career highs. He has developed in each of his four N.B.A. seasons.
At this stage, the most obvious hole in his game is his handiwork from beyond the 3-point line, where he is shooting a less-than-robust 23.1 percent this season. But he provides enough flashes to tantalize teammates and demoralize opponents.
But when he was asked how close he was to becoming a consistent outside shooter, he left about an inch of space between his index finger and his thumb.
Against the Nets, Antetokounmpo offered a preview of sorts. His first points came on a 3-pointer from the right corner. Trevor Booker, his defender, was a step late, and Antetokounmpo shot over the top of him. His release looked effortless. And for the rest of the game, Booker had no choice but to trail Antetokounmpo to the perimeter.
If defenders press up against Antetokounmpo along the 3-point line, he is fully capable of driving past them. The threat of his shooting the 3-pointer also opens passing lanes and creates space for teammates, especially in the paint. If Antetokounmpo’s defenders are stationed 25 feet from the basket, that means the lane is less protected.
Still, the Bucks want to be careful, reminding Antetokounmpo to resist the seductive pull of the 3-point shot — no easy thing for a player who grew up in Greece hoping to emulate Kevin Durant, a 6-foot-9 player with the deftest of outside touches. The 3-point shot has become the most fashionable skill for big men in recent seasons.
The Bucks just want opponents to know that Antetokounmpo is capable of dabbling from deep. That would be enough to cause a host of new problems.
In the meantime, Antetokounmpo said he would continue to hone his technique, squeezing in extra shots before and after practice. As the rest of the league waits and watches with a mix of wonder and dread, he seems eager to see how far his game can go.