As of early Monday, at least 36 bodies had been recovered from the ruins of a warehouse in Oakland that was engulfed in fire as young people gathered Friday night for a party.
Officials warned that the toll would likely rise.
The authorities said on Monday morning that firefighters had located an area of the building in which they believed the fire may have started. They needed “days” to process the scene while ensuring their own safety inside the precarious structure.
Melinda Drayton, Oakland Fire Department battalion chief, on Sunday said the work had been somber.
“It was quiet, it was heartbreaking,” she said, choking back emotion during a news conference.
• Who are the victims?
The Alameda County Sheriff’s Office released the names of seven victims on Sunday.
The name of an eighth victim, a 17-year-old, was withheld.
Sgt. Ray Kelly of the Alameda County Sheriff’s Office acknowledged the agony of the wait for family members, but said identification of additional bodies would take time. He said more than half of the warehouse had to still be searched.
The toll already makes the fire among Oakland’s deadliest. The Oakland Hills fire of 1991 killed 25 people and destroyed 3,000 houses.
• What was the warehouse used for?
The fire tore through a two-story structure called the Ghost Ship, in the Fruitvale neighborhood, which was used as a live-in and work space for a loose tribe of striving artists.
Images of the interior captured before Friday showed it cluttered with art, antiques and musical instruments beneath exposed wooden rafters.
The building had a permit to operate as a warehouse, but not a residence or party site. It had been under investigation for code violations.
A criminal investigation was opened on Sunday.
• How did the fire unfold?
On Friday, dozens of people congregated for an event with electronic music.
Firefighters arrived just before midnight to a roaring fire and thick smoke pouring into the sky. The roof and part of the second floor collapsed.
The authorities said the building lacked sprinklers and had only two exits. An ad hoc staircase was made out of wooden pallets.
The authorities said they have not yet been able to determine how or where the inferno started. But witnesses said it spread with ferocious speed.
Read more in The Times about problems inside the Ghost Ship.
• On Thursday, U.C. San Diego will host “Water in the West,” a round table of experts discussing water use in California. It’s free to the public.
• California is the capital of Christmas boat parades. Among those holding events this weekend: San Diego, Dana Point, Huntington Beach and Discovery Bay.
• The Los Angeles premiere of “Rogue One: A Star Wars Story” is Saturday. Hollywood will be shutting down streets.
• On Sunday, the comedian T.J. Miller will host this year’s Critics’ Choice Awards. The Los Angeles love story “La La Land” leads the pack with 12 nominations.
As Christmas trees go, giant sequoias don’t normally spring to mind.
And yet, amid the soaring redwoods of California stands the nation’s official Christmas tree.
General Grant Tree, a giant sequoia in Kings Canyon National Park, measures 267 feet tall, more than 34 feet in diameter and about 1,650 years in age.
The residents of the nearby city of Sanger liked the idea and petitioned President Calvin Coolidge to make it the national Christmas tree. He agreed, proclaiming it so in 1926.
Ever since, Sanger (population: 25,000) has identified closely with the holiday.
“We are known as the Christmas tree city here in California,” said Raul Cantu, Sanger’s mayor pro tempore.
Each year on the second Sunday of December, the chamber of commerce holds a ceremony at General Grant Tree.
Speeches are given, carols are sung and a wreath is placed at the foot of the tree.
Anyone is welcome, Mr. Cantu said. This year’s event is scheduled on Sunday.
