IOWA CITY — The tree wasn’t growing correctly. The projection cues weren’t right. A mouse got stuck as it scurried up a pole. The Nutcracker’s sword broke, then broke again. “Stop, please,” Christopher Wheeldon called out patiently for the umpteenth time as the technical team of his new production of “The Nutcracker,” for the Joffrey Ballet of Chicago, worked away at a table in the newly rebuilt, gleaming Hancher Auditorium here recently.
It was Day 2 of a week of stage rehearsals at the Hancher, where the Joffrey would present five preview performances before opening in Chicago on Saturday, Dec. 10. A week of onstage rehearsal and previews is an unusual luxury for a ballet company. But a lot rides on this “Nutcracker,” a $4 million reimagining of the traditional story — it’s set at the 1893 Chicago world’s fair — that will serve as replacement of the Robert Joffrey production that the company has performed every December for 28 years. In a neat bit of symmetry, its 1987 premiere was at the former Hancher (closed after flooding in 2008 and rebuilt in a new spot); Ashley Wheater, the director of the Joffrey who was then a company member, danced as the Snow King.
Mr. Wheeldon, 43, who recently directed and choreographed the Tony Award-winning “An American in Paris” on Broadway, is a star of the ballet world, with — among much else — several full-length, critically applauded narrative ballets to his credit. One thing he has clearly mastered: his directorial bedside manner.
During a 12-hour day of slow-going rehearsal, he remained calm and warmly encouraging, giving detailed instructions to dancers (“Miguel, more crazy genius face!” “Amanda, you need to be having a much worse nightmare.”) and staying in constant dialogue with his team seated nearby: Natasha Katz (lighting), Julian Crouch (sets and costumes), Ben Pearcy (projections) and the puppeteer Basil Twist.
Since Mr. Wheater wanted a “Nutcracker” that would be specific to Chicago and the Joffrey, Mr. Wheeldon has relocated the story from its traditional setting of an upper-middle-class German household. Now it’s set in a worker’s shack on the site of the World’s Columbian Exposition, which commemorated the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the New World. In this telling, Marie, the young heroine of the tale (danced by an adult rather than a child here) is the daughter of Polish immigrants. Her mother, who will later incarnate the Sugar Plum Fairy role in the different guise of a golden sculpture that presides over the world’s fair, is a single parent, raising her and her brother, Franz, alone.
At the same time, Mr. Wheeldon said, “‘The Nutcracker’ still needs to be ‘The Nutcracker’ and deliver what people want — and what is dictated by Tchaikovsky’s score: the tree growing, the snow, the journey to a magical land.” To help his story ideas fit into the existing structure of the ballet, Mr. Wheeldon called on Brian Selznick, a writer and illustrator of children’s books, whose work he had long admired.
Mr. Twist, who like the rest of the creative team has collaborated with Mr. Wheeldon before, said he was using puppetry, shadow effects and silk effects in the ballet. “With the growing tree, for example, they wanted a tiny tree to start, and we had to figure out how to get from that to an enormous tree, so we pull in shadows, scenery and projections,” he said.
He added that it was exacting, demanding hours of painstaking planning and focused attention from the entire creative and technical team. “Broadway people can’t conceive how ballet does this in such a short time,” he said.
