It ended with a bang.
The HBO hit “Westworld” wrapped up its 10-episode first season on Sunday, and gave the premium cable channel something it has not enjoyed in some time outside of “Game of Thrones”: an ongoing drama with strong ratings, and a ravenous following online.
On Monday, the show’s creators, the husband-and-wife duo of Jonathan Nolan and Lisa Joy, talked to The New York Times about the first season; how online commentary spoiled many of the show’s biggest mysteries weeks ago; and why a second season isn’t likely before 2018. Below are edited excerpts from the conversation.
Long before ‘Westworld’ had its debut there was plenty of talk that the show was in trouble after production shut down last year. Just how vindicated are you feeling at this point?
When you shut down production to turn back to writing scripts, did you have any big changes in mind for the show? For instance, did you have a different ending originally and then reworked it?
NOLAN No big jumps. All of these things had been layered together so, so carefully from the beginning, which is part of what makes it so difficult to write. You’re writing at least three separate timelines that have to interact with one another as if it’s all ever-present.
So to be clear: There are at least three timelines. What timelines were you working with?
NOLAN One timeline is between 34 and 37 years ago that results in the conception of the park. Another timeline that plays out 30 years ago. And the present day timeline.
Many of the biggest twists of the series were laid out weeks ago by websites like Reddit or Vanity Fair. I’m sure it was satisfying to see people so engaged, but was it also frustrating that your biggest secrets were revealed?
NOLAN It’s a great problem to have this many people engaged with the show. Look, internet speculation has always existed. With a lot of shows along the way, the theorizing doesn’t add up to much. In the case of “True Detective” in the first season, a lot of the theorizing was outside of the scope of what the show intended to do. In our case, the theorizing was right on target. We were layering this idea of a nonlinear experience experienced linearly. Sites like Reddit, which I love, that’s not a problem. In this case, I was only frustrated when quote-unquote theories, which at a certain point clearly became spoilers, wound up in headlines. When those theories have been taken out of a site like Reddit and put into headlines, that’s a bummer.
Will it affect next season’s plotting? People will piece stuff together a lot sooner.
NOLAN Not at all. We’re not going to change the way we write the show because of the way it’s written about. That would be intellectually and creatively bankrupt.
There wasn’t universal praise for the season. Some critics argued that things like story and character development were overshadowed by the mysteries of the show. Your reaction to that?
JOY In the show, when Ford tells the Man in Black, “The maze wasn’t built for you,” I kind of feel that way about the twists. The twists aren’t just there for the audience. They’re a conceit that we have because they are embedded naturally in the setup of our characters. They’re reconciling themselves with their place in time and what it means for their growth and who their friends are, and who their enemies are and what their next steps are.
NOLAN In a sense, this season was really a prologue. You’re coming to understand the particular, peculiar nature of the hosts’ experience of reality. It’s not a twist for the sake of it. It’s something that illuminates the situation the hosts find themselves in. They don’t quite understand reality. And to use that idea moving forward with the audience now fully aware of how that’s working in subsequent seasons, we could do some really cool things.
What can you tell us about the second season?
NOLAN The answer is nothing. We want each season to feel like an evolution of the show and something that builds in scope and ambition season on season.
What about casting? Jimmi Simpson already said he won’t be back for Season 2. Will Anthony Hopkins or Ed Harris?
NOLAN With this show, you never quite know. We really want the audience to have no sense or very little sense of what to expect for Season 2.
How many seasons are you envisioning?
JOY There’d be some hubris to know exactly how many seasons the show has. Some of that is beyond our control. What isn’t beyond our control is creating a story that’s satisfying to us that has a beginning, middle and end and tells the whole story and wraps it up nicely.
Why do you need until 2018 for a second season?
JOY Have you seen the show? It’s huge!
NOLAN We’re hopeful the audience will be patient with us. We want to take the time so that the second season is every bit as ambitious and beautifully produced as we can make it.