Last month, the night before his team played at Columbia, Hofstra’s basketball coach, Joe Mihalich, walked into the locker room after practice and found his team watching Kentucky pummel Arizona State in a game the Wildcats eventually won by 46 points.
To Mihalich, his players’ curiosity about Kentucky, then the country’s top-ranked team, was not the most encouraging sight.
“I wanted to say, ‘Fellas, don’t worry about that right now; let’s take care of Columbia,’” Mihalich said.
Still, it was hard for Hofstra to ignore the big blue Wildcat in the room. Mixed into Hofstra’s nonconference schedule alongside Coppin State, Sacred Heart and Medaille College — a Division III program in Buffalo — was Kentucky.
The Pride had known for a year that they would play the Wildcats this week.
Originally, the game was planned to open the newly renovated Nassau Coliseum, next door to Hofstra’s campus in Hempstead, on Long Island. Instead, it was played Sunday at Barclays Center in Brooklyn. And while Hofstra (6-5) briefly appeared to have the slimmest of chances, trailing sixth-ranked Kentucky by a 3-pointer with just over three minutes remaining in the first half, the Wildcats (9-1) went on a 26-3 run over seven minutes and cruised to a 96-73 victory.
Unfortunately for Hofstra, those seven minutes were all it took to expose the chasm in talent separating the teams. And for all the excitement of playing highly ranked team, in an N.B.A. arena, in a nationally televised game, the occasion also brought undue stress.
Kentucky routinely draws dozens of pro scouts to its games, and that meant Sunday’s outing provided Gustys with the kind of stage that games against Sacred Heart cannot create. That was why, as Mihalich juggled ticket requests and the difficulty of trying to plan for teams like Columbia and St. Bonaventure with the Wildcats in the back of his players’ minds, Mihalich felt the need to have a talk with Gustys, who entered Sunday leading the nation in rebounding, at 13.5 a game.
Gustys had promised not to try to play above his ability, even with the opportunity to elevate his pro prospects. Before he arrived at Hofstra, Gustys, who is Lithuanian, had played at the prep powerhouse Oak Hill Academy in Virginia, and he has participated in international competitions against some of the United States’ best young players.
Gustys finished with 13 points and 8 rebounds, and he outrebounded Kentucky’s heralded freshman Edrice Adebayo, but he said he had been thrown off by a crowd in which a majority of fans were Wildcats supporters.
There were other drawbacks to all the attention Kentucky brings, too. The freshman guard Eli Pemberton, who entered Sunday’s game leading Hofstra in scoring, said some students at the university had mocked the Hofstra basketball team on social media, expecting a blowout.
With their showcase in the books, the two teams will now return to their paths on the college basketball landscape. Kentucky’s next two games are against North Carolina and Louisville. Hofstra has its own big rivalry game on Tuesday, against Stony Brook.
Deron Powers, a senior transfer from Hampton, played against Kentucky in the Wildcats’ opening-round N.C.A.A. tournament game in 2015, when his team lost by 23 points. After Sunday’s loss by the same margin, Powers was asked if scheduling Kentucky was worth it.
“I thought we learned a lot about ourselves,” Powers said.
Kentucky Coach John Calipari also saw benefits of the matchup, even if the prospects for his Wildcats are much higher than those for Hofstra this season.
