From kitchen sinks to chancellors and immigrants to burlesque queens, these four photography shows light up the season. Three are by contemporaries working in color, and one by a gifted amateur recording America’s diversity in the early 20th century.
Sing the virtues and the scintillating color of vacuum cleaners, car trunks and back alleys, of everything and everywhere unprepossessing, generally unnoticed and unrelentingly commonplace, and you will have an ode by William Eggleston called “The Democratic Forest.” Through Saturday, the David Zwirner Gallery has on view a fine selection of more than 40 photographs, most not previously exhibited, culled from an unostentatiously autobiographical chronicle of Mr. Eggleston’s travels across America and parts of Europe from 1983 to ’86. The rest of this epic of the mundane — 1,000 images — can be seen in Steidl’s recent reissue of a 10-volume set of the same title.
The democracy Mr. Eggleston has in mind is the equivalence of all objects before the camera. As Shakespeare put it, “There is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so.” And photographers have long thought that what is ordinarily ignored is worth a look. And worth seeing, which takes more time, perception and talent. Perhaps the forest is what we do not see for the trees, the normally uninteresting beauties of everyday life in everyday places. This is how we live, among kitchen sinks and highways, water hoses and roadside stands, which, in these instances, are often rural, often Southern, familiarly human. Mr. Eggleston’s adroit compositions and vibrant light teasingly suggest that a larger story lurks within the minutiae of everyday existence.
People are implicit in these images, but no one’s at home. Almost the only person on view is a young boy studying a double-page magazine spread of handguns, as if to tell us that conditions are changing, not necessarily for the better.
Mr. Eggleston sees brilliant, saturated color in a chartreuse vacuum cleaner near a gold plastic laundry basket, a bit of a turquoise cabinet muscling in at one corner. Or a clump of red and yellow tomatoes beside a green sink, or, in a desolate, gray back alley, orange paint juxtaposed with rusty bricks and a building’s decorative coral touches.
When John Szarkowski at the Museum of Modern Art gave Mr. Eggleston a one-man show in 1976, The New York Times called it “boring,” and other New York critics thought that much too kind. That exhibition is now recognized as a turning point, for it erased the “advertising only” stigma of color film and established Mr. Eggleston as a major influence on subsequent color photographers.
By the way, Mr. Eggleston can be boring, for what photographer has ever taken 1,000 outstanding pictures? But he’s mostly at his well-chosen best on Zwirner’s gallery walls.
‘WILLIAM EGGLESTON: THE DEMOCRATIC FOREST’ Through Saturday at David Zwirner, 537 West 20th Street, Manhattan.
“Augustus Sherman: Aliens or Americans?,” a pointedly timely show at Steven Kasher Gallery, presents 35 photographs made by Sherman on Ellis Island between 1905 and 1920. It opens with the display of a book of that title, published in 1906, with a Sherman photograph as its frontispiece. Howard B. Grose, the author, begins with this: “It is not a question as to whether the aliens will come. They have come, millions of them; they are now coming, at the rate of a million a year. They come from every clime, country and condition; and they are of every sort: good, bad and indifferent.” He continues, “What they will be and do then depends largely upon what our American Protestant Christianity does for them now.” The book, presented as part of the materials for a course for missionaries, was strongly anti-immigration and especially disparaging of immigrants from Eastern European countries.
Sherman, chief clerk at the Ellis Island Immigration Station, was on the immigrants’ side. Not a professional photographer but a good one, he was clearly interested in the diverse origins and customs of those who came to these shores. He persuaded many to pose for him in their best clothes or national dress, which they had presumably worn to make a good impression in the place they hoped to call home. The Ellis Island Immigration Museum has more than 250 of his pictures.
Photographs do not explain themselves; without captions, they are vulnerable to widely differing interpretations, often unintended by the photographer. Sherman’s sympathetic portraits were used in anti-immigration publications, like Grose’s book, without attribution. His pictures are sober, respectful, formal, nicely printed and centered on the subject, with mainly, but not exclusively, plain backgrounds that insist that the sitter is worth looking at — is, in fact, the only thing worth looking at. He took family portraits that speak to the enormous effort some made to get here. One family poses with nine children, eight of them boys. The parents look rather tired.
The variety of headgear, costumes, decoration and jewelry is like a tour through Europe, Russia, parts of northern Africa and the Middle East early in the 20th century. What Sherman has photographed is the diversity of America as it defined itself, as it developed a century ago.
Resourceful enough to get here, most immigrants did all right, if only in menial jobs. There is a story about an Italian man who said he came because he heard the streets were paved with gold, only to discover that not only weren’t they paved with gold but that they weren’t paved at all — and that he was meant to pave them.
Sherman photographed Americans to whom we owe a debt. They made this country richer in many ways, not merely by paving roads and shortening trousers. They were the promise of a melting pot that has never quite been fulfilled. This is how they looked before they stepped into a new life, most likely spent in tenements or trying to learn how to farm. Thanks to Sherman, we can look into the eyes of people who were aliens for a long-ago moment and acknowledge them as Americans just like us.
‘AUGUSTUS SHERMAN: ALIENS OR AMERICANS?’ Through Dec. 23 at Steven Kasher Gallery, 515 West 26th Street, Manhattan.
Human beings, like many animals, find safety, comfort and socialization in groups. Families, tribes, book clubs, knitting circles, religious societies, or Rotarians, colleagues, poker players and members of a graduating class or a board: The group quickly becomes an essential element of personal identity. In 17th-century Holland, the municipal authorities were especially partial to group portraiture, which put the seal on their stature. When photography was invented, practitioners wanted to photograph groups right away, but it wasn’t easy. Families wanted to be memorialized and sometimes, when the baby stopped crying, and the dog stopped chewing the furniture, they were.
Since 1972, Neal Slavin has made a career of group portraits in color, a large number of which are now on view in “Neal Slavin: A 40-Year Chronicle of Groups and Gatherings,” at Laurence Miller Gallery on 57th Street.It’s a hoot. Mr. Slavin can apparently persuade almost any gathering to be photographed en masse: a burlesque troupe; a snooker club (where one player’s head has been eaten by a large, aggressive cloud of smoke); worshipers at a Hindu temple in Brooklyn; the custodial staff at Stonehenge; and Elizabeth Arden masseuses, with two women who compose themselves to look their very best while dressed in a sheet.
Mr. Slavin is not only a clever, and possibly sly, persuader with a gift for color and lighting, but also a talented stage manager who can position any group as a lucid explanation of what it does, or as a symbol of itself, as a comic opera, or as a bundle of unexpected redundancies. There is the “Rescue Team, Royal National Lifeboat Institution, UK,” standing atop the upthrust prow of a rescue boat while a yellow copter hovers overhead, dangling a rescued man on a wire. There’s a Santa extravaganza of seven “Bingo and Buddies Santa Clauses,” practicing looking jolly as they indulge in milk and cookies in a Maryland diner, wearing identical long white beards and luxuriant mustaches that make drinking milk an adventure.
Mr. Slavin has carved out a niche in portraiture that should put the selfie to shame, if ever that is possible.
‘NEAL SLAVIN: A 40-YEAR CHRONICLE OF GROUPS AND GATHERINGS’ Through Dec. 23 at the Laurence Miller Gallery, 20 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
In 1998, Andreas Gursky said, “I realized that photography is no longer credible, and therefore found it that much easier to legitimize digital picture processing.” He was already playing with the medium’s relation to painting, with the line between abstraction and figuration, with an abolition of traditional perspective, with the theme of global commercialism, with picture sizes so large that viewers’ experience of the work changed noticeably at different distances. In the bracing exhibition “Not Abstract II,” at the Gagosian Gallery on West 21st Street — “Not Abstract” because, Mr. Gursky says, “Photography in general simply cannot disengage from the subject” — he also tackles aerial photography; political commentary; the humorous possibilities of viewers’ relation to art; and comic books. An electronic sound installation by the Canadian D.J. and producer Richie Hawtin sometimes seems to emanate from the images as well.
In one pointed, amusing and enormous image, four German chancellors (you will recognize Angela Merkel) sit with their backs to us, contemplating Barnett Newman’s enormous “Vir Heroicus Sublimis” (“Man, Heroic and Sublime”) from so close up that a curator would panic. One chancellor interrupts Newman’s strict, flat, painted surface by sending across it a rococo swirl of cigarette smoke.
Mr. Gursky comments on a more contemporary kind of sublime heroism in photographs that feature Marvel comic heroes. In one, in a kind of technological update of King Kong, the all-metal Iron Man embraces an adoring blond woman in a landscape of palm trees that could be an ad for Caribbean vacations, were it not for the sulfurous pink atmosphere.
Three seemingly abstract, multicolored stripe paintings look as if some industrious child had carefully colored in the spaces in paintings by Agnes Martin. Only at a myopic distance from the images do they explain themselves as aerial photographs of rows of cultivated tulips.
A picture of a huge, chaotic welter of books and products in Amazon’s warehouse continues Mr. Gursky’s observations on the commercialization and globalization of, well, things in general. He has himself become symbolic of what he portrays: In 2007, his “99 Cent 11 Diptychon,” a picture of a store for those who cannot afford much more, set an auction record of more than $3.3 million.
‘ANDREAS GURSKY: NOT ABSTRACT II’ Through Dec. 23 at Gagosian, 522 West 21st Street, Manhattan.