• Deadly attack in Berlin.
The Berlin Christmas market where 12 people died and at least 48 people were wounded Monday night was the target of terrorism, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany said today.
A Pakistani man who was arrested on suspicion of involvement in the attack applied for asylum a year ago, officials said. He has denied any wrongdoing.
The body of a passenger in the cab of the vehicle was identified as a Polish citizen.
In a separate attack in Zurich, a gunman who wounded three people at an Islamic Center has been found dead.
• Aftermath of assassination in Turkey.
While they have a history of tensions, Russia and Turkey have recently taken pains to line up their once-conflicting strategies in the Syrian war.
• Electoral College seals Trump’s victory.
President-elect Donald J. Trump cleared the 270-vote threshold needed to defeat Hillary Clinton. But protests at state capitols hinted at a tumultuous inauguration and first 100 days in office.
Though seven electors defected, they chose someone other than Mr. Trump or Mrs. Clinton.
Separately, a federal judge has ordered the release of some documents related to the F.B.I. inquiry of Clinton emails that the agency revealed to Congress two weeks before the election.
• Showdown looms in North Carolina.
The Republican-led legislature plans to hold a special session this week to consider repealing the so-called bathroom bill, which limits legal protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.
Governor-elect Roy Cooper, a Democrat, said the bill had cost the state thousands of jobs.
• A $1.6 billion bust?
A six-year effort to improve Interstate 405 in Los Angeles, the busiest highway in the country, known for gridlock, is coming under scrutiny.
Critics say the project hasn’t significantly relieved congestion, and a new study suggests that rush hour traffic has gotten worse.
• The International Monetary Fund is standing by its leader, Christine Lagarde, after she was convicted in a French court of negligence that resulted in the misuse of public funds.
No fine or sentence was imposed, but the ruling could damage Ms. Lagarde’s reputation at a time the I.M.F. faces criticism of being out of touch with populist movements around the world.
• A new study discrediting calls to cut sugar in diets drew sharp criticism this week because its authors have ties to the food industry.
The review was paid for by a group that is funded by Coca-Cola, General Mills, Hershey’s, Kellogg’s, Kraft Foods and Monsanto, among others.
• Blued is China’s most popular gay dating app, with more than three million active daily users and an estimated value of $600 million.
Its founder is a former police officer who for 16 years secretly ran a website for gay people, at a time when they were viewed by many in the country as criminals and deviants.
• Inside a migrant boat.
Abandoned boats, once used by migrants crossing the Mediterranean to reach Europe, lie in a junkyard on the Italian island of Lampedusa.CreditCredit...Gregorio Borgia/AP Photo. Technology by Samsung.
Our latest 360 video takes you to a junkyard on an Italian island where boats that carried refugees across the Mediterranean now sit.
• Wonders of the human body.
A woman’s brain is altered during pregnancy in ways that may allow her to better care for her child, a new study suggests.
Dr. Esther M. Wilkins, 100. At a time when few women were dentists, Dr. Wilkins compiled what would become the modern curriculum for training dental hygienists.
China Machado, 86, whose 1959 appearance in Harper’s Bazaar was the first time a nonwhite model was featured in a glossy magazine. She later became the publication’s fashion director.
• Today’s recipe (with a side of good news).
Try whole wheat pasta baked with brussels sprouts, potatoes and Gruyère — it’s like macaroni and cheese with vegetables.
Then read about a Spanish restaurant with a unique business model: It uses the money it takes in at breakfast and lunch to offer free dinners to the homeless.
When is a phone call like a diplomatic life preserver?
When you’re the leader of Taiwan, and on the other end of the line is President-elect Donald J. Trump, the first American head of state to speak to you in 37 years.
China considers the island, governed by Nationalists who fled the Communist takeover in 1949, a renegade province. So when the U.S. and China opened diplomatic relations in 1979, the U.S. had to cut off Taiwan.
As China’s might and markets grew, most other countries followed suit.
Taiwan is now recognized by just 22 countries, mostly tiny island nations in the Caribbean and Pacific swayed by Taipei’s aid packages. Two years ago, a former Guatemalan leader admitted to accepting bribes from Taiwan in exchange for diplomatic recognition.
Taiwan’s last ally in Europe is the Vatican. But there, too, officials have made overtures toward China, which has a vigorous, if partly underground, Catholic community.
For now, Nicaragua remains with Taiwan. But it may be swayed: A mainland Chinese company has pledged to create a transoceanic shipping route through it, to rival the Panama Canal.
Patrick Boehler contributed reporting.
