DUBLIN — Two retired British soldiers will be prosecuted in the killing of an Irish Republican Army commander in Belfast, Northern Ireland, in 1972, early in the conflict known as the Troubles, officials announced on Friday.
The commander, Joe McCann, was walking on Joy Street near the city center on April 15, 1972, when a patrol ordered him to stop. He ran, and the soldiers opened fire, fatally injuring him.
Mr. McCann, 24, had four children and was a well-regarded leader in the Official Irish Republican Army, an outlawed paramilitary Marxist group that sought Northern Ireland’s independence from Britain and union with the Republic of Ireland. A year earlier, he and his unit took over a local bakery and defended it from 600 British soldiers who were seeking to arrest paramilitary suspects there.
After Mr. McCann’s death, boys threw rocks and paving stones at British troops in retaliation.
The next month, the Official I.R.A. declared a cease-fire, but another faction of the Republican movement, the Provisional I.R.A., continued a deadly campaign of resistance for more than two decades, until the 1998 Good Friday Agreement largely brought about an end to the Troubles.
An investigation by the Royal Ulster Constabulary, the police force for Northern Ireland at the time, declined to prosecute anyone for Mr. McCann’s death in 1972.
As part of the peace process, the constabulary was disbanded in 2001 and replaced with a new police service. A number of prominent cases, like Mr. McCann’s, have never been solved, and in some cases families have pleaded for decades for basic answers, much less closure.
In 2005, the new Police Service of Northern Ireland opened a review of unsolved cases related to the Troubles, and as part of that process, investigators examined the facts of the case. In March 2014, the attorney general for Northern Ireland referred the matter to prosecutors for a fresh review.
“The two defendants in the case are surviving members of the army patrol which shot Mr. McCann,” the Public Prosecution Service said in a statement on Friday. “A third member of the patrol who also fired at Mr. McCann died in the intervening years. At present these individuals are not being named and are identified as Soldier A and Soldier C.” The decision followed “careful consideration of all the available evidence,” the statement said.
Gerry Kelly, a former I.R.A. member and a spokesman for policing and justice matters for Sinn Fein, the Irish republican political party, praised the decision to prosecute the retired soldiers.
Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein and a member of Parliament in the Republic of Ireland, has himself recently faced questions over what he knew about the 1983 shooting of an Irish prison officer, Brian Stack, who died 18 months later.
The Police Service said the decision to prosecute was “not the result of a police investigation, or re-investigation,” but solely the decision of prosecutors.