Here’s a look at what’s coming up the week.
Mexico to enlist help in tapping oil reserves.
In a highly anticipated opening to foreign oil companies, Mexico is holding its first auction of deepwater oil and gas blocks on Monday. Investors will be watching the results closely as a measure of the energy overhaul’s success. The deep waters off Mexico’s Gulf Coast are believed to hold important reserves of oil and gas, but Mexico’s longtime national oil company Petróleos Mexicanos, or Pemex, does not have the capital or expertise to develop them.
Justice Department challenges Aetna-Humana deal.
The second of two proposed health insurance mega-mergers goes to trial in United States District Court for the District of Columbia on Monday. The $37 billion combination of Aetna and Humana, two of the nation’s largest insurers, is being challenged by the Justice Department as being bad for consumers.
Referendum in Italy could overshadow E.U. finance talks.
Finance ministers from the 19 eurozone countries hold their monthly meeting on Monday. The ministers could conclude a review of reforms in Greece and discuss ways of making its giant debt more manageable. Some ministers could push to ease austerity policies that have aroused populist discontent across the European Union.
But the formal agenda is most likely to be overshadowed by the referendum in Italy, after voters on Sunday rejected Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s plan to streamline the government. The “no” vote could open the way to opponents of euro currency membership, which could deepen the crisis in the country’s banking system and possibly start another period of financial turmoil in the region.
European Central Bank to continue bond purchases.
Service sector growth may bolster I.S.M. index.
Analysts expect trade deficit to widen.
Senate committee to mull AT&T-Time Warner merger.
The top executives for AT&T and Time Warner will defend their proposed $85 billion merger before members of the Senate Judiciary Committee on Wednesday. The hearing is expected to reveal the temperature in Washington on big mergers under a Trump administration. Witnesses include AT&T’s chief executive, Randall L. Stephenson, and Time Warner’s chief executive, Jeffrey L. Bewkes.
They will be asked to explain how the union of a video distribution and wireless powerhouse with a company that produces premium channels like HBO and CNN can be a good deal for consumers and not stymie competition in the telecom and media industries.
