SAN DIEGO — As the final seconds ticked off the clock in Sunday’s game between the San Diego Chargers and the Oakland Raiders, the scoreboard and each team’s fans affirmed what had become abundantly clear over the course of this season: The two longtime rivals were headed in different directions.
The questions are how far will they go, and where will they end up?
By beating the Chargers, 19-16, in a defensive slugfest, the Raiders secured their 11th win and a playoff berth for the first time since 2002. For a team that has spent most of the past decade churning through quarterbacks, coaches and top draft picks, the Raiders are in the midst of a Cinderella season, and their jubilant fans who traveled by the thousands from up and down California for the game were enjoying every minute of it.
“It must be hard for Chargers fans to see a home game like this, with so many Raiders fans here,” said Ernie Martinez, a longtime Raiders supporter who drove from Los Angeles to see his team play.
Indeed, after another dispiriting loss, Chargers fans had little to cheer for and must have felt like visitors in their own stadium. With nine losses, their team was assured of a losing record and a third straight season without a playoff appearance.
The off-season, though, may be more gut-wrenching for fans of both teams. The owners of the Chargers and the Raiders may move their teams to new cities less than a year after they failed in their bid to jointly build a stadium in the then-vacant Los Angeles market. The possibility that both teams may move added a touch of the surreal to the taunts and gibes that fans aimed at one another on Sunday.
“Your team is moving to L.A.,” one Raiders fan shouted on his way into the stadium.
Inside the stadium, most fans focused on the field. But every so often, they would take stock of what loomed beyond the game. Rafael Alvarez, the longtime leader of Bolt Pride, a Chargers fan group that sits behind an end zone, was trying to remain optimistic.
Alvarez and his buddies have good reason to be worried. Of the two teams, the Chargers are closer to moving. Their owner, Dean Spanos, has said that after the season ends on Jan. 1, he will announce whether he will exercise his option to move to Los Angeles and play in a stadium now being built by the Rams, who moved to Southern California from St. Louis in time for this season.
In a referendum last month, taxpayers soundly rejected a plan that would have diverted hundreds of millions of dollars in hotel bed taxes to help Spanos build a stadium in downtown San Diego, the latest of many attempts by the team to find a replacement for Qualcomm Stadium, one of the oldest facilities in the N.F.L.
Spanos has until Jan. 15 to exercise his option to move, so the time for civic leaders to present an alternative stadium proposal is running out. Even if a proposal was to materialize, the public would have to approve any stadium-related tax hikes, something it has already rejected.
And the economic benefits of moving to Los Angeles are compelling. The Chargers would be a tenant in the stadium that the Rams’ owner, E. Stanley Kroenke, is building, so Spanos would not have to spend years and potentially billions of dollars buying land and overseeing construction.
The most significant outlay the Chargers would have to make would be a relocation fee, which would come to $650 million if it was paid over 10 years. To soften the blow, N.F.L. owners last week allowed the Chargers to exceed the league’s debt limit and borrow up to $325 million, or half of the relocation fee, presumably at low interest rates.
In addition, the Chargers could raise money through the sale of personal seat licenses and sponsorships, even if they are tenants.
Until Kroenke’s new stadium opens in 2019, the Chargers could play in the Los Angeles Coliseum with the Rams. Or they could find their own temporary home at the StubHub Center, a 30,000-seat soccer stadium in Carson, Calif. The Chargers would also have to build a temporary practice facility and team offices, most likely in Orange County.
In moving 120 miles to the north, Spanos, of course, would risk alienating fans in San Diego, where the Chargers have played for more than a half-century. It is unclear how many of those fans would pay thousands of dollars for seat licenses and tickets, which would undoubtedly be more expensive in Los Angeles.
“I’ll drive to L.A. to support them, but only a couple of games a year,” said Alex Sanchez, a lifelong Chargers fan.
Spanos will need to find new fans in Los Angeles should he decide to move — he agreed in a television interview on Sunday that he was more likely to move his team than stay, only to say later that he had not made up his mind.
The city went without an N.F.L. team for two decades before the Rams returned. Of course, the Chargers might be a breath of fresh air compared to the Rams, who are 4-10.
In an effort to make a splash, the Rams made a blockbuster trade to acquire the first overall pick in the draft in April. They chose quarterback Jared Goff, who sat on the bench until late November and has lost all five games that he has started since then. Coach Jeff Fisher was signed to a two-year extension before the season, then fired this month after the team’s ninth loss.
But while the Chargers and the Rams struggle, the Raiders and their fans are reveling in their good fortune, at least on the field.
Off the field, owner Mark Davis has threatened to move to Las Vegas, where state lawmakers agreed to help pay for a domed stadium by raising $750 million through an increase in the hotel bed tax. The public largess is in contrast to Oakland, where Mayor Libby Schaaf has made far more modest promises, though last week the city and county gave the Fortress Investment Group, which is representing the city, two months to negotiate a stadium deal with the Raiders, assuming the team will come to the table.
While the owners understand why Spanos might abandon San Diego for Los Angeles, a much larger market, they are far less convinced that it makes sense for the Raiders to leave the Bay Area, the sixth-biggest media market in the country, for Las Vegas, which is far smaller.
Raiders fans in Oakland certainly want their team to stay put. But the team is also immensely popular in Southern California from the years it played in Los Angeles, and many fans in that part of the state say they could travel to Las Vegas just as easily as the Bay Area.
“I’m a Raiders fan, so I’m always going to follow them,” including to Las Vegas, said Jose Munoz, who lives in Culver City in Los Angeles County and made the trip to San Diego this weekend.
Alvarez, the Chargers fan, said he, too, had a game plan if the Chargers leave San Diego. His season-ticket money would be available to use for other purposes, such as going on the road to watch the Chargers play, but just not in Los Angeles.