BEDMINSTER, N.J. — The local roads were closed, with Secret Service agents, the state police and local law enforcement on patrol. Deep in a protective bubble, President-elect Donald J. Trump was holding court in his living quarters not long after his election, receiving would-be members of his future administration at his country club. A crush from the news media waited outside for a photo opportunity. But there was little traffic, no protesters and few gawkers — except for a herd of horses, idly chewing grass.
This seat of presidential power is far from Fifth Avenue and its gold-hued Trump Tower, and farther still from Washington and the White House. It sits on a golf course in Bedminster, a rural New Jersey township of just over 8,000 residents, where small farms and crumbling Revolutionary War-era structures abound. This sleepy pocket of the state, where residents boast about their miles of dirt roads, has suddenly found itself in the glare of attention as the home to Mr. Trump’s weekend getaway and the headaches that may come with it.
At Bedminster Pizza just down the road from the Trump National Golf Club, Enzo Grande, a cook, wiped flour off his hands onto his apron. He dug into his pocket and pulled out a star-shaped pin, a now-cherished gift doled out to the restaurant staff by members of the Secret Service when they stopped in for subs.
Business has ticked up, Mr. Grande said, after word spread that Mr. Trump often ordered the takeout — meatballs, extra sauce. Both Mr. Trump and his daughter Ivanka have cottages on the country club’s property, and spotting the family in town or out to eat has long been something of a spectator sport here. Many residents view Mr. Trump as a local son.
The centerpiece of Mr. Trump’s 36-hole golf course is a 1939 red brick mansion in the Georgian Revival-style. He bought the property, the onetime estate of the automaker John DeLorean, in 2002.
The club’s website says it encompasses 600 acres and is 35 minutes from Midtown Manhattan. In fact, it is closer to 500 acres, according to property records, and the drive from Manhattan usually takes more than an hour. Equestrian trails snake around the course and graceful details abound: On the greens, for instance, hidden garbage pails emerge from the ground with the tap of a foot pedal, according to several visitors. Membership reportedly costs $300,000, though messages left with the club to verify the price were not returned.
Mr. Trump’s transition team has indicated that he may continue to use the property after he moves into the White House, which will bring new kinds of disruptions to a town where a loose horse or a stranded hay truck is usually the most difficult traffic problem.
“With the highway getting shut down for his motorcade to come in, that’s something we’re not used to,” said Ray Goettel, 22, a truck driver and a captain with the Far Hills-Bedminster Fire Department. For Mr. Goettel and other members of local emergency services, solutions to novel situations — like how to respond to a fire alarm at the golf club when it is cordoned off by security — are still being figured out.
Before Mr. Trump’s arrival as president-elect in November, Bedminster was asked to assign most of its 16-person police force to the task of blocking roads and patrolling perimeters, according to Steven E. Parker, the town’s part-time mayor, who also runs a local airport. It was a “hair-on-fire type moment,” the mayor, a Republican, recalled.
In New York City, officials have requested reimbursement from the federal government for securing Mr. Trump, estimating the cost will reach $35 million by the inauguration on Jan. 20. (Federal officials said $7 million had been set aside.) Mr. Trump’s three-day visit to New Jersey cost the Bedminster police force $5,000 a day.
Mr. Parker sent Mr. Lance a letter in December saying the town was flattered that Mr. Trump enjoyed spending some weekends and holidays in town, but was concerned about the impact. “We want to welcome Mr. Trump with open arms, but we don’t want to burden our taxpayers disproportionally for these visits,” he wrote.
On Mr. Trump’s first New Jersey visit as president-elect, the traffic snarls and demonstrations that have become part of the landscape around Trump Tower since the election did not materialize. A candlelight vigil in the parking lot of the Clarence Dillon Public Library had a handful of attendees.
That may be because the township was a Trump town — albeit narrowly. Though it sits in Somerset County, where Hillary Clinton received better than 54 percent of the vote, Mr. Trump won Bedminster by a handful of votes, according to the Somerset County Election Board.
Bedminster is about 85 percent white, according to the Census Bureau, yet that number may not reflect a hidden group of residents — the predominantly Latino laborers who underpin the equestrian lifestyle here, many of whom are undocumented. Frank Mata, 39, who emigrated from El Salvador two decades ago and cares for horses at farms across the area, said Mr. Trump’s presence had made many of these laborers fearful.
“Some are afraid to go to supermarkets” when Mr. Trump is in town, he said. When Mr. Trump’s retinue arrived at Lamington Road in November, closing streets and filling the town with Secret Service agents and other law enforcement officers, some laborers at farms near the golf course were afraid to leave, Mr. Mata said, anxious about being stopped by agents.
“He talked about us so badly; and now he is close by,” Mr. Mata said.
But many others are thrilled that Mr. Trump will soon be leading the country. On election night, some local residents brought their Trump yard signs into Delicious Heights, a restaurant and bar, and popped Champagne, staff members said.
“He’s the town’s biggest landowner and biggest taxpayer,” Judith A. Sullivan, a town administrator, said as she stood near her desk at Town Hall, a canary-yellow building designed to resemble an old country house.
In a green leatherette binder in a room beside her office, tax records show the golf club’s property taxes were $400,000 in 2016. The Trump Organization regularly donates golf outings to local charities for raffle prizes and silent auctions, she added. Mr. Trump is known to show up at weddings and parties held on the golf course and pose for photos — something he even did when he was here in November, the mayor recalled.
