Michael Polovich is not one to skimp on research. An assistant attorney general for Tennessee, he applies the same level of meticulousness to leisurely excursions as he does to his casework. So when he and his girlfriend took a trip to Charleston, S.C., this past summer, he had assembled a robust dossier of intelligence on his destination.
But his concierge at the Courtyard by Marriott in the city’s historic district, Kevin McQuade, soon convinced him that he didn’t know squat.
Mr. Polovich lives in Nashville and knows a hackneyed tour when he sees one. But Mr. McQuade connected him with a local professor who does walking tours on weekends. He turned out to be “the highlight of the trip,” Mr. Polovich recalled.
For dinner, Mr. McQuade sent Mr. Polovich and his girlfriend a mile down the road to Chez Nous, a hole in the wall that has a different handwritten menu every day and doesn’t take reservations.
Mr. McQuade is a member of Les Clefs d’Or, a society of concierges whose members must pass a series of rigorous tests to gain entry. But even he acknowledges that the availability of travel information online has called the very usefulness of his profession into question.
“When you have a problem like this, you can lay down and say smartphones are just taking over the world and give up, or you can step up your game,” he said.
Mr. McQuade said he thought too many of his colleagues were hung up on sending guests to venues they could walk to or were preordained as tourist-friendly. “You go to a concierge to find things you couldn’t find on your own,” he said. “If you’re in New York, you’re going to know about the Met and the Statue of Liberty. But if I tell them about a good jazz club or a Greenwich Village walking tour or a restaurant in Little Italy, that’s something they can only get from me.
If guests can find them, that is. According to the American Hotel and Lodging Association, the share of luxury hotels that employ concierges fell to 82 percent from nearly 100 percent between 2014 and 2016, with many concierges taking on duties that require them to abandon their once stationary posts. For instance, Joseph Sundberg of the Hotel Monaco in Portland, Ore., now holds the title of roving concierge, which finds him ferrying luggage, among other chores.
Mr. Sundberg, who has worked in Portland’s hotel industry for 31 years, is a microbrew connoisseur in a resolutely sudsy city, and is constantly visiting new haunts to assess their worthiness. It’s this physical connection to a place that he feels gives him an edge over what can be gleaned online.
But for all the passion and validity of Mr. Sundberg’s spiel, the internet isn’t going away — which is fine by Robert Marks. The president of Les Clefs d’Or USA, Mr. Marks has been a concierge for 29 years — he currently works at the Omni Hotel in San Diego — and feels he has a crucial role to play in concert with iPhones and Samsungs.
Portland’s stately Benson Hotel has a Les Clefs d’Or member named Mike Rowland. He wasn’t working on the Friday in September when I stayed there, but a gentleman named Tom was. I had tickets to a concert with the Nickel Creek alumna Sara Watkins at the Aladdin Theater in Southeast Portland, which is in something of a restaurant desert. I asked Tom for a recommendation, and nothing came to mind, save for the adjacent bar and a 24-hour pancake house around the corner. But Tom stayed with me, quickly learning that I was willing to walk up to two miles after my meal.
After searching the web for a bit, he pointed me to Sunshine Tavern, a hip, child-friendly establishment with shuffleboard, vintage video games, chicken and waffles, $4 whisky shots and a bearded bartender in a flannel shirt. As I exited, a man in a top hat on a cartoonishly tall bike whizzed by, with nary a “Portlandia” camera rig in tow.