Theater|Josh Radnor Is ‘Existentially Restless.’ And That’s O.K.
Josh Radnor Is ‘Existentially Restless.’ And That’s O.K.
Posing for a photographer in the lobby of the Rubin Museum of Art one December afternoon, the actor Josh Radnor was plainly ill at ease. He may have spent nine seasons starring in the hit CBS sitcom “How I Met Your Mother,” but Mr. Radnor — in town from Los Angeles to play the lead in Richard Greenberg’s new comedy “The Babylon Line” at Lincoln Center Theater — has yet to learn to be comfortable having his picture taken.
Meeting at the Rubin, a six-story trove of art from the Himalayas and the surrounding region, tucked away on West 17th Street in Chelsea, had been his idea. Its abundance of Buddhist and Hindu works jibes with his deep interest in spirituality. 
Josh Radnor and Elizabeth Reaser in a scene from Richard Greenberg's new play.
Unlike some of his co-stars on “How I Met Your Mother” — Jason Segel, Alyson Hannigan and Neil Patrick Harris — Mr. Radnor, 42, was largely unknown before the show’s premiere in 2005. Fame was an adjustment (“There’s stuff that comes along with it that’s really nutty,” he said), and while he is grateful for the series, he found himself “actively depressed” by the end of the second season.
Talking about all this, Mr. Radnor worried that he would seem “spiritually pretentious.” But in three hours at the Rubin, he came across as thoughtful and genuinely searching — a digressive, intellectually curious conversationalist, and easygoing once the camera was gone.
Raised in a suburb of Columbus, Ohio, he was educated at an Orthodox day school. Consulting sacred texts makes sense to him.
Aaron Port, his character in “The Babylon Line,” knows that unmoored feeling. Most of the play is set in 1967, when Aaron, a New York writer with a desultory career, reverse-commutes to Levittown, Long Island, to teach an adult-education class. His much older self narrates the play, letting the audience know that Aaron will later flourish. But in 1967, he can’t see that his misery is temporary.
After the sitcom ended in 2014, he quickly returned to the stage, in a developmental production of “The Babylon Line” at New York Stage and Film in Poughkeepsie, then in Ayad Akhtar’s Pulitzer-winning “Disgraced” on Broadway.
Lately he has been trying, as an artist, to make his favorite things. Thus the songs he has been writing with his friend Ben Lee, a musician, for their coming album, “Love Songs for God & Women.” Thus also “The Seeker,” the dialogue-free movie he shot last year with the band Cloud Cult.
A film he acted in this year, “ _______ People,” poses a slight obstacle with its unprintable title, which he’s hoping will be changed. He gave up swearing a while back, bothered by what he called the “resonance of negativity” in the words.
As for his own movies — two so far that he has written, directed and starred in — the adverse reviews for the first, “Happythankyoumoreplease” (2011), are still a tender subject. He attributes the critical response in part to the fact that he was a sitcom actor directing a film. 
His second movie, “Liberal Arts” (2012), did better, and found a fond defender in Roger Ebert. In both films, Mr. Radnor said, the central tension is “between trying to be something in the world” and trying to “get better at being yourself a little bit.” That is, of course, their author’s ongoing dilemma.
He intends to direct more of his own screenplays and has begun writing plays, one of which, “Sacred Valley,” had a reading at New York Stage and Film this summer. He also sold a book of essays, which he now needs to write.
He questions how much he wants to continue to act, wondering if writer-director is the more adult occupation. He also believes, though, that he has returned to the theater a wiser actor than when he started there.
And that’s a plus?
