175 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers. Paper, $15.99.
Kathleen Collins’s short story collection, “Whatever Happened to Interracial Love?” opens with a monologue. An unnamed director is giving instructions to someone — a stagehand? a cinematographer? — on how to light a room in which two lovers are suffering the demise of their relationship. The last line is this: “Leave her in the shadow while she looks for the feelings that lit up the room.” This three-page section, titled “Exteriors,” can hardly be considered a story; it is more like a voyeuristic passage through which the reader can oscillate between being emotionally invested in and distant from matters of love. Collins toys with human beings as shadows, who fade in and out of one another’s lives, and she carefully depicts how abandonment and attachment can be two sides of the same experience.
This collection of previously unpublished short fiction is long overdue. Collins, who died of breast cancer in 1988 at the young age of 46, was a playwright, educator, activist and among the first African-American women to make a feature film, the comic drama “Losing Ground.” With “Whatever Happened to Interracial Love?” she weaves what seem to be autobiographical details into her fiction. In “How Does One Say,” Collins makes use of her Sorbonne education and French proficiency to write about a young black girl who establishes a rapport with the professor of a French immersion program in Maine. In the title story, two activist lovers — a black woman and a white man — are struggling to reconcile their relationship with their familial obligations. The lovers met while encouraging others to vote in the South; Collins, for her part, joined the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and helped with its efforts to register voters in Georgia.
Collins truly understands her characters in all of their ambivalence and complexity, and she shows how respectability politics governs many of their lives, with devastating effects. “I was the first colored woman he ever seriously considered loving,” the narrator says in “Stepping Back.” “The first one with class, style, poetry, taste, elegance, repartee and haute cuisine. Because, you know, a colored woman with class is still an exceptional creature.” She sounds so confident, so sure of herself, yet later on she is unable to make love, because such physical intimacy would strip away all her affectations: “How could I occupy the splendid four-poster bed? Tastefully enough.” A widower in another story mourns for his late wife and laments their tough history. “Nobody in that family wanted Lillie to marry me,” he tells his daughter. “I was too dark, I didn’t have any money and I wasn’t a teacher.” While racism and colorism are always present, they infuse the stories rather than dominate them, affecting how the characters judge each other and themselves. Collins focuses on black people whose esteem for one another is based on their proximity to whiteness, despite white people being kept in the background for almost the entirety of the book.
There is an impressive balance of candidness and lyricism in these stories, which convey how platonic and romantic love can either sink to the depths of cruelty or soar as high as any imagination can stretch. Collins enriches this exploration by switching among different perspectives — whether it’s the first person (“Documentary Style”), a conversation formatted like a script (“When Love Withers All of Life Cries”), the third-person (“Only Once”) or the voices of two people reflecting on the same story (“Interiors”) — suggesting that no single consciousness has a monopoly on the truth when it comes to something as dizzying as relationships. It is with these different kinds of interiority that Collins shows the vastness of emotion, making a reader aware that nothing ever stays the same, that someone can be here today and gone tomorrow and that memories of relationships past can pulsate with the same amount of force as the present. Collins was a contemporary of Alice Walker and Jamaica Kincaid, and we should make room for her in the literary canon; “Whatever Happened to Interracial Love?” is evidence that this space would be much deserved.