NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. — On Thursday, at precisely 9 a.m., virtually every front office executive in baseball, as well as scores of scouts, agents and most writers covering the sport, gathered in an enormous banquet hall at the Gaylord Hotel.
They came together for the Rule 5 draft, a unique and rapid-fire event on the baseball calendar, where most of the nonuniformed decision makers in baseball assemble in one room for about half an hour on the final morning of the winter meetings, pick players most people have never heard of and then sprint headlong for the airport for their journeys home.
After more than three dizzying days of trade talks, negotiations, bluffs, rumors, signings and actual trades, the Rule 5 draft is the unofficial closing ceremony of the winter meetings. It’s a bit like the finale of the Olympics, but without the laser shows, extravagant costumes and lavish dance routines.
There is a smidgen of suspense about who gets taken, but for many in the sport, the event is more like an annual social mixer to enjoy before jostling for a cab in the hotel driveway.
The room is set up with a podium at its front, and 30 tables with four or five representatives from each team. Behind that setup is seating for scouts, major league officials, agents and reporters. But since the event is so brief, many stand at the perimeter, close to the doors, some with their suitcases at the ready.
In existence since 1903, the Rule 5 draft allows teams to select players from the farm systems of other clubs who are not on those teams’ 40-man rosters. The players must have been in the minor leagues for four or five years, depending on how old they were when they signed, without any major league service time.
It is a gamble because the team selecting the player must pay $100,000 (it was $50,000 until the recent collective bargaining agreement) to the player’s former organization and then keep the player on its 25-man major league roster for the entire coming season and pay him the minimum major league salary ($535,000 in 2017). If the team does not keep the player on its roster, it must offer him back to his former organization for $50,000.
Most players chosen in the Rule 5 draft amount to little. A handful become useful major leaguers, and a tiny collection become superstars. Perhaps the most famous was Roberto Clemente, the Hall of Fame outfielder who was plucked out of the Brooklyn Dodgers’ system by the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1954.
George Bell, the 1987 American League most valuable player, was a Rule 5 selection, as was Willie Hernandez, the 1984 American League Cy Young winner and M.V.P., and R. A. Dickey, who won the National League Cy Young Award with the Mets in 2012.
Johan Santana was taken by the Florida Marlins from the Houston Astros’ Class A affiliate in 1999 and was immediately traded to the Minnesota Twins for Jared Camp. Camp never played in the majors, but Santana won two A.L. Cy Young Awards for the Twins and threw the Mets’ only no-hitter.
Peter Greenberg, Santana’s agent, was delighted that his client was selected because it meant he would get a chance to pitch in the big leagues and get a year of service time.
It was part of a string of five straight years when Greenberg and his brother Ed had players selected at the top of the Rule 5 draft, including the former Mets outfielder Endy Chavez.
On Thursday, three of their players were taken, including Kevin Gadea, whom the Rays obtained from the Seattle Mariners’ Class A team.
One of the boldest Rule 5 selections came in 2006, when the Cincinnati Reds took a gamble on Josh Hamilton, who was the first overall pick of the June 1999 amateur draft, by Tampa Bay. Drug addiction and related problems ruined Hamilton’s early career, and he was out of baseball for four years before playing 15 games for Tampa Bay’s Class A Bakersfield team in 2006.
That was enough for the Reds, who paid the Cubs $100,000 to draft Hamilton with the second pick and transfer him to Cincinnati. Hamilton later made five All-Star teams and was named the 2010 A.L. M.V.P. for the Texas Rangers.
The idea to draft Hamilton came from Chris Buckley, the Reds’ scouting director, who suggested it to Wayne Krivsky, the Reds’ general manager then.
In one case, a pick was traded for a pitching coach, though few knew it at the time. In 2003 the Mets sent their pick to the Oakland Athletics for a player to be named later, as Jim Duquette, then the Mets’ general manager, explained it. But the real focus of the deal was Rick Peterson, who was allowed to leave the A’s to become the Mets’ pitching coach. Duquette could not even remember the name of the player involved.
Thursday’s draft lasted only 25 minutes from the first pick to the last, a mere blink of an eye compared to the N.F.L. draft, a made-for-television event that stretches over three days.
Only teams that have space on their 40-man roster can take players in the major league phase of the Rule 5 draft. Some teams, like the Kansas City Royals and the St. Louis Cardinals, unwilling to take the financial risk, simply passed. Only 18 players were picked in the major league phase Thursday, which took only 11 minutes.
There were 39 players selected in the Class AAA phase (those players are assigned to minor league rosters, and the selecting team must pay $24,000). The entire event was over by 9:35 a.m., at which point most of the general managers did end-of-meetings interviews. Very few questions were about the Rule 5 draft.
The Yankees’ system was strip-mined of a staggering seven players — including the former first-round pick Tyler Hensley — and they picked up two in the minor league phase. But General Manager Brian Cashman was peppered with questions about his signing of Aroldis Chapman.
