238 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers. $27.99.
To ESPN fans and New Yorkers the story of Dewey Bozella will be familiar. An amateur boxer imprisoned for two and a half decades for a murder he didn’t commit, Bozella, freed in 2009, was the network’s 2011 Arthur Ashe Courage Award winner. He was also the subject of a subsequent documentary that chronicled his dream of being allowed into the ring for a professional bout as a free man.
“Stand Tall” revisits this journey and more, taking readers deep inside an engrossing narrative that is equal parts inspiration and heartbreak.
“I’ve been a case number for most of my life,” Bozella begins. “Foster care, at-risk programs, welfare checks.” His father, Harry (whom Bozella secretly called Dirty Harry), was a violent, sporadic presence.  At 9, he watched his father pummel his mother for the last time, her death marking the end of childhood for him and his five siblings.
Shuffled through group homes and foster care, Bozella dropped out of high school (no surprise there) and embarked on a life of stealing, smoking marijuana, drinking and gambling. His first sentence was 16 months in juvenile detention for stealing a stereo by sticking his finger in a potato chip bag and pretending it was a gun.
But his discovery of boxing lights a path forward, as he rides his bike to an old barn that has been converted into a center for at-risk youth on the heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson’s chicken farm in New Paltz. The makeshift gym becomes everything to Bozella, who for a blissful time trains with the heart of a champion.
Until that too falls apart: In 1983, Bozella is arrested and convicted for the murder of 92-year-old Emma Crapser and sentenced to 20 years to life at Sing Sing prison.
“Stand Tall” is as much a celebration of one man’s tenacious spirit as it is an indictment of the criminal justice and foster care systems. In prison Bozella hungrily completes degrees and certificates, from food services to peer counseling to theology. He becomes a certified paralegal and files motions on his case “all the way up to the U.S. Supreme Court.” He writes to Congress and to the NAACP. He copies out motivational books and makes five‑, 10- and 20-year plans. He even studies Japanese and Arabic.
By the time the Innocence Project arrives on the scene — after Bozella has written to them every week for four years — he’s been wrongfully convicted by an all-white jury, received a retrial and then, unbelievably, convicted again. In fact, his first attorney was so disillusioned by the decision that he gave up criminal law entirely.
At 52, Bozella wins his only professional bout, thanks to the patronage of Oscar De La Hoya, and to Bozella’s wife, Trena, whom he married 13 years into his sentence. And he receives a $7.5 million settlement (half of which will go to taxes) from Dutchess County, although even today, prosecutors refuse to admit wrongdoing.
