Opinion|What Will Happen to Abortion in the Trump Era?
What Will Happen to Abortion in the Trump Era?
The increasing difficulties that women are likely to face in getting an abortion make clear that two things will inevitably rise in response: More women, denied access because of distance and cost of travel, lodging and so on, will try to self-abort, and many will be permanently injured as result; and there will be increased pressure for women to carry to term and give up their babies for adoption.
The short-term reaction to such a loss is expected, but the long-term consequences for a mother to lose a child to adoption are nothing short of disastrous. Poor grief resolution for a great many women leads to lasting trauma that exhibits itself as a psychiatric diagnosis for depression, low self-esteem and self-punishment, difficulty in giving and receiving love, as well as a decreased likelihood of ever having another child.
In other words, the trauma of losing one child to adoption deters a goodly percentage of women from ever having another.
In large part, we — I am one of those women — do go on with our lives, but not without deep psychological consequences that affect our lives in myriad ways. Not only did I never have another child, I never see a child with a mother without immediately assessing to my own satisfaction whether the two are related by blood, or if an adoption was part of the story.
No credible research finds that an abortion leads to such life-altering, encompassing and cataclysmic reactions.
We weren’t surprised by a study that found that abortion has little effect on the mental health of women and indeed that barriers to abortion probably pose bigger emotional and psychological effects. But we were disappointed that news reports of the study did not note the disparate effect of barriers to abortion on minority women and immigrant and low-income women.
A federal ban on taxpayer funding is among the many hurdles that many minority women and immigrant and low-income women must overcome to get a legal abortion. This study is further proof that such funding restrictions imperil women’s health in addition to violating women’s rights.
Legal, accessible abortion improves and protects women’s mental and physical health. That alone is cause to repeal the federal Hyde Amendment and all other funding restrictions on abortion.
