Even as Ridgewood, Queens, undergoes rapid transformations as one of New York’s neighborhoods du jour, Rudy’s Bakery and Cafe, on Seneca Avenue, remains loyal to its old-school identity. The soda-shop signage and unflashy storefront seem to be working just fine for this 82-year-old business.
“We’ve never changed anything,” Antonetta Binanti, whose family bought the business 36 years ago, said of the shop’s décor. Actually, there will be a slight change in the coming weeks: A wobbly front-door hinge will be replaced for the first time.
The awning bears the inscription “konditorei” — bakery in German, the language and ethnicity of the shop’s founders. Plenty of classic German baked goods are still offered daily, like apple strudel ($3) and blueberry crumb turnovers ($3.50), as well as seasonal offerings like stollen (sweet bread embedded with dried fruit, popular at Christmas) or pfeffernüsse (spice cookies).
“We still have the old recipes,” said Ms. Binanti, 55, referring to the German pastries. “I’ve just added onto them.” Which is to say: The traditional recipes stay untouched, while new treats are constantly being developed, sampled and sold.
The source of the innovative baking efforts is the head chef, Cristina Nastasi, an alumna of the French Culinary Institute and the Danny Meyer-run cafes at the Museum of Modern Art. Born on Menahan Street, just steps away from the shop, Ms. Nastasi, 32, a Ridgewood native, worked behind the counter in high school and has even folded “sugar” into her email address. Her signature item is the best-selling oatmeal marshmallow cookie — soft oatmeal cookies sandwiching a generous dollop of fluff. Like everything there, they are prepared from scratch and baked on the premises.
Newer menu additions include alfajores ($3), confections with dulce de leche squeezed between a pair of cookies, then rolled on their edges along coconut flakes; and guava sticks ($2), which pack a touch of the tropics into every flaky, fruity bite. For savory taste buds, there are egg-and-croissant breakfast sandwiches ($6 and up).
Menus can go stale, so offerings change seasonally, monthly, weekly, daily and, often, according to personal whim.
Christopher Bryan, a regular customer recovering from a knee injury, hobbled in on crutches. For the past month or so, he has stopped by after his physical therapy sessions. “You can tell that everything is made fresh,” he said. In a quiet corner, writing partners worked on their screenplay while a schoolgirl focused on her homework.
Pop by often enough, and it won’t matter whether you are a freshly minted fan or a third-generation patron; you will be greeted by name. It also works the other way around, with personal friends and longtime fans showing up unannounced, asking for Ms. Binanti or Ms. Nastasi.
And since Ms. Binanti has been in the neighborhood longer than almost any broker, off-menu requests tend to involve real estate. “People come back to me, and tell me that they’re looking for an apartment,” she said. She obliges when she can.
In the recipe for longevity, the key ingredient might very well be innovation.