WASHINGTON — Just weeks before leaving office, President Obama on Monday issued 78 pardons and commuted the sentences of 153 prisoners, extending his acts of clemency to a total of 1,324 individuals, one of the larger uses of the presidential power to show mercy in modern presidential history.
Of the 231 people who received a pardon or a reduced sentence from Mr. Obama, virtually all had been serving sentences under tough antidrug laws, including those convicted of low-level, nonviolent crimes like possession of cocaine.
Those who received pardons had completed their sentences and are, in the words of Neil Eggleston, the White House counsel, now leading “a productive and law-abiding post-conviction life, including by contributing to the community in a meaningful way.” The pardons wipe away any legal liabilities from a conviction.
Commutations are different. They typically shorten the sentences of people in prison, often by many years, but do not eliminate a conviction or restore rights lost, such as the right to vote. In many cases, the people selected to have their sentences commuted have participated in drug treatment, or educational or vocational technology courses while in prison.
One example: Anthony DeWayne Gillis of Supply, Va., was convicted in 2005 of possessing cocaine, making false statements and possessing a firearm in “furtherance of drug trafficking.” He was sentenced to 145 years in prison. Mr. Obama’s grant of commutation reduces the sentence to 20 years.
All presidents have the power to commute sentences and pardon people for past acts. But Mr. Obama’s use of the power far exceeds many of his predecessors.
The Constitution grants a president the power to issue “pardons for offenses against the United States” or to reduce the length of federal sentences in prison.
Since taking office, Mr. Obama has commuted the sentences of more than 1,000 people — more than 50 times the number of people whose sentences were commuted by President George W. Bush and more than the past 11 presidents combined.
White House officials have said that Mr. Obama will continue to review applications for clemency until his final day in office, suggesting that his record will be extended.
The president has said he has been motivated to exercise his clemency power by a belief that the sentencing system in the United States was used to lock up minor criminals — often minorities — for excessively long periods of time.
Tens of thousands of inmates, mostly young African-American or Hispanic men, were locked up in the effort to combat drug violence during the past three decades. Many of those men were sentenced under federal guidelines that required them to serve decades or longer in prison.
During the past several years, a bipartisan coalition emerged to overhaul that system. The unlikely allies included conservatives like Charles G. and David H. Koch, the billionaire brothers, and the Center for American Progress, a liberal advocacy organization with close connections to Hillary Clinton.
But hopes for a legislative deal to overhaul the nation’s sentencing system failed to materialize during the bitter 2016 presidential campaign. That left Mr. Obama with one option: to use his clemency power case by case.
After the White House publicized the president’s desire to use his clemency power, more than 30,000 convicts applied for relief. That required setting up a process by which Mr. Obama’s lawyers could sift through the requests and make recommendations.
In response, several advocacy groups — including the American Civil Liberties Union, the American Bar Association and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers — formed a consortium called the Clemency Project, to help screen applicants.
Many law firms joined the effort, assigning lawyers to evaluate the clemency applications and to forward deserving cases on to the White House. Violent offenders or those who otherwise did not meet the criteria set out by the Justice Department were set aside. Others were forwarded to government lawyers for review and, potentially, onto the president.
It is unclear whether President-elect Donald J. Trump will continue the practice of using pardons and commutations to address the sentencing issue. As a tough-on-crime candidate, it seems unlikely.
Some Republican lawmakers may renew bipartisan efforts to overhaul sentencing laws, which would give the new president an opportunity to confront the issue without turning to his clemency power, at least initially.
And some presidents — like Mr. Obama — have waited until the end of their presidencies before issuing pardons and making grants of commutation.