The New York theater talked back this year — to its audiences, to a nation, to the world. This new boldness made international headlines when a cast member of the blockbuster musical “Hamilton” (still dominating Broadway more than a year after its opening) addressed an audience member from the stage during curtain calls — one Mike Pence, the vice president-elect — on the importance of honoring his country’s diversity.
But in theaters throughout this city, other productions were issuing similar pleas, more obliquely perhaps but just as resonantly. To grasp the force and complexity of what was being said, you needed only to bring your ears and eyes to the theater and to keep them — and your mind — wide open.
The credo in each case was pretty much the same: “Attention must be paid,” to again quote that well-worn but enduringly urgent line from Arthur Miller’s “Death of a Salesman.” In a year that saw the most divisive presidential election in living memory, the New York theater asked us to refocus and listen — really listen — to how we talked about race, sexuality, the demonization of others (as in Ivo van Hove’s radically reimagined Broadway revival of Miller’s “The Crucible”) and even, in the case of Richard Nelson’s beautiful cycle of “Gabriels” plays at the Public Theater, about the election itself.
In the list that follows, I have limited myself to productions that made us rethink not only their subjects but also how we experience theater itself. (That means not including a nigh-perfect and delicious revival like the Roundabout Theater Company production of “She Loves Me.”) Plays as different as Sarah DeLappe’s “The Wolves” (with its frenzied, overlapping dialogue), Simon McBurney’s “The Encounter” (with its sophisticated manipulation of sound) and Adam Bock’s “A Life” (with its thunderous silences) all asked us to retune our ears.
Lucre-minded Broadway made room for precedent-smashing productions that jiggered and blurred the senses, including not only “The Crucible” and “The Encounter” but also the triumphantly transplanted “Natasha, Pierre & the Great Comet of 1812,” Dave Malloy’s ecstatic musical adaptation of a part of “War and Peace” (which appeared on my best-of-the-year list for 2013 in its Off Broadway incarnation).
A scene from Sarah DeLappe’s new play, at the Duke on 42nd Street.
The year just passed, or soon to pass anyway, has been inspiring, both on Broadway and off. As if speaking to the contentiousness of the election, it has also been a theatrical year rich in diversity, offering unexpected combinations and a welcome dose of topicality. The finest musicals, in particular, did not fall into familiar formulas.
