Pork-and-Chive DumplingsCredit...Gentl and Hyers for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Amy Wilson.
At her home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, Helen You made dumplings and told her children stories about growing up in China. About how when she was a little girl, she would visit her father — their grandfather — in a prison, far from home, on an island that turned pitch dark after sundown.
Just before You was born in Tianjin in 1963, her father was sent to a labor camp for speaking out against corruption in the government. The family’s home was marked with a sign, indicating their status as dissidents. Once a week, You had to stand on a stage with her mother and listen to her neighbors tell them all the reasons her family was “bad.” “I couldn’t make friends at school or go out for fun,” You says.
By her mother’s side, You washed greens, fried eggs, chopped vegetables. She rolled fresh dumpling wrappers with extra-thin edges, so that the folded dough would form a delicate ruffle instead of a thick lump. As she got the hang of it, she pinched dumplings shut with beautiful, even folds, the sheer dough gathered like a doll’s pleated skirt.
When You was 12, her mother told her that she was old enough to make the trip to visit her father on her own, if she wanted. The labor camp had no running water or electricity, and the trip to the upper Yangtze River would take many hours. But during summer vacation, You woke up extra early to wrap pork-and-chive dumplings, boiling them until they rushed up to the surface of the water and their thin skins turned almost translucent. She packed these in a steel box, clamped shut with a wire, and carried them alone on the bus that took her to the train station, where she caught a train south toward the mountains, and found a boat that would row her across to the island. When she arrived with her care package, her father was there, on a bicycle, to meet her at the shore.
You moved to the United States in her mid-20s and worked for years as an international tax analyst, taking the elevator up and down a glass skyscraper in Midtown. When her mind wandered, though, it was often toward dumplings and all their glorious deviations. Sweet shrimp and cucumber. Lamb and zucchini, licked with an infusion of toasted Sichuan peppercorns. Chewy rehydrated octopus and chive. Chopped salmon mixed with a lavish amount of fresh dill.
A decade ago, You took her chances on a tiny stall in Flushing, Queens, which she called the Tianjin Dumpling House. Then she opened Dumpling Galaxy, a grander restaurant nearby that serves more than 100 varieties of dumplings out of an airy stainless-steel kitchen that she designed herself.
As a chef, You is a joy-seeking tinkerer who tweaks and edits her work every time she is driven by a new idea. She is not a purist: Her chicken-and-broccoli dumplings reconfigure the familiar flavors of Chinese-American stir-fry, even making use of the crunchy stems. And much of You’s work is ephemeral, off-the-menu stuff that comes and goes in a flash of genius — diaphanous lamb-and-squash soup dumplings, full of piping-hot fatty juices, appeared just before Thanksgiving. Of sweet pumpkin-sesame dumplings, You said, “I just wondered what would happen if I dropped these in hot oil, instead of boiling them.” Something wonderful happened: The dumpling puffed up and went crisp-edged and golden, with a hot, melting core of black sesame.
One classic Chinese dumpling on You’s menu does not change; it’s the delicious pork-and-chive she carried to her father, simple and satisfying to make at home. You offers a recipe for it in her forthcoming book, “The Dumpling Galaxy Cookbook” (written with Max Falkowitz). The filling is a mix of ground pork with chopped garlic chives, grated ginger and soy sauce. Chinese rice wine is traditional, but You prefers to splash the pork with a bit of sherry instead, for its meaty sweetness. That’s it; the filling is ready.
“Wrappers are part of the beauty of dumplings,” You said. And good boiled dumplings require soft, homemade wrappers of flour and water, kneaded together until smooth. You slips an egg white into the mix too, which gives the dough the strength it needs to survive a hard, fast boil. For beginners, it does take some time to roll these wrappers by hand. And then, to pinch each one shut and repair any holes torn in the process. But the result is hot, fresh, tender dumplings, and even if they don’t look as perfect as You’s, they can still carry a taste of home.
