Most car owners who live in the two-story rowhouses and duplexes along 86th Street opposite the Dyker Heights Golf Course in Brooklyn face the same parking shortages as many other city drivers.
But in December, when the neighborhood swells with visitors drawn to the ornate Christmas decorations adorning house after house, the parking problems — just like the holiday lights — grow larger than life.
Now things have gotten even worse: A monthlong parking ban, affecting most nights on two blocks of the south side of 86th Street, has just been instituted.
The restrictions — forbidding parking from 5 p.m. to 11 p.m., Thursday through Sunday — were posted late last month onto locust trees on the Street. They were a gift from the Police Department.
The parking spaces are being cleared to make room for the tour buses that haul thousands of visitors from outside the city to behold the wonders of the neighborhood, called Dyker Lights by some. Residents, meanwhile, are adding street parking to their holiday wish lists.

She wondered when her friends and relatives from out of state would be visiting during the holidays.
“Where are they gonna go?” she said, referring to where they might find parking.
Josephine Beckmann, the district manager for Community Board 10, said she was “taken aback” by the outcry from residents. She said she had helped shape the parking plan with the police in response to complaints last year about the dangerous chaos that resulted from tour buses cruising around with no designated drop-off spots.
Nikolaos Kostopoulos, who lives on 86th Street, said he had a tour bus block his driveway last year. He is much happier with this year’s arrangement.
“With 15 buses coming every night, it’s a good idea,” Mr. Kostopoulos, 72, a retired electrician, said.
But when the police announced a prohibition around Thanksgiving this year, complaints posted on social media took off.
“It’s annoying,” said George Alexander, 33, a construction worker who pulled his sedan out of the new bus-only zone late Friday afternoon. He added that he expected to “pretty much do laps” all month, driving around looking for parking spots.
Adding insult to injury, the disputed blocks of 86th Street sat mostly empty of cars and buses on Friday evening. Ms. Beckmann, from the community board, said the number of tour buses surged last year, especially in late December.
Paulo Pesce, 72, a food importer, said he started hiring a contractor 10 years ago to decorate the large lawn outside his chandelier-filled home. Since then, he has observed some of his neighbors work to keep up, as his audience of tourists grows.
The Police Department said in a statement that it was prepared to manage all the visitors to Dyker Heights.
“There will be an adequate police detail in place to help with pedestrian and vehicular traffic,” an email from the department said.
Wrapping his front yard bushes on 86th Street with a simple strand of blue Christmas lights, Frank Monferrato, 53, tried to make peace with his neighborhood’s mixed Christmas blessing.
