The Obama administration’s sanctions on Russia for meddling in our election put Donald Trump in a very difficult position. If Mr. Trump still wants to be friendly with Russia, he is playing right into its hands and becoming Russia’s patsy.
If Russia ends up undermining and manipulating us once again, it will make Mr. Trump look like a weak, foolish and naïve president and could end up severely damaging American interests.
The sanctions are more of a message to Mr. Trump than to President Vladimir Putin, to show that Russia can’t be trusted.
While I applaud President Obama for enforcing sanctions against Vladimir Putin and the Russian hackers, I think there must also be harsh financial sanctions. Why aren’t known Russian assets in the United States frozen? Merely kicking spies or alleged spies out of our country and closing compounds isn’t enough. Mr. Putin must be made to feel the full weight of our government’s and citizens’ disapproval of his actions.
No person or potential political candidate should feel threatened by such a preventable act as hacking. I implore our intelligence and security services to work together for the common good, and for our government to seek avenues of repudiation so egregious they make prospective hackers recoil from future criminal activities.
Donald Trump’s cavalier and almost bored response to Russian cyberattacks should raise a big red flag for every American regardless of party. This isn’t something we should “move on” from. This is serious stuff. A hostile foreign government successfully interfered in our national election.
Why aren’t Americans marching in the streets, demanding to know exactly how and why this happened? Why did it take Republican politicians many months, until just now, to take this seriously? It is very, very serious and yet much of the country has been asleep at the wheel.
I plead with every American of every stripe to demand information and evidence about why Russia’s goal was to help Donald Trump get elected and hurt Hillary Clinton. We must demand an investigation into Mr. Trump’s bizarre alignment with Vladimir Putin. If this has been investigated by our intelligence agencies, we as American citizens must see the information they have discovered.
Have Mr. Trump’s relentless abhorrent words, deeds and Twitter inanities so deeply distracted us that we have forgotten who we are?
It appears as though President-elect Donald Trump is on a collision course with two powerful and politically savvy members of the Republican Party, Senators John McCain and Lindsey Graham. During the campaign Mr. Trump said that Mr. McCain was “not a war hero,” and he publicly released Mr. Graham’s cellphone number. Now these two senators are calling for a thorough investigation into the possibility that Russian hacking interfered with an American election.
So far Mr. Trump’s response has been that of the police officer trying to discourage public attention: “Nothing to see here, folks. Just move along.” He claims that sooner or later he’ll find the time to get a complete briefing from the intelligence community, so that he can learn the truth. But until that time don’t worry, because he’s working on the real big things that confront our great nation. Plus the Russian hacking is so yesterday’s news.
My guess is that Senators McCain and Graham have already found the time to talk to the right people in the intelligence community, and they already know the truth about the Russian hacking, and the truth is not good.
