The Times has used drones to give readers a sky-view perspective on some of the year’s most visual stories, from China’s rapidly growing deserts to a secretive island of graves in New York City. Here are some of our favorite stories told by drones in 2016.
We braved sandstorms and a broken four-by-four to capture the visual story of how people living on the edges of the country’s vast sands are being displaced by climate change. After shooting drone video of a child playing on the dunes, we flew the drone out over the sand so readers could watch the desert stretch all the way to the horizon. Read more about the reporting journey here.
Construction of the new Panama Canal, an artery nourishing the world economy, did not go as planned. Using a drone, we brought readers to the new canal and gave them the sense of scale of this huge infrastructure project. The drone allowed us to reveal safety risks and hazards discovered by our investigative reporters after months of digging.
Bolivia’s second-largest lake had long been vulnerable. Climate change was the final blow.
The lake bed was too soft to drive on, so we used the drone to survey a very large expanse of it. The view gave readers a sense of the enormous scale of the lake that had dried up, and how its disappearance had threatened the lifeblood of the Uru-Murato people.
After being denied access to Hart Island — the potter’s field where New York City buries its unclaimed dead — we decided to try an air-based approach. Flying allowed us to show readers the burial process that the city wouldn’t let us witness: prison inmates stacking bodies three deep in pine boxes in unmarked trenches. The footage also uncovered an eerie and previously unknown hatch on the west coast of the island.
November was closing in. The presidential campaign had reached a fever pitch as both candidates made their closing arguments to voters. Reporters and the public struggled to keep up with the breakneck pace of political news. So we gave readers an opportunity to reflect on one of the most peaceful places in the United States, the Boundary Waters in northern Minnesota as the morning fog lifted.