SANTA MONICA, Calif. — As anyone who has been to a movie theater knows, a lot of seats are usually empty. Add up those empties over the course of a year, according to Atom Tickets, a start-up based here, and more than 5 billion seats go unsold annually at North American multiplexes.
How can theaters fill just 1 percent of that inventory, resulting in hundreds of millions (if not billions) of dollars in added box office and concessions revenue?
Atom, a movie ticketing app and website, has made solving that puzzle its mission — and, as it seeks to increase its user base over the busy holiday film season, it has secured backing from three Hollywood heavyweights: J. J. Abrams, Tyler Perry and Steven Spielberg. The men have agreed to join Atom’s advisory board. Mr. Abrams and Mr. Perry are also stakeholders; Atom would not say whether Mr. Spielberg had become an investor.
Even with its new pitchmen, Atom faces an entrenched competitor in Fandango, which NBCUniversal owns. Fandango, known for its playful marketing campaigns, has been the longtime leader in online movie ticketing and continues to grow, in part by embedding its ticket-selling technology into Facebook and Snapchat feeds. Fandango, which services about 28,000 domestic movie screens, is also focused on international growth.
“The market needed shaking up,” said Matthew Bakal, Atom’s chairman, noting that even Universal Pictures, a corporate cousin to Fandango, recently contacted Atom to discuss a potential promotional partnership.
Atom, which has $60 million in funding from Lions Gate, 20th Century Fox and Disney, also learns which theaters users tend to frequent and with whom, allowing people to easily extend digital invitations to friends and family members for future group outings. Because Atom facilitates payment splitting among multiple people, “one poor goat isn’t stuck buying tickets for everyone,” as Mr. Paleja put it.
The start-up has also made group discounts, particularly for less popular showtimes, part of its mission, along with concession stand pre-orders. Merchandise is another component. Starting last week, anyone using Atom to buy tickets to “Rogue One: A Star Wars Story,” set for release by Disney on Dec. 16, could also buy exclusive products tied to the film, including sweatshirts and T-shirts. Down the road, Atom plans to sell toys, music and games related to various films.
Free to download, Atom collects a surcharge on ticket sales. Studios can also hire it to promote certain films.
Hollywood could use the help. As entertainment options have proliferated, theater admissions in North America, despite a growing population, have been roughly flat. Last year, 1.32 billion tickets were sold in the United States and Canada, a bit up from the year before, but down from the 10-year high of 1.42 billion in 2009, according to the Motion Picture Association of America.
Atom had hoped that its app would result in a 2 to 5 percent increase in ticket sales and concession orders for its theater partners. Early results indicate that some theaters have instead seen “double-digit percentage growth,” Mr. Bakal said. More than 80 percent of Atom users are 18 to 39.
Mr. Paleja, who previously worked at Amazon, where he helped introduce Prime Instant Video, said he hopes that the megaphones offered by Mr. Spielberg, Mr. Abrams and Mr. Perry will result in more growth.
