After another take, Mr. Daniels crooned, “Cruella de Vil, Cruella de Vil,” gleefully comparing the supermodel-turned-actress’s haughty, villainous performance to the infamous “101 Dalmatians” character. As both boss and head cheerleader, he was in his element.
Mr. Daniels, though not officially directing that day in mid-December, was overseeing the filming of his new Fox series, “Star,” about a girl group clawing its way through Atlanta’s booming music universe. Ms. Campbell’s scene, a showdown between two disparate matriarchs over the fate of a young woman caught between worlds — after an episode of police brutality — had him charged up.
It’s exactly that blend of finger-on-the-pulse social consciousness and histrionic soap opera that has driven Mr. Daniels’s triumphs in film (“Precious,” “The Butler”) and television, where he scored big for Fox with the Shakespearean hip-hop melodrama “Empire,” beginning in 2015.
But while “Empire,” now in its third season, relies on bombast and opulence, with a plot twist every few scenes — “Dynasty” and “Dallas” by way of peak Puff Daddy and Bad Boy Records — “Star” finds its creator returning to his earlier, grimier palette, including foster homes and addiction, for a slightly more earthbound tale.
Yet instead of returning victoriously to movies, particularly a long-gestating Richard Pryor biopic, Mr. Daniels was persuaded to double down on another network show about the music business, despite the mixed results of recent programming — “Vinyl,” “Atlanta,” “The Get Down” — set in the record industry. “My boyfriend said, ‘On TV, more people will appreciate your work, even if it’s not as potent, than on any film you ever do,’” Mr. Daniels recalled.
“Star,” which addresses Black Lives Matter and transgender issues in the first episode, also comes at a loaded moment politically. Mr. Daniels assumed, as he was sketching the 13-episode first season, that Hillary Clinton would win the presidency. He imagined the show’s diverse girl group — one poor and white, one rich and black, one of mixed race — as an imperfect yet inspiring portrait of racial unity and healing.
“I was going to hit you with stings of ‘this is what’s going on in the streets,’” Mr. Daniels said. Now, instead of ratcheting up the politics under the coming administration of President Donald J. Trump, “It’s really going to be more of a place of escape.” He cited 1960s sitcoms like “Bewitched” and “I Dream of Jeannie” as mass entertainment necessary in uncertain times.
Even if he hopes to avoid positioning “Star” as a protest show, though, it still has progressive, confrontational themes at its core — albeit expressed through Mr. Daniels’s idiosyncratic lens.
He found his girl in Jude Demorest, a tough-talking, all-purpose performer from Detroit, with a pile of bleach-blond ringlets and earrings the size of her face. The character, as written, “had all but her Social Security number,” Mr. Daniels said.
On the other hand, Mr. Daniels said he created Derek, the show’s young Black Lives Matter activist played by Quincy Brown, as a message to his son, who had recently left what Mr. Daniels called his Upper West Side “bubble” and began experiencing real-world racism.
The idea of using desperate, wily young women to tell a version of that story grew out of Mr. Daniels’s childhood love of “Dreamgirls,” which he said taught him that “we’re from the ’hood and we can still be fabulous.” Other influences included “Valley of the Dolls” and “Paris Is Burning,” both of which Mr. Daniels had considered remaking; Ms. Demorest also said that he told her to watch “Sweet Charity” and “Female Trouble” during the audition process.
“They only last for a few years — because they implode,” Mr. Daniels said, with delight, of girl groups. “That’s just the nature of the beast.” (In fact, Fifth Harmony would lose a member to a solo career not long after “Star” had its premiere.) Careful attention to group chemistry led Mr. Daniels and Fox to audition Ms. Demorest, Ms. Destiny and Ms. O’Grady about a dozen times, mostly as a unit, before choosing them for the roles.
He created “Star” with Tom Donaghy (“The Mentalist”), not his “Empire” co-creator Danny Strong, who also wrote “The Butler.” “I don’t think Danny would understand this world,” Mr. Daniels said. “This would not have been the right partnership for us, because of the specifics — it’s an underbelly.” Early episodes touch on sexual abuse, human trafficking and an assault of a transgender woman outside a strip club.
“Go out and do the work,” he fumed over oatmeal at his apartment. “Oscars so white! So what? Do your work. Let your legacy speak and stop complaining, man. Are we really in this for the awards?
