Does anyone actually believe in magic these days? Blame the Enlightenment. Blame Reddit. Whatever did it, nearly all of us now recognize magic as the work of expensive gadgetry, ordinary fraud and thousands of hours of solitary practice — time a magician might instead have spent bettering the world. Or at least meeting women.
Besides, in this political moment, who wants to feel bewitched, bothered and bamboozled?
Last week I saw two magic shows: Jason Bishop’s “Straight Up Magic” at the New Victory Theater and “The Illusionists: Turn of the Century” at the Palace Theater. The first was an introduction to conjuring for the elementary-school set and their credulous parents, the second a tribute to the legerdemain of times past. At each it was pleasant to murmur “How did he do that?” about something as anodyne as a spectacular levitation.
Mr. Bishop is a New Jersey native who taught himself magic from books while he shuffled from one foster home to the next. With his motorcycle jacket and frayed jeans, he cultivates a tough-guy persona. But he’s a nice kid trying to look like a mean one, his rebel-without-a-cape pose undercut by a goofy smile and some cheerful self-deprecation: “I can melt right through jail bars, but I can’t get my hands on ‘Hamilton’ tickets.” It’s also a relief to see a beautiful assistant (Kim Hess) favoring comfortable athleisure in place of spangled lingerie.
In a brief close-up routine, shared with the audience via live video, there’s real elegance and even wit in the precision of his gestures, the agility of each finger. But Mr. Bishop’s enthusiasm is for larger illusions, which he performs with only moderate bombast (though it wouldn’t kill him to mellow out his music cues). He can teleport his assistant, he can vaporize a dog, he can walk through a wall, he can escape a locked box, he can tell some pretty funny jokes about Chris Christie and Halloween candy. He can astound, especially if you’re one of the more junior audience members: “That’s not real!” gasped the 6-year-old pal I’d brought with me.
More gasping could be heard at “The Illusionists,” altogether a bigger, blingier and kitschier enterprise, but still a less grandiose occasion than the first two seasons of this ensemble evening. This time the enchanters favored the kinds of acts, and kinds of personal grooming, that were popular a century ago. This did not translate into scrupulous attention to historical accuracy — the evening begins with a videotaped sequence. It did, however, make for some nifty facial hair.
As music played, some live and some recorded, a few lavish set pieces unfurled, like a woman sawed in half (a fine trick accessorized with some graceless sex jokes) and an escape act featuring handcuffs, a burning rope and some very pointy spikes. This was performed by Jonathan Goodwin, the Daredevil, who later returned for a swell and far simpler bit with a bullwhip and a flower that apparently had it coming.
While the illusions were uniformly expert, several of the performers had a stilted, somewhat formal stage presence, like Rick Thomas, the Immortal, though his mustache was easily the evening’s winner, and Thommy Ten and Amélie van Tass, the Clairvoyants, who had a way of making even ordinary phrases sound odd and unidiomatic. “I can tell you have a sweet tooth,” Ms. van Tass said to an audience member faced with a dish of jelly beans. Then she had to repeat it. Their mind-reading act was top-notch, their patter a notch lower.
But the patter doesn’t really matter. That’s the thing about magic. Even when it’s performed with something less than perfect flair or fluency, even when we know it to be entirely fake, it accesses fantasies we all have — to flee, to fly, to see, to survive what seems impossible. You can dematerialize a beautiful assistant, sure, but try making those desires disappear. “Was that amazing?” Mr. Bishop asked at the close of a routine. “Sort of,” he answered himself. It was amazing enough.