The phrase “midseason finale” is television’s most egregious neologism. Essentially marketing-speak for “the last episode of the year before we take a few weeks off around the holidays, because we’re not just airing the whole season in a row the way cable shows do,” it carries with it an oxymoronic promise of finality. But this week’s “Empire” is the rare (sigh) midseason finale that lives up to the moniker. An effective wrap-up of a half season’s worth of story lines, it sets up the show to start anew next year, bigger and better.
They’ve rekindled their romance on stage with a kiss heard round the world. It may well be a publicity stunt to buoy the sales of their duet single and raise their respective profiles as insurance against the label’s upstart talents like Nessa and Freda Gatz. But actors Serayah and Bryshere Y. Gray play the moment as intriguingly ambiguous. It could be real, it could be fake, it could even be real for one and fake for the other. Tune in next year to find out!
The warring half brothers reach a new level of conflict when Tariq freezes Empire’s assets and Lucious responds by marching into F.B.I. headquarters to deliver their murdered father’s old Philadelphia police badge — a gift, he indicates, since Tariq never got to know the man himself. Tariq ultimately rejects the peace offering, but is that really what it was to begin with? After all, Lucious reveals the secret of their blood relationship to Tariq’s stunned Bureau colleagues, then maneuvers around the asset freeze with a cash infusion from Shyne, Tariq’s own informant. The long-simmering story line is now a lot closer to a boil.
There’s a marvelous sequence in which Jamal surrenders all his pills to his concerned mother, Cookie, who washes them down the kitchen sink. Later, though, she returns to his apartment and finds him vomiting and writhing from withdrawal. With his career on the line, she goes against every instinct she has as a mother, gets down on the floor with a set of tools, and wrenches open the pipe beneath the sink while wearing a couture dress in order to access the pills stuck inside.
With this chemical and maternal help, Jamal gets over his stage fright, but the cost to Cookie’s soul is tremendous … or it would have been, if she hadn’t staged an intervention and sent him to rehab the second he stepped offstage. Each twist and turn here creates a further complication of Cookie and Jamal’s mother-son relationship, and it’s impressive to watch it unfold.
Most promising of all is the continued grooming of Andre Lyon to become the show’s Big Bad. This involves tasking actor Trai Byers with a range of work to do. In one scene, he’s laid low by depression and has to tearfully accept the help offered to him by his new girlfriend, Nessa, while a hallucinated version of his late wife, Rhonda, harangues him in the background. In another, he begs the imaginary Rhonda to let him go while he sits alone on the beach, the sand and sea stretching vast around him. She agrees, but only if he promises to continue their plan to take over Empire and seek vengeance against Anika, the woman who murdered her and killed their unborn child. Andre makes the deal, and then throws his wedding ring into the ocean while watching the spectral woman depart. That’s a lot to deal with right there.
And that’s before we arrive at his apotheosis in the episode: his climactic conversation with Shyne, the gangster producer and mogul who’s been undermining Lucious’s Empire from within. Andre reveals that he’s on to Shyne’s snitching and double-dealing, but he’s not there to stop him — he’s there to take over the operation, with the murder of his own father as the endgame. As I’ve said all season, Andre is the first genuine threat to the throne that Lucious has faced in ages. He’s got the tools, he’s got the talent, and he’s got the newfound ruthlessness to go through with it.
It’s smart of the show to juxtapose Andre’s emergence as an arch-villain against one of Lucious’s moments of triumph. Lucious, too, has a wide array of business to attend to this episode, much of which centers on thwarting his romantic rival, the politician Angelo Dubois. In secret meetings with DuBois’s snobbish mother, Diana (Phylicia Rashad, an actress Terrence Howard is visibly delighted to be working with in their scenes together), he plots to stop an exposé of the politician in exchange for Diana’s help in breaking up Angelo and Cookie’s relationship.
His plans quickly start to go awry. During a triumphant comeback performance by Jamal at a fund-raiser that Cookie produces for her politician beau, Lucious glares from the sidelines as his son proves his predictions of disaster wrong — then flips immediately into the mode of genuinely concerned parent while all of Jamal’s loved ones surround him after the performance, insisting he go to rehab.
And yet, by the end, Lucious manages to come out on top, at least for now. When Diana refuses to make good on her end of the deal (turns out Cookie is good for Angelo’s poll numbers), Lucious pays her back by helping a reporter ambush the do-gooder politician with questions about his fatal Chappaquiddick-like drunken driving episode as a teenager. He walks away from the chaos with a handful of balloons he releases into the air, like a gleeful child without a care in the world. If Andre gets his way, though, that happiness won’t last.