Calling Peter Voulkos a ceramist is a bit like calling Jimi Hendrix a guitarist. The charismatic, rebellious sculptor and teacher was a genuine rock star of his medium, a trained potter who went on to violate every rule of pot-making — often before a live audience. His sculptures started out clearly enough as polite, wheel-thrown vessels but evolved into nervy and transgressive abstract paintings, looming behemoths fired in industrial-size kilns, precarious assemblages and live-wire performances (no ritual immolation but lots of smashing and dropping of plates and vases).
“Voulkos: The Breakthrough Years,” a taut, electric exhibition at the Museum of Arts and Design, shows us just how quickly and deftly Voulkos (1924-2002) reinvented ceramic art. It zooms in on 1953 to 1968, a pivotal decade and a half in American painting and sculpture — not just in New York but, as is less often recognized, on the West Coast, where Voulkos worked and taught (first at the Los Angeles County Art Institute, now known as the Otis College of Art and Design, and then at the University of California, Berkeley). There, he developed a kind of “Abstract Expressionist ceramics,” embraced by critics in both Artforum and Craft Horizons, and influenced outstanding painter-ceramists including Ken Price and Ron Nagle.
His next “breakthrough” would require some technical innovation: a factory-size kiln, an industrial dough mixer and the kind of warehouse-size humidifiers used to keep fruit moist, as well as some tweaking of the clay recipe to enable monumental forms. Sharing a studio with the artist John Mason, Voulkos fired up his new equipment and made ever bigger and wilder ceramics: craggy, hulking creations like “Little Big Horn” and “Sitting Bull,” which look monolithic but are actually composed of multiple wheel-thrown forms and clay slabs fitted together.
These works drew comparisons to muscular abstract paintings by Franz Kline, Jack Tworkov and others. Voulkos fostered such associations with brightly colored glazes and epoxy-based paint, and in forays into actual paint on canvas (which look oddly timid compared with his ceramics). He also started to give public demonstrations that amounted to “action painting” in clay, a practice he continued well into his career: A photograph from 1976 shows him elbow-deep in a tall vase of stacked wheel-thrown cylinders. Often, as in the 1961 vessel “Josephine,” he would build up such a form only to pound it down, slash it and splatter it with slip and glaze.
The show ends on something of a precipice, with a group of “blackwares” initially exhibited in 1968 at the Quay Gallery in San Francisco. These tall, stacked vases, named for the black iron slip that gave them their deep metallic surfaces, evince a new, more restrained way of working — one influenced by Minimalism and postpainterly abstraction, and by Voulkos’s evolving interest in bronze casting. They seem uncharacteristically subdued but remind us that a real sensitivity to materials and their affinities was as much a part of Voulkos’s breakthroughas his performative flair.
Organized by the Museum of Arts and Design’s former director Glenn Adamson with Andrew Perchuk of the Getty Research Institute and the museum’s assistant curator Barbara Paris Gifford, the 30-piece exhibition is accompanied by a 208-page book that offers a more complicated and cleareyed look at Voulkos’s legacy. The essayists have a lot to say about the gender dynamics that went along with the artist’s macho persona and theatrics; Jenni Sorkin’s “Gender and Rupture,” which gives credit to Voulkos’s early teachers Frances Senska and Marguerite Wildenhain, is particularly incisive.
There’s less ambivalence where Voulkos’s influence on the thriving field of contemporary ceramics is concerned, as is clear from a wry conversation in the catalog between the artists Mary Heilmann, who studied with Voulkos at Berkeley and continues to work in both painting and ceramics, and the talented sculptor Arlene Shechet, who was not his student but is certainly a kindred spirit (as observed in her recent show of interlaced wood and ceramics at Sikkema Jenkins and her playful rethinking of Meissen porcelain now at the Frick).
A Voulkos lesson was quite an event: Ms. Heilmann recalls that he would stride into the room in his Beatle boots, sit down at the wheel and throw a large pot, and then stumble and drop it on the floor, startling his students. “He would go ‘oops!’” she remembers, and then “he would pick it up, squeeze it together, and make it into this sculpture.” It was a shtick, to be sure. But it’s part of the reason that artists today (from Lynda Benglis to Sterling Ruby) see ceramics as a truly open and permissive medium, fragile but never too precious.