Opinion|On College Campuses, Does ‘Liberal’ Mean ‘Illiberal’?
On College Campuses, Does ‘Liberal’ Mean ‘Illiberal’?
I agree with Nicholas Kristof on the importance of young people understanding how others with differing outlooks see the world. But by relying on the reaction of many college students to Donald Trump’s election to make his point, he misses the mark.
Young people I know aren’t dismayed because a Republican presidential candidate won. They’re horrified because someone who lied, incited hatred, found joy in sexual harassment and denigrated the skin color and religions of people just like their friends will soon determine the course of their lives.
Just think of how young people on the threshold of adulthood see the world when a person who embodies the antithesis of character qualities their mothers and fathers worked so hard to instill — honesty, fairness, compassion, generosity — rises to occupy the most powerful office in the world.
In repeated columns, Nicholas Kristof has chastised academics for rejecting diversity in ideology. I have been an academic for more than 20 years, and have never witnessed discrimination based on political ideology. Yet even in the sciences, academics are now overwhelmingly liberal.
Academics are trained to distinguish reality from lies or fantasy, and to respect facts and sound arguments. If that biases academics toward liberalism, then there is a problem with conservatism, not with academia.
The writer is a professor of physics and astronomy at the University of Pennsylvania.
Nicholas Kristof called the actions of Oberlin students an example of “liberal hysteria.” As a student senator at Oberlin who had a direct hand in the boycott of a local bakery accused of racial profiling, I found his claim to be devoid of nuance.
Time and again, the students of Oberlin College are represented in mainstream media as a monolith conforming to illiberal values and practices. This could not be further from the truth.
Oberlin students are strong-willed and steadfast in our beliefs, yet we are a diverse group of deep thinkers with the capacity to understand dissenting opinions.
We Obies may get it wrong from time to time, and for that we deserve criticism. But Oberlin isn’t an echo chamber. Oberlin is a hub for the progressive movement, a home for intellectual inquiry, and a space for students of all ideological backgrounds to come and have their beliefs challenged.
We just want to make the world a better place. Can you blame us?
