The bustling riverfront envisioned for a tattered stretch of warehouses and parking lots in the South Bronx is still many years away.
But that has not stopped the administration of Mayor Bill de Blasio from going ahead with a $194 million plan to improve the infrastructure in a 30-block area on the Bronx side of the Harlem River. The plan will include making streets pedestrian-friendly, replacing water and sewer lines, carving out a new park and expanding broadband access — all in preparation for future development that, for now, exists only on paper.
Though public investment in the city’s infrastructure is not new, it has often been an afterthought, especially in neighborhoods where development has been piecemeal. Now, as the city moves on its ambitious effort to build more affordable housing, economic development officials aim to make more infrastructure investments as part of a shift toward a more comprehensive, community-based approach — known as “placemaking” among urban planners — as they develop the city’s remaining tracts of available land.
The city also planned, she added, to make substantial investments in infrastructure in Far Rockaway in Queens, East New York in Brooklyn and Inwood in Manhattan, all places where the de Blasio administration is planning to add affordable housing.
In the South Bronx, where borough officials and others have worked to remake the riverfront, five acres of vacant, city-owned land is slated to become a riverfront complex that will bring 700 to 900 units of affordable housing to the city’s poorest borough as well as an esplanade, stores and businesses, and exhibition, performance and meeting spaces for community groups and others. The city also plans to acquire two and a half acres of privately owned land nearby currently used for a parking lot and two warehouses and turn it into a riverfront park.
Jonathan Bowles, the executive director of the Center for an Urban Future, a nonprofit that has called attention to the city’s aging infrastructure, said the de Blasio administration’s emphasis on infrastructure was refreshing and important because city investments in infrastructure had largely failed to keep up with the development and population growth in many neighborhoods, especially outside of Manhattan.
As a result, he said, there has been a lot of frustration over problems that could have been avoided, such as overtaxed utilities and subways, crowded schools and a shortage of street parking and open spaces.
The South Bronx riverfront, once a thriving industrial area, is connected to Manhattan by a series of bridges that run over the Harlem River and is within walking distance of multiple subway and bus lines. While the city’s infrastructure improvements do not extend to public transportation, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which operates the subways, is upgrading several nearby stations along the Grand Concourse.
City officials and Bronx leaders said that they would continue working to increase transit services as development progresses. In addition, they noted, the South Bronx will benefit from other projects — such as the opening of the Second Avenue subway in Manhattan and the planned addition of Metro-North railroad stations in the Bronx — that are expected to ease crowding on public transit systems.
Kate Van Tassel, a vice president for development at the Economic Development Corporation, said that officials had been meeting with South Bronx leaders and residents to include their priorities in the plan. For instance, in response to residents’ requests for better access to the river, a new intersection will be created at Exterior and 144th Streets, which will open directly into the new park.
Next month, the city will also begin working on a redesign of Exterior Street that will include replacing the aging water and sewer lines underneath, and widening sidewalks, repaving the road surface, improving lighting and adding pedestrian medians and bike lanes. In addition, the city plans to extend broadband access north to Morris Avenue so existing residents and businesses as well as Hostos Community College can benefit from it.
In total, the transformation of the riverfront is expected to bring nearly 2,000 temporary construction jobs to the South Bronx, according to economic development officials.
Ms. Torres-Springer said the city had received a number of proposals for the site this year and expected to select a developer by next fall. Groundbreaking will not take place until 2019 at the earliest.
The site is currently used to store road construction equipment, and after the holidays, for mulching Christmas trees. Two circuses — UniverSoul Circus and Circo Hermanos Vazquez — also rent space during the year for performances.
Cedric Loftin, the district manager for Bronx Community Board 1, said that while there had been some concerns about the planned development, many residents supported the city’s infrastructure investment.
