There is a party going on at the Metropolitan Opera House, and if you are a fan of the raucous, eccentric, solemn, hilarious and heartbreaking art form that’s celebrated there, you should join the fun before it ends on Jan. 7.
It’s a bit of an old-fashioned party, which makes sense, as the two hosts are septuagenarians who have been playing together at the Met for 45 years. Yes, they’ve both been counted out a few times of late. But it turns out they still know how to throw quite the shindig.
I’m talking about James Levine and Plácido Domingo, the battle-scarred titans of opera who joined forces on Monday, their 329th performance together since their Met partnership began, for Verdi’s “Nabucco,” a biblical potboiler of religious wars and forbidden love. Aided in onstage revelry by an enviable, clearly inspired assembly of collaborators, Mr. Levine, 73, and Mr. Domingo, 75, firmly slash through a host of recent suggestions — including, yes, from this critic — that it might be time for them to hang up their respective towels.
To be fair to those who have tried to show them the door, both men have grappled with health issues. Mr. Levine’s troubles — Parkinson’s disease, a spinal injury, a cancerous growth on his kidney, the use of a wheelchair — forced him from his position as the Met’s music director in April, though he has continued to conduct. Mr. Domingo has suffered from colon cancer, a pulmonary embolism and a gallbladder that required removal — all in the past six years. Cancellations have dogged both, along with those pesky calls to retire.
There was a measure of shared defiance, then, in the warmth and polish they showed together in this “Nabucco,” the culmination of a joint history at the Met that dates to a Nov. 4, 1971, performance of yet another Verdi opera, “Luisa Miller.” They never stood side by side on Monday, even at the curtain calls — Mr. Levine now stays in the pit for those — but they were effortlessly in sync the whole evening, two men with both a foundation of vast experience and the fire of something to prove.
In the midst of his health struggles, Mr. Domingo, one of the 20th century’s most distinguished tenors, reinvented himself as a Verdi baritone, a very different beast. This has resulted in unexpected returns to operas in which he once triumphed: After singing the upstart Ismaele in “Nabucco” decades ago, he has recently taken on the opera’s title role: the ancient Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar, who sacks Jerusalem and captures its inhabitants before going briefly mad.
While the deeper notes of this new repertory are in Mr. Domingo’s range, the basic color of his voice, its center of gravity, is still too high for him to be fully persuasive at all times. (And even a baritone’s highest notes don’t come as easily to him as they once would have.) It is, as I’ve said before, a kind of drag act, if often a convincing one.
He was perfectly impressive — stern and sonorous — as the disapproving bourgeois patriarch of “La Traviata.” As the title character in “Simon Boccanegra,” he has sung smoothly enough; the issue is that Verdi carefully calibrated and combined the voices in that male-heavy opera — deep, deeper, deepest — for an effect distorted by Mr. Domingo.
More vigorous characters, demanding more sustained, arching rainbows of tone, have proved more unfortunate: I’m thinking of his ill-fated performances as the Count di Luna in “Il Trovatore” and, God help him, Don Carlo in “Ernani.” He unveiled his Macbeth last year. As for Rigoletto, the Everest of this group, well, Mr. Domingo has sung it. I, for worse or for better, have not heard it.
Nabucco works as well for him as any of these. His voice still has extraordinary volume and a warm, penetrating presence. If a hint of brittleness is now detectable in Mr. Domingo’s tone, an occasionally questionable pitch and some fogginess at the bottom of his range, he sounds remarkably fresh and vibrant. He poignantly underplayed Nabucco’s descent into madness — no flailing or wild eyes — and his heartfelt prayer, “Dio di Giuda,” felt less a showpiece than a moment of sober intimacy.
Russell Thomas, a tenor of gorgeously burnished power, and Jamie Barton, whose mezzo pours out like lava, are luxury casting as the star-crossed lovers, Ismaele (Israelite) and Fenena (sigh, Babylonian). Dmitry Belosselskiy’s capacious bass is well suited to the pronouncements of Zaccaria, the Israelites’ high priest.
“Nabucco” is defined by its choruses, much as Rossini’s “Guillaume Tell,” at the Met earlier this season, is. The company’s ensemble, under the direction of Donald Palumbo, rose to the occasion with massed yet transparent, shimmering singing.
Its climactic number is the great “Va, pensiero,” a prayer for God to give these Israelites the courage to endure their suffering and a lament for the homeland from which they have been exiled — a country “so beautiful and lost.” The audience kept applauding until the lilting, sinuous melody was repeated. It may be just what people need to hear right now.
Clearly doing well since being freed of his day-to-day duties as music director — his arm and hand movements look more precise and controlled than a year ago — Mr. Levine guided the number with flowing grace. He led the entire performance with an energy that never felt pressured; the score surged inexorably forward, though with the confidence and, yes, maturity, to linger in lyrical moments, serene and calm.
Deep in the opera, Nabucco sings, “What shame has fallen upon me in my old age.” Well, there was none of that here for a triumphant Mr. Domingo and Mr. Levine.