Imagine the restaurant Wolfgang Puck might have opened if he had wafted into New York in the 1980s on warm, mesquite-scented Southern California breezes.
In that era, Mr. Puck was a nonstop innovator. He turned the Sunset Strip on to duck-sausage pizzas and other exercises in treating Italian cuisine as a blank slate at Spago. He hipped Santa Monica to Chinese-style fried catfish with Japanese ponzu at Chinois on Main, the kind of crossbreeding we would learn to call Asian fusion. Above all, by the end of the decade, he had shown chefs the way to scrub the starch out of their restaurants and still be taken seriously.
All of these ideas would hitch rides to New York sooner or later, but Mr. Puck could have given us a peek into the future of dining if he had come to town in those days. It never happened. Aside from opening a kiosk at Kennedy Airport about a decade ago, he stayed away until September, when he opened a steak-driven restaurant in the financial district.
The steaks, presented bare, on white plates, are excellent. Appetizers and other dishes are appealing, if a little unfocused. The food is served in rooms whose design, by Strata Architects and Jacques Garcia, appears to have been lost in the mail for a decade or so. It is a new restaurant that already feels dated.
To the right of the glass doors on Church Street is an entryway framed by fold upon fold of shimmery red fabric, suggesting that you are about to walk into a room full of elegantly debauched vampires. Instead you find hotel guests and solitary men in an awkward lounge illuminated by slashing bolts of red neon lightning; it’s how you’d imagine a sexy downtown bar if you’d never been downtown, gone to a bar or had sex.
Sometimes you gag in your mouth, the critic sighed.
Early in the meal, a short glass vase arrives at the table loaded with Parmesan-crusted breadsticks about a yard long. They always seem to be aimed straight at my face, as if challenging me to a duel.
They do taste good, though, and the sharp, creamy gougères that show up next are terrific. While we’re looking at our menus, somebody stands next to the table holding a white china platter arrayed with cuts of Wagyu beef wrapped in black napkins. Each hunk of muscle is pointed out and described appreciatively. There is less ceremony when you buy a diamond at Tiffany.
Some pride in these steaks is understandable, particularly in the case of the Japanese beef. Imported from Miyazaki Prefecture, this is true Wagyu, rarely offered in American restaurants. It is rich in a way that’s hard to fathom, the melting streaks of fat cascading from the flesh onto your tongue.
It is sold at $25 an ounce. I can’t stand pointlessly expensive luxuries, but this one has a point. The beef is so rich that a table of curious diners for whom the price is not an automatic deal breaker might share a six-ounce steak, the smallest cut offered.
I am less inclined to splurge on the hybrid Wagyu raised in Idaho, with its broader, less graceful flavor and noticeably less marbling. Next to the genuine article, it tastes like a compromise.
Of course there are normal American steaks, too, from three sources. One night, I ran a controlled study on two of the rib-eyes, both of them cornfed. While I was taking apart a steak from Kansas that had been aged for 28 days in vacuum-sealed plastic, a guest ate one raised in Illinois that had been dry aged for 35 days. The contrast kept us trading slices all night. Mine was chewier, more purple, a little more concentrated, with a potent red-meat flavor. The other exemplified the old-fashioned American ideal: soft, pinkish, mild and shiny with rendered fat.
Cut uses a technique for cooking its varieties of beef that I strongly endorse. Steaks are grilled over wood and charcoal and then blasted under a broiler running at 1,200 degrees, roughly hot enough to melt aluminum. The meat arrives with a textured, almost brittle outer bark, like the crust on a really great loaf of sourdough.
Old-guard steakhouses are losing their juice these days because well-connected chefs like Mr. Puck can often buy better, more flavorful beef. Other ingredients at Cut are enviable, too. The tender and herbaceous double chops of lamb come from Elysian Fields Farm in Pennsylvania, and two preparations of bay scallops out of Nantucket popped up, near the start of their brief, glorious season in November.
Very little about the menu says steakhouse aside from the steaks. Cut is not a wedge-salad joint. The executive chef, Raymond Weber, who comes to New York from the Cut in Dubai, makes elaborate new dishes alongside vintage ones from the first Cut restaurant, in Beverly Hills. Impressively tender and flavorful veal tongue with artichokes and white beans was served at the original from the start, and it is worth repeating. So is the lobster and crab Louis, the chilled shellfish set over a coaster of panna cotta pointedly spiked with horseradish.
A few dishes fail to land their punches. A bone-marrow flan, meant to be spread on toasted brioche with a savory mushroom marmalade, was very delicate but didn’t taste much like marrow. Steamed salmon with snow peas and spicy soy sauce reminded me of all the perfunctory, umpteenth-generation Asian fusion dishes that made everybody lose interest in the genre.
The pastry chef is Zairah Molina, another Puck veteran. Like the rest of the kitchen, her department can overcomplicate its plates. But she always puts a good idea at the center, like the crisp membrillo-stuffed fritters dusted with cardamom sugar next to a spoonful of kabocha ice cream that she was serving last month.
Except for the art, nothing about Cut is less than good. But a lot of it isn’t very inspired, either. The Wolfgang Puck in charge here is the proficient overseer of high-end hotel amenities, not the chef who crossed boundaries and defined an earlier era. If 80 percent of success is just showing up, as Woody Allen has said, a good chunk of the remainder is arriving at the right time.