Hal Walter always loved donkeys a little more than they loved him.
For over 30 years, they’ve fought, kicked, and confused him — and for that, he’s truly grateful. Donkeys have made his temples throb with fury, but they’ve also prepared him for the most perplexing challenge of his life: a boy named Harrison.
I traveled to Colorado for a tutorial from Hal in the art of burro racing, the old Rocky Mountain sport of running marathon distances alongside a trotting donkey. I became interested in all things burro by necessity, after we adopted a neglected donkey named Sherman and had to figure out what to do with him. When I heard about burro racing, I was intrigued by three mysteries: How has it survived as America’s second-oldest marathon, right behind Boston? Why do women and older runners often defeat younger men? And most of all, how do you persuade nature’s most obstinate creation that it really wants to run with you?
When I arrive at Hal’s home among the ranches of Westcliffe, Colo., a fourth item shoots to the top of the list: Why are donkeys so amazing with challenged kids?
Because as soon as I get out of the car, a curly-blond blur bursts out the door and barrels straight at me. Hal is behind him, calling “Son. Son. Harrison,” but nothing about Harrison suggests he’s about to listen or ever has.
Harrison is 12 years old and has autism, meaning on his best days he’ll sing and tell stories and charm you stupid, and on his worst… well, often that’s the same day. A few weeks ago, Harrison was doing great in a middle-school cross-country race when his classmates burst into cheers. Upset by the noise, Harrison veered away from the finish line with 10 yards to go and hid in the bushes. A kind bystander used her golden retriever to lead Harrison to the finish line, which he crossed by rolling over it sideways. At another race, Harrison waded into the spectators, swinging his fists.
Harrison sprints straight past me, a kid on a mission, but that mission, I realize with a jolt of panic, might involve those three mammoth donkeys at the paddock gate. The bars are wide enough for Harrison to dive right through, and judging by his speed, that’s exactly where he’s headed. Donkeys are notoriously skittish about sudden moves, and their natural reaction is to hammer away with their hooves until the threat is pummeled into the dirt. Donkeys have fought off mountain lions, and even Hal, a seasoned and careful pro, got a nasty nip near his neck last year.
And find Hal reaching out for a handshake.
“Good trip?” he asks. “Harrison, come on over and say hello.” The donkeys haven’t even blinked. They understand Harrison, Hal says, and always have. When Harrison is having a really tough afternoon, in fact, Hal will scoot him outside and onto the back of one of the donkeys, Laredo. Within seconds, boy and burro are ambling along, Laredo’s ears waving as Harrison sings him a Mumford and Sons song.
“I can’t explain it except that in their way, donkeys think faster than we do,” says Mary, Hal’s wife. Mary is a nurse and for years was a superb burro racer herself until she was badly hurt in a “wreck”: her legs got tangled in the lead rope during a race and she fell, spooking her donkey into dragging her through a boulder field. 
“Why did you name him McMurphy?” Amber asked.
“After the crazy guy in ‘One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest,’” Curtis replied, which didn’t alarm Amber as much as it should have.
And that’s when McMurphy tripped.
For the Wanns, that tumble sealed the deal. It’s been four years and they’ve been a dedicated burro clan ever since. They show up at every race, three generations strong; Amber’s parents even got a pair of mini-donkeys so they can hike along behind the grandkids.
Like acupuncture and meditation, equine therapy lives in that anecdotal world where plenty of credible people are convinced it works but science can’t yet prove why.
To be fair, Hal Walter has to admit that the burros have helped him as much as his son. “Pack burro racing was my training for fatherhood,” says Hal, a seven-time titleholder who still wins at age 56. For years, Hal was a newspaper reporter, and he’s captured his evolution as a dad and donkey trainer in two books, “Full Tilt Boogie” and “Endurance.” Burros, he believes, led him to insights he might never have discovered.
#3: You don’t train them. They train you.
