

What foods will you just not eat? Why?
Since childhood, has the list of foods you avoid gotten shorter or longer? Or, do you tend to not hold strong opinions on any food?
Children are known for being picky eaters. But what happens when these picky eaters grow up?
Many children leave behind their quirky eating habits as they get older. But “what is less certain are the predictors of who will remain a picky eater in adulthood,” said Nancy Zucker, a psychologist and director of the Duke Center for Eating Disorders. She is the lead author of a 2015 study that linked picky eating in some preschoolers with emotional problems.
Adults may hang on to their youthful food dislikes — at the top of the list are vegetables — but then add more restrictions, such as consuming only smooth foods or limiting their diet to bland, white meals. Dr. Zucker said that in a sample of 2,600 adults who identified themselves as picky eaters, 75 percent reported the pattern started in childhood.
The estimates of picky eating in childhood vary widely, ranging from 5 percent to more than 25 percent, depending on the definition of selective eating. But “there is no consensus on the prevalence in adults,” Dr. Zucker said. One reason is that many adults try to keep their picky eating a secret, a common source of stress that can lead to personal or professional problems.
As a child, Stephanie Lucianovic, the author of “Suffering Succotash: A Picky Eater’s Quest to Understand Why We Hate the Foods We Hate,” would hide vegetables or hold her nose during meals. As an adult, her selective eating posed new challenges when she fell in love with a man from a “foodie” family.
— Are you or have you ever been a picky eater?
— To what degree, if at all, do you identify with the ideas in the article? Explain.
— Are there any foods you just don’t like? If so, can you describe what it is you don’t like about them?
— Do you agree with Ms. Lucianovic’s statement “there’s not a lot of empathy for picky eaters”? How do your experiences or observations factor into your answer?
— Over time, have you found yourself liking foods you used to detest, or vice versa?
— Have you ever had a strong opinion about a type of food you never tried? What put you off — smell, texture, even just how the food looked?
