So, apparently, did the chef Daniel Rose, after a sous-chef made him this French potato classic for the first time at Spring, his tiny restaurant in Paris.
According to the culinary historian Philip Hyman, pommes Darphin, also called potato straws or straw potatoes, first appeared around 1900 in the French resort town of Aix-les-Bains, the creation of a maître d’hôtel named François Darphin.
Pommes Darphin aren’t exactly the same as latkes — for one thing, they are made without onions — but, taking inspiration from his menu at Le Coucou, Mr. Rose helped me transform this French classic and shortcut latke into an easy treat for Hanukkah.
Mr. Rose uses both clarified butter and grapeseed oil when making pommes Darphin, something most Jewish cooks wouldn’t do with their latkes. “We’re kind of in France here,” he explained, looking around the kitchen of the very French Le Coucou, where I’d come for a potato pancake primer a few weeks after that first pommes Darphin bite. Born in Chicago, Mr. Rose learned French cooking in Lyon, worked in restaurants all over France, and then opened the highly praised Spring when he was 29. He also revamped the Parisian standby Chez La Vieille this year.
“Latkes are my mother’s thing,” said Mr. Rose, who is 39. He diverges from her method, omitting the egg she puts in her potato mixture. But there are points of similarity, too. “She also uses onions, the jewels of latkes, which I think are so important to the dish,” he said.
When he was growing up, his mother would make potato pancakes the first and the last three nights of the holiday. “The whole house smelled of them,” he said. “They were delicious.” Now Mr. Rose wants to replicate the flavor and the aromas for his French wife, Marie-Aude, who is also a chef, and for his two young children.
After about an hour of schmoozing, Mr. Rose used the grating blade of a Robot-Coupe, the French food processor, to quickly shred the potatoes and onions before frying. “You want to retain the smell, so use very sweet onions for sautéing and, after cooking, keep the latkes warm in the oven,” he advised.
As I watched him add the clarified butter to the potato mixture, he told me not to bother with clarifying — plain, melted butter works just fine. But instead of making many pancakes, he made one large pancake, like the classic pommes Darphin, pressing handfuls of grated potato and onion into a well-greased 6-inch nonstick frying pan. (Home cooks can use an 8-inch pan, which is more common.) “To drain the grease, my mother always uses a paper bag, because you can’t be shy with the oil,” he said.
