HONG KONG — A Malaysian court on Wednesday upheld a sodomy conviction for Anwar Ibrahim, the jailed leader of the country’s opposition, bringing to a close a prolonged legal battle and sidelining a charismatic official ahead of an election in which he had hoped to challenge the scandal-ridden prime minister.
A lower court had sentenced Mr. Anwar to five years in prison in 2014, and the Federal Court upheld the sentence last year, prompting Mr. Anwar to call for a review. His lawyers have argued, in part, that the prosecution’s case had been based on a political conspiracy. But the Federal Court rejected their arguments in its decision on Wednesday.
Adib Zalkapli, a political analyst with the Singapore-based consulting firm Vriens & Partners in the Malaysian capital, Kuala Lumpur, said that the verdict exhausted Mr. Anwar’s legal options and that he would probably not be released from prison until at least June 2018 — after the expected date of the country’s next general election.
“It makes a good opening line to Anwar’s political obituary,” Mr. Zalkapli said.
But Latheefa Koya, a member of Mr. Anwar’s legal team, disputed that assessment, saying in an interview that Mr. Anwar was waiting to read the court’s full judgment and would be considering an alternate legal avenue to appeal the decision. She declined to elaborate.
Mr. Anwar, 69, a former deputy prime minister, was ejected in 1998 from the United Malays National Organization, the party that leads Malaysia’s governing coalition and had once groomed him to be the country’s next leader. He has championed a brand of multicultural politics that attracts a diverse range of supporters in a country that is sharply divided along ethnic and religious lines.
The United Malays National Organization has governed Malaysia since its independence from Britain in 1957. It has long used mildly authoritarian tactics to stay in power. In recent years, as the opposition has gained ground — nearly toppling the governing party in 2013 — prosecutors have filed a raft of cases against critics, including opposition figures, a professor and a cartoonist.
Mr. Anwar was first convicted of sodomy in 1999 in a separate case, brought under a British colonial law that critics consider absurdly outdated, and served six years in prison. That conviction was overturned in 2004, but the courts upheld charges that he had abused his power as a government official to cover up the accusations.
Human rights groups have long said the cases were politically motivated attempts by his opponents, including Prime Minister Najib Razak, to silence him.
The accuser in the second sodomy case, Saiful Bukhari Azlan, an aide in Mr. Anwar’s party, testified that he had met with Mr. Najib, then a deputy prime minister, at his home two days before the sexual encounter. It has never been fully explained why Mr. Najib happened to meet with a staff member from the opposition party.
“With this final decision running roughshod over Anwar’s rights and sending him back to prison, Najib and the ruling UMNO party have just fired the starting gun on the expected 2018 election by permanently sidelining the political opposition’s most capable leader,” Mr. Robertson said, referring to the governing party by its acronym.
The election is scheduled for 2018, but Mr. Zalkapli said that the governing coalition may call it earlier, perhaps in the months after the country’s 60th anniversary next August.
Mr. Najib has faced heavy criticism over a major corruption scandal, in which he is accused of taking $1 billion from a government investment fund. The United States Justice Department filed a civil complaint related to the scandal in July, and tens of thousands of protesters gathered in Kuala Lumpur last month to call for Mr. Najib’s resignation. He has denied any wrongdoing.
Mahathir Mohamad, a former prime minister who fired Mr. Anwar from his post as deputy prime minister in 1998 and also accused him of sodomy, announced this summer that he was creating a political party to challenge Mr. Najib.
During a court appearance in the capital in September, Mr. Anwar publicly shook hands with Mr. Mahathir in an attempt to project unity against Mr. Najib, who is now their common opponent.
But James Chin, the director of the Asia Institute at the University of Tasmania in Australia, said that the new alliance between the two men would have been strained had Mr. Anwar been released.
