Draw a circle. Give it stumpy legs, beer-keg arms, a big head of hair and a necklace of teeth. Draw some leaves around its middle, for modesty, and cover everything else in tattoos.
You’ve just drawn Maui, the Polynesian demigod, as imagined in the new Disney movie “Moana.” He’s a heavily inked muscleman pumped to what, in a tire, would be a dangerously high p.s.i.
If you grew up in Polynesia, you may see Maui differently. To children across the Pacific, he is an agile trickster known for feats of daring mischief, like lassoing the sun and fishing up islands from the sea bottom. In picture books he is strong and skinny, like a very young Duke Kahanamoku, the surfer.
This radical redrawing has perplexed and angered a few Polynesians. Obesity is a painful subject in the Pacific islands, where indigenous peoples have gotten fatter and sicker on a first-world diet. Cultural conquest, ethnic stereotyping and racism, colonialism’s aftershocks — these are all open wounds into which this Hollywood mega-Maui is seen by some as rubbing sea salt.
Yes, of course: It’s a cartoon. It was no crime for Disney animators to draw Maui any way they wanted. Some islanders have applauded this Maui, seeing his signature trait as not obesity but power. One New Zealand writer told Disney detractors to stop with the fat-shaming. Maui does make a striking visual contrast with the title character, a young girl who, with Maui’s help, becomes a courageous ocean wayfinder. And yes, when those two start singing show tunes, when the happy islanders’ canoe hulls break the waves, that soaring Broadway feeling you get — thank you, Lin-Manuel Miranda and Opetaia Foa‘i — can momentarily disarm indignation and silence the stickler. It’s possible for a person with island roots to hate and love this movie.
With “Moana,” Disney has put itself in a strange spot. Its marketing materials boast of slavish attention to historical and cultural accuracy. In search of sensitivity, it created an “Oceanic Story Trust” of expert advisers. Disney wants you to know that it got social practices and clothing and tattoos just right, so you can load up on the merchandise without guilt.
And yet, there he is: Maui, super-dupersize, full of himself and ot-nay oo-tay ight-bray. Ethnic stereotypes are as old as the movies, though humongous Hawaiians are a more recent addition to the cliché file; I’m not sure why. You’ll see them in Adam Sandler movies and the new “Hawaii Five-0” and Nickelodeon cartoons. Maybe it’s because of the abundance of Polynesians in the National Football League. Maybe it’s that one of the best-known and beloved Hawaiians of recent decades was the musician Israel Kamakawiwo‘ole, known as Iz. A mountainous man, was Iz. He suffered greatly, and died young.
Hawaiians and New Zealanders and Tongans and Tahitians know what “Moana” viewers in mainland America may not: that islanders come in all sizes. Just among legendary Hawaiian musicians, Gabby Pahinui had a middle-aged beer gut, while his son Bla is chopstick-skinny. Don Ho was normally proportioned. There are fat Hawaiians in sumo and football, skinny ones who swim and surf. Look up Eddie Aikau, Jason Momoa, Nainoa Thompson: You’ll be wowed. Dwayne (The Rock) Johnson, of Samoan ancestry, is the voice of Maui, and a big guy. But not that big.