When babies have an acute ear infection, they tug at their ears, get cranky and struggle to sleep through the night. Ear infections are the most common reason doctors prescribe antibiotics to children.
Because of the growing threat of drug-resistant bacteria, many physicians had hoped that a shorter course of antibiotics would be as effective as the standard 10 days of treatment for babies.
If five days did the trick, parents would benefit, too: It would cost less, and the inconsolable infant would be back to her old self and to day care more quickly — with possibly fewer days of nasty side effects, like diarrhea.
But a trial published in The New England Journal of Medicine on Wednesday dashed those hopes.
“Our intuition was that shorter courses would likely be as effective and lead to less antibiotic resistance, but neither of those proved to be the case,” said Dr. Donald H. Arnold, an associate professor of pediatrics and emergency medicine at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.
Ear infections are often caused by bacteria, but some are caused by viruses and should not be treated with antibiotics. Babies with a middle-ear infection, known as acute otitis media, have pain, an eardrum that’s at least moderately protruding, and other symptoms.
The new study included 520 babies 6 to 23 months old, the age group most prone to middle-ear infections. By their first birthday, almost half of infants will have had one.
Treatment was considered a failure if a child still had a bulging eardrum or persistent symptoms on the day of the last dose of antibiotic, in this case amoxicillin combined with clavulanate.
One group was given the antibiotics for 10 days, and the other took the drugs for five days and a liquid placebo for five more. Parents did not know which group their child was in.
The results were unexpected. About one-third of babies in the five-day group failed treatment, compared with 16 percent of those in the 10-day group.
“In this case, five-day treatment wasn’t on par; it was worse,” said Dr. Alejandro Hoberman, the study’s first author and a professor of pediatrics at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. There was no difference between the two groups in bacterial resistance or side effects, like diarrhea and diaper rash.
He says he thinks the study “settles the question,” confirming a 10-day course is best. But other physicians interpreted the results differently.
Dr. Rosenfeld, who helped compile the guidelines on ear infection for the American Academy of Pediatrics, quibbled with the study’s assumption that some babies who felt better should nonetheless be counted as treatment failures just because their eardrums were still bulging.
On the fifth day of treatment, if a baby’s “eardrum looks nasty and they feel great, why would I marinate them in more antibiotics?” he asked.
However, if a child has infections in both ears or fraternizes with other children in day care, “the full 10 days is the way to go,” Dr. Rosenfeld said.
In the study, 44 percent of babies with double-ear infections failed the five-day treatment, compared with 25 percent given antibiotics for 10 days.
Similarly, 40 percent of the babies in proximity to three or more children for at least 10 hours weekly failed after five days of antibiotics, compared with just 19 percent of those in the prolonged group.
When parents were asked about their child’s symptoms a week or two after starting antibiotics, there was hardly a difference.
All reported a mean score of under 2 on a symptom scale that ranges from 0 to 14, where 14 is totally miserable.
Importantly, months after the initial ear infection, “both groups looked very similar in term of the rate of recurrent infection,” Dr. Margaret A. Kenna, the director of clinical research in the department of otolaryngology at Boston Children’s Hospital, who wrote an editorial accompanying the new study.
Dr. Hoberman and his colleagues also took swabs from the backs of infants’ noses to test for bacteria resistant to penicillin and ones still susceptible. For almost a year, they swabbed participating babies every six weeks or during any visit for an illness.
Babies given amoxicillin-clavulanate temporarily had a greater proportion of resistant strains of bacteria, and fewer suspectible strains, in the samples.
The study’s findings do not apply to older children or those with additional risk factors for ear infections, such as cleft palate or Down syndrome.