The Federer family has shared many a road trip, but in this unusually settled period, the patriarch and primary breadwinner has been fielding more and more questions.
But the next family business trip is now fast approaching. Federer is set to return to action next month in Perth, Australia, at the Hopman Cup team event before returning in earnest at the Australian Open in Melbourne.
Federer has not played a match since July 8, when he lost in five sets to Milos Raonic in the semifinals at Wimbledon. In the last set, he took an awkward and uncharacteristic tumble on the grass that was too easy to see as a metaphor for the decline of a great, balletic champion.
Federer landed on his still-fragile left knee, which in February had required him to have surgery for the first time in his career, keeping him out for more than two months. Though he got up slowly at Wimbledon and finished the match, he did not finish the season. He even missed the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, which had long been one of his major late-career targets.
While his longtime rivals Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic duked it out for the No. 1 ranking and his Swiss countryman Stan Wawrinka won the United States Open, Federer got a taste of retirement with his longest break from the tour since he turned professional in 1998. Now, he will try his hand at a staple of modern tennis: the comeback. And he will do so with a world ranking of No. 16, his lowest since 2001.
Federer, 35, has little left to prove. He has already won a record 17 Grand Slam singles titles and 71 lesser titles. He has maintained a standard of excellence for far longer than most tennis champions do. Although he said he had treasured his time away from the tour with his wife, Mirka, and their four young children, he insisted that no consideration had been given to making the break permanent.
Those are particularly intriguing questions at a moment when so much talent — both rising and established — seems to be converging in the men’s game. Federer, as much a tennis aficionado as a tennis maestro, is well aware of the story lines.
The old guard on the men’s tour remains with Federer and Rafael Nadal, who at age 30 is returning from more injury problems of his own with a new coach in his team: Carlos Moyá.
The new wave is full of promise, led by Dominic Thiem, Alexander Zverev and Nick Kyrgios, all of whom have already beaten Federer. There are also many established stars in their primes: from Raonic, Kei Nishikori and Juan Martín del Potro to the multiple Grand Slam champions Wawrinka, Murray and Djokovic.
Federer, even in absentia, said he had kept checking the scores on his phone as Murray dueled with Djokovic down the stretch in November to secure the year-end No. 1 ranking.
“Maybe it’s only human and understandable that Novak had a letdown, because he achieved everything he wanted to,” Federer said. “You have to maybe reinvent yourself or whatever you have to do. But it’s nice to see that maybe it doesn’t always come so easy for everybody for so long.
He said he had taken a particularly conservative approach this time around.
“Especially the first three months, I was working out maybe one hour a day,” he said.
He has been practicing there frequently with the rising Frenchman Lucas Pouille, and on Thursday Federer planned to broadcast their practice session live on Periscope to give his fans an update on his progress.
“I just felt I needed to start filling in people on how I’m doing as we get closer to the beginning of the season,” he said.
The real test of how he is playing will have to wait for Australia, where his six-month preview of life without the tennis circuit will officially come to an end.
Federer enjoyed having that time with his family and the predictability of being in one place for more than a week at a time.
Fortunately, he said, his knee held up, and he was able to make the most of it.
