Public Theater - Shiva Theater, 425 Lafayette St.
What confuses “Confused” is love. And love is a topic on which Sugar has definite and profound opinions. She starts to talk, gropingly at first. But then she lands on the subject of her last encounter with her dying mother, many years earlier. And you suddenly find yourself in the midst of what feels like a delicately wrought chapter in a memoir — except, somehow, this memoir is as much about you as it is about its author.
My acquaintance with advice columns had been limited to childhood memories of voyeuristically reading Ann Landers and “Dear Abby” in the morning paper. The idea of a play based on such exchanges sounded awful, an occasion for sentimental slush or snarky camp.
Yet, as adapted by Ms. Vardalos and directed by Thomas Kail (of “Hamilton” fame), “Tiny Beautiful Things” turns out to provide an ideal catharsis for those suffering from the various deep-dyed blues that are so contagious right now. I mean post-election blues, holiday blues, end-of-the-year blues, all those afflictions that make us feel cranky, thin-skinned and intolerant.
Because, more than anything, “Tiny Beautiful Things” turns out be about the endangered art of listening to — and really hearing and responding to — other people. This production is not a successful narrative play in any conventional sense. But it works beautifully as a sustained theatrical exercise in empathy.
Ms. Vardalos, Mr. Kail and Marshall Heyman (with whom they conceived the project) do wonders in bringing fluidity to the standard Q. and A. format. Setting the play in Sugar’s home (Rachel Hauck did the appealingly lived-in set) was a smart choice. It personalizes someone who might otherwise come across as an abstract oracle, and it matches the present-tense, practical intimacy of Ms. Strayed’s voice.
As Ms. Vardalos’s Sugar listens to the letters of her bewildered correspondents, she tidies up, packs lunchboxes and looks with trepidation and eagerness at the screen of her laptop, on which she receives the email of the lovelorn, the angry, the thwarted. These interlocutors are affectingly embodied by Phillip James Brannon, Alfredo Narciso and Natalie Woolams-Torres.
They write about miscarriages and sexual assault; feeling trapped in marriages and being rejected by parents. Sometimes they speak in echoing choruses. Sugar delivers answers that are, often as not, anchored in specific (and sometimes harrowing) personal memories of her own.
The cast members endow their characters with distinguishing individuality and, more important, a connective emotional transparency. Ms. Vardalos, best known as the writer and star of the hit movie “My Big Fat Greek Wedding,” wisely makes her role more a verb than a noun.
The point of her character is not so much who she is as how she reacts, and that registers in the shifting intelligence, wonder and pain on Ms. Vardalos’s luminous, sharp-featured face.
Toward the show’s end, a man (portrayed by Mr. Narciso) whose son was killed by a hit-and-run driver tries to articulate, using a systemic list, the elements of what his life has become. After Sugar has answered him point by point, in a voice swollen with shared grief, he passes by her and briefly clutches her shoulder.
That’s the one moment of physical contact that I can recall among the performers. It is thoroughly earned and appropriate, capturing what by now feels like a deeply reciprocal relationship between a show and its audience.