On the plus side, he’s so outgoing he can start an animated conversation with a chaise longue. Then again, that unloosed tongue has a way of straying beyond bitchy gossip, the lingua franca of his gay world, into more bitter territory. Not long after he’s arrived in Palm Springs, Calif., for a friend’s wedding, he’s confiding to the first two guests he meets — his ex Dwayne and Dwayne’s younger boyfriend, Mack (who remain unseen) — that the man their friend is marrying has all the personality of an ottoman. And that’s one of the kinder things he has to say.
As played with devastatingly funny panache by Mr. Droege himself, Gerry would probably be overwhelming in real life. He’d greet you effusively with a bear hug and seconds later “read you to filth,” as the (gay) saying goes. But at a safe distance onstage, he’s a delight — a slightly exhausting one (10 minutes less would be more), but still a delight.
Drew Droege in a scene from his play when it appeared at the Barrow Street Theater in 2016.
He’s soon complaining to Mack and Dwayne about the wedding invitation, which admonished guests to “refrain from wearing bright colors and bold patterns.” Gerry flies into high dudgeon as he recalls this affront. Especially since the living room of the house rented for the wedding is no sea of soft tones. “That den looks like Trina Turk and Betsey Johnson threw up Bacardi Razz and sold it to Target,” he snipes.
Set poolside, this 80-minute evening is essentially an audience with Gerry, who suffers from a serious case of ADHD, throws back cocktails as if they were cleansing juices, possesses a voluminous knowledge of pop culture (who is Shannon Elizabeth, anyway?), wields an acerbic wit that could flay you at 50 paces and has no off button.
One minute he’s singing the praises of a cheesy Lifetime movie starring Rita Wilson and Victor Garber (you know, the one where she has the imaginary kid?), the next he’s raising a margarita to Olympia Dukakis, and then he’s somehow throwing shade at Queen Latifah.
Mr. Droege, best known for a series of online videos in which he parodies Chloë Sevigny, grows more unmoored, especially when the cocaine comes out, as afternoon wanes into evening. As he restlessly runs his hands through his hair, eyes blazing with irritation, we learn that Gerry’s beef isn’t just with the sartorial demands but with the whole notion of gay weddings.
When his frenetic zest finally begins to flag as dawn creeps over the horizon, Gerry becomes a bit misty-eyed and sentimental, revealing (surprise) the insecurity that underlies his ferocious need to be the life of the party, any party. Here Mr. Droege dips his toe into the pool of sentimentality but quickly draws it back.
Once the hangover passes or the next drink arrives, we are pretty sure that Gerry’s self-pity will abate, his batteries will be recharged, and he’ll be back to upbraiding young Mack for not knowing who Nia Peeples is.
And no, I don’t know who she is either.