Sports|That Coach Looks Familiar. And He Is. Welcome Back, Jim Calhoun.
That Coach Looks Familiar. And He Is. Welcome Back, Jim Calhoun.
WEST HARTFORD, Conn. — Sean Witecy knew exactly what he wanted after graduating in 2017 from Elkhorn High School in Nebraska. He wanted a big college. He wanted to play Division I basketball. He tried, with no luck, to play at Creighton and at Texas Christian, which he ended up attending as a freshman but not as a player.
Now, later this month, Witecy will be part of the first class of young men to enroll at the University of St. Joseph, a Roman Catholic school in this Hartford suburb that was established in 1932 and is newly coed.
It’s not a big college. It’s N.C.A.A. Division III, not Division I. But it does offer the 6-foot-5 Witecy something that Creighton or T.C.U. couldn’t — an opportunity to play for Jim Calhoun, the Hall of Fame former coach at the University of Connecticut.
He emailed Calhoun and put a video of his highlights in the mail. He visited the campus over winter break. And this fall, he will be a St. Joseph Blue Jay, instead of a Creighton Bluejay, which is just fine with him.
“If I can reach my potential as a basketball player, there’s really no better place,” he said.
Witecy’s name is at the top of his list of forward/centers on a whiteboard in Calhoun’s cluttered office at St. Joseph. It’s a small room, “about the size of my locker at UConn,” he joked. He left Connecticut in 2012 and became a well-paid consultant to the university.
Then, last summer, he heard from the St. Joseph’s athletic director, Bill Cardarelli, one of his former assistants at UConn. Cardarelli wanted Calhoun’s help in building a men’s basketball program after the university decided to become coed. And the more they talked, the more Calhoun, 76, became convinced he was the right person for the job.
He signed on as a part-time consultant to the St. Joseph basketball program last September so he would not be in conflict with his contract with Connecticut. But all along, it was assumed that he would become the full-time coach, and he is expected to be officially named to the position in the next few weeks. His contract with UConn will presumably be adjusted to accommodate his new job.
The bottom line is that come November, when the season starts, Calhoun will be the face of St. Joseph basketball.
It’s not unprecedented for a successful Division I coach to move to Division III. The former Boston College and Ohio State coach Jim O’Brien finished his career coaching at Emerson College in Boston. But Emerson had an established program.
Calhoun is starting something from scratch. He said he was healthy after going through three cancer operations. He hasn’t coached in nearly six years and can’t wait to do so again.
The University of St. Joseph was founded by the Sisters of Mercy religious order. Its 90-acre campus on Asylum Avenue is less than three miles from the state capitol. In June 2017, the university’s board of trustees voted unanimously to admit men for the first time.
Free then went to Cardarelli and told him, “We have to do something to get on people’s radar.” She had seen the power of athletics as a graduate student at Notre Dame and thought it would help get the word out about the changes at St. Joseph. All the university needed was to make a splash in its sports program.
In bringing in Calhoun, a 2005 inductee into the Basketball Hall of Fame, St. Joseph was able to do that and then some. Initial plans called for admitting 50 men in the first class. That has doubled.
“This is what we now refer to as the Calhoun Effect,” Free said.
According to university officials, freshman applications are up by 83 percent (female applications have increased nearly 40 percent) and transfer applications have almost doubled, to 438 from 224. The officials expect a student body of 900 undergraduates, 300 of whom will be freshmen or transfers.
Calhoun has about 15 players ready to go. Many have been participating in summer leagues in Hartford. One of them is Brad Landry, who spent the last two years at Choate Rosemary Hall, a prep school in Connecticut. He was thinking of going to Brandeis, outside Boston, until he, like Witecy, heard the news about Calhoun.
Two of Calhoun’s recruits are from the New York City area. Another is from Puerto Rico. Landry and Jake Sullivan, another new player at St. Joseph, captained Choate Rosemary Hall to a state scholastic title. Another new St. Joseph player, DelShaun Jackson, was named a high school player of the year by The Hartford Courant.
The Blue Jays have not had a practice yet, but they are shaping up to be one of the more publicized and scrutinized Division III teams in N.C.A.A. history. The flagship radio station for UConn basketball is negotiating to broadcast St. Joseph home games. ESPN is considering a documentary, and some home games may be streamed live.
The interest is so strong that Calhoun envisions having a subvarsity team, which will play primarily against local prep schools. He also envisions moving some home games down Asylum Avenue to the state armory. He has lined up the former UConn stars Kemba Walker and Ray Allen to speak to the team. The schedule calls for a visit to Florida for a tournament in December. The groundbreaking for a new athletic facility is scheduled for the spring.
It may not be Division I, but the overpowering presence of Calhoun, who won 873 games at Northeastern and Connecticut, certainly gives it a D-I feel. The first practice is Oct. 15, and there are even plans for a Midnight Madness session. Jim Calhoun is back.