U.S.|Stop Saying ‘Mormon,’ Church Leader Says. But Is the Real Name Too Long?
The word “Mormon” is out, says the president of the Utah-based church. But the proper term for what to call the faith and its followers is a mouthful.
Mr. Nelson, 93, said that the policy change came to him in a revelation from God and that members of the church must work to adjust their vernacular. “The Lord has impressed upon my mind the importance of the name He has revealed for His Church,” he said in a statement.
The church’s updated style guide specifies that “Mormon Church,” “Mormons” and “Mormonism” are no longer acceptable. And no, you should not use the abbreviation “L.D.S.,” either.
The only exceptions listed are for the Book of Mormon, the church’s sacred text, and historical names like the Mormon Trail, a government-recognized path that members of the church took from Illinois to Utah in the mid-19th century.
The abrupt shift was left largely unexplained by the church, whose spokesman declined to elaborate on the rationale behind the new policy, but church leaders have promoted the idea for decades. In 1990, Mr. Nelson pushed for the use of the church’s formal name as it was communicated by the prophet Joseph Smith in 1838, according to religious doctrine.
The policy change presents a snag for Dr. Bennett’s own academic career: His biography lists him as an expert in 19th-century Mormon history. On Friday morning, Dr. Bennett found himself going through drafts of his writing to update its language.
The church recognizes that people will need more concise terminology, and suggests that they use the “restored Church of Jesus Christ,” among other terms.
Matthew Bowman, the author of a book called “The Mormon People,” said this suggests that the policy might be an effort to emphasize the church’s distinctive take on Christianity. Dr. Bowman said the term “restored” refers to the idea that the original Christian religion is obsolete, and Mormons alone are practicing true Christianity.
Mormon was first used as a derogatory term in the 19th century by people from outside the faith, Dr. Bowman said. But members of the church soon began to embrace the name, and it was in wide use by the 20th century.
Over a decade ago, before the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, church leadership made a similar push for people to use its full name: the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. But the effort was a bust.
The new policy may present a challenge for prominent church members who discuss their faith in the wider public sphere, where the new directive is unlikely to be followed.
Doug Andersen, a spokesman for the church, said church leaders planned to address concerns about issues of practicality, but there was “no timetable” for doing so. He declined to discuss the decision in more detail.
Dr. Bowman, the historian of Mormonism, rejected the idea that the church was distancing itself from the word because of the popular musical “The Book of Mormon,” which satirized the faith.
After the show was first staged in 2011, church leaders doubled down on the use of the term, continuing to publish a series of advertisements called “I’m a Mormon,” which aimed to counteract stereotypes about the faith by telling personal stories.
Historians have another rationale for the shift. In making this policy change, the church may wish to associate itself with the wider Christian world by referring to Jesus Christ in its name, said Dr. Bennett, the professor at Brigham Young University.
