Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo is facing activist and actress Cynthia Nixon in New York’s Democratic primary next month. But in public appearances the governor is focusing on a different rival: President Trump.
There was a time when Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo used to shy away from criticizing President Trump. No more.
Now, as the governor seeks a third term, he rarely goes even a day without slinging a one-liner at Mr. Trump or threatening to sue him.
It represents a sharp change in tactics for Mr. Cuomo, who as recently as mid-2017 said he found “nasty ad hominem attacks” on Mr. Trump unhelpful.
But taking on Mr. Trump also thrusts Mr. Cuomo, whose extemporaneous speaking style can lead to verbal misfires, into the national spotlight, for better or worse.
The remark drew furious reaction from the right — it was bannered on the Drudge Report and the talk of Fox News — further cementing Mr. Cuomo’s status as a left-wing villain from New York, as his staff sought to backtrack and push back simultaneously.
“A total meltdown!” declared Mr. Trump.
“We will not go back to discrimination, segregation, sexism, isolationism, racism or the KKK,” Mr. Cuomo replied.
For a governor known for his fixation with polls (he has spent nearly $300,000 on them since the start of 2017), the anti-Trump strategy is informed by months of focus groups and survey research, according to people involved with the campaign. Mr. Cuomo has rotated the issues he has challenged Mr. Trump on — immigration, abortion and guns most loudly of late — but the broader frame of him leading the charge against the White House has been the same.
“Thank God for New Yorkers that we have his tenacity, his toughness, his competence and his experience because he knows how to push back,” said Maggie Moran, Mr. Cuomo’s campaign manager.
“The reality is that Cuomo is desperately trying to run against Donald Trump because he doesn’t have the progressive credentials to run against me,” she said on Thursday.
When Ms. Nixon first emerged on the scene in March, Mr. Cuomo had found himself seemingly responding to her every move. Her campaign gleefully branded it #TheCynthiaEffect, as he moved toward legalizing marijuana, for example, or presided over Democrats reuniting in Albany after years of division that had helped empower Republicans.
But the governor has mostly ignored her in recent months, doing so at the urging of numerous advisers who intervened in late spring to say his aggression was damaging his own standing while elevating hers. He recently agreed to one televised debate.
While Mr. Cuomo had begun to speak out directly against Mr. Trump months before Ms. Nixon emerged on the scene — especially about the tax cut legislation that targeted high-tax states like New York and the slow response to Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico — he has clearly turbocharged his rhetoric and focus in recent months.
By early May, Mr. Cuomo was incorporating the line that “New York is the alternative state to Trump’s America” not just into his stump speech but his administration’s daily posture.
There have been cable news hits, news conferences and, in a particular Cuomo favorite, sternly worded open letters (eight since the start of July) to Mr. Trump and his administration.
His tactical shift was particularly evident at an event at a Manhattan hospital last month, when he railed against “Trump and his cronies” for undermining the health care system. A year earlier, the governor appeared on the very same stage, with the same banner — “Fighting for N.Y.’s Healthcare” — that was used last month. Then, Mr. Cuomo had conspicuously avoided saying Mr. Trump’s name.
The new anti-Trump message is also being amplified by millions of dollars in television ads, with Mr. Cuomo’s campaign spending more than $5 million in the last month, according to his campaign filings.
Last December, Mr. Cuomo condescended to a veteran female reporter who had asked about the state’s sexual harassment policies by saying her question was “a disservice to women.” In April, his joke that he convinced Joseph J. Lhota to lead the Metropolitan Transportation Authority by tugging on “other parts of his anatomy” fell flat.
For her part, she has tried to outdo Mr. Cuomo on opposing Mr. Trump, calling to abolish the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency and promising drivers licenses for people who are here illegally.
And yet, Mr. Cuomo’s pitch that he is the man to take on the president has a side benefit: It casts the tough-guy tactics that Ms. Nixon has hammered him for — she calls him “Andrew the Bully” — in a positive light benefiting New York.
Mr. Cuomo has aggressively leveraged his incumbency to make the contrast, ordering state agencies to reject health insurance price hikes because of the president’s partial repeal of Obamacare, suing over the federal limit on deducting state and local taxes, and leaking word through senior administration officials that his tax department is investigating the Donald J. Trump Foundation (no matter that New York’s attorney general had separately already filed a lawsuit accusing the foundation of violating campaign finance laws and self-dealing).
So eager has Mr. Cuomo been to burnish his anti-Trump credentials that he broke the news on CNN of a multistate lawsuit against the Trump administration’s child-separation policy in late June before an agreed-upon embargo by the state attorneys general who were filing the suit, according to two people with direct knowledge of the episode.
“When we file, how we announce — that matters a lot to us,” said one state attorney general, not from New York, who was involved in the case and spoke on condition of anonymity to describe a sensitive legal and political matter, adding that Mr. Cuomo unnecessarily gave the Trump administration advance notice, even if by an hour.
Mostly, it was viewed as Mr. Cuomo trying to take credit for a broader legal action against the Trump administration. “Amongst A.G.s, it’s a collective eye-roll,” the attorney general said.