Jeanie Walls Knigin and William Gary Knisely met in 2016, after a woman whom Ms. Knigin knew referred Mr. Knisely to her as a potential date. It turned out that he had been out with several other women in Ms. Knigin’s sphere, but none had been quite right, and each had suggested that he might contact another acquaintance.
After their first date, on a Friday, they agreed to meet again the following Tuesday.
But then Ms. Knigin received an email from Mr. Knisely saying that he wouldn’t be able to meet again after all. He’d been seeing someone else and had mistakenly thought that the relationship had concluded.
Six months later, Mr. Knisely contacted Ms. Knigin again. This time, he said, the other relationship was truly over, and Ms. Knigin had been on his mind since that first date.
Capt. Richard Williamson Hagner spotted Capt. Jaclyn Georgette Ambriscoe in classes during two weeks of preliminary training at Fort Lee, in Virginia, in February 2013, before heading to Charlottesville, Va., to study military law for eight weeks in the Judge Advocate General’s Legal Center and School. He said he noticed her for two reasons.
Although Captain Ambriscoe considered him “good-looking, gentlemanly and polite,” when she briefly chatted with him at the food court on the Fort Lee base, she did not take him up on his offer to sit with him.
“I was focused on wearing my uniform correctly or learning how to salute,” she said.
She eased up in Charlottesville, where they began hanging out in the same group for meals and outings, and when her parents took him and some of her friends to lunch after graduation she recalled her mother whispering in her ear.
“My mother thought he was the one for me,” she said.
Felicia Renaye Griffin and Sean Lorenzo Simpson met in 2014 at an annual conference for statisticians that was held that year in Baltimore. They initially saw each other in a workshop on diversity, but later that evening, they found themselves at the same table at a social event, and a spark between them ignited.
The two exchanged business cards and over the next months had contact sporadically. She was finishing up graduate school in Florida, and he was in Winston-Salem.
The following year, at the very same conference, they met again.
It wasn’t a surprise. Both were on conference committees, and they had exchanged email on matters relevant to the conference, and so they expected to see each other. But for Dr. Griffin, at least, there was some planning ahead to take care of.
“It was kind of like, yeah, you know, let me make sure I’m looking really great because I know I’m going to see him there,” she said.
Kiara Chloe Brereton and Tyler Christian Dziama were married Aug. 4 at the Riverside Church in New York. The Rev. Michael Livingston, the senior executive minister at the church, officiated.
The bride, 26, and groom, 28, met at Trinity College in Hartford, from which they graduated.
Mrs. Dziama is a management consultant at EY, the New York-based accounting firm.
She is a daughter of Janice E. Augustine and Gerald Augustine of Graniteville, Staten Island. The bride’s father retired as a member of NYU Langone Medical Center’s information systems team in New York. Her mother is a former senior accounts coordinator at Universal Music Group, also in New York.
Mr. Dziama, is an associate at Neuberger Berman, an investment management firm with headquarters in New York.
He is a son of Kimberly N. Dziama and Jeffrey R. Dziama of Wellesley, Mass. The groom’s mother is a mental health counselor at MetroWest Hospital in Framingham, Mass. His father is a managing director of J. P. Morgan Private Bank in New York.
Amanee Michelle Markos and John Russell Ablan were married Aug. 4 at Christ Episcopal Church in La Crosse, Wis. The Very Rev. Archpriest Dionysios Wilhelm, an Antiochian Orthodox priest, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 35, is a program manager at The New York Times for its educational student travel program, Student Journeys. She graduated from the University of Wisconsin-Madison and received a master’s degree in international comparative education from Stanford.
She is a daughter of Terri L. Markos and Richard E. Markos of La Crescent, Minn. The bride’s father owns and operates Markos Apparel, a retail and wholesale clothing company in La Crosse. He is also an elected official for the township of Hokah, Minn. Her mother retired as the director of international services and cultural outreach for Winona State University in Winona, Minn. She is also a committee member for the global awareness fund of the La Crosse Community Foundation.
The groom, 32, is a vice president and legal counsel for Credit Suisse in New York. He graduated from Washington University in St. Louis. He also received an Master of Science in economic history from the London School of Economics and Political Science, and a law degree from Vanderbilt.
He is a son of Marilyn R. Ablan and James J. Ablan of Chicago. The groom’s mother retired as a commercial real estate investment professional at MassMutual in Chicago. His father owns and operates Beacon Real Estate Investments in Chicago.
The couple have been acquainted since childhood. The bride’s family attended the same church as the groom’s grandmother, where they initially met in the early ’90s, when the groom visited his grandmother.
Masako Ikegami and Alexander Diez are to be married Aug. 5 at the Bretton Woods Country Club in Germantown, Md. Matthew Ford, the groom’s uncle who became a Universal Life minister for the event, is to officiate.
The bride, 34, is a landscape architect for the SWA Group, a landscape architecture, urban design and planning firm in Los Angeles. She graduated from the University of Toronto, Canada and received a master’s degree in landscape architecture from Harvard.
She is the daughter of Hiroko Ikegami and Takao Ikegami of Darnestown, Md.
The groom, 33, works in Los Angeles as an architect for Gensler, an integrated architecture, design, planning and consulting firm based in San Francisco. He graduated from Roger Williams University in Bristol, R.I.
He is the son of Joanne G. Diez and Alejandro Diez of Princeton, N.J.
The couple met in 2015 through mutual friends in Brooklyn.
Sarah Rose Langberg and Andrew John Schirack were married Aug. 4 at the Schirack Farm in Wasilla, Alaska. Rabbi Abram Ezra Goodstein officiated.
Mrs. Schirack, 31, is a lawyer in the Anchorage office of the law firm Perkins Coie. She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton and received a law degree from Yale, from which she also received a master’s degree in environmental management. In 2004, she won a top prize at the Intel International Science & Engineering Fair in Portland, Ore.
She is a daughter of Phyllis B. Langberg and Dr. Gerald J. Langberg of Fort Myers, Fla. The bride’s father retired as an oral and maxillofacial surgeon in Seattle; his private practice was managed by the bride’s mother. The bride’s father was also an instructor of oral and maxillofacial surgery at the University of Washington.
Mr. Schirack, who is 29 and goes by A. J., is a mechanical engineer in Anchorage for RSA Engineering. He graduated from the University of Alaska in Fairbanks.
He is a son of Julia M. Schirack and John A. Schirack of Wasilla. The groom’s parents own and operate Schirack Farm, a hay farm in Wasilla that they took over from the groom’s maternal grandfather, who homesteaded it in 1950, before Alaska gained statehood.
The bride moved to Alaska in August 2014 for what she thought would be a one-year stint clerking for Dana Fabe, then the chief justice of the Alaska Supreme Court. The bride decided to stay after falling in love with Alaska, and a lifelong Alaskan, whom she met on Bumble in July 2016.
Dr. Jacqueline Anne Madison and Jonathon Carson Tap were married Aug. 4 in Port Austin, Mich. Dr. Priya A. Rajdev, a Universal Life minister and friend of the couple, officiated at Huron City, a frontier lumber town that is operated as a living history museum and was founded by the bride’s maternal great-great-great-grandfather.
Dr. Madison, 31, is a fellow in pediatric and adult rheumatology at the University of Michigan Hospital in Ann Arbor, Mich. She graduated from Yale and received a medical degree from Michigan.
She is the daughter of Gretchen Parcells Madison and Norbert T. Madison of Grosse Pointe Park, Mich. The bride’s father is a shareholder in the law firm Fraser Trebilcock; he works in the Detroit office. Her mother is a special-education teacher at East English Village Preparatory Academy in Detroit.
Mr. Tap, also 31, is a project manager for a doctors’ organization at Michigan Medicine, the health system of the University of Michigan. From 2009 to 2010 he was an aide in Washington to then-Senator Carl M. Levin, a Michigan Democrat. The groom graduated and received a master’s degree in public policy from Michigan, where he is now a second-year M.B.A. student.
He is the son of Juliana M. Carson and Dennis M. Tap of Livonia, Mich. The groom’s mother is a fulfillment specialist in the service parts operations of General Motors in Belleville, Mich. His father is a sales associate at Les Stanford Chevrolet, a car dealership in Dearborn, Mich.
The couple met on the dating app Hinge in 2015.
Robyn Beth Fialkow and Dr. Mark Philip Kurzrok were married Aug. 4 at Sunset Terrace at Chelsea Piers in Manhattan. Kenneth Elmore, a Universal Life minister, officiated. On Aug. 3, Joshua M. Fialkow, the bride’s brother, oversaw the signing of a ketubah, a Jewish marriage contract.
Mrs. Kurzok, 31, is a fourth-grade special education teacher at Public School 87 in Manhattan. She graduated cum laude and received a master’s degree in higher education administration from Boston University, and received a master’s degree in elementary inclusive education from Columbia.
She is the daughter of June Silverman Fialkow of North Massapequa, N.Y., and the late Richard B. Fialkow. The bride’s mother retired as an English teacher at Plainedge High School in North Massapequa. Her father retired as the president of City Stationers, an office equipment company that was in Manhattan.
Dr. Kurzrok, 30, is a third-year resident in psychiatry at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan. He graduated magna cum laude from Duke, received a master’s degree in public health from Johns Hopkins University and received a medical degree from the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.
He is a son of Dr. Dorothy Bulas Kurzrok and Dr. Neal M. Kurzrok of Bethesda, Md. The groom’s mother, a pediatric radiologist, is the chief of diagnostic imaging and radiology at the Children’s National Medical Center in Washington. His father, a neurologist, is in private practice in Washington.
The couple met in June 2015 through the dating app Hinge, and had their first date in New York at a wine bar on the Upper East Side.
Zachary Merrill Robbins and Scott Joseph Ehlen were married Aug. 4 in Provincetown, Mass. Myrna G. Robbins, a grandmother of Mr. Robbins who received permission from the State of Massachusetts to solemnize the marriage, officiated at the Pilgrim Monument.
Mr. Robbins (left), 29, is a manager, consulting on state and local tax matters, at Crowe, an accounting firm in Chicago. He graduated from George Washington University and received a law degree from Suffolk University.
He is a son of Deborah A. Robbins and Mark A. Robbins of East Longmeadow, Mass. Mr. Robbins’s mother is a licensed practical nurse in the primary care practice at Mercy Medical Center in East Longmeadow. His father is the owner of Mark Robbins Jewelers in Springfield, Mass.
Mr. Ehlen, 34, is an associate in the investment banking group in the Chicago office of Robert W. Baird, a financial services firm. He graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received an M.B.A. from Boston University.
He is a son of Catherine A. Ehlen and Daniel J. Ehlen of Elkhart Lake, Wis. Mr. Ehlen’s mother retired as a first-grade teacher at Lincoln Elementary School in Wauwatosa, Wis. His father is a vending sales director at the AVS Companies, a distributor of amusement, gaming and vending equipment; he works in the company’s Hartford, Wis., office.
The couple met online in 2008 while living in Washington.
Ye Dam Lee and Julio Angel Alicea were married Aug. 2 at Trinity at 22nd, an events space at the Center for Urban Life affiliated with Trinity Memorial Church in Philadelphia. The Rev. Timothy Thomson-Hohl, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony.
The bride and the groom met at Blackstone Academy Charter School in Pawtucket, R.I., where, until June, both were teachers.
Mrs. Alicea, 25, is a ninth-to-11th grade mathematics teacher at the Polytechnic School, a private school in Pasadena, Calif. She graduated cum laude from Harvard.
She is the daughter of Helen Y. Lee of Placentia, Calif., and Kevin Lee of Seoul, South Korea. The bride’s father is an education consultant and trains debate coaches in Seoul. Her mother is an independent certified public accountant in Irvine, Calif.
Mr. Alicea, 26, is pursuing a doctorate in urban schooling at University of California, Los Angeles. He graduated with high honors from Swarthmore, and received a Master of Arts in Teaching from Brown.
He is a son of Cindy L. Cope and Carlos A. Alicea, both of Bethlehem, Pa. Until 2009 the groom’s mother was an environmental service worker at ManorCare Health Services, a provider of nursing care in Bethlehem. Until 2005 his father was a factory worker at various plants in the Lehigh Valley area of Pennsylvania.
The couple met in 2016 at summer staff meetings at Blackstone Academy, when she arrived as a new teacher. At this June’s graduation, Mr. Alicea, elected as the faculty speaker by the senior class, and already engaged and heading to Los Angeles with Ms. Lee, mentioned that like the students he was going to a new school, and never in his wildest dreams did he imagine he would be marrying his “high school sweetheart,” to which the audience responded with laughter and awws.
Sara Snedeker and Dr. Edward Joseph Houston are to be married Aug. 5 in Olalla, Wash. Elizabeth Houston, the sister of the groom who became a Universal Life minister for the occasion, is to officiate.
The bride, 28, will take her husband’s name. She is a communications manager at Amazon Web Services in Seattle. She graduated cum laude from Barnard College. She is a daughter of Mona Rivera of Manhasset, N.Y., and Robert A. Snedeker of Roslyn, N.Y. The bride’s father, who works in Jamaica, Queens, is the director of Northeast Customs Brokerage Operations at United Parcel Service. Her mother is a news anchor at the ABC News Radio network in Manhattan.
The groom, 30, is a third-year obstetrician/gynecologist resident at Madigan Army Medical Center on Joint Base Lewis-McChord in Tacoma, Wash. He is also an Army captain treating active duty service members and their families. He graduated from N.Y.U. and received a medical degree from Uniformed Services University in Bethesda, Md.
He is a son of Mary Jane Houston and Vincent Houston of Hartsdale, N.Y. The groom’s mother is an art teacher at RAD ART School in Hartsdale. His father is the head coach of the Iona Preparatory crew team in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The couple originally met in 2009 through a mutual friend in Manhattan. They later reconnected at the same friend’s wedding in 2014, while the groom was in medical school in Bethesda. After two years of long-distance dating, they moved cross-country to begin their lives together in Washington State.
Barbara Bitner Whitton and Peter Stanfill Tufo were married Aug. 4 at Hildene, a museum in Manchester, Vt. Nicholas Z. Hammerschlag, a brother-in-law of the bride and a longtime friend of the groom, officiated, having received permission from Vermont to solemnize the marriage. Ashley T. Jeffress, a childhood friend of the bride, took part in leading the ceremony.
Mrs. Tufo, 27, is known as Bea. She is a business associate, managing operations and business development, at Teton Sports & Spine Imaging in Jackson, Wyo. She is also a certified yoga and fitness instructor at Pursue Movement Studio in Jackson, and provides yoga instruction on YogaToday, an online streaming service for yoga practitioners. She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
She is a daughter of Linda F. Whitton and John R. Whitton III of Pembroke, Bermuda. The bride’s father is the managing director and portfolio manager for bonds in the investments division of Arch Capital Group, an insurance and reinsurance company in Pembroke. Her mother is a trustee of Middlebury College.
Mr. Tufo, 31, is the financial controller at Teton Gravity Research, a digital and film production company in Jackson that specializes in extreme sports. He graduated from Vanderbilt University.
He is the son of Francesca Stanfill Nye of New York and Peter F. Tufo of Southampton, N.Y. The groom’s mother writes under the name Francesca Stanfill, and her novels include “Wakefield Hall” (Villard, 1993). She is also a trustee of the New York Society Library. His father retired as an investment banker in the advisory practice at Merrill Lynch, the New York investment bank, and was the ambassador to Hungary from 1996 to 2000. He also served as the chairman and chief executive of the New York State Thruway Authority from 1989 to 1996. The groom is also a stepson of Maya Rana Tufo and of Richard B. Nye.
The bridegroom’s grandfather is Dennis C. Stanfill of Pasadena, Calif., a former chairman and chief executive of the 20th Century Fox Film Corporation.
The couple met originally in 2011, at the wedding of the officiant and Ms. Whitton’s sister, but after Ms. Whitton moved to New York, in 2014, Mr. Tufo asked for a second introduction. The two had a dinner date, and hit it off right away.
Julia Yenha Trankiem and Marlen Duanne Whitley were married Aug. 3 at the Beverly Hills Courthouse in Beverly Hills, Calif. On Aug. 18, the couple is to take part in a spiritual ceremony with family and friends at a private residence in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico. Travis Townsend, a friend of the couple, is to lead the ceremony.
Mrs. Trankiem Whitley, 39, is a partner in Hunton Andrews Kurth, a law firm based in Richmond, Va. She works in the firm’s Los Angeles office. She graduated from U.C.L.A., and received a law degree from the University of Michigan.
She is a daughter of Tuong-Giang Trankiem and Dr. Thuc A. Trankiem of Encino, Calif.
Mr. Whitley, 42, is a lawyer in Irvine, Calif. He was previously a corporate and securities partner in the Houston office of the international law firm Reed Smith. He graduated from the University of Texas, from which he also received a law degree.
He is the son of the late Brenda Jewel Whitley and the late Jackie Don Whitley, who lived in Little Rock, Ark.
The couple met in May 2015 while working together as lawyers at Reed Smith in Houston.
Paige Rachel Landsem and Timothy Sinh-Nhat Huynh are to be married Aug. 5 at Castaway Portland, an events space in Portland, Ore. The Rev. Joseph Yu, a Presbyterian minister, is to officiate.
The bride, 28, is a publicity manager in New York for “The Rachael Ray Show,” the daytime talk show. She graduated from the University of Oregon.
She is a daughter of Kimberly S. Landsem and Mark E. Landsem of Portland.
The groom, 30, is a photo editor at The Wall Street Journal in New York. He graduated from Taylor University in Upland, Ind., and received a master’s degree in journalism from the University of Missouri in Columbia.
He is a son of An-Ninh P. Huynh and Rev. Linh V. Huynh of Round Rock, Tex.
The couple met in New York while attending Redeemer Presbyterian Church, where Mr. Yu is a pastor.
Divya Gopal and Joseph Gerald Moroney were married Aug. 4 at the Fearrington House Inn, a hotel in Pittsboro, N.C. Pandit Shivananda Bhat officiated.
The couple met at the London Business School, from which they received M.B.A. degrees.
Ms. Gopal, 35, works in London as a high yield credit analyst for T. Rowe Price, the asset management firm based in Baltimore. She graduated with honors and distinction as a Morehead Scholar from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She is a daughter of Dr. Krishna K. Talluri and Ramagopal S. Muppirala of Morrisville, N.C. The bride’s father is the president and chief executive of Phoenix Cardiac Devices in Morrisville. Her mother is a physician and consultant, also in Morrisville.
Until last month, Mr. Moroney, also 35, was a senior associate in the Luxembourg City, Luxembourg office of Loyens & Loeff, a law firm with headquarters in New York. He graduated from University College Dublin, from which he also received a law degree.
He is the son of Geraldine Moroney and Joseph A. Moroney of Kirkstown, County Donegal, Ireland. The groom’s mother is a sales assistant at Penney’s, a clothing store in Letterkenny, Donegal, Ireland. His father, who is retired, was an Irish civil servant.
Hayley Renée Curry and Fabio Leonardi were married Aug. 4 at Arnold Palmer’s Latrobe Country Club in Latrobe, Pa. Judge Chris F. Scherer of the Court of Common Pleas of Westmoreland County, Pa., officiated.
Ms. Curry, 31, is an associate in the privacy and data security group, in Washington, of the law firm Morrison & Foerster. She graduated summa cum laude from Vanderbilt and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania. From 2012 to 2016, she served in the Army, attaining the rank of captain and working as a lawyer in the office of the Army general counsel at the Pentagon.
She is the daughter of Shirley M. Hyatt-Curry and James A. Curry of Unity Township, Pa. The bride’s father retired as a state trooper in the Greensburg, Pa., barracks. Her mother, who is retired, was a second-grade teacher at R.K. Mellon Elementary School in Ligonier, Pa.
Mr. Leonardi, 32, is a senior associate in the white-collar defense and government investigations group, in Washington, of the law firm Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman. He graduated from the University of Padua in Italy, received a law degree from George Washington University and then received a Master of Laws in tax law from Georgetown, where he is now an adjunct law professor.
He is the son of Paola Cicala and Lauro N. Leonardi of Vittorio Veneto, Italy. The groom’s father retired as an administrative officer in the municipal engineering department of Vittorio Veneto.
The couple met on the dating website Match.com.
Tegan Vivian Donnelley was married Aug. 4 to Colin Cornelius Stalnecker in Southfield, Mass. The Rev. Stanislaus Gumula, a Roman Catholic priest and a friend of the bride’s family, officiated at the family’s vacation home.
The bride, 29, is in her final year at Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York. She graduated summa cum laude from Yale, and received a master of philosophy in history and philosophy of science and medicine from the University of Cambridge.
She is a daughter of Vivian Donnelley of New York and the late Strachan Donnelley. The bride’s mother is a retired senior admissions associate at the Dalton School in New York, and is a trustee of the American Museum of Natural History. The bride’s father was the founder and president of the Center for Humans and Nature, an environmental ethics organization based in Chicago.
The groom, 32, is a vice president in the New York office of H.I.G. Capital, a private equity firm. He graduated from Yale and has an M.B.A. from Stanford.
He is a son of Julie Stalnecker and Dr. Michael Stalnecker of Indianapolis. The groom’s father is a plastic surgeon with Community Hospitals Indianapolis, and is a former assistant professor in the Department of Surgery at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons.
The couple met in September 2010, through mutual friends at a Yale alumni event in Chicago two days after the bride moved to the city after her college graduation.
Alexandra Villamia Drimal and Samuel John Barr were married Aug. 4 at Deity, an events space in Brooklyn. Paul A. Engelmayer, a federal judge for the Southern District of New York, for whom the groom clerked from 2015-16, officiated.
The couple met at Harvard, from which the groom graduated summa cum laude, and where the bride and groom each received a law degree, the groom magna cum laude.
The bride, 28, is a lawyer for the Community Development Project at the Urban Justice Center, a nonprofit organization in Manhattan, where she represents tenants facing discrimination and displacement. She graduated magna cum laude from Boston College.
She is the daughter of Arlene Villamia Drimal and Craig Childs Drimal of Weston, Conn.
The groom, also 28, is a lawyer at Appellate Advocates, a nonprofit organization in Manhattan, where he represents indigent criminal defendants appealing their convictions.
He is the son of Rebecca Vogel of Metuchen, N.J., and the late Stephen H. Barr.
The couple met as students in Harvard’s public defense clinic, the Criminal Justice Institute. A mutual friend who had agreed to accompany the groom on an investigation pretended to be injured and asked the bride to take his place.
Regan Anne Marin and Huan Hung Nguyen were married Aug. 4 at Glen Island Harbour Club in New Rochelle, N.Y. Alan D. Marrus, a retired justice of the New York State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, officiated.
Mrs. Nguyen, 26, is an earth-science teacher at Central Queens Academy in Glendale, Queens. She graduated from Bryant University in Smithfield, R.I., and received a master’s degree in secondary education in general science from Fairfield University.
She is a daughter of Rita Camhi Marin and Richard P. Marin of Bedford, N.Y. Her father is a senior partner at Marin Goodman, a law firm in Mamaroneck, N.Y. Her mother retired in June as an assistant general counsel in the legal department, in Manhattan, of Con Edison, the power company.
Mr. Nguyen, 27, is a compliance associate, covering corporate finance, in the Manhattan office of Deutsche Bank, the German investment bank. He graduated from Connecticut College and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School. He is also an assistant coach for the men’s and women’s tennis teams at Connecticut College.
He is the son of Hieu K. Ly and Ha H. Nguyen of Pleasantville, N.Y. The groom’s mother is a vice president for integrated oncology data services, in Woodcliff Lake, N.J., at Eisai, a Japanese pharmaceutical company. His father is a senior director for biostatistics in early clinical development, in Pearl River, N.Y., at Pfizer, the pharmaceutical company.
The bride and groom met in 2006 at Byram Hills High School in Armonk, N.Y., and began dating in 2009, when both were seniors.
Jillian Robbins and Kenneth Stark are to be married Aug. 5 at the Gramercy Park Hotel in New York. Rabbi Lisa Rubin is to officiate.
The bride, 29, is the associate producer at Joey Parnes Productions, a theatrical management and production company in New York. She graduated magna cum laude and with honors from Brown, and received an M.B.A. from Columbia, from which she graduated with dean’s honors and distinction.
She is the daughter of Allison S. Robbins and Dr. John B. Robbins of Manhattan. The bride’s mother is the president of Tommy Hilfiger Watches and Jewelry, a licensee of the Movado Group. Her father is the chief of neurological surgery at Phelps Memorial Hospital in Sleepy Hollow, N.Y.
The groom, 34, is the vice president for private equity at Brooklyn NY Holdings, an asset management and investment firm. He graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, from which he earned both a bachelor of arts in political science from the College of Arts & Sciences and a bachelor of science in economics from the Wharton School of Business.
He is the son of Sharla Weiner Stark and Richard B. Stark of Houston. The groom’s mother is a former secondary school teacher in the Austin Independent School District, and has served on the boards of the I. Weiner Jewish Secondary School and Weiner Foundation. The groom’s father, who works in Houston, is a strategic development planner at the Sysco Corporation, which is involved in marketing and distributing food products to restaurants, health care and educational facilities and hospitality businesses.
The couple met in New York in April 2013.
Katherine Breckinridge Later and Jack Carter Godshall were married Aug. 4 at the summer house of the bride’s family in Ephraim, Wis. Christopher A. Kliner, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for this event, officiated.
Ms. Later, 29, is a senior director for development at Lyric Opera Chicago, a performing arts company. She graduated from Smith College.
She is the daughter of Mary B. Field and G. Timothy Later of Chicago. Her father retired as the chief of staff to the Chicago Park District’s board of commissioners. Her mother is the executive producer for news and public affairs at Chicago’s PBS station, WTTW.
Mr. Godshall, 34, is developing a sustainable infrastructure investment platform, and was until July a senior vice president for sales and marketing at Invenergy, a developer, owner and operator of renewable energy sources such as wind, solar and natural gas. He graduated from Kenyon College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
He is the son of Cathy C. Godshall and Douglas N. Godshall of Akron, Ohio. His father, a lawyer, is in private practice as a mediator in Akron. His mother is a partner in Buckingham, Doolittle & Burroughs, an Akron law firm.
The couple met in 2014 through the dating app Coffee Meets Bagel, and had their first date in Chicago.
Marta Bralic and Joseph Michael Kerns were married Aug. 4 at Alyson’s Orchard in Walpole, N.H. Timur Kalimov, a friend of the couple, was given permission by the State of New Hampshire, to officiate.
The bride, 28, is the vice president for business development at Flatiron Health, a technology company in New York that aims to accelerate cancer research. She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard.
She is the daughter of Zorica Bralic and Dejan N. Bralic of Chicago. The bride’s father, who works in Chicago, is a director and market executive for PurePoint Financial, a division of the Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group. Her mother, who worked in Queens, retired as a database specialist for Langenfcheidt, a German publishing company.
The groom, who is 32 and works in Manhattan, leads a sales strategy and operations team at Facebook. He graduated from Harvard. He is also a member of New York City Community Board 3, representing Manhattan’s Chinatown and the Lower East Side.
He is a son of Marilyn Erwin Kerns and Francis Michael Kerns of New Hope, Pa. The groom’s father is a manager at J.H. Reid Generator Contractor & Recycling in South Plainfield, N.J. His mother is a teacher assistant at Maureen M. Welch Elementary in Richboro, Pa.
The couple were set up on a coffee date by a recruiter at McKinsey & Company in 2011, where the groom was working as an engagement manager and the bride was a soon-to-be intern.
Jacqueline Frances Kappler and David Moore Litt were married Aug. 4 at Seven Presidents Park in Long Branch, N.J. Elisabeth Evans, an American Marriage Ministries minister, officiated.
Ms. Kappler, 32, is the legislative director for Representative Hank Johnson, Democrat of Georgia. She graduated from Albright College in Reading, Pa., and received a law degree from Catholic University of America in Washington.
She is the daughter of Marie E. Kappler and Alan W. Kappler of Oakhurst, N.J. The bride’s father, who is retired, was a systems administrator at Georgian Court University in Lakewood, N.J. Her mother is a part-time sales associate at J.C. Penny in the Monmouth Mall in Eatontown, N.J.
Mr. Litt, 31, is a former speechwriter for President Barack Obama and the author of “Thanks, Obama: My Hopey Changey White House Years” (Ecco, 2017). He graduated from Yale.
He is the son of Sara M. Litt and Dr. Andrew W. Litt of Bainbridge Island, Wash. The groom’s mother is a board member of the Northwest Immigrant Rights Projects and of Bend the Arc, a progressive Jewish coalition, both in Seattle. His father is a neuroradiologist and an executive in residence with G.E. Ventures, also in Seattle.
The couple met through the dating app OkCupid.
Courtney Anne Chua and Rohan Keith Stevens were married Aug. 3. The Rev. Anthony Vilano performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St. Francis of Assisi in San Antonio.
The bride, 32, will continue to use her name professionally. She is an associate specializing in matrimonial, family and immigration matters at Gorlick, Kravitz & Listhaus, a Manhattan law firm. She graduated from Tufts and received a law degree from Touro College.
She is the daughter of Myrna A. Chua and Alfonso R. Chua Jr. of San Antonio. The bride’s father, a civil engineer, retired as a vice president of Pape-Dawson Engineers in San Antonio. Her mother is a nurse in the psychiatric nursing division at San Antonio Behavioral Healthcare Hospital.
The groom, 38, is an advertising sales account executive in Manhattan for Turner Broadcasting, which is a division of WarnerMedia. He graduated from Boston University.
He is a son of Sandra P. Stevens and Bruno A. Stevens of Oakland Gardens, Queens. The groom’s mother is a staff accountant in Manhattan for Air India, and is the president of the Goan Association of New York, a cultural society in Flushing, Queens, for immigrants from the Indian state of Goa. His father retired as a mail carrier for the United States Postal Service; he worked out of the Englewood Cliffs, N.J., station.
The couple met in 2015 through Match.com.
Tiya Nandi and Aditya Avinash Gulanikar were married Aug. 4 in New York. Pandit Harish Sharma, a Hindu priest, officiated at the Plaza Hotel.
Mrs. Gulanikar, 26, advises clients at Prosek Partners, a strategic financial communications firm in New York. She also serves on the young professionals board of Children’s Hope India, a nonprofit organization that raises funds to improve access to education, medical care, and job skills training. She graduated from N.Y.U. and received a law degree from Fordham.
She is a daughter of Dr. Reena Nandi and Dr. Dipak Nandi of Old Westbury, N.Y. The bride’s mother is a child psychiatrist and the director of psychiatric services at North Shore Child and Family Guidance in Roslyn, N.Y. He father, a psychiatrist, is also the chairman of Sunknowledge, a health care information technology company in New York.
Mr. Gulanikar, also 26, is an investment analyst at Silver Point Capital, an investment management firm in Greenwich, Conn. He graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth.
He is the son of Dr. Vinita Gulanikar and Dr. Avinash Gulanikar of Ridgeland, Miss. The groom’s mother is an anesthesiologist at Metro Anesthesia in Ridgeland. His father is a urologist at Urology Associates of Mississippi in Flowood, Miss.
The couple met in New York through mutual friends in October 2014.
Suzanne Ruiz Goldenkranz and Seth Benjamin Samuels are to be married Aug. 5 at Costanoa Lodge, a resort in Pescadero, Calif. Rabbi Paula Marcus is to officiate.
Ms. Goldenkranz, 31, is an associate director in the performance technologies division at EAB, an education consulting firm based in Washington. She graduated from Washington University in St. Louis.
She is the daughter of Andrew N. Goldenkranz of Aptos, Calif., and the late Kathy Ruiz-Goldenkranz. The bride’s father is a science teacher at Cupertino High School and a director of science and technology projects for the Fremont Union High School District, both in Cupertino, Calif. He is on the board of the Santa Cruz County Community Health Centers in Santa Cruz, Calif. Her mother was a labor organizer and community leader in Santa Cruz. She was the president of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Santa Cruz County in California.
Mr. Samuels, 36, is the chief analytics officer at the Messina Group in Washington, a political and business consulting firm. The groom graduated with high honors from Wesleyan University and received a master’s degree from University of California, Berkeley.
He is a son of Frances Rosenblatt Samuels of Tel Aviv and Jeffrey B. Samuels of New York. The groom’s mother retired as a director of college counseling from the upper school at Trevor Day School in New York. His father is a partner in the New York law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, of which until 2017 he was a chairman of the tax department. He is a vice chairman of the Careers Through Culinary Arts Program, a national nonprofit job-training and internship program for underserved high school students.
The couple met in 2015 when they sat next to each other at a Thanksgiving dinner hosted by mutual friends in Washington.