Now Mr. Kobach, who oversees the state’s elections, finds himself in charge of a closely watched Republican gubernatorial primary that is far too close to call. Just 191 votes separated the two candidates on Wednesday with all precincts reporting. Some mail-in and provisional ballots were yet to be counted. A lengthy recount process seemed likely.
The candidate holding the razor-thin lead? Mr. Kobach himself.
This awkward coda to the long, tense primary campaign between Mr. Kobach and the sitting governor, Jeff Colyer, threatens to further divide long-feuding Kansas Republicans. Even before Tuesday’s voting Republicans had feared that Mr. Kobach’s nomination could imperil their hold on the governorship and a pair of congressional seats in November’s election.
And now it forces Mr. Kobach toward an uncomfortable choice: Recuse himself from one of his office’s most important tasks, or oversee a sensitive and critical process where conflict of interest questions are unavoidable.
In a news conference Wednesday afternoon, Mr. Kobach said that he was declaring a “tentative victory” in the primary and planned to begin campaigning for the general election. But he said thousands of votes remained to be counted and conceded that Mr. Colyer could surpass him and clinch the nomination.
Mr. Kobach suggested he had no plans to recuse himself from an eventual recount, saying that the actual ballot counting would be done at the county level, that his role would be merely supervisory and that there were safeguards in place to ensure the integrity of the process.
“It’s an issue that is endemic to having an elected secretary of state,” Mr. Kobach said.
Mr. Kobach and Mr. Colyer are both politically conservative, though with far different styles and personalities. Mr. Kobach, a Yale-educated lawyer, has for years burnished a national profile by drafting voter I.D. legislation and helping states and cities enact and defend restrictions on voting and immigration. He served as vice chairman of Mr. Trump’s voter fraud panel, which was disbanded after failing to find evidence of the widespread election rigging that the president claimed.
Mr. Colyer, more mainstream and mild-mannered, served seven years as Sam Brownback’s lieutenant governor. Since taking over as governor about six months ago, he has tried to broker compromise on a longstanding school funding debate and has signed a law allowing state-contracted adoption agencies to reject gay couples on religious grounds.
Speaking Wednesday afternoon at the Capitol, Mr. Colyer said he was hopeful that mail-in and provisional ballots would favor his campaign. He declined to take a position on whether Mr. Kobach should recuse himself from any potential recount.
In a message to supporters, Mr. Colyer said he expected every county would have mailed-in ballots to count, perhaps hundreds in larger counties. These ballot are valid if received by Friday, as long as they were mailed by election day.
Whichever candidate emerges the winner, he will face State Senator Laura Kelly, the Democratic nominee, and Greg Orman, a businessman running as an independent.
State Representative Brett Parker, a Democrat from Overland Park, said the continuing Republican primary for governor could help Ms. Kelly make inroads on the campaign trail. Mr. Parker said he believed both Republicans were beatable in November.
A fierce Trump loyalist whose pugnacious approach mimics the president’s, Mr. Kobach received Mr. Trump’s endorsement on Monday, less than 24 hours before the polls opened. It was the latest in a string of endorsements the president has doled out as he increasingly weighs in on midterm races. But many Republicans, in Kansas and in Mr. Trump’s own White House, were uneasy about the president intervening in the race, fearing that a Kobach candidacy would turn off independents and centrist Republicans while energizing Democrats.
That could not only imperil the Republican hold on the governor’s office but also hand Democrats a chance to win a pair of competitive House seats.
One of those districts involves an open seat that is held by a Republican not seeking re-election, and encompasses Topeka and Lawrence, a more liberal university town. A former state House Democratic leader, Paul Davis, won his party’s nomination on Tuesday and will face Republican and Army veteran Steve Watkins.
In the other House district where Republicans could be vulnerable, Sharice Davids, a lawyer who is Native American, won the Democratic congressional primary on Wednesday in a swing district that surrounds Kansas City. She will face Representative Kevin Yoder in the general election.
Kansas has long been the reddest of red states at the federal level. Republicans hold control of the entire congressional delegation, have carried the state in 13 consecutive presidential elections and supported Mr. Trump in 2016 by a nearly 21-point margin.
But Democrats have repeatedly won the governorship here thanks in part to longstanding divisions between moderate and conservative Republicans.
Some Kansas Republicans played down the prospect of a damaging schism over a potential Kobach candidacy, pointing to the challenge Democrats may have forging their own coalition. For Democrats to win here, they must lure large numbers of independents and poach some Republicans. The candidacy of Mr. Orman, a centrist who ran as an independent for the Senate in 2014, threatens to complicate that task.
“He’s going to be a refuge for some moderates and take some Democrats,” Steve Fitzgerald, a Republican state senator, said of Mr. Orman.
Mr. Kobach echoed part of that message at his news conference. Even as he pledged to begin campaigning in the general election, he called on Republicans to avoid the divisions that have plagued the state party before. And Mr. Kobach encouraged his own supporters to vote for Mr. Colyer if he became the nominee.
