H. F. Lenfest, a cable television mogul turned philanthropist who donated hundreds of millions of dollars to arts, education and journalism institutions in Philadelphia, died there on Sunday. He was 88.
Mr. Lenfest, who was known as Gerry, was taken from his home in Rittenhouse Square and pronounced dead at Penn Presbyterian Medical Center, said Fred Stein, a family spokesman and friend. The cause was complications of chronic illness, Mr. Stein said.
Mr. Lenfest joined the media group Triangle Publications in 1965 after working at a New York law firm. When the company sold its cable television assets, he purchased them with the help of two investors and expanded the assets into the 11th largest cable company in the country.
He and his wife, Marguerite Lenfest, made $1.2 billion after selling the company, Suburban Cable, to Comcast in 2000. They donated an estimated $1.1 billion, The Associated Press reported.
Mr. Lenfest had long been a supporter of public institutions that served the community, donating millions to Columbia University, the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the Lenfest College Scholars program and the Barnes Foundation in Philadelphia, according to the Lenfest Institute for Journalism. He also contributed to the Museum of the American Revolution.
In 2012, he made his name in journalism at a time when daily newspapers were confronting dwindling circulation and advertising revenues, and were seeking new business models and sources of income.
Mr. Lenfest was part of a group of investors that purchased the Philadelphia Media Network, publisher of The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Philadelphia Daily News and Philly.com.
At the time, he had come to see newspapers as a public trust, similar to museums and libraries, David Boardman, the chairman of the Lenfest Institute, said on Sunday.
Mr. Lenfest and a fellow investor, Lewis Katz, agreed in 2014 to pay $88 million to buy the Philadelphia publications. Just days after the purchase, Mr. Katz died in a plane crash.
In 2016, Mr. Lenfest announced that he had donated the three news outlets to a new nonprofit he had created, the Institute for Journalism in New Media, which was later renamed the Lenfest Institute for Journalism. He said the move was intended to extend the publications’ longevity in a new digital age.
“My goal is to ensure that the journalism traditionally provided by the printed newspapers is given a new life and prolonged, while new media formats for its distribution are being developed,” he said at the time.
He stepped down as chairman of the institute in 2017, and Mr. Boardman took his place.
By investing in those news outlets in Philadelphia, Mr. Lenfest helped create a way for local journalism to survive and possibly be replicated in other parts of the country, Mr. Boardman said.
Harold FitzGerald Lenfest was born on May 29, 1930, in Jacksonville, Fla., the son of Harold C. and Herrena FitzGerald Lenfest. He liked to be known as Gerry because he wanted a common man’s name, Mr. Stein said.
When Harold was 13, the family moved to a farm near Lambertville, N.J. He went to Flemington High School and graduated from Mercersburg Academy in Pennsylvania.
He graduated from Washington and Lee University in Lexington, Va., with a degree in economics in 1953, served in the Navy, attaining the rank of captain, and graduated from Columbia Law School. He married Marguerite Brooks in 1955, when she was a senior in college.
In addition to his wife, Mr. Lenfest is survived by his children, Diane Lenfest Myer, H. Chase Lenfest and Brook Lenfest; his sisters, Marie Schmitz and Lauren Lenfest; a brother, Robin; and four grandchildren.