A long-awaited analysis of Hurricane Maria’s deadly sweep through Puerto Rico prompted the government on Tuesday to sharply increase the official death toll. The government now estimates that 2,975 people died as a result of the disaster and its effects, which unfolded over months.
The new assessment is many times greater than the previous official tally of 64, which was not revised for nearly a year despite convincing evidence that the official death certificates failed to take full account of the fatal and often long-range impacts from the storm across the island.
The revision came just hours after the release of a new assessment of excess deaths in the roughly six months after the storm, conducted at the government’s request by researchers at George Washington University’s Milken Institute School of Public Health. Their report found that nearly 3,000 more deaths than expected occurred in the wake of the storm — 22 percent more than the number of deaths that normally might have occurred in that period.
At issue has been how to assess the severity of a storm whose devastating impact on fundamental needs — water, electricity, communications and medical care — seemed to rival or exceed that of the deadliest recent storms to hit the United States, but whose official fatality count until now was far less severe. By comparison, Hurricane Katrina, which struck the Gulf Coast in 2005, is thought to have killed anywhere from 1,000 to more than 1,800 people.
The government’s latest revision brings to a close a year of debate and scientific scrutiny over fatality estimates that had seemed to vary widely — in some cases by thousands. Gov. Ricardo Rosselló faced constant political challenges over the disparity between the official death toll, released within weeks of the disaster, and what was apparent to most scientific researchers and reporters who investigated deaths. The inability to provide a reliable death count seemed, to many critics, to echo the dysfunction apparent in the island’s lack of preparation or any swift, effective response from the local and federal governments.
Relief supplies were bottled up at the port, gas and food were in short supply, and electrical power was cut off to large sections of the island for months. Full power was restored to the last homes only this month.
On Tuesday, Mr. Rosselló said he would move immediately to improve the process for certifying deaths and communicating information among public and private health workers.
“Everybody’s going to be held accountable and everybody’s going to be expected to make changes,” he said at a news conference in San Juan. He added that the island would establish a registry for people who are likely to be the most vulnerable, such as the elderly and those who rely on kidney dialysis.
In a visit to the island around two weeks after Hurricane Maria, when the official death toll stood at 16, President Trump contrasted the number with the “hundreds and hundreds of people that died” after Hurricane Katrina. “Everybody watching can really be very proud of what’s taken place in Puerto Rico,” he said.
The new research, which was performed independently of the government, compared the actual death rate with what would have been expected had the storm not occurred — a method used in several earlier analyses. In December, The New York Times found that 1,052 more people than usual died in the 42 days after Hurricane Maria made landfall.
A study by Harvard researchers published in The New England Journal of Medicine earlier this year estimated the death toll could range from 800 to more than 8,000 people, and was based on a household survey.
The results of the new study make clear what the government had recognized even before the official expansion of the death toll, officials said on Tuesday.
The George Washington University researchers released very few details of their methodology or analysis, making it difficult to assess the quality of their work, which was carried out at a cost of $305,000 and also included an analysis of how the government certified deaths and communicated about them. They wrote that “national and international experts in different fields” had reviewed their methods. The report has not yet been subjected to the more rigorous process of being published in a peer-reviewed medical journal, though it has been submitted for publication.
The new study has two main differences from most previous analyses. Researchers looked at deaths for a longer time period, from last September — when two hurricanes, Irma and Maria, hit the island in close succession — until this past February. Deaths continued to be elevated throughout this period.
The researchers also adjusted their calculations for what they estimated to be an 8 percent drop in the population after the storm and prolonged power failures, when thousands of people fled for the mainland. Using data from the territory’s Bureau of Transportation Statistics as well as from a government survey of airline travelers, the researchers estimated that nearly 280,000 fewer people were living on the island in February as the previous September. That exodus made it even more significant that deaths had increased compared with previous years.
People in poorer municipalities and older men had a higher risk of death throughout the study period, the researchers found.
The researchers also tried to understand why the official death count was so low, despite the overall spike in deaths.
In completing death certificates, which were the basis for the official count, doctors followed conventions that considered the disaster a factor only if it directly contributed to a death — for example, through “structural collapse, flying debris, floods and drownings.” The doctors at the time were not aware of new guidelines from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, released the month after the hurricane, which recommend that doctors also consider a natural disaster’s indirect impacts — for example, from delayed access to health care.
Some doctors told the researchers in interviews that they were confused about the new guidelines, or concerned that listing the hurricane as a contributor was too subjective, or could raise questions of liability.
“Most physicians have no formal training in completing a death certificate and thus are not aware of appropriate death certification practices, especially in a disaster setting,” the study found.
The researchers also concluded that while there were delays in registering deaths that ranged from about a week to a month, those delays did not appear to have affected the overall quality of the process. The vital statistics office was damaged and lost power after the storm. Records were kept on paper until electronic systems could again be used.
The researchers reported that when vital records personnel noticed that the number of deaths per day was higher than normal, but that few death certificates related those deaths to the hurricane, the department tried to disseminate the C.D.C. guidelines to hospitals, doctors and funeral home directors by email and in meetings.
Dr. Gilbert Burnham, a professor of international health and founder of the Center for Humanitarian Health at Johns Hopkins University, said the study was a good complement to the earlier Harvard research in that it factored the exodus after the storm into the excess death assessment.
“The protracted higher mortality, particularly among males, is interesting and opens many questions about potential causes,” said Dr. Burnham, who has performed similar studies assessing deaths, including in Mosul, Iraq.
The proposed next phase of the George Washington study will examine the death certificates recorded in the months after the hurricane and will try to determine, through interviews with family members and others, whether individual deaths should be attributed to the storm. Researchers said they did not know when that next phase would be completed.
The research was performed in collaboration with the University of Puerto Rico Graduate School of Public Health. The actual number of excess deaths was statistically estimated to be in the range of 2,658 to 3,290.