Credit...Illustration by Tracy Ma. Source photograph of chair from Leathercraft Furniture.
Thanks to ruthless discipline — and a plan long in the making — the G.O.P is carrying out a sweeping transformation of the federal judiciary.
Donald F. McGahn, the White House counsel, stood in the gilded ballroom of Washington’s Mayflower Hotel last November to address the annual meeting of the Federalist Society. He seemed humbled, even a bit awed to be delivering the Barbara K. Olson Memorial lecture, named after the conservative lawyer who died in the Sept. 11 attacks. Noting some of the legal giants who gave the Olson lecture in years past, McGahn reflected, “You hear names like Scalia, Roberts and Gorsuch and then me; one of those names really is different than the rest.” Unlike previous speakers — to say nothing of many of those to whom he was now speaking — McGahn, himself a member of the Federalist Society, hadn’t attended an Ivy League law school; he went to Widener University, a “second tier” law school in Pennsylvania. He had never held a tenured professorship or boasted an appellate practice, much less a judgeship, that required him to think deeply about weighty constitutional issues; he specialized in the comparably mundane and technical field of campaign finance and election law. “But here we are,” McGahn said to the audience, almost apologetically. In 2015, Donald Trump hired McGahn to be the lawyer for his long-shot presidential campaign. Then, after Trump shockingly won the election, he tapped McGahn, who had proved his talent and loyalty during the campaign, to be White House counsel. Trump, in other words, had made McGahn’s wildest dreams come true. Now, McGahn told the Federalist Society, Trump was going to make their wildest dreams come true, too.
While Trump has lagged behind other presidents in political appointments, the streamlining of the judicial-selection process has helped him deliver a historic number of judges to the federal bench. In 2017, the Senate confirmed 12 of Trump’s appeals court picks — the most for any president in his first year in office. This year, the Senate has already confirmed 12 appellate judges and, according to a Republican Judiciary Committee aide, hopes to confirm at least four more. The White House refers to every new batch of judicial appointees Trump selects as “waves” — in early June, it announced the “Fifteenth Wave of Judicial Nominees”— as if they’re soldiers landing on the beaches of Normandy.
Trump’s appointees have tended to be unusually well credentialed and conservative. Republicans like to emphasize their academic and professional bona fides — the summa cum laudes, the Phi Beta Kappas, the Supreme Court clerks — and jokingly celebrate their “deep bench” of candidates. Democrats, for their part, prefer to focus on the appointees’ ideology. “If someone had said or written something half as controversial as these Trump nominees, they never would have been picked by President George W. Bush,” says Kristine Lucius, a former Democratic Senate Judiciary Committee aide and now the executive vice president for policy at the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights. “What once would have been disqualifying” — a nominee’s stated views on contraception or gay rights or consumer protection — “is now motivating this president.” Or perhaps, the nominees’ views are what’s motivating many conservatives to go along with Trump’s presidency — which is what’s motivating Trump.
When it comes to Trump’s judicial appointments, the public has been understandably focused on the Supreme Court, with first Neil Gorsuch and now Brett Kavanaugh receiving most of the attention. When one of Trump’s lower-court nominees has managed to penetrate public consciousness, it has usually been an outlier, like Brett Talley, whom Trump picked last year for an Alabama Federal District Court judgeship. Talley, who had never tried a case and whom the American Bar Association rated unanimously “not qualified,” ultimately withdrew his nomination after it was discovered that he was a member of a ghost-hunting group and had apparently defended the honor of the early Ku Klux Klan on an Alabama Crimson Tide football fan message board.
Like most members of the Republican establishment, Leonard Leo, the executive vice president of the Federalist Society, was initially skeptical — if not contemptuous — of Trump’s political aspirations. A few months before Trump announced his presidential bid in 2015, Sam Nunberg, then a political adviser to Trump’s campaign, tried to arrange a sit-down between his boss and Leo. “I told Leonard, ‘Mr. Trump is a conservative now on these issues, and you’re not going to believe how good he is going to be for you,’ ” Nunberg recalls.  He probably said, ‘Gee, I feel bad for that kid.’ ” The meeting between Trump and Leo never happened.
But by the time the Republican presidential primaries began in early 2016, Leo’s thinking about Trump had evolved. Trump, by then, had established himself as a plausible candidate, maybe even a front-runner. That March, Leo was part of a small group of Washington Republicans, including Gingrich and the Heritage Foundation president at the time, Jim DeMint, who met with Trump for a lunch at the Jones Day law firm, where McGahn was a partner. When the meal was over, Leo, McGahn and Trump broke off from the larger group for a private meeting. Reaching into his suit-jacket pocket, Leo presented Trump with a list of potential Supreme Court nominees that McGahn had asked him to bring — a combination of federal judges and State Supreme Court justices who Leo believed would be suitable successors to Justice Antonin Scalia, who died the previous month.
“I was really hoping for 12,” Trump told him.
“Well, you’ve got eight,” Leo replied.
“Can’t we find more?” Trump asked.
“We can try,” Leo pledged.
“It was an interesting insight that I hadn’t really thought of,” Leo told me. We were sitting at Morton’s, the venerable Washington steakhouse, where Leo, an owlish man in his 50s who wears a pocket watch, keeps a wine locker. “It was, I think, the best conversation I have ever had in my professional life with a Republican presidential candidate on the issue of judges,” he marveled.
It’s hard to take that claim at face value. In 2016 alone, Leo discussed judges with Jeb Bush — who, as governor of Florida, appointed more than 100 of them — and Ted Cruz, who clerked for Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, argued nine cases in front of the Supreme Court and himself is a member of the Federalist Society. A mere two weeks after Trump shared his insights about the judiciary with Leo, he told an interviewer that he planned to appoint Supreme Court justices who “would look very seriously at her” — Hillary Clinton’s — “email disaster.” A few months after that, Trump promised a group of congressional Republicans that he would protect “Article XII” of the Constitution — an article that doesn’t exist.
The Federalist Society was founded in 1982 by a small cadre of conservative law students at Yale and the University of Chicago. Its first faculty advisers were Robert H. Bork at Yale and Antonin Scalia at Chicago. The group quickly spread to other campuses, and within a few years it had received an infusion of cash from conservative donors, including the Koch brothers. Ever since then, if you were a law student with conservative leanings, it was more than likely you became a Federalist Society member and were absorbed into a sprawling network of law school chapters, practice groups, publications and seminars that could nurture you for your entire career. Today, the Federalist Society boasts more than 70,000 members.
For most of the organization’s first three decades, its dominant philosophical emphasis was on judicial restraint: the idea that judges shouldn’t overrule majority-passed, democratically enacted laws — that they shouldn’t, as Amanda Hollis-Brusky, a Pomona College professor and the author of the 2015 book “Ideas With Consequences: The Federalist Society and the Conservative Counterrevolution,” puts it, “move the law too far, too fast.” This philosophy emerged largely as a reaction to liberal rulings by the Warren and Burger courts — as well as those of lower-court judges — who, conservatives complained, tried to “legislate from the bench” on civil rights and civil liberties. But within the Federalist Society and the larger conservative legal movement, there was an emerging faction that favored a more aggressive approach. These libertarian legal theorists, led by the Georgetown law professor Randy Barnett, subscribed to the judicial philosophies of originalism and textualism, which hold that judges should interpret the Constitution according to the meaning of its plain text, instead of its intent or purpose, and, more important, should not hesitate to overturn any law that deviates from that text.
Critics of the Federalist Society contend that the group actually favors judicial activism: Judges who will take a stance on social issues, particularly on abortion. Many of the group’s members question the legal basis for Roe v. Wade and whether a right to privacy exists in the Constitution, as Roe held it does. Leo was hailed by the conservative legal activist and writer Ed Whelan in National Review in 2016 for being “more dedicated to the enterprise of building a Supreme Court that will overturn Roe v. Wade” than anyone else in the United States. Yet Leo accuses Democrats of “scare tactics” when they charge that Trump seeks to appoint judges who will outlaw abortion. Similarly, Trump, who at one point during the 2016 campaign pledged that Roe would be overturned because he would put “pro-life justices on the court,” maintains that he did not bring up the topic of abortion in his interviews with Brett Kavanaugh.
The Federalist Society — and the Trump administration — are more forthright about the ways in which they hope originalism and textualism may apply to other arenas, particularly government regulation. “The greatest threat to the rule of law in our modern society is the ever-expanding regulatory state,” McGahn declared in his November speech to the Federalist Society, “and the most effective bulwark against that threat is a strong judiciary.” He added, “Regulatory reform and judicial selection are so deeply connected.” This idea is now at the heart of the Federalist Society, whose members believe that federal agencies have become an unaccountable “fourth branch” of government — and that their bureaucrats, oftentimes experts in their fields, should no longer be shown any deference by the courts in how they apply laws enacted by Congress, but should instead be restrained from doing anything beyond what the law, as Congress wrote it, stipulates. The originalists and textualists now favored by the Federalist Society and the Trump administration are decidedly disinclined to defer to executive-branch agencies, whether it’s the Environmental Protection Agency or the Food and Drug Administration or the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, when it comes to interpreting arguably (and often necessarily) ambiguous statutes about the environment or public health or workplace safety. Unless Congress explicitly mandates it, originalists and textualists believe, agencies can’t do it.
From the moment Obama entered the White House, McConnell led Senate Republicans in a disciplined, sustained, at times underhanded campaign to deny the Democratic president the opportunity to appoint federal judges. McConnell’s first move came six weeks after Obama’s inauguration, in the form of a letter, signed by all 41 Republican senators, which warned the new president that if he did not consult with — and, more crucial, receive the approval of — home-state senators for his judicial nominees, then the Republicans would filibuster, insisting on 60 votes to end debate. “They were very clear from the beginning that they were going to make this as difficult and as partisan as possible,” says Christopher Kang, who worked on judicial nominations in the Obama White House Counsel’s Office.
Even without Leahy’s strict blue-slip policy, Obama would probably still have sought Republican approval for his judges. He was less interested in making the judiciary more liberal than in making it more diverse. It was important, Obama once told The New Yorker, for minorities “to see folks in robes that look like them.” Surely, there were African-American, Latino, Asian, gay and female judges with moderate records and temperaments whom Republican senators could support. “We were in the business of picking judges,” says Michael Zubrensky, a former Department of Justice official who worked on judicial nominations in the Obama administration, “not picking fights.” The fundamental battles Obama wanted to wage with Republicans involved legislation, not a long game with the courts.
The issue came to a head in the fall of 2013 over three vacancies in particular — all of them on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Senate Republicans had been unable to prevent the nominees from receiving a hearing, because there were no home-state senators to withhold blue slips. But when the Senate’s majority leader at the time, Harry Reid, brought each of the three nominees to the floor, Republican senators, who by then numbered 45, refused to give them a vote. The Republicans didn’t object to the nominees themselves; all three were considered moderate and eminently qualified. Rather, the Republicans argued that the District of Columbia Circuit’s caseload was so meager that the judgeships should be eliminated. Reid decided to invoke what was known as the “nuclear option,” doing away with filibusters for most nominations by presidents, including those to the lower courts.
With the filibuster for lower-court judicial nominations eliminated, Obama was able to score more than 100 judicial confirmations in just over a year. Then and now, Republicans denounced Reid’s triggering of the nuclear option. “You’ll regret this,” Mitch McConnell warned in 2013, “and you may regret this a lot sooner than you think.” But with Leahy leading the Judiciary Committee, Republican senators, even without the filibuster, still maintained some leverage — and whenever possible, they used their blue slips to bottle up Obama’s judicial nominations. Saxby Chambliss and Johnny Isakson, both Georgia Republicans, held up Jill Pryor’s nomination to the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit for two years, finally returning their blue slips only after Obama agreed to nominate one of their picks to another 11th Circuit vacancy and three of their picks to district court judgeships. Democrats might have played hardball with the nuclear option, but they still shrank from a fight, either because they agreed with Leahy that the blue slip was an important procedural safeguard or because they didn’t have the stomach to pressure him to change his stance.
Republicans weren’t as squeamish. After taking back the Senate in the 2014 midterm elections, McConnell, now the majority leader, began a near blockade of Obama’s judicial appointments. In Reagan’s final two years in office, 66 of his district court and 15 of his appeals court nominees were confirmed. Clinton managed 57 and 13 in his last two years. George W. Bush had 58 and 10. In Obama’s final two years, 18 of his district nominees and just one of his appellate court nominees were confirmed — the lowest number since Harry Truman was president.
One of the earliest, and ultimately most prolonged, battles in McConnell’s fight for Republican control of the judiciary began when a routine vacancy opened up on the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Wisconsin in 2010. Wisconsin had long been considered a model of bipartisanship in filling vacancies in the federal judiciary. In 1979, the state’s senators, William Proxmire and Gaylord Nelson, established a commission to depoliticize the judicial-selection process. Known as Wisconsin’s Federal Nominating Commission, it was composed of 11 legal experts — some appointed by the senators, others by the state bar — and led by the dean of the law school at either Marquette or the University of Wisconsin. It solicited applications, vetted candidates and ultimately came up with a list of four to six individuals that the senators would review and forward to the White House for consideration.
To fill the Seventh Circuit vacancy in 2010, the commission recommended six candidates to replace Terence Evans, who was taking senior status. Kohl and Feingold forwarded the names to Obama for consideration. In July, Obama nominated Victoria Nourse, a University of Wisconsin law professor and former Senate Judiciary Committee staff member for Joe Biden. She was a fairly typical Obama nominee, in that she was a woman (42 percent of Obama’s judges were women, the highest percentage of any president) and a moderate (besides working for Biden, Nourse worked on the Judiciary Committee with Orrin Hatch, a Utah Republican). She was also typical in that the Obama administration and Senate Democrats didn’t seem to afford her nomination much urgency. At the end of 2010, Nourse still had not been scheduled for a confirmation hearing.
This would prove to be a problem when, in November of that year, Feingold lost his re-election campaign to Ron Johnson, a Republican businessman and Tea Party candidate. Although Feingold had returned his blue slip for Nourse, as well as for a nominee to a district court, Johnson, upon joining the Senate, essentially took them back. In Wisconsin, legal experts chalked up Johnson’s move to inexperience. “Everybody just assumed that once he got up to speed, he would see these were quality nominees and would support them,” says Michelle Behnke, a former state bar president who served on the commission. But Johnson was simply adhering to the Washington Republican playbook, outlined by McConnell in his original letter about judges to Obama two years earlier. Nourse says she repeatedly sought a meeting with Johnson so he could review her credentials, but he rebuffed her entreaties and refused to return her blue slip. In early 2012, after 18 months of waiting, Nourse withdrew her nomination. Johnson, meanwhile, said he wanted Wisconsin to come up with a new system for recommending judges, but he and Kohl couldn’t agree on what it would look like. The Obama administration declined to nominate anyone until they could.
In 2012, Representative Tammy Baldwin, a Democrat, was elected to succeed Kohl in the Senate. One of her first acts was to meet with Johnson to start filling Wisconsin’s judicial vacancies. Johnson insisted on a new nominating commission with a different structure. No longer would the state bar or the state’s law school deans participate, nor would a senator whose party was in the White House be able to appoint more members. Instead, the commission would consist of six members, three appointed by each senator. Under the commission’s new rules, a judicial candidate needed five votes to be recommended for a judgeship; the commission was required to recommend four to six candidates. Baldwin agreed to Johnson’s stipulations, and in April 2013, the commission was formed.
The commission began soliciting applications for the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit seat in 2014, which by then had been vacant for more than four years. By the end of 2014, the commission had reviewed numerous applications for the position and interviewed eight candidates, but only two, a Madison lawyer named Don Schott and a Milwaukee Circuit Court judge named Rick Sankovitz, received the requisite five votes. Months later, when the commission was still at an impasse, Baldwin sent the White House the names of the eight candidates interviewed. Johnson and his commissioners cried foul. “In our view, there’s no sense in which they were finalists,” says Rick Esenberg, one of Johnson’s commissioners.
Rather than take advantage of the deadlock to nominate a “finalist” of whom the commission’s Republican members disapproved, the Obama administration sought to defuse tensions and quickly settled on Schott, one of two candidates who had received five votes, as its likely nominee. In late July 2015, the White House initiated Schott’s F.B.I. background investigation and American Bar Association evaluation, which were concluded by early September. It stood to reason that Johnson would support Schott’s nomination — after all, he had been recommended by the commission Johnson established — but the White House wanted to make sure before it went ahead with it. Johnson dragged his feet. First, according to a former government official familiar with the process, Johnson asked to see Schott’s F.B.I. file. “I don’t remember any other instance in which a Senate office made that request” before a nomination was made, the official says. When the Obama administration wouldn’t give Johnson Schott’s F.B.I. file, Johnson insisted on interviewing Schott himself. But then he didn’t schedule an interview. Finally, Schott flew to Washington in early November to meet with Johnson. In January 2016, six years after the Seventh Circuit seat became vacant, Johnson told the White House that Schott was acceptable, and Schott was quickly nominated.
Then came another round of delays. First, Johnson didn’t return his blue slip for Schott until March. Next, Charles E. Grassley, the Iowa Republican and chairman of the Judiciary Committee, stalled on scheduling a confirmation hearing. Finally, in May, Schott was given a hearing. Baldwin appeared to introduce him and speak on his behalf to the committee. Johnson did not attend. Although he had returned his blue slip, he refused to offer Schott any support. “I have recommended the committee consider it,” Johnson explained. “What I am not going to do is publicly go out and make any other statements beyond that.” Nonetheless, in June, the Judiciary Committee voted 13 to 7 to advance Schott’s nomination. By now, however, there were only five months until the presidential election, and with McConnell already refusing to give Merrick Garland a hearing for his Supreme Court nomination, it seemed unlikely that he would schedule a floor vote for Schott. The White House and Baldwin pressed him; Johnson did nothing. In November, when Trump was elected and Johnson was re-elected, Schott still hadn’t been given a vote. His nomination was dead.
Even before Trump was sworn in as president, Don McGahn, Leonard Leo and other members of Trump’s transition team began vetting potential judicial candidates to fill all the empty seats on the bench. Together with McConnell, McGahn and transition officials devised a strategy to speed confirmations through the Senate: Trump would prioritize appellate judges, rather than district court ones, and initially fill vacancies from states with two Republican senators or from states with Democratic senators that had been won by Trump. Like George W. Bush, Trump wouldn’t allow the American Bar Association to vet potential judges before they were nominated. But under the new way of business, the Senate wouldn’t necessarily wait for the association to complete its vetting before the nominees were given hearings. The Judiciary Committee would also more regularly take the unusual step of holding confirmation hearings for two appellate nominees at a time.
The most crucial procedural maneuver, however, involved the blue slip. When Grassley became chairman of the Judiciary Committee in 2015 after Republicans took back the Senate, he publicly indicated (in a column in The Des Moines Register) and privately said (in a conversation with Leahy, according to Leahy) that he would afford blue slips the same weight as his Democratic predecessor. If both home-state senators didn’t return their blue slips, the nominee wouldn’t receive a hearing. Sure enough, in Obama’s final two years in the White House, Grassley denied hearings to four appellate court and five district court nominees who didn’t receive blue slips. (A Grassley spokesman maintains that the nominees didn’t receive hearings “solely” because of unreturned blue slips.) Although this benefited Republicans, it was viewed not as partisan but as principled; Grassley, in his sixth term and having just turned 80, was, like Leahy, an avowed institutionalist.
While Grassley and the White House have sought the input of some Democratic senators on judicial nominations from their states — notably those in the Democratic leadership, like Chuck Schumer, Richard Durbin and Dianne Feinstein, the ranking Democrat on the Judiciary Committee — they have, more often than not, steamrolled the rest of them.
Similarly, Oregon’s Democratic senators, Jeff Merkley and Ron Wyden, both refused to return their blue slips for Ryan Bounds, Trump’s nominee for a judgeship on the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. Bounds had concealed newspaper columns he wrote as a Stanford undergraduate in the 1990s, in which he railed against “race-focused groups” on campus and likened the university’s multicultural efforts to Nazi Germany. Nonetheless, Bounds received a Judiciary Committee hearing in June and was voted out of committee on an 11-to-10 party-line vote. His nomination was withdrawn minutes before a floor vote, when Senator Tim Scott of South Carolina, the only African-American Republican in the Senate, announced that he wouldn’t vote for Bounds on account of those columns.
During the transition, Trump’s advisers turned their attention to Wisconsin’s Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit vacancy. Leonard Leo and several others recommended Mike Brennan for the spot. A Milwaukee lawyer and a founding member of that city’s Federalist Society chapter, Brennan had been the chairman of an advisory committee that helped Gov. Scott Walker select his own state-level judges, many of whom had won plaudits from conservatives. In March 2017, seven weeks into Trump’s presidency, the White House Counsel’s Office interviewed Brennan for the appellate judgeship. This was somewhat awkward, because Johnson and Baldwin had intended to use their beleaguered commission to help fill the vacancy. Johnson prevailed upon the White House to hold off on making a nomination until the commission could review candidates, and in April it began accepting applications.
Brennan applied. So, surprisingly, did Schott. According to those familiar with the commission’s deliberations, which are confidential, Schott initially received the same five votes he did two years earlier, but when the Republican commissioners realized that Brennan had fallen short of the required five votes — receiving just four — two commissioners changed their votes, and Schott finished with just three. If in 2014 the commission was able to give Johnson and Baldwin only two names, this time it came up with zero. In June, Schott was invited to Washington to interview with the White House Counsel’s Office. Five weeks later, Trump nominated Brennan for the vacancy.
Johnson hailed the move, but Baldwin cried foul, noting that the commission hadn’t recommended any candidates for the Seventh Circuit, nor did she believe that she had been sufficiently consulted by the White House Counsel’s Office about Brennan. She said she wouldn’t return her blue slip. But under Grassley’s new blue-slip policy, that didn’t matter. In January, the Judiciary Committee held a confirmation hearing for Brennan. Two weeks later, the committee approved Brennan’s nomination 11 to 10 on a party-line vote. And in May, Brennan’s nomination came before the full Senate, which approved it 49 to 46. After 3,044 days of sitting vacant, Terence Evans’s Seventh Circuit seat was finally filled.
Yet despite Trump’s record on judicial appointments, some in the conservative legal movement remain uneasy. “He’s been great, and everything’s good,” one prominent conservative legal activist says, “but what happens if the Senate goes 50-50? What happens if Don McGahn gets replaced by Judge Napolitano?” Or what happens when an originalist judge does something that goes against Trump? When Neil Gorsuch was awaiting confirmation to the Supreme Court, he told a Democratic senator that Trump’s attacks on the federal judge who temporarily blocked his travel ban were “demoralizing.” According to The Washington Post, Trump contemplated withdrawing his nomination because Gorsuch was not “loyal.” But after reading Gorsuch’s note thanking him for the nomination — “Your address to Congress was magnificent,” Gorsuch wrote — he decided to stay the course.
For the moment, Trump may believe that originalism and textualism cut in his favor, but there is no guarantee this will always be the case. While a president with an intellectual commitment to originalism and textualism would most likely be philosophical about a ruling from a like-minded judge that runs counter to his political or personal interests, this doesn’t describe Trump. He would almost certainly interpret such a ruling as evidence of a judge’s “cowardice” and “weakness.” Yet Trump can’t simply fire the offending judge the way he fires a secretary of state; these are lifetime appointments and thus, unlike so many others whom Trump has ushered into power, judges are protected from his capriciousness. Earlier this year, McConnell, looking back on Trump’s achievements in 2017, noted that the tax bill was “hugely important,” but added that once Democrats took back control of the White House or Congress, they would revisit the tax code. By contrast, he said, “the thing that will last the longest is the courts” — whether Trump ultimately wants them to or not.