The organization that made the posters, DrinkWise, describes its focus as promoting “a healthier and safer drinking culture in Australia,” but is funded largely by the alcohol industry. It withdrew the 2,400 posters after hearing complaints and substituted new text.
But concerns remained among people working to spread the message that women should stay away from alcohol while pregnant.
In an emailed statement, DrinkWise’s chief executive, Simon Strahan, suggested the flap was more about precise messaging than intent.
“It is clear, from the ‘It’s safest not to drink while pregnant’ headline of the posters, that the intent is to encourage abstinence when pregnant, planning a pregnancy or breast-feeding,” he said.
“DrinkWise wants to ensure all women are aware of the risks of drinking while pregnant,” he wrote.
In the updated poster, the disputed line was replaced with: “A very important choice you can make for the health of your baby is to abstain from alcohol while pregnant, planning a pregnancy or breast-feeding.” The news was first reported by The Sydney Morning Herald.
Indeed, health organizations are virtually unanimous on the issue: Women shouldn’t drink while pregnant. Doing so can cause an array of physical and mental impairments in the child.
While just about every public health organization agrees the best option is to not drink, there is some debate about the exact effects of drinking early in a pregnancy, or drinking small amounts throughout. Some studies have suggested the effects are minimal.
But many working in public health note that those studies are far from conclusive, and they say the uncertainty shouldn’t be taken as a green light to drink.
It’s an issue that advocates continue to push in Australia through public health campaigns. A study published in the Medical Journal of Australia reported that 53 percent of pregnant Australian women drank in 2007, but the number had fallen to 35 percent by 2011. In that time, the number of women who drank after the first trimester dropped to 26 percent from 42 percent.
