Sometimes it seems as if we’re living under a constant barrage of heavy news. But it isn’t all bad out there. This feature is meant to send you into the weekend with a smile, or at least a lighter heart. Want to get The Week in Good News by email? Sign up here.
Paris sees a rise in urban beekeeping.
“The bee is the insect the most essential for life on the planet,” said Pénélope Komitès, the assistant mayor in charge of green space, biodiversity, urban agriculture and cemeteries. (Did you know bees love cemeteries?) “Perhaps one reason people now want to keep bees is that it’s a way of participating in the protection of the environment,” she said.
The city estimates that it now has more than 1,000 hives. Beekeepers include for-profit entrepreneurs, students and hobbyists.
And all that tasty Parisian honey is unlikely to be tainted by pesticides. The city has largely ensured its purity by stopping the use of chemicals in parks and gardens, as well as on home terraces and roofs.
California sets a goal: Zero carbon by 2045.
Lawmakers took aggressive steps on Tuesday to counter climate change, voting to require that all of the state’s electricity come from carbon-free sources by 2045. The move highlights California’s determination to be a leader on climate issues.
California joins Hawaii, which passed legislation in 2015 calling for 100 percent carbon-free electricity by the same deadline. Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York and Washington, D.C., are considering similar mandates.
A new dawn for night owls.
But workplace culture is changing as the traditional 9-to-5 schedule begins to fall out of favor, and the needs of us night owls are finally being recognized. You can thank creative sectors and Silicon Valley.
“The most productive coders I know — and writers and probably a lot of other creatives — tend to do a lot of their best work when others are asleep, at times that coincide with the fewest inbound distractions,” said Tim Ferriss, an author and tech investor.
Scotland is the first country to provide free sanitary products to students.
The move is part of an effort to end “period poverty,” in which girls and women miss school regularly because they can’t afford protection.
Scotland’s initiative is seen as a way to contribute to a more open conversation about menstruation, reducing stigma.
Walt Disney World workers reached a deal for a $15 minimum wage by 2021.
“I love working for Disney; it’s just that I couldn’t live off of it,” said Jessica Lella, a union steward and ride operator at the theme park in Florida. She’s been working for the company full time for nearly six years. She currently earns $10 an hour, the same rate as a new hire.
Now that wages are set to increase, she plans to stay at the company and hopes to start a family in the near future. “There is no doubt that this is going to change people’s lives,” Ms. Lella said.
Twitter catapulted a Texan into the hearts of Australians.
It started with two men named Peter Dutton. One is an Australian politician who was defeated in his efforts to become prime minister last week. The other is a popcorn seller in Austin, Tex.
The Texan was flooded with messages intended for the Australian. This being Twitter, many of them weren’t very nice.
But Mr. Dutton capitalized on the attention. Charmed by his responses on Twitter, hundreds of Australians have clamored for him to visit their country, and some donated to a crowdfunding page to buy him a plane ticket. They’ve offered him places to stay and bottomless beer.
A police officer in Argentina was promoted after breast-feeding a neglected baby.
Celeste Ayala was among a group of officers who took six siblings into state custody near Buenos Aires. The children had been living in dismal conditions.
The youngest, who was about 7 months old, was crying furiously.
So Officer Ayala, who was breast-feeding her daughter, sought permission from the hospital staff to feed and comfort the neglected baby. “I didn’t doubt it for a second,” she told an Argentine television show.
A photograph of her act of kindness was widely shared on social media. Afterward, the minister of security for the province of Buenos Aires told Officer Ayala that she was being promoted to sergeant.
