Since the news broke of Michael Cohen’s guilty plea, we’ve been getting a ton of legal questions from our readers, and I’m going to try to answer some of them. On the one hand, impeachment is a political process. But if everything Michael Cohen says is true — that the president instructed him to violate campaign finance laws by paying hush money to women who said they had affairs with him in order to influence the election — that is just the sort of thing the framers of the Constitution were concerned about. And they thought that interfering with the integrity of elections could well be an impeachable offense. Which leads us to our next question that some of you were wondering about: In general, for impeachment purposes, most scholars say that only the actions of a sitting president should matter — that criminal misconduct before a president took office should not be grounds for impeachment. But they make one exception: Did the conduct cause the president to obtain his office illicitly and corruptly? And that’s what the Cohen allegations seem to add up to. And one question we got via Twitter was: I think they’re basically surface similarities because President Clinton’s conduct — however ugly and questionable — was private conduct. In the Trump case, if the Michael Cohen allegations are correct, you may well have him corruptly obtaining his office. And that’s much more closely tied to the presidency than what was said about Bill Clinton. Lastly, one person asked if Cohen could be pardoned. The president can pardon Michael Cohen if he wishes to. Were he to pardon somebody who poses a threat to him, in a criminal proceeding, that would be the use of the president’s office not to offer clemency based on neutral grounds — but on self-interested grounds. And that, too, could raise the prospect of impeachment.
WASHINGTON — For much of the 1980s and 1990s, “the Dapper Don” and “the Donald” vied for supremacy on the front pages of New York’s tabloids. The don, John J. Gotti, died in a federal prison in 2002, while Donald J. Trump went on to be president of the United States.
Mr. Trump’s current lawyer, Mr. Giuliani, said that as a United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, he listened to 4,000 hours of taped conversations of Mafia suspects — a discipline that he claims makes him an expert in deciphering Mr. Trump’s intent in recorded exchanges with Mr. Cohen about paying off women. It has also steeped him in the language and folkways of the mob.
Who Said It: Trump or Gotti?
President Trump’s language has drawn comparisons to that of the Mafia boss John Gotti.
Mr. Giuliani was an enthusiastic fan of “The Sopranos,” once joking that HBO set its celebrated series about an everyday mob family in New Jersey because he had done such a good job driving the Mafia out of New York.
During Mr. Giuliani’s days as a United States attorney, his office was labeled the “House of Pancakes” for the parade of suspects who “flipped” to try to reduce their prison sentences.
In his Fox interview, Mr. Trump expressed a fleeting moment of sympathy for Mr. Cohen’s desire to do likewise.
At other times, he has made clear that he views disloyalty pretty much the way Mr. Gotti would have viewed the decision of his underboss, Sammy Gravano, to cooperate with the government in 1991 and testify against him in the trial that sent him away for life.
“There is nothing presidential about him or his actions,” Mr. Dean added.
His references are also unlikely to impress prosecutors like Mr. Mueller, for whom the mob is old hat. But they, too, have been struck by the parallels. Mr. Comey, in his recent book, “A Higher Loyalty,” likened his first meeting with the future president at Trump Tower in Manhattan to paying a call to a Mafia don.
To Mr. D’Antonio, the president’s tough-guy language mostly sounds quaint — the vocabulary of a man who grew up with a comic-book view that real men wore fedoras and carried .38 revolvers.
