WASHINGTON — The Trump administration issued a final rule on Wednesday that clears the way for the sale of many more health insurance policies that do not comply with the Affordable Care Act and do not have to cover prescription drugs, maternity care or people with pre-existing medical conditions.
President Trump has said that he believes that the new “short-term, limited-duration insurance” could help millions of people who do not want or need comprehensive health insurance providing the full range of benefits required by the health law.
The new plans will provide “much less expensive health care at a much lower price,” Mr. Trump said. The prices may be lower because the benefits will be fewer, and insurers do not have to cover pre-existing conditions or the people who have them.
Democrats derided the new policies as “junk insurance” that will lure healthy people away from the broader insurance market, raising premiums for sicker people and putting purchasers at risk.
“After an illness or an injury, many Americans who enroll in these G.O.P. junk health coverage plans will end up being hit by crushing medical bills, finding that they have been paying for coverage that doesn’t cover much at all,” said Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader.
Under the current rule, issued in late 2016 by the Obama administration, short-term insurance cannot last for more than three months, as it was meant to be a stopgap. Under the new rule, the limit would be 364 days, and insurers would be allowed, but not required, to extend policies. The maximum duration, including any extensions, would be 36 months.
The new rule is presented as a redefinition of “short-term, limited-duration insurance.” But it stretches the common understanding of those terms, and some of the new policies could be an attractive option for healthier consumers who now pay high prices for major medical coverage and are willing to take more risk in return for lower prices.
“Short-term is getting longer!” one insurance marketing company advised clients this week.
Randy Pate, a senior official at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said the Trump administration expects 600,000 people to buy the new insurance policies next year, with enrollment increasing to 1.6 million by 2022.
The agency’s chief actuary, Paul Spitalnic, has estimated that premiums for short-term policies would be about half of the average premium for coverage sold in insurance exchanges under the Affordable Care Act, roughly $340 against $620 next year.
Consumer advocates, doctors, hospitals and some insurance companies expressed deep concern about the new plans, saying they would not adequately protect people who develop serious illnesses and could further destabilize insurance markets by drawing away healthy people.
People who buy the new policies and develop cancer could “face astronomical costs” and “may be forced to forgo treatment entirely because of costs,” said Chris Hansen, the president of the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network.
Stung by such criticism, Trump administration officials said they would require insurers to tell consumers exactly what is and what is not covered under the new policies.
The new rule takes effect in two months. Consumers could see the new policies in October or November. That creates a potentially confusing situation for consumers, who typically shop for insurance that complies with the Affordable Care Act in the annual open enrollment period that starts Nov. 1.
The short-term policies will be subject to state regulation. States can restrict their sale or require specific benefits, and some states have indicated that they intend to do so.
In another rule, issued six weeks ago, the Trump administration made it easier for small businesses to band together to set up health plans that skirt many requirements of the Affordable Care Act.
In the past year, the Trump administration has also cut funds for groups that help people sign up for coverage; ended cost-sharing subsidies paid to insurers on behalf of low-income people; and asked a federal court to throw out parts of the Affordable Care Act, including the popular protections for people with pre-existing conditions.
Some insurers see the new short-term plans as a potentially lucrative opportunity.
The UnitedHealth Group has largely withdrawn from the Affordable Care Act marketplace, but it is actively selling short-term medical plans through its Golden Rule Insurance Company.
On its website, UnitedHealth says that short-term plans are available for as little as $23.70 a month — for some unmarried women aged 19 to 24 who do not smoke. The plans have a $10,000 deductible, which is $2,650 more than the out-of-pocket costs allowed under a plan that complies with the Affordable Care Act.
Jan Dubauskas, general counsel of healthedeals.com, a division of the Independence Holding Company, known as IHC Group, said her company would go to market with 12-month plans in states that allow them, like Arizona, Arkansas, Oklahoma and Texas, starting in October.
Short-term plans were originally intended for people who were between jobs or needed temporary coverage for other reasons.
The administration acknowledged that making short-term insurance more available, for longer periods of time, could raise premiums for individual health insurance coverage in the Affordable Care Act marketplace. When premiums rise, federal costs also increase because the government subsidizes premiums for more than 85 percent of people buying insurance in the marketplace.
The additional cost to the federal government will total $28 billion over 10 years, according to an official estimate published with the new rule.
Federal subsidies are not available for short-term policies. Most people who qualify for subsidies will stay in the public marketplace, the administration predicted.
At the same time, it said, most of the people who switch from marketplace plans to short-term insurance “will be relatively young or relatively healthy” and will have annual incomes above $48,000 for an individual or $98,000 for a family of four, making them ineligible for subsidies.
