Politics|The Marines Didn’t Think Women Belonged in the Infantry. She’s Proving Them Wrong.
The Marines Didn’t Think Women Belonged in the Infantry. She’s Proving Them Wrong.
MOUNT BUNDEY TRAINING AREA, Australia — First Lt. Marina A. Hierl watched a dozen Marines charge toward human silhouettes made of paper atop a nearby hill. Despite the early hour, the troops’ armored vests and camouflage uniforms were soaked with sweat. She stood back as they scrambled up the rocky incline, shouting and firing rifles.
But Lieutenant Hierl is the first woman in the Marine Corps to lead an infantry platoon — a historic moment for a male-dominated organization that had fiercely opposed integrating female troops into combat, something that still unsettles many within the ranks.
Lieutenant Hierl is one of four platoon commanders in Echo Company. Her presence, first eyed with skepticism, appears to have been quietly accepted.
Thirty-seven women have attended the Marines Corps’ Infantry Officer Course at Quantico, Va., for 13 weeks of combat evaluations and mileslong hikes carrying heavy loads. Only two women have passed.
Of those two women, only Lieutenant Hierl has been given a platoon of roughly 35 men to lead.
Last fall, Lieutenant Hierl was among the handful of new lieutenants who reported to duty with the Second Battalion, Fourth Marines at Camp Pendleton in California. The battalion is made up of about 1,000 troops divided into five companies, including Echo.
When the commanding officer of Echo Company, Capt. Neal T. Jones, learned that Lieutenant Hierl had been assigned to the battalion, he asked that she be sent to his unit.
Captain Jones and Echo Company’s most senior noncommissioned officer, First Sgt. Paul G. Quesada, decided not to tell the unit about Lieutenant Hierl before her arrival. She would be treated like any other new officer.
In 2013, during Lieutenant Hierl’s sophomore year at the University of Southern California, Leon E. Panetta, then the defense secretary, announced that women would no longer be excluded from combat roles in the military. The directive would initially have the greatest effect on the ground warfare of the Army and the Marines, especially their infantries, which demand physical strength and endurance.
The moment remains a vivid memory because, Lieutenant Hierl said, it had not occurred to her that her gender could have kept her from leading Marines in war.
Over all, women make up about 15 percent of the military’s 1.3 million active-duty troops.
By contrast, 740 female soldiers have been allowed into previously restricted combat jobs out of the roughly 65,000 women in the Army. Fifteen women have graduated from its arduous Ranger school, including Capt. Kristen M. Griest, who became the Army’s first female infantry officer in 2016.
Lieutenant Hierl has avoided publicity and is reluctant to talk about herself. The training mission in Australia, observed by The New York Times, was the first time that a journalist has embedded with a Marine infantry unit led by a woman. But she repeatedly sidestepped interviews and spoke sparingly for this article, insisting that she instead needed to focus on her job and on the Marines under her command.
Lieutenant Hierl’s arrival to Third Platoon was, as some put it, strange.
Lance Cpl. Kai Segura, 20, is among the young Marines who make up a majority of Third Platoon and is its frequent, if unofficial, spokesman. He was suspicious of Lieutenant Hierl until she led the group back from an exercise in the Mojave Desert soon after she arrived.
Her seemingly casual pace turned out to be deceptively fast, forcing the other Marines into a near jog to keep up. That, Lance Corporal Segura said, showed that her physical ability was not in question — one of the many important, if sometimes peculiar, measuring sticks for a new officer.
In the months that followed, Lieutenant Hierl earned Third Platoon’s quiet respect. With help from Staff Sgt. Jesse Rodriguez, the platoon’s top enlisted Marine who serves as a sounding board and a mentor, they found their footing.
“She’s one of us,” Lance Corporal Segura said.
Two months later, Third Platoon and the rest of Echo Company split from the rest of the battalion in the country’s south and headed to the dusty shrub of the Northern Territory for their first large field exercise in Australia.
Wearing her hair in either a bun or a low braid, Lieutenant Hierl alternated with Sergeant Rodriguez in running Third Platoon through the training. As Lieutenant Hierl issued orders against the din of rifle fire, she dropped her usually reserved, soft-spoken demeanor for a firm tone that left no doubt about who was in command.
Each morning, Lieutenant Hierl woke before the rest of Third Platoon and crouched in a nearby tree line, poring over a map and a computer tablet to ensure that machine guns and mortars that were firing from the rear were angled correctly to avoid hitting the advancing Marines.
Colonel Cook said he was there to watch the entire company, but he largely appeared focused on Third Platoon — even as he took pains to not single out Lieutenant Hierl.
There are two other female Marines in the battalion, both in enlisted ranks. Colonel Cook said their performance has been at least equal to that of the men.
Over the next two days, Lieutenant Hierl led Third Platoon into its first attack range in Australia.
On the platoon’s second and final run of the simulated attack, Lieutenant Hierl, again under the eye of senior officers, led Third Platoon into the draw.
Armed with thousands of rounds of ammunition, the Marines pushed toward the bunkers after mortar explosions subsided and machine guns stopped firing from a nearby hill. But as the platoon closed in, the radio operator assigned to Lieutenant Hierl noticed the device’s antenna had snapped off.
Kneeling behind a tree and trying to fix the antenna, the radio operator did not realize he was no longer by Lieutenant Hierl’s side until she was hundreds of yards away. He ran toward his commander, struggling to keep up.
By the end of the nearly hourlong attack, Third Platoon had stopped shooting and was spread out atop a hill. One of the officers monitoring the exercise threw a tear gas grenade, forcing the Marines to put on gas masks.
The 38 men and one woman of Third Platoon were quickly indistinguishable, a kaleidoscope of green camouflage, tan bulletproof vests and black masks. One Marine struggled to put on the mask. It was not Lieutenant Hierl.