SYDNEY, Australia — An Australian lawmaker invoked a Nazi euphemism for genocide on Tuesday, calling for a “final solution to the immigration problem” during a speech in Parliament in which he proposed a national plebiscite on banning all Muslims from entering the country.
“We as a nation are entitled to insist that those who are allowed to come here predominately reflect the historic European-Christian composition of society and embrace our language, culture and values as a people,” said Senator Fraser Anning, a member of Katter’s Australian Party, a small, conservative political party.
On Wednesday, leaders from across the political spectrum condemned Mr. Anning’s remarks. Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull, of Australia’s conservative Liberal Party, called them a “shocking insult” to the millions of Jews who perished in the Holocaust, and he used the moment to appeal to the country’s Muslim population.
Other politicians, from the Greens to the far right, joined in denouncing Mr. Anning. But some critics said his speech, while extreme in its choice of language, was not that far off in tone from much of Australia’s recent public debate about immigration.
Decades after Parliament phased out the so-called White Australia policy, which limited immigration by people of non-European descent, critics contend that racism is again creeping into the national discussion of the issue, with politicians scapegoating new migrants to score populist points.
On Wednesday, Anne Aly, a member of the opposition Labor Party who was the first Muslim woman elected to Parliament, broke into tears as she addressed the House of Representatives about the speech.
“I’m tired of fighting. I’m tired of having to stand up against hate, against vilification, time and time and time again,” she said.
In a telephone interview after her speech, Ms. Aly called Mr. Anning a white supremacist and accused him of abusing the bully pulpit of the Senate.
In an interview on Wednesday, Mr. Anning said that he had not intended to invoke Nazi language but refused to apologize for his comments.
He reiterated his call for a national vote on banning Muslim migration, accusing Muslim immigrants of failing to integrate into society. “We don’t need to bring more people in this country who may cause us harm,” he said.
Bob Katter, the lawmaker who founded the party to which Mr. Anning belongs, lauded the senator on Wednesday.
A motion to censure Mr. Anning was introduced by the Greens party on Wednesday but did not pass Parliament. Lawmakers instead agreed to a statement supporting the principle that “race, faith or ethnic origin” should not be a factor in creating immigration policy.
In recent years, Australia has become a focus of migration for Muslims escaping war and economic deprivation in the Middle East, Southeast Asia and Africa. The country has a maintained a contentious policy of offshore detention, on remote islands in the South Pacific, for migrants who try to reach Australia by boat.
The influx in immigration has strained resources and infrastructure in some cities. Critics of Muslim immigration have also pointed to several small attacks carried out by people who voiced support for Islamist extremism, although many of those people showed signs of mental illness.
“Political speech sets the tone for our society and Fraser Anning’s speech flirted with inciting the most serious kind of violence against Muslims,” said Tim Soutphommasane, Australia’s race discrimination commissioner.
At the Immigration Museum in Melbourne, dedicated to celebrating Australia’s diversity, visitors and employees tried to take Mr. Anning’s comments in stride.
She smiled and fixed her black hijab, noting that in her two years in Australia she has generally felt welcomed. Asked if Senator Anning’s comments made her angry, she said no.
