Our critic helps intimidated newcomers learn what to listen to, where to hear it and how to find more of what you like.
Still, let me offer a bit of advice, by answering some of the questions I’ve received.
What exactly is classical music, and what differentiates it from other musical genres?
Ah, that inevitable question. Labels can be problematic in any field; “classical music” especially so. One complication is that music history refers to the years from roughly 1750 to 1825 as the “classical” period, when Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven achieved their glory. But in a broader sense the term classical music has been adopted as a way to describe the continuing heritage of music mostly written to be performed in concert halls and opera houses by orchestras, singers, choruses, chamber ensembles and solo instrumentalists. Another characteristic is that composers in this tradition have been drawn to larger, structured forms. Still, the term is far from ideal, but no one has come up with a good alternative — yet.
Classical music is available on CDs and streaming services. Isn’t that a great way to get to know this art?
Recorded music is widely accessible, and that’s an incredible resource. Still, classical music is a performing art best experienced live. In our wired, amplified world, concert halls and opera houses are essentially the last places we can hear music in a natural acoustic, where we can savor the richness of an orchestra’s string section or the ping of a tenor’s voice. What really hooked me on this art form as a child was the splendor of the sounds, from the sumptuous beauty of the soprano Renata Tebaldi’s soft, floating high tones as Verdi’s Desdemona at the Metropolitan Opera, to the blazing sonic inundation of Leonard Bernstein conducting Stravinsky’s “The Rite of Spring” with the New York Philharmonic.
That said, one of the best trends in classical music over the last 25 years has been the growth of programs presented in very intimate spaces, like the Kaplan Penthouse at Lincoln Center. If you hear a fine string quartet filling the penthouse with just the sounds of four string instruments, and you don’t walk away a convert to chamber music (instrumental music played by a small ensemble), then this art form is probably not for you.
But if I were to stick with recordings for now, are there a few classic ones that you would recommend?
Here are some of the cherished recordings I grew up with: Igor Stravinsky conducting his own plush, exciting ballet score for “The Firebird”; the pianist Rudolf Serkin playing Beethoven’s aptly titled “Emperor” Concerto with Leonard Bernstein conducting the New York Philharmonic; Glenn Gould’s exhilarating 1955 account of Bach’s “Goldberg” Variations (which he rerecorded, quite differently, in 1981). Last year, I made a case for Maria Callas’s 1953 recording of Puccini’s “Tosca” as the greatest all-around recording of any complete opera.
If I hear a certain work and really like it, should I get recordings and go through that composer’s catalog?
This endeavor could make what should be a bracing exploration feel like an academic assignment. If anything, I’d urge someone who was excited about, say, Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony to seek out performances of symphonies by other composers from other periods, works by Schumann, Mahler and Sibelius, or maybe Stravinsky’s “Symphony of Psalms” (a choral symphony that is one of my favorite pieces).
If you really want to hear how the Beethovenian symphonic ideal was transfigured in the 20th century, try Messiaen’s ecstatic, serenely gorgeous and cosmically wild “Turangalila” Symphony.
Now, sometimes an ensemble will survey a composer’s works in one genre through a special series of concerts: an orchestra will play the six Tchaikovsky symphonies, or a string quartet might tackle the 16 Beethoven quartets. Ventures like these can be immersive, exhilarating marathons that you’ll partake with other audience members, which makes it more fun.
Will reading about the historical era in which a piece was created help me appreciate what I’m hearing?
Though such knowledge may be informative, it’s not what matters in the moment of hearing a piece. Music has certainly changed over time. You could even say it has evolved. But it’s misleading to think you have to “understand,” say, a Bach violin concerto from the early 1700s, in order to “get” the much-later Beethoven Violin Concerto from the early 1800s or, moving ahead, the Brahms, Bartok and Berg violin concertos. Some listeners may by inclined to enjoy Bach’s animated Baroque style much more than Brahms’s teeming Romanticism. It has nothing to do with historical era.
Isn’t it helpful to know something about the musical styles and conventions of an era before hearing certain works?
Not really. Now, learning about the historical background of a particular work can certainly enhance one’s perceptions. I suggest hearing something fresh, and then, once you’re intrigued, finding out more. Take, for example, the Beethoven piano concertos. You don’t have to know about the history of the concerto genre to “get” that this form involves a back-and-forth between a soloist and an orchestra. The exchanges can be playful, stealthy or downright combative. But the feistiness is built-in and unmistakable. Just trust your instincts and your ear will serve you.
Of course, the more music you hear the more you start to pick up associations between one period and another, between one genre and another. For instance, Mozart’s passion for opera comes through in all of his music. Many of the slow movements of his piano concertos can seem like instrumental evocations of an opera aria. The pianist, almost like a singer, often plays a single melodic line in the right hand, shaping and ornamenting the “vocal” part, and adding a minimal accompaniment with the left hand, as the orchestra provides deferential backing. But even without knowing this, most listeners, I think, will intuitively sense when the soloist in Mozart’s slow movements becomes the pianist equivalent of a prima donna.
Is opera just an entirely different kind of classical music?
Yes and no. Opera is a form of drama — musical drama. So the music is of course heard, and judged, according to how it conveys the drama. By all means go to the major opera houses and hear big, grand operas. But the smaller-is-better trend has been going on in opera as well. There are lots of companies trying experimental approaches to opera in unconventional spaces and smaller halls, in almost every city. In 2011, I took my neighbors’ 12-year-old son to see his first opera: a daring production of “Don Giovanni” directed and conducted by Ivan Fischer with a good cast and the Budapest Festival Orchestra at Rose Theater at Jazz at Lincoln Center. In this riveting staging, instead of employing sets, a roster of actors with pasty-faced makeup and chalky costumes joined hands and made human formations to suggest walls and tables, doubling as choristers. I don’t think my young friend could have had a better introduction to opera. He loved it.
The Mostly Mozart Festival at Lincoln Center, running through Aug. 12, has a few enticing events coming up.
Aug. 3, Kaplan Penthouse, Lincoln Center: For one of those smaller-is-better experiences, I suggest catching the Prazak Quartet from the Czech Republic in a program of works by Mozart and a recently discovered work by a Czech contemporary of Mozart’s.
Aug. 6-8, Gelsey Kirkland Arts Center, Brooklyn: Here’s something that should be fresh and challenging: a new piece by the composer Ashley Fure and her architect brother, Adam Fure, titled “The Force of Things: An Opera for Objects,” described as an immersive music-theater piece.
Aug. 7-8, David Geffen Hall: The program, featuring the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra, with Louis Langrée conducting, offers John Adams’s “The Chairman Dances,” Mozart’s Violin Concerto No. 3 (with the rising 17-year-old violinist Daniel Lozakovich as soloist), and Beethoven’s plucky First Symphony.