A number of new hotels and other destinations are eager to help socially minded travelers put their money where their principles are. Here are a few of them.
Several European properties have taken a fresh approach to socially responsible travel by integrating pressing issues — from immigration and old age to domestic violence — into their daily operations. Travelers can contribute to worthy causes while getting a good night’s sleep.
The Magdas Hotel in Vienna not only employs and is largely run by refugees, it recruits them. The 88-room property is close to the city center and a large public park; it opened several years ago to help the new arrivals who had difficulty landing jobs. The hotel’s concept was based on the notion that refugees often had skills suited to the hotel industry: They were strong in languages (more than 20 are spoken at the hotel), comfortable in multicultural environments and from countries where hospitality is revered. “The idea was to focus on their talents, not on what they can’t do,” said Gabriela Sonnleitner, chief executive of the hotel.
Twenty refugees, overseen by 13 experienced staff members, work in reception, food services and housekeeping, and through training and apprentice programs, learn everything from German language and hotel management to how to make a perfect latte. Amenities include a cafe, conference rooms, a garden, modern guest rooms (with upcycled luggage racks from Austrian trains and artwork by the neighboring art academy), live events, Sunday brunch and dinner parties. The hotel “works in terms of its social and its economic goals,” Ms. Sonnleitner said. Caritas Vienna, a Catholic nonprofit that owns the hotel, is in talks to develop a franchise. Rooms start at €71 (approximately $82) a night.
The Black Forest Highlands, near Freiburg, Germany, is home to a growing population of aging adults. Some had hoped to rent their apartments online for extra income, but found it difficult because of limited technical skills and overwhelming and expensive upgrades. “We lost capacity for guests,” said Thorsten Rudolph, chief executive of the Black Forest Highlands Tourism Company, a public-private partnership representing 17 villages. “We have to help them,” he recalled thinking. So he developed Cuckoos Nests (Kuckucksnester) Design Apartments, named for the cuckoo bird that lays its eggs in other birds’ nests, and the cuckoo clocks that have been made in the region for centuries.
“We do the work for them,” said Mr. Rudolph, whose company oversees everything from renovations to daily management, including invoicing, cleaning and a 24/7 concierge-type service. Visitors get stylish, reasonably priced accommodations, and for stays of two or more nights, a guest card for free transportation and activities. Property owners earn money from their visitors, and the region draws tourists by offering authentic local experiences. “It’s 100 percent sustainable. Everything comes from the Black Forest,” he said, from the wood used in the flooring and furniture to goods and services, including a welcome basket. Rates for the 20 apartments (more are planned) start at €89 (approximately $103) a night for two people.
The guesthouse, in a newly renovated building that has served women in various capacities since 1869, opened on International Women’s Day in March 2017. On average, women stay two to four months, but some remain up to six months to get their affairs in order. Children are welcome. Female travelers to Zurich for business or leisure can book rooms for single nights, too. All guests enjoy a shared kitchen, free breakfast and Wi-Fi and a rooftop terrace. “Travelers to Zurich often have this image of rich bankers, beautiful ladies and expensive shops,” Ms. Kern Nyberg said, “but at Josephine’s they meet a more diverse range of inhabitants, the real Zurich.” Daily rates start at 80 Swiss Francs (approximately €69 or $80); less for longer stays.