Sculptures by the Romanian master artist are on display at a ‘focused presentation’ at the Museum of Modern Art, along with his little-known and amazing films.
“Art is itself embodied in each curve!
The sculptor chisels life down to its core.
That little poem was written by a critic for The New York Sun, waxing satirical after a visit to the 1913 Armory Show, which gave Americans their first taste of modern art.
Now, a version of Constantin Brancusi’s egg-like bust is on display at the Museum of Modern Art in “Constantin Brancusi Sculpture.” The show is built around 10 works by the Romanian modernist (1876-1957) that are longtime highlights of the museum’s own collection, in what the curators Paulina Pobocha and Mia Matthias refer to as a “focused presentation.” Packaging these MoMA treasures as a special exhibition is a way to get them seen by today’s audiences, who don’t know from permanent collections but flock to any shareable event.
Given all the chestnuts in this show, the challenge is to see if we can still find a way to be astonished by them, as we were when they first appeared. In 2018, can Brancusi still release our inner poetaster?
The answer may lie in paying less attention to the sculptures themselves and more to Brancusi’s little-known and quite amazing films, projected by MoMA at the entrance to the gallery, throughout the duration of the exhibition. They are a series of video clips borrowed from the Pompidou Center in Paris.
In the films where Brancusi shoots his own sculptures they seem more vibrant than in the museum’s white cube. Footage of his great “Endless Column,” installed in a 100-foot version in a park in his native Romania, shows Brancusi obsessed with how his soaring sculpture comes to life in the open air. He lets us watch it change as a moving sun plays across its zigzag surfaces and as his camera takes it in from all kinds of angles.
Brancusi’s films give the feeling that he is less interested in making fancy museum objects than in putting new kinds of almost-living things into the world. In one of the clips, Brancusi turns his camera on a pacing hawk, which comes across as a close, natural analog to the many “birds” he created as sculptures — not because it looks all that much like them, but because it seems to be a model for the animation he’s after when he carves.
The most striking footage at MoMA was shot in Brancusi’s studio in Paris. It shows one of his stone pedestals, which meant as much to him as the sculptures set on them, supporting a live flapper doing an ecstatic dance. The footage is totally charming and maybe a little bit cheesy. (“Damsel-as-sculpture” was already a pretty tired conceit by the Jazz Age.) It also conveys Brancusi’s own idea of the vital energy his sculptures were meant to capture. I think he truly hoped that a dancing bohemienne and a hunk of carved marble might turn out to be interchangeable.
Constantin Brancusi Sculpture: The Films. Through Feb. 18 at the Museum of Modern Art; moma.org.