Mr. Trump’s decision to follow through in punishing Mr. Brennan came only a day after his campaign brought an arbitration case against Ms. Manigault Newman to enforce a nondisclosure agreement that she signed in 2016.
Mr. Brennan has become increasingly vocal in his criticism of the president and often tweets or appears on television as a contributor on NBC to question Mr. Trump’s fitness for office. Last month, Mr. Brennan said the president should be impeached for “treasonous” behavior after Mr. Trump stood next to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia at a news conference in Finland and cast doubt on the conclusion of the intelligence agencies that Moscow interfered in the 2016 presidential election.
Mr. Ohr’s wife, Nellie — Mr. Trump singled her out as “beautiful” in a tweet over the weekend — worked until September 2016 as a contractor for Fusion GPS, the research firm that commissioned the dossier.
Clearances are typically revoked for cause, because of a security concern like alcoholism, financial problems, health concerns or the mishandling of classified material.
The standard procedure for revoking a security clearance is initiated by the sponsoring agency — which in this case would have been the C.I.A. — and includes memos outlining why a clearance is being withdrawn and, in some cases, an opportunity for the current or former official to offer a defense or rebuttal. The appeals process can be avoided if the head of an agency orders the revocation.
The C.I.A. did not begin a proceeding against Mr. Brennan or take action to remove his clearance, according to officials familiar with the process. The spy agency referred all questions to the White House.
Mr. Hayden, in an interview with CNN, said the president had “absolute authority” to oversee security clearances, but that by revoking Mr. Brennan’s for political reasons, Mr. Trump had degraded “the dignity of the office” of the president and suggested he wanted to pressure his critics into silence.
In an email, Mr. Hayden said that losing his clearance would have “a marginal impact on the work I do,” noting, for example, that he would have to resign from the proxy board of an American subsidiary of an Irish company to ensure that its work respects the classification rules of the United States.
Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, who first raised the prospect of stripping Mr. Brennan of his clearance in a meeting last month with Mr. Trump at the White House, applauded the president’s action on Wednesday.
“He participated in a shredding of constitutional rights, lied to Congress and has been monetizing and making partisan political use of his clearance since his departure,” Mr. Paul said in a statement.
But Democrats said Mr. Trump’s move against Mr. Brennan was dangerous, likening it to President Richard M. Nixon’s drawing up of a list of political opponents against whom he would use the government to extract revenge.
