CHAPEL HILL, N.C. — Protesters toppled “Silent Sam,” the towering Confederate monument at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, on Monday night, swiftly intensifying a debate over a divisive symbol at a renowned public institution.
The guerrilla demolition of the statue on the night before fall classes began, in apparent defiance of North Carolina law, provoked a crush of official outrage that may reverberate for months in Chapel Hill and in Raleigh, the state capital.
But the mood on campus on Monday night and Tuesday was celebratory. Critics of the monument, who condemned the 105-year-old display as an enduring tribute to white supremacy, hailed the potentially permanent demise of a statue that had been reviled for decades.
Protesters tried to bury the fallen statue’s head in the North Carolina dirt. But university officials, who had signaled misgivings about the monument’s continued presence on their campus while seeming to do little about it, soon secured and removed the effigy of a Confederate sentinel from the area where it had long stood.
By midday Tuesday, university leaders were sharply criticizing the toppling of Silent Sam, echoed intensely by the Republican lawmakers who control the state legislature.
The state’s legislature elects the system’s board of governors, which in turn names the president. Legislative leaders spent Tuesday angrily denouncing the events of the night before.
Still, while administrators and elected officials were beginning to navigate the political and legal fallout from the toppling of the statue, people in Chapel Hill seemed generally pleased it was gone.
Michelle McQueen, 56, a black woman who earned a degree from the university in the 1980s, posed for a selfie on Tuesday with Evan Dunn, a white senior, as she walked toward the spot where Silent Sam had stood less than 24 hours earlier.
Confederate monuments have been a source of friction for years in the modern South, but they have come under particular scrutiny since 2015, when a white supremacist murdered nine black churchgoers in Charleston, S.C. The following month, South Carolina lawmakers removed a Confederate battle flag that had been flying outside the State House in Columbia, and other symbols of the Confederacy have been removed or challenged in a host of towns and cities.
The dramatic demonstration on Monday night followed decades of controversy and protest at the university that had accelerated in the last year, after the fatal eruption of racist violence in Charlottesville, Va.
The university said last year that “removing the Confederate monument is in the best interest of the safety of our campus,” but that a state law made it impossible to remove the statue on the university’s own authority.
Under that 2015 law, which is similar in language and structure to laws in other states that shield Confederate-themed displays, a “monument, memorial or work of art owned by the state” may not be “removed, relocated or altered in any way” without the consent of a state historical commission.
Nor did the university do much to pursue the formal process under the law for deciding the monument’s fate.
Before the protest on Monday, a state panel was planning to meet on Wednesday to weigh the legal standing of private individuals who had sought the statue’s removal. The historical commission said it had not received any requests for action from the university system or its board of governors.
It was not clear on Tuesday what the authorities would — or could — do now about Silent Sam. No details were released about the extent of damage to the effigy or whether there were plans to restore, relocate or dispose of it.
Before the statue was brought down, demonstrators, who gathered on Monday to oppose possible sanctions against a student who splashed red ink and blood on the monument in April, marched across the campus and sometimes exchanged verbal barbs with counterprotesters.
Eventually during the demonstration, protesters erected coverings around the monument, shielding some of the statue’s critics while they worked to take it down.
Someone handed out bandannas with the words “Sam Must Fall” printed on them.
The statue had been a part of campus life in Chapel Hill for over a century. The United Daughters of the Confederacy proposed the monument, which the university’s board approved in June 1908.
But the protests of recent months had suggested that the statue might endure only so much longer.
Jan Werner, a research engineer at the university, said he worried about how the monument had come down, but was glad to see it go. Mr. Werner, a native of Poland, said he appreciated the historical value of the statue and suggested that its pedestal should remain.
