A hospital conference room is an unlikely place to assess a budding transportation revolution, but a team of San Francisco trauma specialists and researchers who gathered there sees its work as essential to ensuring the safety of residents in a city of high-tech guinea pigs.
“We don’t know what we don’t know,” Dr. Catherine Juillard, a trauma surgeon at Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital, said during the meeting in late June.
After a brief absence, shared electric scooters will soon return to San Francisco, and the city and the doctors at the meeting want to track the injuries — from skinned knees to head trauma — that result from the scooters and other transportation options flooding the city.
The concern began with the arrival of thousands of shared electric scooters this year. The pay-as-you-go vehicles — unlocked for $1 with a smartphone app, and then 15 cents per minute — turned pedestrians into urban adventurers whirring by at up 15 miles per hour.
After nearly three months, the city issued cease-and-desist orders that temporarily took the scooters off the streets, but they’re poised to return as soon as this month, when the city issues permits to as many as five scooter companies.
The major scooter companies say they’re paying attention to injuries and doing what they can to encourage riders to be safe.
Bird, the segment’s biggest player, with scooters in more than a dozen cities and a value estimated at $2 billion, said Thursday it was forming a safety advisory council led by David Strickland, a former head of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Mr. Strickland’s panel will “focus on increasing the safety of people riding slow-speed electric scooters in a car-centric world,” the company said.
Dr. Juillard sees only the most banged up of accident victims, those who are rushed to the operating theater or admitted to the intensive-care unit. But Dr. Chris Colwell, the hospital’s chief of emergency medicine, sees everything from bumps and bruises to life-altering head injuries, and safety concerns popped up almost as soon as the scooters did.
The exact number of scooters that hit the streets is hard to know, but Bird told The Wall Street Journal that its customers totaled 90,000 miles in the first three weeks in San Francisco. A few weeks later, the San Francisco supervisors unanimously passed the ordinance and issued cease-and-desist letters.
The wave hit Santa Monica, Calif., where Bird is based, before it arrived in San Francisco. Santa Monica sued Bird last year, but its scooters returned to the city’s streets after the company agreed to pay more than $300,000 in fines and secure proper licenses.
Lt. Saul Rodriguez, the public information officer of the Santa Monica Police Department, said he knew of three or four serious scooter injuries that he believed would require long-term treatment.
The imminent return of the electric scooters to San Francisco, even in smaller numbers and in a limited one-year pilot, puts pressure on the doctors and public health professionals working on a taxonomy of e-vehicle types, sorting out shared and not shared, with or without a helmet, severity of the injury, and so on.
“The ideal is to be ready with standardized data-collection instruments when the pilot rolls out,” said Megan Wier, an epidemiologist with the San Francisco Department of Public Health.
With the clock ticking, Ms. Wier and her colleagues combed through months of police and hospital records to help inform the classifications. But she believes the most useful injury patterns will emerge only after a data schema is established and the scooters return to San Francisco.
In California’s Legislature, there is a movement afoot to loosen some regulations on the scooters. Assembly Bill 2989 would relax helmet requirements, stipulate that only riders under 18 need to wear protective headgear and allow electric scooters to be used freely on streets with speed limits up to 35 miles per hour, rather than the current limit of 25 m.p.h.
Euwyn Poon, president of Spin, another scooter company, said it was “sensible” to allow electric scooter users to ride without a helmet, even on streets with higher speed limits.
“Our users prefer the convenience of riding a very short distance on a scooter without a helmet,” Mr. Poon said.
Mr. Peskin, the San Francisco supervisor, called the bill “terrible public policy” that would risk safety. Still, he said he understood that the city needed to do something about pollution and congestion.
Mr. Peskin said he was impressed by new safety measures proposed in some of the permit applications. One company offered to include a helmet with each scooter, and another offered to require users to submit a selfie while wearing a helmet before the scooter could be unlocked.
Still, Dr. Juillard said she believed that hard data about safety risks was advisable as electric scooter companies expand into dozens more cities around the country. Bird alone wants to be in 50 cities by the end of the year.
