Adults-only vacations appear to be growing in popularity. Here are a few ideas to get you started planning your child-free trip.
Adults-only vacations for parents appear to be growing in popularity. Expedia recently reported that social media posts about child-free trips doubled in the past year. Travel Leaders Group, which represents 50,000 travel agents in North America, reports an upsurge in adults-only travel — in particular romantic trips, getaways with friends and parents traveling with adult children. Sales of river cruising within the network, predominantly an adults-only vacation option, is expanding by double digits, according to a company spokeswoman.
At Twin Farms, which is set in an 18th-century farmhouse surrounded by 300 acres of land, a stay includes all activities, meals and alcohol. Parents of picky eaters will particularly enjoy the freedom of those meals: there are no menus; instead, the chefs create dishes for each guest based on their preferences and the most seasonal produce. Options for activities in fall and winter include bicycling, fly fishing, guided hikes, sledding and skiing. Bookings start at $1,500 a night for two people.
In Greece, Domes Miramare, a Luxury Collection Resort, Corfu, reopening this August after a renovation, is a beachfront retreat for adults that was originally built for the Onassis family in the late 1960s. It’s surrounded by centuries-old olive groves and has a focus on wellness with activities like yoga on the beach and hikes. The property has a grand opening offer through October that includes breakfast, a bottle of wine, a lunch for two and a 20 percent discount on drinks. Nightly rates start at 229 euros, about $262. A three-night minimum stay is required.
For those who prefer to travel by water, U by Uniworld is a new river cruise brand for those 18 and over. Its two ships accommodate 120 passengers each; each boat has two rooftop bars, a spa, communal tables for dining and farm-to-table cuisine. The company offers a range of eight-day itineraries that include longer stays at ports. This September and October, for example, one option is a trip from Regensburg, Germany, to Budapest that includes a stop in Vienna and a two-night stay in Budapest. Tickets begin from $1,499 a person, and include most meals and excursions.
Primland, in Virginia’s Blue Ridge Mountains, offers a retreat within a retreat, made up of three tree houses solely for adults. They all have large decks and are built around the solid branches of the tree tops; guests can expect views of the Kibler Valley by day and the stars at night. This fall, the property has a stargazing experience that includes a treehouse stay, an evening star walk and a tour of the property’s observatory, complete with two telescopes. Prices start at $900 for two people.
Jamaica offers two options. In Negril, Sunset at the Palms is an adults-only, all-inclusive hotel that has 85 treehouse-style guest rooms with private balconies. A stay includes a variety of nonmotorized sports, tennis and all meals and drinks. Bookings begin at $152 a person per night.
Another possibility is the newly-renovated Sandals Montego Bay. A stay includes unlimited water and land sports, unlimited dining at nine restaurants and premium spirits. Rates start at $234 per person per night.