Movies|‘Crazy Rich Asians’: Why Did It Take So Long to See a Cast Like This?
‘Crazy Rich Asians’: Why Did It Take So Long to See a Cast Like This?
WEST HOLLYWOOD, Calif. — In January 2017, the director Jon M. Chu announced an open casting call for Asian and Asian-American actors for his movie adaptation of “Crazy Rich Asians.” Recorded in the kitchen of his West Hollywood home (you can see his fridge in the background), the online plea instructed anyone interested in joining his all-Asian cast, from aspiring actors to “cool personalities with hidden talents,” to post a two-minute video of themselves on social media. “We are looking for you,” he beamed.
The call was an enticing one. The romantic comedy was going to be a major feature film, with a reported budget of $30 million; its inspiration, the best-selling novel by Kevin Kwan, had already sold millions of copies. And then there was the sheer singularity of it all. How often did a Hollywood filmmaker go looking for a whole bunch of Asians for anything? The last time a major Hollywood film set in the present day showcased a majority Asian cast was a whopping 25 years ago, with “The Joy Luck Club” in 1993. Many of the folks Mr. Chu was seeking now weren’t even alive then.
For Asian and Asian-American viewers, the film, which opens on Aug. 15, is important not just as something of a cinematic Halley’s comet — before “Joy Luck Club,” there was “Flower Drum Song” in 1961, and then, what? There’s also an eager hope that if this movie succeeds, it just might stave off another quarter-century drought. Producers use something called “comps” — recent films similar to the ones they’re pitching — to help sell studios on their ideas and budgets. For the producers of “Crazy Rich Asians,” there weren’t any. For scores of Asian-themed films to come, the hope goes, “Crazy Rich Asians” could be that comp.
When Mr. Chu made his online pitch, the film seemed a godsend for Asian actors, aspiring or otherwise. Forget a few token parts here and there; in this one film, Asian actors would play everything: the romantic leads and sympathetic sidekicks, the comic foils and cads, the faces in the crowd. With more than 4 billion Asians on the planet, how hard could it be to cast this thing?
Pretty hard, as it turned out. The talent was there. But as roles were considered and cast, the filmmakers contended with questions about identity amid the Asian diaspora. Could an Asian play an Asian-American? Could a Malaysian play a Singaporean? And what about an Asian guy with a white mom or dad — could he even be in the running?
Indeed, according to a recent study by Ms. Yuen and others, 64 percent of television series in the 2015-16 season didn’t have a single Asian-American regular; another report revealed that of the top 100 films of 2017, nearly two-thirds didn’t include a single Asian or Asian-American female character.
On a recent morning, Mr. Chu was here in his West Hollywood home, recounting the joys and struggles of casting his all-Asian feature. Sporting a white baseball cap and gray T-shirt, he talked about hiring legends (Michelle Yeoh) and relative unknowns (Henry Golding), Asian stars (Singapore’s Fiona Xie) and Asian-Americans on the rise (Awkwafina).
The search began in 2013, when the producers Nina Jacobson (“The Hunger Games”), Brad Simpson (“Pose”) and John Penotti (“Awake”) secured the rights to Mr. Kwan’s book. In the story, Rachel, a Chinese-American professor at New York University, travels with her London-bred professor boyfriend, Nick, to Singapore, where he was born. Once there Rachel discovers two things: Nick’s steely mother, Eleanor, thinks Rachel is beneath her, and Nick — and the rest of his family — is obscenely, stupefyingly wealthy.
As it turns out, there were questions about casting even before the book hit stores. Mr. Kwan said a producer who wanted to option the book had suggested that he make Rachel white. Mr. Kwan refused.
When Mr. Chu announced his open call, thousands of videos poured in. Working actors from the United States, Singapore and elsewhere submitted auditions alongside those outside the industry who figured they had nothing to lose.
“When I got the news that Jon wanted me to do it, I couldn’t stop screaming,” she said.
The cast soon became increasingly international. There was Gemma Chan and Jing Lusi from Britain; Chris Pang and Remy Hii from Australia; Pierre Png, Ms. Xie and a host of others from Singapore; Ronny Chieng and Ms. Yeoh from Malaysia; Lisa Lu and Jasmine Chen from China. Nico Santos had spent his childhood in the Philippines before moving to the United States and co-starring on “Superstore”; Mr. Chieng was born in Malaysia and had gone to school in Australia before getting a regular gig on “The Daily Show.” Among the American-born crew, there were actors who hailed from Detroit (Ken Jeong); Queens (Awkwafina); and Richmond, Va. (Constance Wu).
With the entire world to pull from, the filmmakers faced several concerns about who they could cast to play what. There were the accents, of course. Whoever played Nick had to nail a British accent, which left out many of the Chinese box-office draws under consideration.
With much of the action taking place there, there was a push to get as many Singaporeans as possible. If that wasn’t possible, the producers said, they wanted to understand when a non-Singaporean could fill a Singaporean role.
One of the last actors to be hired was Henry Golding, who auditioned for Nick. On paper, he was perfect. He was handsome and charismatic. Born in Malaysia to a mother from the Iban tribe there and a white British father, he had grown up in London, where he had acquired the requisite British accent, then spent much of the rest of his life in Asia, where he had worked as a travel host for BBC and Discovery Channel.
The fact that he had never acted before seemed to only add to the Cinderella charm of his story, which went something like this: With just a few months to go before filming started and no Nick, an accountant with the production in Malaysia told a line producer about this sexy travel host “all the girls were gaga over.” From there, Mr. Golding’s name went up the chain.
But when his casting was announced, the actress Jamie Chung, among others, criticized the decision. Ms. Chung, who is Korean-American, had been told by Mr. Chu that he was looking only for Chinese-Americans for the role of Rachel, so casting of a half-white actor as Nick seemed like a betrayal.
Asian-American journalists and bloggers wrote about the controversy, noting Hollywood’s historical preference for biracial Asian actors (such as Nancy Kwan and Keanu Reeves) and hinting (sometimes more than hinting) that biracial Asians weren’t “real Asians.” The controversy became so heated that Mr. Golding and other stars were compelled to address it in interviews and online posts.
Ms. Chung walked back her comments soon after — “I am sincerely sorry about the ignorant comment I made earlier in the year,” she tweeted — and apologized to Mr. Golding.
Mr. Golding as Nick in “Crazy Rich Asians.”Credit...Sanja Bucko/Warner Bros.
With more and more people talking about diversity in casting and calling out examples of whitewashing, Mr. Chu sees positive developments, particularly for Asian-Americans. This week Netflix will begin streaming “To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before,” a coming-of-age tale starring the Vietnamese-American Lana Condor. And on Aug. 24, two years after #StarringJohnCho began hyping the actor as “the star we deserve,” there’s “Searching,” a thriller starring, yes, John Cho.
