‘THE ELLEN SHOW BUT VIOLENT’ at the Brick (Sept. 1, 9:30 p.m.). This is not “The Ellen DeGeneres Show” you see in America’s living rooms. This is the hourlong talk show recreated by the minds of Clickhole and the Annoyance Theater’s Rachel Kaly. Joining Ms. Kaly will be Daniel Maseda, of the La MaMa Theater; Eliza Cossio, of “Wyatt Cenac’s Problem Areas”; and others.
LESLIE JONES at Carolines on Broadway (Sept. 6, 7 and 9:30 p.m.; Sept. 7-8, 7:30 and 10 p.m.). A riotous “Saturday Night Live” regular with an equally riotous Twitter feed, Ms. Jones is an enthusiastic performer on- and offstage, whether she’s sharing her passion for the Olympics and live-tweeting reality television or airing her thoughts on dating and “Hidden Figures” on “Weekend Update.” Ms. Jones will be imparting her infectious energy to the crowd at Carolines for a handful of solo performances.
‘MONICA LEWINSKY SINGS YOUR HEART OUT’ at the Duplex Cabaret Theater (Sept. 5, 7 p.m.). The Upright Citizens Brigade comedian Amanda Hunt wrote and stars in this cabaret-style show that, unsurprisingly, features characters from recent American history. It’s rounded out by parodies from Broadway musicals and, we’re told, a variety of wigs.
‘MY OBITUARY SHOW’ at Q.E.D. (Sept. 6, 7:30 p.m.). The writers and contributors to this show are afforded a very rare opportunity: the chance to write their own obituaries and read them before a live audience while they’re still very much alive. Mike Drucker, of “Full Frontal With Samantha Bee,” will host, and Alison Leiby, of “The President Show”; Mehran Khaghani, of “Last Comic Standing”; Josh Gondelman, of “Last Week Tonight With John Oliver”; and others will eulogize.
‘ONE YEAR SMARTER, ONE YEAR DRUNKER: A CAVEAT BIRTHDAY BLITZ’ at Caveat (Aug. 31, 7:30 p.m.). It’s been one year since the opening of this Lower East Side club — a destination for those who like their comedy served up with a light smattering of astronomy or history lessons — and it’ll be celebrating in fitting style. An hour of this event will be dedicated to a rapid-fire sequence of 14 of Caveat’s regular shows, such as “Literati,” “An Inconvenient Talk Show,” “Biodiversity Jam” and “Monotony,” illustrating the beautiful thing that happens when funny and nerdy collide.
‘SINGLE DEAD FEMALE’ at Theater for the New City (Sept. 2, 8 p.m.). This original play, as funny as it is dark, sprung from the mind of Lana Schwartz, a local comedian. Borrowing from wildly popular true-crime television shows and podcasts like “Serial” and “Making a Murderer,” Ms. Schwartz reimagines the genre gone horribly wrong, when a true-crime podcast host finds out her intern accidentally killed a young woman and they decide to make her the subject of their show. Will listeners be able to figure out this plot twist? Find out.
