Illustrated. 338 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $28.
On the spines of books everywhere, “girls” are sticking with all the tenacity of a chewed piece of bubble gum. As the author of one such book whose title includes the word “girl” — a term even I find grating — I can offer only this defense to beleaguered readers: Contained within the woefully misapplied noun is a reminder that for much of American history, grown women were not merely called girls, but frequently treated like helpless children. In Keith O’Brien’s exhilarating “Fly Girls,” the title stands in reverence not to misplaced nostalgia but to the female aviators who were hindered by the deep gender inequities that defined the golden age of flying.
Five of these “fly girls” provide the basis of the text: Ruth Nichols, Louise Thaden, Ruth Elder, Florence Klingensmith and Earhart. Their backgrounds and experiences are distinct: Nichols is a New York debutante, Thaden sells coal in Wichita, Elder is concealing her divorce, Klingensmith is working on airplane engines and Earhart is running out of options in Boston. Yet physical characterizations of the women tend to run together. One is “blond and young,” another “young, tall and slender,” still another, “younger and prettier, flirtatious and Southern.” Their clothing is frequently described by how it drapes the body, whether a dress is “low-backed” or a sweater is “tight.” For women whose achievements were discounted based on their sex, the frequency of skin-deep descriptions feels jarring, and occasionally makes it difficult to keep track of the characters.
These superficialities nonetheless give way to vibrant accounts of airplane racing, with the women speeding around the country, crossing oceans, making fantastic turns around hazardous pylons and flying so high into the air that they carry oxygen tanks beside them. Each struggles for opportunity — begging sponsors, borrowing planes, dealing with unscrupulous organizers, and taking risks equal to those of their male colleagues — but with fewer rewards to tempt them. O’Brien’s prose reverberates with fiery crashes, then stings with the tragedy of lives lost in the cockpit and sometimes, equally heartbreakingly, on the ground.
