If finalized, they could have a sizable impact.
We learned early details of the Trump administration’s plan to overhaul some Obama-era climate change regulations. And on Monday, the acting head of the Environmental Protection Agency signed a proposal to weaken regulation of coal-fired power plants. The E.P.A.’s own numbers showed how this could lead to as many as 1,400 premature deaths a year by 2030.
Then, President Trump had a rally Tuesday night in West Virginia, where he told supporters, “We’re putting our great coal miners back to work.” We fact-checked his claims about coal. And yet, as we wrote today, all this may help a few coal plants in the short term — but still won’t save the coal industry.
We also profiled the former industry lawyer who is leading the E.P.A.’s air office, and who, before that, spent the better part of a decade fighting his current employer over air pollution rules.
What do Trump’s pollution rules mean for climate change?
The Trump administration has been particularly busy this August rolling out its plans to weaken federal climate policies.
First, there was the proposal early in the month to prevent fuel-economy standards for cars and light trucks from continuing to get stricter after 2021.
Then, this week, the Environmental Protection Agency announced its intention to replace the Obama-era Clean Power Plan, a sweeping program aimed at pushing states away from coal and toward cleaner sources of electricity, with a less-stringent rule that would only encourage coal plants to make modest efficiency upgrades and allow states to regulate lightly.
From a climate perspective, these two moves together could have a sizable impact if they’re finalized. Weaker vehicle rules could add an extra 28 million to 83 million metric tons of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere in 2030 alone, according to a Rhodium Group analysis. The proposal to relax rules for coal plants would add another 47 million to 61 million tons of CO₂ that same year, according to the E.P.A.’s own numbers.
To put that in context: At the high end, that’s the climate equivalent of putting an extra 31 million cars on the road. It’s more carbon dioxide than many midsize nations like Belgium or Greece put out in an entire year. And it comes at a time when global emissions are still rising, while scientists say they need to be falling rapidly to avoid the worst impacts of global warming.
That said, it’s not yet certain that this higher emissions scenario will come to pass, and there are a few things we’ll be watching closely in the months ahead.
Lately, federal courts have been striking down a number of the administration’s regulatory moves. California plans to sue over the vehicle rollbacks, arguing that the proposal constrains the state’s longstanding authority to set its own car standards. And environmentalists are likely to challenge a section of the coal rule that would exempt plants from certain pollution controls if they invest in upgrades.
Which is all to say that this story is still in flux and even the most careful predictions about what different policies mean for global warming could change over time. Stay tuned.
When the last ice age retreated, the Earth’s crust sprang back up again as the weight of the ice was pressing down no more. Question: Would the melting of the ice caps cause the Earth’s crust to shift and cause more quakes or volcanic activity?
Here’s another reason to be concerned about global warming: It might lead to more earthquakes, at least near the poles.
In addition to the other problems that the eventual melting of the thick ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica would create (soaring sea levels centuries from now, for one thing), it would remove a huge weight from the two land masses and affect stresses in the faults beneath them.
There are indications that this happened in the past, as the large ice sheets that covered much of the Northern Hemisphere and Antarctica during the last ice age began to retreat 12,000 years ago and the land began to rise (a process called postglacial rebound, which continues today). Scientists have found evidence in northern Scandinavia of large faults that ruptured after the ice retreated.
Much more recently, relatively small changes in mass at or near the Earth’s surface have been thought to cause quakes. Several earthquakes in the 1970s and 1980s in a natural gas field in Uzbekistan, for instance, were believed to be the result of removing so much gas by drilling operations. And some scientists have linked a strong earthquake that struck Sichuan Province in China in 2008 to the filling of a reservoir behind a new dam.
As for volcanoes, Dr. Ekström was less certain what the impact would be. There are indications, for example, that higher sea levels in the ancient past reduced volcanism at midocean ridges, as the extra weight of water acted to constrain molten rock, or magma. So loss of the ice sheets might be expected to lead to increased volcanic activity on the newly exposed land. “To the extent that a load should affect the magma bodies underground, there should be a connection,” Dr. Ekström said.
