Politics|White Nationalists Love Corey Stewart. He Keeps Them Close.
White Nationalists Love Corey Stewart. He Keeps Them Close.
The Republican nominee for Senate in Virginia likes to engage the racial fringes of his party, creating a dilemma for mainstream G.O.P. leaders wary of his views.
WOODBRIDGE, Va. — Corey Stewart stands at the end of a long driveway that leads back in time, to his 18th century plantation manor hidden in woods behind a modern housing development. Mr. Stewart, the Republican Senate nominee from Virginia, treats the brick home like a living museum, complete with buttons from Redcoats, a Civil War soldier’s belt buckle and a room dedicated to George and Martha Washington, who were once visitors.
This has made him a popular figure with white nationalists, much to the horror of many Virginia Republicans. While Mr. Stewart has disavowed some on the extreme right, interviews with dozens of his friends, colleagues, supporters and fellow Republicans yielded a portrait of a political opportunist eager to engage the coarsest racial fringes of his party to advance his Trumpian appeal.
Some white nationalists volunteer for Mr. Stewart’s campaign, and several of his aides and advisers have used racist or anti-Muslim language, or maintained links to outspoken racists like Jason Kessler, the organizer of last year’s violent rally in Charlottesville, Va. Mr. Stewart has not distanced himself from those aides.
For mainstream Republicans in Virginia and nationwide, a profound political dilemma of the Trump era is whether to support the growing number of candidates like Mr. Stewart who make racially divisive remarks — particularly about immigrants — and back causes that are championed by white nationalists. President Trump’s own language and policies have energized Mr. Stewart and other far-right candidates, and Mr. Trump has high approval ratings from Republicans, but it is not clear how many rank-and-file voters will embrace like-minded politicians like Mr. Stewart.
Mr. Trump has enthusiastically endorsed Mr. Stewart — tweeting in June: “Don’t underestimate Corey, a major chance of winning!”— and the candidate is comfortable defending the president’s most controversial comments. Sitting in the living room of the historic brick home he bought in 2012, Mr. Stewart praised President Trump’s statement that there were “very fine people on both sides” at the Unite the Right white nationalist protests in Charlottesville last August.
He does not accept that slavery was at the heart of the Civil War.
“We can debate about the causes of the Civil War,” he said, adding, “But the causes of it were much more complex” than only slavery.
He contended that the term “white supremacist” was a concoction of the left.
In an extraordinary sign of discomfort with Mr. Stewart, some Republicans have been eager behind the scenes to provide opposition research aimed at discrediting him, with disaffected party members circulating racially inflammatory tweets and Facebook postings authored by one of Mr. Stewart’s advisers.
Shaun Kenney, former state party executive director, lamented that “the alt-right has taken over the Virginia Republican Party.” After Mr. Stewart secured the nomination in June, John C. Whitbeck, Jr., the party chairman who once accused Mr. Stewart of “racist” language, resigned.
But many Republican leaders haven’t publicly disavowed Mr. Stewart, mindful that Mr. Trump is supporting him, and that the president has strong influence with the party base — many of whom supported Mr. Stewart in the primary.
Virginia has not elected a Republican statewide since 2009 and voted for Hillary Clinton over Mr. Trump in 2016. With its strong economy and elite public university system, Virginia has become a symbol of Southern moderation and tolerance, but the far right sees an ally in Mr. Stewart who will push back against the leftward drift and demographic changes underway in the state.
For his part, Mr. Stewart said he sees virtue in being provocative.
“I think you need to be edgy,” he said.
Even as a teenager growing up in Duluth, Mr. Stewart was known for his ambition.
He came from a family of Democrats. His father was a longshoreman who couldn’t vote because of a felony conviction, Mr. Stewart said, adding it was “probably manslaughter” stemming from a fatal car accident. The younger Mr. Stewart was the first in his family to graduate from college, initially attending St. Olaf College in Minnesota, then transferring to Georgetown.
He eventually became an international trade lawyer and moved to Virginia, working at Foley & Lardner, a prominent firm. In 2006 he was elected chairman of the Prince William County Board, a county outside Washington, D.C., that has become majority minority in recent years.
Prince William County began questioning arrestees about their immigration status, then turning them over to federal agents.
Frank Principi, a Democrat on the board, said the county began to “detain people who did not look like us — different skin, different clothes, different language” and became known as Condado del Diablo, the devil’s county.
Many found the ease with which Mr. Stewart adopted hard-line views unsettling, starting with colleagues at work.
He left in 2009 and began doing international trade work largely on his own. He also refashioned himself as a booster of the Confederacy, especially in his unsuccessful 2017 race for governor. He has appeared at the Old South Ball, an antebellum-dress event in Danville, and likened his own political crusade to that of Confederate rebels.
“You’ve got this guy who is a transplant coming into Virginia trying to out-Southern folks who’ve been here for 400 years,” said Brian Schoeneman, a Fairfax Republican and former legislative candidate.
But Kevin Chandler, president of the state’s N.A.A.C.P., called Mr. Stewart “treasonous” for his embrace of the Confederate flag.
At a board meeting this summer, one that Mr. Stewart did not attend, several speakers blamed him after Klan fliers landed on local lawns.
Mr. Stewart later issued a statement condemning the Klan.
A “Corey Stewart for Senate” sign flanks the gravel driveway leading to George and Donna Randall’s southern Virginia home.
Gregory, left, and George Randall, right, are known to provide volunteer security for Mr. Stewart, center, at public events.
An avowed secessionist, Mr. Randall is eager to explain himself, welcoming a visitor onto his porch.
Interviews with Mr. Randall and his twin brother Gregory helped explain Mr. Stewart’s appeal to his die-hard supporters.
Gregory was asked about anti-Semitic chanting that took place at the rally.
Such associations have dogged Mr. Stewart. He called a Wisconsin Congressional candidate, Paul Nehlen, “one of my personal heroes,” long after Mr. Nehlen suggested American Muslims should be deported. Anti-Semitic rants finally prompted Mr. Stewart to disavow Mr. Nehlen.
Mr. Stewart’s associations with Mr. Kessler, the Charlottesville rally organizer, and Mr. Kessler’s ties to a Stewart aide, Brian Landrum, have raised the most serious questions.
In February 2017, during his governor’s race, Mr. Stewart appeared at a news conference with Mr. Kessler to oppose the Charlottesville City Council’s decision to remove a Robert E. Lee statue from a park.
Mr. Stewart backed away from Mr. Kessler before Unite the Right last August. But afterward, in a Facebook video, he questioned why left-wing protesters shouldn’t share equal blame.
One of Mr. Stewart’s paid county staff members — Mr. Landrum — has maintained ties with Mr. Kessler, according to court documents. Mr. Landrum recently took part in a Facebook chat with about 20 people, including violent racists, planning a second Unite the Right rally later this month.
Mr. Landrum, who also worked in Mr. Stewart’s campaigns, commented only once on the chat, on May 17, with smiley emojis and profanity.
In a July deposition in a dispute with the city over a proposed rally this month in Charlottesville, Mr. Kessler described Mr. Landrum as a friend. “Have you had discussions with him in the last couple months?” Mr. Kessler was asked. “Yes,” he answered.
Mr. Stewart declined to comment, referring questions to Mr. Landrum, who did not return messages seeking comment. An attempt to reach him at his Woodbridge, Va., apartment resulted in a police complaint that a reporter for The New York Times entered his dwelling unlawfully, an allegation The Times has denied.
Mr. Stewart brushed off questions about the company he keeps, and returned repeatedly in the interview to his love of his adopted state’s heritage, and his admiration for the president.
