As an appeals court judge, he signed on to decisions that deprived detainees of the chance to contest their detentions.
For a long time, I made it a point to write about Guantánamo at least once a year. There was usually some new development to hang a column on. But the real reason was that, having chronicled the riveting legal saga sparked by the George W. Bush administration’s decision to create a legal black hole at the U.S. Navy base there in which to imprison hundreds of men captured in Pakistan and Afghanistan in the aftermath of 9/11, I felt an obligation to show that I was still watching, even if most people no longer were.
True, back in June, when Supreme Court Justice Anthony M. Kennedy announced his retirement, there were a few comments about his important role in the Supreme Court majority that pushed back against both the White House and Congress in a series of Guantánamo decisions more than a decade ago. But those few references were quickly buried in the avalanche of speculation on what Justice Kennedy’s departure will mean for the future of gay rights and the right to abortion.
I’m writing about Guantánamo now because of a little noticed order that came down earlier this month from the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. That’s the court on which President Trump’s Supreme Court nominee, Brett Kavanaugh, has sat for the past 12 years. The order, and the appeal that produced it, provide a bridge between past and present, between Justice Kennedy and his former law clerk who would replace him, between a battle over the rule of law now fading into history and a battle over the future of the Supreme Court that will play out when Judge Kavanaugh’s Senate confirmation hearing begins next week.
The three-sentence order did not directly concern Judge Kavanaugh. He and his newest colleague on the appeals court, Gregory Katsas, “did not participate in this matter,” a footnote informs us. The court’s other nine judges did, and all agreed not to grant an unusual request to hear, as a full court (en banc in legal terminology), an appeal brought on behalf of a Guantánamo detainee named Khalid Ahmed Qassim. Such a request typically comes after a three-judge panel has heard an appeal, but Mr. Qassim’s lawyers sought to skip that step, deeming it futile.
Mr. Qassim, a 41-year-old Yemeni, is one of Guantánamo “forever prisoners,” having been held without charge for 16 years. He filed a habeas corpus petition in Federal District Court in Washington, D.C. in July 2004, shortly after the Supreme Court ruled in Rasul v. Bush that, contrary to the government’s argument, federal judges had jurisdiction to hear such cases from Guantánamo inmates. Mr. Qassim’s petition, along with others, was kept in abeyance as cases that would inevitably bear on it traveled up and down the legal system. Finally, in May, a federal district judge, Thomas F. Hogan, denied the petition in a brief oral ruling. Binding precedent of the circuit left him no choice, the judge said.
“Judge Hogan was correct that panel decisions of this court prevented him from granting relief to Mr. Qassim,” the detainee’s lawyers told the appeals court’s judges. And here is the link to Judge Kavanaugh. The lawyers cited four D.C. Circuit decisions that they say have flouted the Supreme Court’s holding in Boumediene v. Bush, the 2008 decision that recognized a constitutional right — not simply a statutory right, as in the earlier Rasul case — for Guantánamo inmates to seek federal court review of the legality of their detention. The four decisions, the lawyers asserted, have left Mr. Qassim and others at Guantánamo “caught in a trap from which they cannot escape based on rules set by panels of this court that are directly contrary to the Supreme Court’s ruling in Boumediene.” Under federal court practice, panels within an appeals court must accept each others’ decisions as binding, unless and until the full court announces a change of course. The Qassim case will now go to an ordinary three-judge panel, which may send it back to Judge Hogan for additional fact-finding in advance of a renewed appeal.
The other case, Al-Adahi v. Obama, overturned a district judge’s grant of habeas corpus to Mohammed Al-Adahi, a Yemeni who had once attended an Al Qaeda training camp and stayed at an Al Qaeda guesthouse. “In all, there can be no doubt that Al-Adahi was more likely than not part of Al Qaeda,” Judge A. Raymond Randolph wrote for the panel. In granting Mr. Al-Adahi’s petition, the district judge had found aspects of the government’s evidence unreliable. But judges must view the government’s evidence as a whole, not piece by piece, Judge Randolph wrote, in order to see whether taken as a whole it meets the deferential standard of “more likely than not.” The government had easily met that test in Mr. Al-Adahi’s case, Judge Randolph said.
Did these words by his old boss ring in Judge Kavanaugh’s ears as he signed on to opinions that left the promise of the Boumediene decision an empty one? And if not, why not? I don’t know. But I do know that Guantánamo has always been a mirror that reflects back on ourselves. And the reflection in this instance gives us another hint of what the substitution of Brett Kavanaugh for Anthony Kennedy may mean for the future of the court and the country.