The time has come to establish the United States Space Force. The space environment has fundamentally changed in the last generation. What was once peaceful and uncontested, is now crowded and adversarial. Today’s report calls for the creation of a new unified combatant command for space: the United States Space Command. This new command structure for the physical domain of space, led by a four-star flag officer, will establish unified command and control for our Space Force operations, ensure integration across the military and develop the space war fighting doctrine, tactics, techniques and procedures of the future. The second step this report calls for is the creation of an elite group of joint war fighters, specializing in the domain of space, who will form the backbone of the nation’s newest armed service. Third, this report calls for the creation of a new joint organization, the Space Development Agency, that will ensure the men and women of the Space Force have the cutting-edge warfighting capabilities that they need and deserve. Finally, this report calls for clear lines of responsibility and accountability. The command is the process of standing up and and scaling up the United States Department of the Space Force. We will create a single civilian position reporting to the Secretary of Defense to oversee the growth and expansion of this new branch of the service. Ultimately Congress must act to establish this new department, which will organize, train and equip the United States Space Force. America will always seek peace in space as on the Earth. But history proves that peace only comes through strength. And in the realm of outer space, the United States Space Force will be that strength.
WASHINGTON — Vice President Mike Pence promoted a proposed Space Command on Thursday as “an idea whose time has come” in comments at the Pentagon to unveil a few more details about President Trump’s plan to create another military force, this one for outer space, and for it to be in operation by 2020.
Mr. Trump’s space dreams still have to go through a divided Congress to come true, but initially reluctant Pentagon officials have lined up behind the proposal and now say that they will do what they can to bring it to fruition.
“The time has come to write the next great chapter in the history of our armed forces, to prepare for the next battlefield where America’s best and bravest will be called to deter and defeat a new generation of threats to our people, to our nation,” Mr. Pence told an audience at the Pentagon. He called for Congress to allocate an additional $8 billion for space security systems over the next five years.
But that may be a tall order. The administration cannot just create a Space Force on its own; it has to go through Congress, where critics abound.
The Pentagon unveiled a report with steps that would be necessary to create a Space Force, known as United States Space Command. The Pentagon recommended that the Space Force initially be under the purview of the Air Force.
Proponents of a Space Force argue that the Air Force does not pay enough attention to outer space. What is more, they say, Russia and China are developing antisatellite weapons that could pose a threat to American satellites.
The concern about antisatellite weaponry from Russia and China is a real one, Pentagon officials and aerospace experts say. A United States intelligence assessment of threats in February warned that Russia and China will be able to shoot down American satellites within two to three years.
Such an ability, which both countries are believed to be developing, could potentially destroy American global-positioning system satellites, as well as military and civilian communications satellites, to say nothing of the country’s fleet of spy satellites.
The GPS satellites help to guide aircraft carriers in the Persian Gulf, drones in the skies above Yemen and fighter jets over Syria. American ground troops on patrol in Afghanistan use GPS coordinates to track their movement, and intelligence officers depend on spy satellites to gather information on adversaries.