Smarter Living|Should I Still Root for My College Football Team?
Should I Still Root for My College Football Team?
The Edit is back. This week, a student at the University of Oklahoma considers whether he should be a fan in 2018. He has only a few days left to decide.
Editor’s Note: Today’s the day! I’m so excited to relaunch The Edit, a newsletter for college students and recent graduates.
As you may know, early this year I went in search of contributors to write for the newsletter. I wanted to turn this into a platform for your voices and create a space to explore the issues that are on your minds. The response was pretty overwhelming: more than 20,000 people from all around the world applied for the roles.
Ultimately a team of editors at The New York Times picked 13 writers who you’ll hear from throughout the year. (You also might hear from me, Lindsey Underwood, from time to time. I’m the editor of The Edit.) The writers’ columns will be the foundation of the new newsletter. We can’t wait for you to meet them, so we asked them to introduce themselves here.
This week, we’re jumping right in with a piece from Tim Hatton, a senior at the University of Oklahoma. What he’s grappling with: There are so many problems with football, is it still O.K. to root for his school’s team?
If you like the newsletter, share it with a friend, sign up here to get it in your inbox, or share your feedback with us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Whenever I mention where I go to school, people don’t ask me about my classes or professors. They ask me about football. I don’t mind. Every fall, when tens of thousands of people pour onto the University of Oklahoma campus for games, I feel proud.
Or maybe I should say felt. Part of me can’t wait for football season to start. The other part of me wonders: Is it O.K. to be a football fan in 2018?
My school says yes. The Friday before we play the University of Texas each October is an official school holiday. Our stadium just underwent a $160 million renovation. Outside the football stadium, larger-than-life bronze statues commemorate Oklahoma players who have won the Heisman Trophy.
It’s not hard to see why schools like mine encourage this kind of culture. College football is a big business. This year, the Big 12 conference distributed a record $36.5 million in revenue to each of its 10 member schools, including Oklahoma. The school earns about another $5 million annually from its independent distribution deal with Fox (and when the Big 12’s current media rights agreement expires in 2025, the school will likely be in position to earn even more, thanks to some shrewd maneuvering by former university president David Boren).
Even with all that money flying around, players are unpaid. Under N.C.A.A. regulations, student athletes can’t profit from their on-field work in any way, not even through their image, likeness or autograph, not to mention compensation from their schools.
College football teams are under tremendous pressure to win, which can also create an environment that enables intolerable behavior, including violence against women. Oklahoma has seen a few examples of this. In my first semester of college, Missouri Senator Claire McCaskill wrote an op-ed criticizing Oklahoma’s head coach, Bob Stoops, for recruiting the wide receiver Dorial Green-Beckham, who had been kicked off the University of Missouri team for pushing his girlfriend down a flight of stairs. Two months earlier, the freshman running back Joe Mixon had been arrested for punching a woman at a restaurant near campus. Mr. Stoops suspended him for one year.
At its worst, this win-first, high-stress environment can prove deadly for student athletes, as it did at the University of Maryland earlier this year, when 19-year-old lineman Jordan McNair collapsed during a conditioning workout and died two weeks later.
As tragic as extreme cases like Mr. McNair’s are, the health risks of an ordinary football game are no less troubling. At this point, the dangers of repeatedly getting hit in the head throughout a career in football seem pretty clear. These blows have been linked to chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E., a brain disease that causes many different symptoms including depression, memory loss and dementia.
As parents have grown more aware of these risks, participation in youth leagues has dropped. Eventually, football as we know it will be forced to change, because without athletes willing to play, the sport will die.
In the face of all of these problems, can I continue to cheer? Every year so far, I’ve chosen to be a fan. But as the first game of the season approaches on Saturday, that decision is harder than it’s ever been.
Have your feelings changed about supporting your school’s team? We want to hear from you. Email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| with the subject line “Football” and we’ll share some of your answers next week.
The e-cigarette company says it never sought teenage users, but the F.D.A. is investigating whether Juul intentionally marketed its devices to youth.
Personal finance management is a concrete, learnable skill. Here’s where to start.
The conventional wisdom is that morning people are high achievers and go-getters, while late risers are lazy. But what if going to bed in the wee hours is actually an advantage?
We asked wastewater management experts about what’s safe to dispose of down your toilet or sink. Their answer: Not much.
Your college years are privileged and pivotal. Navigate them with as much care as you did the path that got you there.
You know that scene in “Lady Bird” when Saoirse Ronan throws herself out of a moving vehicle to avoid talking to her mother for another second? That was me, at 14, in the car with my father.
Navigating college and the years afterward can be tough, but we’re here to help! Maybe you’re wondering how to choose a major, or the best time to study abroad. Perhaps you’re out of school and figuring out how to budget. Send us an email at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| with the subject line, “Figure It Out.” We’ll do our best to answer a new question each week.
Lindsey Underwood is an editor on the Smarter Living team. Follow her on Twitter @thunderwooddd. Tim Hatton is a contributor to The Edit and a senior at the University of Oklahoma.