COLUMBUS, Ohio — President Trump, closing out a brutal week that plunged him deeper into legal and political peril, warned Ohio Republicans on Friday that Democrats would destroy their state and impose policies that would spill “innocent blood” if they were successful in November.
While presenting himself as the savior of the party’s fortunes in a highly competitive state, Mr. Trump displayed little of his trademark swagger. Appearing subdued and distracted, he played up the strong economy and his trade policies, and charged without evidence that Democrats were putting the interests of undocumented immigrants before those of American citizens.
After a week that brought the criminal conviction of his former campaign chairman; a guilty plea from his longtime lawyer, who implicated him in campaign finance crimes; and a grant of immunity to a top executive in his real estate empire, Mr. Trump alluded only glancingly to the scandals swirling around him.
But even as he argued that the strength of the economy under his leadership should be enough to buoy Republicans in the coming contests, Mr. Trump was less bullish about his party’s chances than he has been in the past.
Mr. Trump won Ohio in 2016, but a recent special election here underscored Republican concerns about the midterm elections this fall, demonstrating both the president’s ability to energize the party’s core supporters, and the ways in which his polarizing brand of politics has left some members of his party vulnerable. Troy Balderson, a state senator, eked out a narrow victory in what was once considered a reliably Republican district in the Columbus suburbs, after Mr. Trump had endorsed him.
“You would have made me look bad if you hadn’t pulled that out,” Mr. Trump quipped during his speech.
Governor John Kasich, the state’s Republican governor and an outspoken critic of Mr. Trump, skipped the dinner, highlighting divisions in the party over the president’s leadership.
Matt Borges, an ally of Mr. Kasich’s whom Mr. Trump helped to force out as chairman of the state’s party, said that the president’s divisive messaging on issues like immigration was driving up the enthusiasm of Democrats in a way that could spell peril for Republican candidates in November.
During the dinner, Mr. Trump stoked the themes of cultural division that he has made his trademarks. He lashed out at the N.F.L., as well as the television networks ESPN and CBS, for their handling of the controversy over football players kneeling in protest during the national anthem.
He falsely accused journalists of ceasing to cover the death of Mollie Tibbetts, a young woman killed in Iowa, after they discovered that the suspect in her killing was an undocumented immigrant.
At times, though, Mr. Trump appeared to wander off his campaign-themed script and toward venting his frustrations about the investigation into Russia’s meddling in the 2016 elections, and whether his campaign played a role.
He began to reel off the names of his perceived enemies.
“McCabe, you have the beautiful Lisa Page and her wonderful F.B.I. agent — how about him?” Mr. Trump said as diners, seated at round tables in a hall lit with red, white and blue lighting, looked on silently.
He was referring to Andrew G. McCabe, the former deputy director of the F.B.I.; Ms. Page, a former lawyer for the bureau; and indirectly to Peter Strzok, an F.B.I. agent who exchanged texts with Ms. Page that were highly critical of the president.
All have since left the bureau.
Even as he bragged about his record and made a final plea to residents to turn out to carry Republicans to victory in the fall, Mr. Trump appeared preoccupied with the cascade of crises in which he has found himself.
