WASHINGTON — The Trump administration imposed sanctions on Wednesday against two top Turkish government officials over the detention of an American pastor being held on espionage charges, threatening to plunge already-fraught relations with a vital NATO ally into crisis.
The sanctions target Abdulhamit Gul, Turkey’s justice minister, and Suleyman Soylu, the interior minister. They were issued just days after President Trump warned the Turkish government to immediately release the pastor, Andrew Brunson — a demand he made directly last week in a telephone call with Mr. Erdogan.
The sanctions mark a rare public break between Mr. Trump and Mr. Erdogan, two combative leaders and allies in the ongoing military campaign against the Islamic State.
A senior Trump administration official said the American president’s ire resulted in part because he thought he had struck a deal with Mr. Erdogan to free Mr. Brunson if Israeli authorities released a Turkish woman being held on charges of funding Hamas.
The Turkish woman went free, but Mr. Brunson remained on house arrest. Mr. Erdogan has denied such a deal, and the senior administration official spoke on condition of anonymity.
At the White House, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the press secretary, said that Mr. Gul and Mr. Soylu both played “leading roles” in the pastor’s arrest and detention, and that Mr. Trump had personally ordered the sanctions be imposed.
Relations between the United States and Turkey have been bumpy for decades, suffering shocks after Turkey’s military intervention in Cyprus in 1974 and its refusal to allow American troops to use bases in Turkish territory in the lead-up to the 2003 Iraq war.
More recently, tensions have flared over Mr. Erdogan’s growing autocratic tendencies and Turkey’s irritation over American support for Kurdish forces in neighboring Syria that Ankara views as part of a terrorist group.
Turkish authorities have long predicted that the United States would refrain from punitive measures, in part because Turkey allows American forces to use Incirlik air base as a crucial staging ground for the air war against the Islamic State.
But as relations with Turkey have worsened, American commanders have been quietly looking for alternatives to Incirlik, including in Romania and Jordan.
Before the sanctions were announced, Mr. Erdogan told reporters in Ankara that threats against Turkey “will not be appropriate,” especially given the country’s “highest level of solidarity at NATO” for the United States.
“They should know our character well,” Mr. Erdogan said.
Mr. Brunson, 50, an evangelical pastor from North Carolina, has been imprisoned in Turkey for 21 months and is accused of aiding the failed coup attempt against Mr. Erdogan in July 2016. Last month, the Turkish government moved Mr. Brunson from jail to house arrest because of health concerns.
Mr. Brunson could face 35 years in prison if found guilty of having links to two groups Turkey considers terrorist organizations: a movement led by the American-based cleric Fethullah Gulen — whom Turkey accuses of initiating the 2016 coup attempt — and the Kurdistan Workers’ Party. Mr. Brunson’s imprisonment has become a cause célèbre among evangelicals, an important voting constituency for Mr. Trump.
The Treasury Department said Mr. Brunson was arrested with “an absence of evidence,” and it accused the Turkish officials of running entities involved in human rights abuses. The two Turkish officials were sanctioned under the Global Magnitsky Act, which penalizes authorities for human rights abuses.
After a phone call last week between Mr. Trump and Mr. Erdogan, Mr. Trump made an abrupt announcement on Twitter that he would place “large sanctions” on Turkey for detaining Mr. Brunson. Even so, talks seemed to progress.
Then on Tuesday, a Turkish court rejected Mr. Brunson’s appeal to be freed during his trial.
Eric S. Edelman, a former American ambassador to Turkey, praised the Trump administration for finally getting tough with Turkey. He said the United States had new leverage amid the deeply troubled economy in Turkey, where the currency, the lira, recently plunged in value.
But Ivo H. Daalder, a former American ambassador to NATO, said the tough stand on the detention of a single American raised questions about how the administration would deal with Turkey’s recent purchase of a Russian air defense system, or its threats to attack United States forces in Syria.
