In “To Survive on This Shore,” the photographer Jess T. Dugan and the professor Vanessa Fabbre have created a road map, archive and remarkably moving body of work about a group almost entirely left out of many narratives: older transgender and gender variant people.
It is easy to forget that only recently have transgender issues become part of the public consciousness, with transgender characters on major television shows and even transgender celebrities. But transgender people — like Sylvia Rivera and Marsha P. Johnson, key figures in the Stonewall uprising in 1969 — have contributed to the queer movement since the beginning, even if they have often been overlooked.
Ms. Dugan and Ms. Fabbre, a social worker and assistant professor at Washington University in St. Louis, wanted to show the fullness of experiences of the older transgender community. The result is a book, to be released on Aug. 28 by Kehrer Verlag, that combines portraits and interviews with transgender people from various walks of life. The combination of intimate and arresting portraits, a signature of Ms. Dugan’s, with frank and deeply affecting quotes — they are often humorous, sad or both at once — is a startlingly deep dive into the individual and collective experiences of this generation of the transgender community.
Common themes include uncertainty of the future because of looming medical care and financial insecurity, which have long been sources of unease for the community. There also are a wide range of feelings about the transition process itself, and Ms. Dugan and Ms. Fabbre wanted to preserve that complexity.
Conducting deeply personal interviews with her subjects also changed her image making. “Sitting down with someone and asking them to share their life story is really vulnerable but also empowering and very significant,” she said. “I was continually struck by how personal people were willing to be with us.” In other projects, like “Every Breath We Drew,” she took out all extraneous information. But in “To Survive on This Shore,” she let details of her subjects’ lives creep in, even including photos of objects.
Ms. Dugan and Ms. Fabbre envisioned their project as equal parts activism and art. The images and quotes will form an exhibition and book, and the work has also been acquired by the Kinsey Institute, the Sexual Minorities Archive and the Transgender Archives at the University of Victoria. Ms. Fabbre plans to use the interviews in her scholarly research, and they have begun sharing their work with nonprofits for training and activism. They hope that the broader theme of aging can resonate with people beyond the transgender community.
Just as crucially, they want the work to serve as a visual record of the joys, traumas, fears and hopes of older transgender people that the younger transgender community — which often has no role models — can use to learn what the future might hold.
“To Survive On This Shore” will be on exhibit at projects+gallery in St. Louis from Sept. 6th to Oct. 10th. An opening reception will be held on Sept. 13th. The book will be released on Aug. 28 by Kehrer Verlag.
