PERPIGNAN, France — First it was the 20 old houses demolished several years ago. Then 13 more 19th-century houses came down in June, wrought-iron balconies and all, leaving only bare asphalt baking in the summer heat in Perpignan, a city near France’s border with Spain and close to the Mediterranean coast.
Finally, the residents of the city’s old Saint Jacques district had endured enough. Well over 50 dwellings in their neighborhood had been reduced to rubble since 2015.
Late last month, they gathered in the district’s ancient square high on a hill, as a city excavator was making another mess of bricks and jagged wall fragments nearby.
Dozens marched from there down to the prefecture, the central government’s representative, demanding to be heard. City Hall backed down. The excavator was withdrawn, the demolitions left at a standstill.
What made the events exceptional was not just that this was a stand by one of the poorest neighborhoods in France. It was also a protest by a unique population, one the French media and academics universally refer to as “les gitans,” or Gypsies.
The Gypsies of Perpignan, who speak Catalan, appear to be distinct culturally from the broader population of Roma, sometimes also referred to as Gypsies, but they are in many ways no less maligned and marginalized in France.
With some 3,000 to 5,000 inhabitants, Saint Jacques is urban France’s largest Gypsy neighborhood, a festering sore of poverty and unemployment, a place normally drawing few allies.
“If you kick an angry dog, he’ll bite you and he won’t let go,” said Alain Giménez, a community leader, as others who had gathered in the raffish Place du Puig, or “Hill Square” in the local Catalan, nodded their assent.
Saint Jacques, dilapidated, crumbling and now threatened, even drew the backing of President Emmanuel Macron’s special emissary on historical preservation, the French television personality, Stéphane Bern.
Mr. Mathon said the Gypsies of Perpignan don’t appear to be related ethnically to the Roma populations of Eastern Europe. Others agree.
“Roma or Gypsies of Romania and Bulgaria did not come to Perpignan;” said the leading sociologist of Perpignan, Alain Tarrius, an emeritus professor at the University of Toulouse.
The moment you climb up to Saint Jacques from Perpignan’s prosperous city center, you enter another land. St. Jacques was built in the Middle Ages with a narrow grid of houses huddled protectively against one another.
The Mediterranean sun cannot penetrate the deep shade. Laundry hangs from windows, and steel girders bridge the alleylike streets, propping up the buildings. Perpignan’s street cleaners don’t appear to make it up to Saint Jacques.
The demolitions have pockmarked the district with “useless” squares — Mr. Mathon’s word — but its social fabric is intact.
The city’s argument for the demolitions is simple, and revolves around numbers. Sixty percent of the district’s population lives below the poverty line. Forty percent of the dwellings are vacant. Overall unemployment is 70 percent. Many children skip school. It is cheaper to rebuild than to renovate.
“You can’t just let people live in insalubrious conditions, just because it’s picturesque,” said Olivier Amiel, the official in charge of the St. Jacques reconstruction, for which he said 100 million euros, or about $113 million, had been set aside. “Given the urgency of the conditions there, we can’t wait for these aesthetic debates to take place,” he said.
“This program is a last chance for the community,” said Mr. Amiel, who added that over 50 meetings had taken place with community representatives. “You can have preservation without freezing things,” he said, pointing to the dangerous collapse of several buildings.
Mr. Amiel said 588 dwellings are to be demolished, “restructured” or rehabilitated, and 312 new dwellings built. But Mr. Mathon says there has been no new construction where the houses have been demolished.
“They think we want to chase them from the district, but that has never been our intention,” said Pierre Parrat, the deputy mayor, in his office at City Hall, an elegant 14th-century building below Saint Jacques.
Officials question the Roma’s hygiene, but Ms. Cargol’s kitchen was sparkling.
