The Facebook page Black Elevation was part of a complex influence campaign that organized real-world events before it was spotted and taken down by Facebook.
SAN FRANCISCO — Black Elevation appeared to be an organization dedicated to fighting racism to the tens of thousands of people who visited its page on Facebook.
And it was all a lie. Black Elevation was actually part of an orchestrated political influence campaign, aimed at sowing divisions among Americans ahead of the midterm elections in November, according to Facebook.
The Black Elevation page, one of the most popular of 32 pages taken down by Facebook last month, demonstrated how an influence campaign targeting Americans has been far more effective at infiltrating activist circles than previously reported.
With 139,217 likes on its Facebook page, the influence campaign also showed an increased sophistication in understanding American culture and the use of technology, said Jonathan Albright, a researcher at Columbia University’s Tow Center for Digital Journalism. The creators of Black Elevation often used the colloquialisms of the activist community and relied on technology to mask their location, and may have even purchased fake followers to appear more popular.
Facebook did not identify who was behind the campaign, but Black Elevation mirrored previous efforts by the Internet Research Agency, a Russian organization that tried to manipulate voters in the United States ahead of the 2016 elections. The company said it had drawn some connections between accounts it removed last month and those operated by Russian agents in the past.
Facebook said the pages it recently removed had created roughly 30 real-world events since May 2017. The Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab, which analyzes misinformation online and works with Facebook, reviewed some of the pages and events, though the Black Elevation page does not appear to be among them.
It was not clear why it was not among the pages the Atlantic Council was able to review. Facebook declined to comment on the Black Elevation page and would not say why it had removed the page before the council reviewed it.
But following a trail of online bread crumbs, Mr. Albright detailed how Black Elevation leveraged tight-knit groups of activists in the United States to gain a following and persuade people to participate in real protest rallies.
On Aug. 12, 2017, Black Elevation held rallies to remember the anniversary of the death of Michael Brown, an African-American teenager who was shot and killed by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo., in 2014. The original pages organizing the events have been removed from Facebook, but traces remain on other social media sites and public event websites that promoted rallies in at least three cities — New York, Atlanta and Memphis.
A woman who answered a telephone for Black Lives Matter in Memphis said she did not recall the event and did not know why it was posted on the group’s YouTube page.
Three activists who attended or promoted the Michael Brown events in the three cities said they were promoted by local chapters of the Black Lives Matter movement and in local email newsletters. The three people asked to not be identified because they feared being targeted by online trolls and they were embarrassed by their involvement with the Black Elevation Facebook page.
No public evidence of those videos remains, but Mr. Albright was able to find at least two videos that were once posted on Facebook — one had 2.5 million views and the other about one million. One of the activists recalled a Black Elevation video being shared by several of his Facebook friends and said he joined the group shortly after viewing it.
Another activist, who is a student at a university near Atlanta, said she joined the Black Elevation page when she noticed a paid advertisement for it on Facebook. The social media company confirmed that the group placed advertisements, though it would not reveal what demographic was the target or how much was spent on ads.
In one of the few details offered about the page, Facebook said the group ran an advertisement seeking to hire an event coordinator. The ad for the part-time position, which was liked more than 1,000 times and shared nearly 300 times, promised payment in two parts, before and after the event.
A student activist in New York said he applied, and was interviewed for the job over Facebook’s Messenger app. He did not recall the name of the person conducting the interview, but said the interviewer asked few questions and made frequent spelling mistakes. He did not follow up afterward, and he said he was never contacted by the group again.
Mr. Albright said it was the first time he had seen an influence campaign advertise for a paid position.
Ben Nimmo, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council, said the behavior of Black Elevation followed a pattern he observed with other Russian-backed influence campaigns.
The Black Elevation organizers may have been trying to slide into the real world by hiring event coordinators or trying to persuade real activists to identify themselves as members of Black Elevation.
Mr. Nimmo said all of the pages Facebook recently removed were aimed at left-wing activists in the United States. It is possible, he added, that a similar influence campaign has been focusing on right-wing activists.
In a conference call with reporters last month, Facebook said it would work with officials from the Federal Bureau of Investigation to share information on any influence operations it uncovered.
