You just released the 10th season of “Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee.” How come it’s illegal to talk on a phone while you’re driving, but it’s legal to film a TV show? Believe me, it’s a hundred times more distracting to try to drive an old stick-shift car and interview somebody at the same time than it is to be on the phone. Definitely distracted driving.
You have a huge collection of classic cars. Not to get too morbid, but have you thought about what will happen to it after you’re gone? Sure. My wife’s going to liquidate it, and that’s fine with me. I want people like me to enjoy them. It should be like blowing on a dandelion.
We’re headed toward an age of self-​driving cars. I assume you’re not looking forward to that. No. That would be like computer-written comedy.
Which is a thing they’re trying to do. Have you heard about that? I’ve heard some of the jokes, and they’re not that bad.
It recently occurred to me that a lot of “Seinfeld” plotlines were car-related: parking garages, parallel parking, handicap spots, traffic, mechanics, license plates, rental cars, car dealerships, running over pigeons, valet B.O., airport pickups. Was “Seinfeld” secretly a show about cars the entire time? No one has ever said that. That’s really funny, although I think you could probably make a list just as long with food and clothes.
When you’re flipping channels and you come across a “Seinfeld” rerun, do you flip right past it or do you linger? Right past it. I think there’s a level of focus you need to get something to a certain point creatively, and you pay a price for that, which is you can’t ever look at it again.
You turned down an offer from NBC of $5 million an episode to do one more season of “Seinfeld.” Nobody in TV has ever made even close to that money before or since. Did you ever second-guess that decision? No. It was the perfect moment, and the proof that it was the right moment is the number of questions you’re still asking me about it. The most important word in art is “proportion.” How much? How long is this joke going to be? How many words? How many minutes? And getting that right is what makes it art or what makes it mediocre.
You’ve been outspoken about stand-up audiences being too sensitive and politically correct these days. Have you ever apologized for a joke? No. Jokes are not real. People assume that when you say something that you believe it. It’s purely comedic invention. You know, I do this whole bit about Pop-Tarts and how much I love them. I don’t love Pop-Tarts. It’s just funny. It’s funny to say it, so I say it.
What did you make of James Gunn, the “Guardians of the Galaxy” director, getting fired for his old Twitter jokes? I didn’t read the jokes, but if they’re jokes, it doesn’t matter. I guess Roseanne Barr thought she was being funny, but it wasn’t funny — and if it’s offensive and not funny, then it’s not a joke. But any comedian that doesn’t understand that dynamic, you’re finished anyway.
You use Twitter mostly for self-promotion. Why no Twitter jokes? I don’t hear the laugh. Why waste my time? It’s a horrible performing interface. I can’t think of a worse one. I always think about people that write books. What a horrible feeling it must be to have poured your soul into a book over a number of years and somebody comes up to you and goes, “I loved your book,” and they walk away, and you have no idea what worked and what didn’t. That to me is hell. That’s my definition of hell.
Let’s say that we’re sending another Voyager out into space, and you get to choose the one joke we include on the golden record to represent comedy to the aliens. What joke would you pick? I would put in Rodney Dangerfield’s joke: “I was making love with my wife, and she had a faraway look in her eyes, and I said, ‘Darling, is there someone else?’ and she said, ‘There must be.’ ” That’s as perfect a joke as I can imagine.