The power of seeing one priest’s name on a list.
Ms. McCormick is the author of several books.
When I saw the name of the priest who molested me listed in the Pennsylvania grand jury’s report, I thought: I’m gonna be in big trouble. The abuse started when I was about 12 years old, so it’s not a surprise that the language that came to mind was straight out of that period of my life.
I scanned through the nearly 900 pages of the report that was released by the attorney general last week. It detailed abuse in six dioceses over 70 years, listing more than 300 abusive priests. The accounts were horrifying — young victims were given gold cross necklaces to signal to other predators that they were ‘optimal targets’ — and the documentation of what happened is surely a good thing.
But what stunned me was my second reaction: a perplexing disappointment that I still don’t know whether I was his only victim. Of course, I didn't want others to have experienced what I did. But I did want some confirmation that his behavior was part of a pattern.
Then our family sat stifled into silence as he held forth on evils of the changing times, reserving special fury for the New Mass, where the organ was replaced by a guitar and tambourine, and where laypeople carried felt banners decorated with handprints and doves. Taking her cue, my mother once asked him what he thought of my Catholic high school teacher who’d assigned the book “A Clockwork Orange” to his class despite a church ban on the movie.
When my mother asked about the Catholic teacher’s defiant assignment, the priest slammed his palm on table. The plates jumped. The water in the water glasses sloshed. The lamp over the table vibrated ever so slightly. “I want to know what Patty thinks,” he said. He turned his mastiff-like head in my direction. My three younger sisters looked at me in awe, as if they were expecting me to turn the water into wine. My father looked on in pity. My mother adopted a pose of polite curiosity.
The dinners became a tradition. One night, Father Bradel arrived early. My mother, who grew up in an era when girls tap-danced or recited poetry for guests, said to me, “Go in the living room and entertain Father Bradel.” She ushered the two of us into the living room, that museum of suburban propriety, and left. Father Bradel and I stood there awkwardly, as if we were waiting to be introduced. He was wearing a long black cassock and stiff white clerical collar; I was in my school uniform and knee socks.
This ritual, where I would be told to entertain Father Bradel in the living room, then be the star student at the dinner table, took place three or four times a year all throughout high school; it was as unchanging as the consecration of the host at Mass. No one had to tell me it was my duty to give this strange comfort to our parish priest. I knew from my catechism book that following the wishes of authority figures was a way of “showing God how much we love him. We show this especially when we obey in something we do not feel like doing.” More than that, I wanted desperately to believe that this man saw something special in me — intelligence, maybe? A rebellious spirit? Or a deep, keening loneliness that he shared.
A few years later, when I was in college, Father Bradel called to say he was coming to take me out to dinner. “Don’t wear jeans,” he said. He took me to a fancy restaurant outside Philadelphia where there was one menu “for the gentleman,” with prices, and another “for the lady.” He ordered a Manhattan. I ordered a Tab.
“I’ve come for your blessing,” he added.
I understood that the moment was significant, that it was a rite of some kind, something like the moment when a young man asks a girl’s father for her hand in marriage. But I had no idea what my role was. Whatever dark power he had possessed back in my suburban dining room, where he had made me feel special, was gone. I saw him as he was: a 53-year-old man in clerical garb at a restaurant where, all around us, people his age were out for a romantic dinner. I just wanted to get out of there. Maybe I could have him drop me off at the dive bar where they took my fake ID.
“It’s O.K. with me,” I said.
I didn’t plan to take legal action. I just wanted to make a report.
I didn’t know why there would be such a list, but I told her that he used to kiss me every time I had to entertain him.
She put her hand over her heart. “Not Father Bradel!” she said.
I asked if I could report my experience, for the record. “The diocese has a clinical support counselor you can talk to,” he said.
It took me a minute to understand: My call had been forwarded not to a victim’s advocate but to the priest in charge of defending the other priests.
“Will you check into whether anyone else reported Father Bradel?” I asked.
He called a week later to apologize. He wasn’t allowed to talk about other victims.
There are several names I recognize in the lengthy report from Pennsylvania: a priest from the parish five miles to the east of mine; a priest from the parish four miles to the west; a priest who taught at my high school. I read the report feeling sick, digesting the accounts of rape, the long list of names with cases involving “indecent behavior” and “child pornography” — and was heartbroken to imagine who among my classmates also were harmed.
I’m grateful that the attorney general did what the diocese wouldn’t. I’m still curious, though, as to whether I’m the only one Father Bradel preyed upon. I hope so. But I doubt it.
