The 95-year-old Nazi who was deported this week after living quietly in Queens for decades was not the only member of his squad to come to New York City.
Jakiw Palij, a former member of Hitler’s Schutzstaffel, or SS, arrived in Germany on Tuesday, 14 years after the federal government stripped him of citizenship.
But the story of how Mr. Palij arrived in the United States, acquired citizenship and built a life in Queens is not one of a lone Nazi thwarting immigration laws, but of a trio of Third Reich soldiers working together to find haven in America, one vouching for the other two on visa applications.
On June 27, 1949, Mr. Palij walked into the American consular office in Schweinfurt, Germany, and applied for a visa under the Displaced Persons Act, which was meant for people left homeless by the war, said Peter Black, the former chief historian for a Department of Justice unit devoted to deporting former Nazis. Mr. Palij claimed that he had worked as a laborer on his father’s farm in Piadyki, which was then part of Poland, and as a factory worker in Germany during the war.
With him was Jaroslaw Bilaniuk, who was from Mr. Palij’s village. Mr. Bilaniuk’s application claimed he worked as a self-employed woodworker in Piadyki and then as a farm laborer in Germany until the end of the war.
They had help from yet another member of their unit, Mykola Wasylyk, who had already gotten a visa and made it to the United States. Mr. Wasylyk signed both applications as a witness, vouching for the men’s truthfulness.

The Department of Justice filed denaturalization charges against former Schutzstaffel member Jakiw Palij in 2002. He was deported to Germany in August 2018.
Records unearthed by Department of Justice investigators in Prague indicated that both Mr. Palij and Mr. Bilaniuk had volunteered to serve in the SS in February of 1943. Their SS identification numbers were a single digit apart — 3504 and 3505 — suggesting they enlisted together with volunteers from the Galicia region of what is now Ukraine.
Mr. Palij was inducted and put through basic instruction at the Trawniki Training Camp in Poland, where the Nazis trained recruits for Operation Reinhard, the code name for the planned extermination of Poland’s population of two million Jews, according to court documents.
“We could see from the names and military identification numbers that these were men who were at the camp when the Germans abandoned the camp in 1944,” Mr. Black said.
From 1941 through 1945, roughly 3 million Jewish adults and children were murdered in Poland, according to Walter Reich, the former director of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
Before arriving in the United States, the three men worked as guards in their unit, which was part of the Streibel Battalion, according to court records. All three guarded forced laborers who made uniforms and brushes, Mr. Black said. Their unit also conducted bloody reprisal campaigns against Polish partisans in the region around the town of Lublin, but Mr. Black said the Justice Department could not confirm whether the men took part in such operations.
When Mr. Palij and Mr. Bilaniuk arrived in the United States in summer of 1949, they ended up settling a dozen miles apart in Queens. Their colleague Mr. Wasylyk moved to the Ulster County village of Ellenville, where he ran a bungalow community that had mostly Jewish summer renters.
It was not until the early 1990s, after the fall of the Berlin Wall, that United States law-enforcement authorities figured out who they were after finding the cache of Nazi records in Czechoslovakia.
The Department of Justice accused all three of serving in the SS in Trawniki, and filed charges to take away their American passports and order them deported. All told, the Justice Department successfully charged and denaturalized 16 former SS members who served at Trawniki.
Yet many of them remained in the country because no other nation was willing to take them. Mr. Wasylyk, who was stripped of his citizenship in 2001 and ordered deported in 2004, died in Florida in 2010. Mr. Bilaniuk, who lived in Douglaston, died in 2007 with the case against him still pending.
Denaturalization charges filed by the U.S. Department of Justice against former Schutzstaffel member Jaroslaw Bilaniuk in 2002. Bilaniuk died in 2007 with his case still pending.
It appeared Mr. Palij might also finish his life in Queens: Germany, Poland and Ukraine had repeatedly refused to take him in. But the Trump administration spent months pressuring Germany to accept his return, White House officials said, and on Monday, federal agents wheeled him out of his house and put him on a chartered air-ambulance to Düsseldorf, Germany.
Walter Reich, the former director of the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, said that Mr. Palij’s deportation was an important moment in ensuring that the murders of millions of Jews would not fade from popular memory.
