In a deal that eases the financial pressure on the Kushner Companies, Brookfield Asset Management said on Friday that it had taken a 99-year lease on 666 Fifth Avenue, the troubled Midtown tower owned by the family of Donald Trump’s son-in-law.
Jared Kushner, now a top White House adviser, paid a record-setting $1.8 billion for the building in 2007, and it has been a drag on his family’s real estate company ever since.
In the 666 Fifth Avenue deal, Brookfield paid about $1.1 billion in upfront rent, according to an executive who requested anonymity because he had been briefed on the deal but was not authorized to discuss it. Charles Kushner, Jared’s father, who now runs the company, in turn, negotiated with his lenders to pay less than the company owed to satisfy the debts, the executive said.
A spokeswoman for Kushner Companies declined to comment on the Brookfield deal.
The purchase of the aluminum-clad tower was intended to vault the Kushners into the top ranks of New York real estate from their perch in New Jersey, where they were known for a huge portfolio of garden apartment complexes. They moved their company headquarters to 666 Fifth, from where they presided over a new and rapidly expanding empire that included former industrial buildings in Brooklyn, apartments in Maryland and development sites in Jersey City, N.J.
But they ran into trouble almost immediately. They were unable to get the office rents they expected in 2007, making it difficult to pay the initial $1.75 billion debt on the building. Then the recession hit.
Jared and Charles Kushner sold 666 Fifth’s most valuable asset — the Fifth Avenue retail space — for $525 million and used the proceeds to pay down some of their debt. But office rents continued to fall and two of the tower’s biggest tenants left.
That forced the Kushners to restructure their loans, and Vornado Realty Trust bought a 49.5 percent stake in the office space and gave the Kushners an $80 million high-interest loan. Vornado later bought the retail space from separate owners.
In 2016, Charles and Jared Kushner pitched a new deal to investors in the United States and abroad: They would demolish the building and erect a $7.5 billion luxury supertower in its place. They got close to a deal with a billionaire from Qatar, Hamad Jassim Al-Thani, the country’s former prime minister, and with Anbang, a giant Chinese insurance company.
But the deal with the Chinese collapsed amid criticism from legislators over the connection between Jared Kushner’s political role and the family business.
Earlier this year, Brookfield said it would buy a 49.5 percent stake in the office portion of 666 Fifth, although Brookfield planned to oversee renovations and management of the tower. But that deal required the Kushner Companies to pay off the mortgage on the office portion of the building and pay back Vornado.
In negotiations with his lenders, the executive familiar with the deal said, Mr. Kushner argued that 666 Fifth was not worth the $1.4 billion that was owed. He eventually worked out an agreement to pay off the debts for substantially less, according to the executive.
But they still could not secure financing, and on Friday, Brookfield, which owns and operates more than 275 office buildings worldwide, said that it had taken the 99-year lease instead. The deal was first reported by The Wall Street Journal.
Also on Friday, Vornado announced that it had sold its stake in the office portion of the building to the Kushners for $120 million.
While the deal solves a major problem for the Kushners, the company still faces challenges. Lenders continue to hesitate or retreat from doing business with the company, cowed by the scrutiny that other financial partners have received.
Early this year, the French bank Natixis, which had lent hundreds of millions of dollars to Kushner Companies before Mr. Trump’s inauguration, abruptly canceled plans to provide a roughly $200 million new loan to 65 Bay Street, an upscale apartment building in Jersey City, in which the Kushners and KABR were partners. The withdrawal was a surprise, said Mr. Pasternak, the KABR executive chairman. “They backed out late,” said Mr. Pasternak, who declined to provide further details.
In a statement, Natixis said that while it had done deals with Kushner Companies between 2013 and 2016, it “no longer has any exposure or active business relationship with Kushner Companies.” Officials there declined to comment on the Jersey City transaction.
Natixis was quickly replaced in the 65 Bay Street deal by Citigroup. But even there, senior executives are now reassessing their involvement with the Kushner firm, say two people with knowledge of the discussions, given the blowback they have received over recent deals with the company.
A loan Citigroup made to the Kushners after its chief executive, Michael Corbat, met with Jared Kushner at the White House last year raised questions about potential conflicts of interest between Citigroup’s policy agenda and its willingness to lend to Mr. Kushner’s family business. Shortly after The New York Times wrote about the meeting that preceded the loan, Elizabeth Warren and other Senate Democrats suggested that the confluence of the meeting and the loan might constitute a federal ethics violation on Mr. Kushner’s part. Ms. Warren and her colleagues have sought additional information.
Danielle Romero-Apsilos, a Citigroup spokeswoman, has said that Kushner Companies is a longtime client of the bank, that the meeting Mr. Corbat had with Mr. Kushner had no connection to the loan made shortly afterward and that every deal is analyzed on a case-by-case basis.
At 666 Fifth Avenue, Brookfield is betting on a turnaround based on the building’s premier location on Fifth Avenue, near Rockefeller Center and Central Park, and its access to public transportation. The company plans to spend about $700 million renovating the lobby, installing new elevators, refurbishing the vacant office space and attracting new tenants.
Brookfield is one of the world’s biggest real estate companies, and among its investors is the Qatar Investment Authority, one of the world’s largest sovereign funds, which bought a $1.8 billion stake in one of the company’s subsidiaries, Brookfield Property Partners in 2014, and is the second-largest investor in the company, ranking only behind Brookfield Asset Management. That has raised questions given Jared Kushner’s portfolio in the White House, which includes the Middle East.
