A white former police officer in a Dallas suburb was found guilty by a jury on Tuesday of fatally shooting an unarmed black high school freshman with a high-powered rifle in April 2017.
The former officer, Roy D. Oliver II, was fired from the Balch Springs Police Department after he shot and killed Jordan Edwards, 15, as Jordan and four other teenagers drove away from a house party. Mr. Oliver fired into the vehicle, hitting Jordan in the head as he sat in the front passenger seat.
Last week, Mr. Oliver testified that he had decided to fire at the car when he saw it moving toward his partner, Officer Tyler Gross, endangering him. But Officer Gross told the court that he had not feared for his life.
The jury returned its verdict on the second day of deliberations. Mr. Oliver, 38, was found not guilty on two counts of aggravated assault, but he faces at least five years or up to life in prison on the murder conviction.
Since Michael Brown, 18, was killed in Ferguson, Mo., four years ago this month, cases in which African-Americans were shot by police officers or died in police custody have risen to national prominence, increasing racial tensions.
But despite the attention, officers are rarely convicted of using deadly force, said Ronal Serpas, a former police chief in Nashville and New Orleans and a co-chairman of Law Enforcement Leaders to Reduce Crime and Incarceration, a group of police chiefs and prosecutors.
A lawyer for Jordan’s family said that Tuesday’s verdict held great significance in the effort to seek justice for black victims.
Mr. Oliver had been an officer in Balch Springs, a working-class suburb of 24,000, since 2011. He joined the force after serving as an infantryman in the Army and being deployed to Iraq twice.
He was charged with murder one week after shooting Jordan and was fired by the town’s police chief, who said Mr. Oliver had violated department policies.
The trial immediately entered the penalty phase on Tuesday, with many of Jordan’s teachers being called to the stand.
