Moshe Mizrahi, an Israeli director whose “Madame Rosa,” one of several movies he made in France, won the Academy Award for best foreign-language film in 1978, died on Aug. 3 at a hospital in Tel Aviv. He was 86.
His son, Daniel, said the cause was pneumonia.
So when Mr. Mizrahi asked Simone Signoret, the French star known for her smoldering sexuality, to star in “Madame Rosa” as an aging former prostitute and Holocaust survivor — a frumpy character with frizzy hair who wears unappealing makeup and dresses — she put aside her resistance to the part because she admired his work.
Based on a novel by Romain Gary, the movie follows Rosa as she raises the children of other prostitutes in a small apartment in Paris and grows particularly close to Momo, an Arab boy.
Ms. Signoret won the César Award, France’s equivalent of the Oscar, for best actress. And “Madame Rosa” remains the only winner of the Oscar for best foreign-language film directed by an Israeli (although it counted as France’s victory).
As an Israeli, Mr. Mizrahi felt ambivalence about winning the award because his film was made in France, and one of the four films it beat was “Operation Thunderbolt,” Israel’s entry in the category.
He would continue to make films in Israel, France and elsewhere. He directed “Every Time We Say Goodbye” (1986), with Tom Hanks, on location in Jerusalem, and “War and Love” (1985), a Holocaust story set in Poland that featured Kyra Sedgwick, was filmed in Hungary.
Moshe Mizrahi was born on Sept. 5, 1931, in Alexandria, Egypt, to Haim Victor and Dora (Behar) Mizrahi. His father, a store clerk, died of an abscess when Moshe was 9, forcing his mother to do housework to support her four children.
Entranced by movies early on, Moshe saw as many as seven films a week in Alexandria, mostly from the United States.
The family left for Palestine in 1946. During the Israeli war for independence two years later, Mr. Mizrahi’s brother, Shabtay, was killed in an Egyptian bombing raid. Mr. Mizrahi did not stay there for long. In 1950, courtesy of a Jewish group that paid his way, he moved to Paris, where he satiated himself on films noir and westerns and hoped one day to work in America.
Returning to Israel, he worked as a newspaper reporter and wrote Hebrew movie subtitles before heading back to Paris in 1958. There he found work in television and was eventually hired by Telfrance Films, where he rose to production manager and producer.
When he turned to film directing, he used some of his family’s lore in telling cinematic stories. For “I Love You Rosa,” he drew on his maternal great-grandmother’s experience for a story set in the late 19th century about a young widow (Michal Bat-Adam) obliged by Old Testament law to marry her brother-in-law, who is only 11 years old.
A year later Mr. Mizrahi directed “The House on Chelouche Street,” whose story echoed his own: A widow moves her family from Alexandria to Israel before its independence.
He married Ms. Bat-Adam, a screenwriter, actress and director, in 1980, after she had appeared in five of his pictures. They continued to collaborate for many years, she as an actor in his films and he as an actor and producer in some of hers. In “Rachel’s Man” (1975), Ms. Bat-Adam played the title role, while Mr. Mizrahi directed and wrote the script with his former wife, Rachel Fabian.
In addition to his son and wife, Mr. Mizrahi is survived by his daughter, Orit Mizrahi; two sisters, Silka Erez and Lea Pinto; and two grandchildren.
Mr. Mizrahi continued to direct until 2007, when he made “Weekend in the Galilee” in Israel, his first film in 11 years — and also his final one. He had been teaching cinema at Tel Aviv University since the 1990s, which occupied him as directing assignments became scarce because of financing and other issues, his son said.
But Mr. Mizrahi suggested that he had fallen out of step both with Israeli and with French culture — and it did not seem to bother him.
