EDINBURGH — Dressed in thick hats and heavy raincoats on the stage of a makeshift theater, three actors stumbled humorously through an imaginary storm. They buckled helplessly against the roaring sonic tempest coming from the room’s speakers, before it abruptly ended. The sun came out. But then the storm returned, louder and more ferocious.
For this year’s Fringe, Ms. Whitehill teamed up with Strictly Arts, a company based in Birmingham, England, to devise a crusading work of physical theater called “Freeman,” about the fragile mental health of black prisoners.
Its touchstone is the story of William Freeman, a freeborn man of African and Native American descent who was accused of multiple brutal killings in upstate New York. He was one of the first to use the insanity defense in a United States court, arguing that the beatings he had received in jail after an earlier, wrongful, conviction had made him insane.
In particular, Mr. Eaton-Lewis pointed to Bryony Kimmings’s “Fake It ’Til You Make It,” a two-hander about depression that was partly inspired by Mr. Williams’s death. Many theater makers cited the work as an influence, he said.
Mr. Eaton-Lewis also noted a generational shift: Younger people talk about mental health more openly, he said, and are more interested in works on the subject.
The Mental Health Foundation introduced a Mental Health Fringe Award last year, a prize for a work of outstanding artistic merit on the subject. But Mr. Eaton-Lewis said that working to break the silence around the topic is less of a priority for him now that so many artists talk about it openly. He is now more concerned with the mental well-being of the artists themselves, he said.
Mr. Eaton-Lewis is also organizing a workshop for performers called “Mental Health Is a Fringe Issue,” providing an opportunity to talk through both the Fringe experience and how to make theater about mental health. He said there were also free events organized by the festival itself, including “Conquering Performance Anxiety,” a session teaching practical mindfulness, breathing and meditation, and “A Mentally Well Fringe,” a series of therapeutic drop-in sessions.
The Fringe provides one of the best opportunities in the English-speaking world for an unknown theater or comedy act to forge a reputation. Nobody will stop you from booking a slot. But there may be nobody to look out for you, either. It’s a long shot at success that thousands are willing to take.