GLOBAL MASH-UP FOR KIDS: ASIA MEETS LATIN AMERICA at Flushing Town Hall (Aug. 12, 1 p.m.). These regions may not connect geographically, but music will form a welcoming bridge between them at this concert in Queens. The first Global Mash-Up for children — the hall has long had such a series for adults — will feature two performers whose own backgrounds could be described as global mash-ups: Elena Moon Park, whose heritage is Korean but who was born and raised in Oak Ridge, Tenn., and Sonia De Los Santos, who comes from Monterrey, Mexico, but now lives in New York City. Known for the album “Rabbit Days and Dumplings,” Ms. Park and her band will offer folk and children’s songs from East Asia, and will teach a few to the audience. Ms. De Los Santos and her musicians will perform bilingual tunes, drawing on her debut album, “Mi Viaje: De Nuevo León to the New York Island.” Dancing will be encouraged.
‘GRAVE OF THE FIREFLIES’ at select theaters nationwide (Aug. 12, 12:55 p.m.; Aug. 13 and 15, 7 p.m.). Don’t expect a happy ending. Often described as a masterpiece, this 1988 anime film from the groundbreaking Studio Ghibli begins by revealing the deaths of its main characters, a Japanese boy and his sister. It then goes back in time, tracing the siblings’ struggles in the aftermath of an American firebombing toward the end of World War II. Although “Grave of the Fireflies,” which was directed by the animation pioneer Isao Takahata, also has moments of tenderness and beauty, its unsparing view of war makes it more appropriate for audiences 12 and older. In honor of the film’s 30th anniversary, Fathom Events and the American distributor GKids are screening it in participating theaters in an English-dubbed version on Sunday and Wednesday, and in Japanese with English subtitles on Monday.
HONEY WEEKEND at Wave Hill (Aug. 11-12, 10 a.m.-4 p.m.). Metamorphosis plays an important role in the insect world, and once a year at Wave Hill, a public garden in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, humans can experience that process as well. During Honey Weekend’s family art project, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., children happily transform into bees, making and donning antennas, wings and so-called pollen cups, or baskets (part of a bee’s anatomy). The garden provides a cardboard hive to play in, as well as kazoos to buzz during a “bee parade” (weather permitting). Little visitors can also try on beekeeping gear and peer into a hive at an information station, make beeswax candles at a drop-in workshop and watch the extraction of honey from a comb. On Sunday only, at 1 p.m., they may spy bees and other creatures during a family nature walk.
THE INTERNATIONAL PUPPET FRINGE FESTIVAL NYC at the Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural and Educational Center (through Aug. 12). A fox with an identity crisis. A tiger that talks. Lovers, besotted and bemused. These are just a few of the characters, with and without strings, that populate this celebration, running through Sunday on the Lower East Side. Produced by the Morán Group and Teatro SEA, the Latino theater for children, the festival includes Compañía la Bicicleta’s wordless “Nana Raíz,” about a sleepless baby and a mystical dream world, and WonderSpark Puppets’ “Fox Fables,” whose titular creature loses his tail and, with it, his sense of self. Paper Heart Puppets performs “Cardboard Explosion!” (You can guess what its eccentric city is made of.) A wily rabbit gets the better of a feline predator in Chinese Theater Works’ “Tiger Tales,” and a notorious horseman rides again in Drama of Works’ “Sleepy Hollow.” Each evening also offers a free outdoor production of Teatro SEA’s “Sueño,” a carnivalesque version of “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” that gives Shakespeare a Latin accent.
ONE CROWN HEIGHTS FESTIVAL at Brower Park (Aug. 12, 11:30 a.m.-5 p.m.). Harmony, both musical and social, inspires this free event, which gathers the different cultures found in the Crown Heights area of Brooklyn for hours of celebration. As a symbol of that unity, attendees are asked to assemble at the Jewish Children’s Museum at 11:30 a.m. for a noon walk to Brower Park and the adjoining Brooklyn Children’s Museum, a festival sponsor that will offer free admission all day. Entertainment in the park will include such varied performers as Eli Marcus and Chony Milecki, who specialize in Jewish dance music; Harmony Music Makers, a Caribbean-style steel pan ensemble; Brooklyn United Marching Band; and stilt walkers from Tropicalfete. The fair, to be held rain or shine, will offer both kosher and nonkosher food.
TOTALLY TOMATOES WEEKEND at the New York Botanical Garden (Aug. 11-12, 10 a.m.-6 p.m.). Are your children skeptical of vegetables? No worries. At this themed weekend, they’ll learn that tomatoes are really a fruit and totally tasty, too. Held at the Edible Academy, the botanical garden’s new educational campus on its grounds in the Bedford Park neighborhood of the Bronx, the activities will include cultivating, harvesting and eating. Children can investigate an heirloom tomato display; learn how to slice, dice and make tomato sauces; start their own garden plots at the greenhouse and pot up basil (a great culinary accompaniment for tomatoes) to take home; decorate aprons with botanical stamps; and mix a packet of herbs for a bruschetta recipe. The garden will also offer tours and a menu of live music.
‘YELLOW SUBMARINE’ at Film Forum (Aug. 11-12, 11 a.m.). Get ready to sing. The title tune for this 1968 movie may not be your favorite Beatles song, but it’s usually irresistible to children. They’re the intended audience for these 50th-anniversary screenings, which make up a rare summer edition of the young people’s series Film Forum Jr. The theater will show a new 4K restoration of George Dunning’s lushly animated picture — Heinz Edelmann did the psychedelic art — which follows the Beatles’ efforts to rescue Pepperland from the music-hating Blue Meanies. At each showtime, the theater will offer both the original film and a special singalong version with onscreen lyrics. All you need is love — and a good pair of lungs.
