New York|Cuomo Attacked N.Y.’s Largest Cable Company. Its Channels Ignored the News.
Cuomo Attacked N.Y.’s Largest Cable Company. Its Channels Ignored the News.
It would have seemed to be the perfect made-for-local-TV moment: a reporter’s hard-nosed questions about potential corruption allegations eliciting an angry rebuke from Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.
Full coverage to follow, right?
But things quickly got complicated last Tuesday when Mr. Cuomo veered sharply away from a question about hundreds of thousands of dollars from possible straw donors, and began to attack the parent company of the veteran reporter who had asked it, Zack Fink of NY1.
“Speaking of fraud, Charter Spectrum has been executing fraud on the people of this state,” Mr. Cuomo said. He attacked the company for not building out as much broadband in rural communities as it had promised, and for television ads it was running to promote its record.
The outburst by the governor, who is seeking re-election to his third term in November, drew calls for an apology from Cynthia Nixon, Mr. Cuomo’s Democratic challenger whose campaign called it a “Trumpian tantrum,” and dual denunciations from the editorial pages of The New York Post and The Daily News.
But the confrontation — a classic of the local news genre — was nowhere to be found on the NY1’s own 24/7 airwaves. The governor had later called into the NY1 newsroom to explain himself — on the record, according to several people familiar with the call. That too, never made it on television.
If anyone at NY1’s Chelsea Market headquarters knew why, they were not willing to say; most people contacted for this story immediately referred questions to the station’s corporate public relations team.
Could Charter officials have quashed such coverage out of concern that it might anger Mr. Cuomo, and thus jeopardize its already tenuous relationship with the state?
Charter Spectrum and NY1 declined to answer any questions, including whether the company had issued an edict explicitly barring coverage of the exchange between Mr. Cuomo and Mr. Fink, or whether the governor had objected to news coverage of him to company officials.
“We stand fully behind Spectrum News and the journalists who make it a tremendous asset to our customers,” the company said in a statement.
There are reasons for Charter officials to be sensitive. Mr. Cuomo’s administration has threatened the company’s very existence in New York: The governor’s appointees at the State Public Service Commission, which oversees the telecom sector, voted at a hastily convened meeting in late July to force Charter to sell its operations in the state.
Those who have tracked the Public Service Commission said its drastic step to revoke Charter’s merger with Time Warner in 2016 was extraordinarily unusual. It came in a special session called with less than 24 hours notice, while one of the commission’s most vocal members had told colleagues she would be out of town on vacation.
“I can’t speak as to why they would have a special session without me but it is for the chair to determine why a special session was called,” said Commissioner Diane X. Burman. She had missed one previous regular session in her five years on the commission, she noted, when she was in the hospital. She declined to speculate about her colleagues’ motivations.
Without her, the meeting lasted less than 20 minutes and none of the three commissioners who attended asked any questions before voting to pull approval of Charter’s merger.
“I think Andrew Cuomo got furious with NY1 News and effectively pulled the plug on an entire cable system as punishment to NY1, and as a warning to others he can affect who dare ask him tough questions,” Mr. Molinaro said.
Karen Scharff, who is supporting Ms. Nixon and is executive director of Citizen Action of New York, said there are serious concerns about Charter’s treatment of consumers, but the Cuomo administration’s push to punish the company still gives her pause.
“It’s sort of the classic Cuomo: Do something with some good and kill your enemies in the process,” she said.
The governor has other reasons to attack Charter. Members of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 3 have been on strike for more than a year and rallying behind those workers is good politics for Mr. Cuomo, who hopes that union members will similarly rally behind him in next month’s primary. Various arms of the I.B.E.W. have been major contributors to Mr. Cuomo over the years, giving more than $100,000 since 2014, including $10,000 this April from the union’s New York political action committee.
Mr. Cuomo has railed against Spectrum’s news stations for failing to sufficiently cover that strike, as well as other legal challenges, including a lawsuit filed against Charter Spectrum by the state’s attorney general. “They virtually blacked it out,” Mr. Cuomo complained the day that the Public Service Commission voted to kick Charter out of the state.
Charter Spectrum’s news channels did briefly cover the Public Service Commission’s move to kick the company out of the state.
Mr. Cuomo is hardly the only politician feuding with Charter Spectrum. This week, Anthony Brindisi, a Democratic candidate for Congress in Central New York, tried to air a television ad criticizing the company but it was rejected. Mr. Brindisi accused Charter Spectrum of trying to “censor” his campaign.
