For more than a year now, an only-in-New York transportation nightmare has been caused by the case of Joaquín Guzmán Loera, the Mexican drug lord best known as El Chapo.
In a highly unusual move, Mr. Guzmán is facing trial in Brooklyn, but, because of his proclivity for breaking out of prison, he is being held in a high-security federal jail in Lower Manhattan.
Every few months or so, whenever he is called to go to court, something awful happens: The police must close the entire Brooklyn Bridge, stranding hundreds of motorists as the world’s biggest drug lord is swept across the East River in a speeding motorcade of heavily armored cars.
And when the trial begins in November, the traffic could get worse because Mr. Guzmán will need to be escorted over the span twice a day, for up to four months. These closures would happen, inconveniently enough, precisely during the morning and evening rush hours.
This temporary gridlock brought on by the criminal-justice system has not only annoyed those who use the bridge, but has given Mr. Guzmán’s lawyers ground to complain. Earlier this year they asked a judge to move the trial to Manhattan — or even Philadelphia — claiming the “spectacle” of shutting down a major traffic artery could prejudice a jury of commuters against their client.
Judge Brian M. Cogan acknowledged on Tuesday the traffic headaches of city motorists (and potential jurors) were “valid concerns,” but he said he had nonetheless decided to keep the trial in Brooklyn. Still, he promised to do his best to spare New Yorkers more transit trauma. At a hearing in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the judge said he had been working with the United States Marshals to come up with a solution to the problem, though he gave no clue what the solution was.
That raised certain questions. Would Mr. Guzmán be transferred to the less secure, but more convenient, federal jail in Brooklyn? Would he be flown over the river in a helicopter every day? Or be ferried across it in a boat?
No one seemed to know — or if they did, they weren’t saying. The Marshals Service, which is responsible for transporting defendants, did not respond to phone calls seeking comment. The city’s Transportation Department referred all inquiries to the New York Police Department. The police, in turn, said nothing.
Speaking to reporters after the hearing, one of Mr. Guzmán’s lawyers, William B. Purpura, speculated that the marshals would house Mr. Guzmán at — or near — the Brooklyn courthouse during trial days, but, he said, he wasn’t sure if his client would return to Manhattan for the weekends.
All of this fretting is necessary because Mr. Guzmán, 61, has twice escaped from maximum-security prisons in Mexico — once, according to his lore, secreted in a laundry cart and once by way of a mile-long tunnel that was dug into the shower of his cell.
When Mr. Guzmán was extradited to New York last year to face charges of running a vast and violent criminal empire, federal officials promised there would be no tunnels this time. They placed him in what is called 10 South, the most secure wing of the city’s most secure federal jail, the Metropolitan Correctional Center. There, Mr. Guzmán is locked behind bars for 23 hours a day and is denied most visitors except for members of his legal team. His lawyers have argued that the harsh conditions of confinement have hindered his ability to prepare for trial.
At Tuesday’s hearing, Judge Cogan said he was inclined to exclude from the trial at least some of the evidence about these vaguely described assassinations, which would severely limit the number of murders that the jury in the case may ultimately hear about. Judge Cogan added that he planned to publish an order on the issue of the killings later this week.
Mr. Guzmán’s other lawyer, A. Eduardo Balarezo, has complained about the lack of details concerning these killings, saying it is almost impossible to defend his client when all the government has revealed to him is — to give just one example — that Mr. Guzmán killed an untold number of unnamed “associates who betrayed” the drug cartel at some point between 1989 and 2014.
“We are defending this case with two hands tied and one eye closed,” Mr. Balarezo said.