The 95-year-old man in the red brick house at 33-18 89th Street in Jackson Heights, Queens, was known for keeping his yard spick-and-span, even tidying up rubbish on his neighbors’ stoops. Most days, he was quick with a smile and a “good morning,” in his thick Polish accent. He would sit on the steps behind his home during block parties, watching the festivities from his perch.
Neighbors at first had little inkling that Jakiw Palij was anything other than another immigrant living out his life in one of the most diverse neighborhoods in the world.
On Monday night, he was deported to Germany, the coda to a 14-year fight to remove Mr. Palij, a former volunteer Nazi guard who is believed to have presided over the death camp Trawniki. Over the years, Mr. Palij’s hidden past became an open secret in Jackson Heights. Residents had grown accustomed to regular protests by Jewish and other groups outside the two-story house, ever since investigators combing through Nazi records identified him in 1993.
That ended on Monday, when neighbors watched agape as Mr. Palij, a cap pulled over his eyes, was wheeled from his home by United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents, who removed him at last from the country he had entered in 1949.
The deportation was the final result of a renewed push by the Trump administration, which had spent months pressuring Germany to accept Mr. Palij, according to a statement released by the White House. He flew out of New York on Monday night and arrived in Düsseldorf, Germany, via a chartered air-ambulance on Tuesday afternoon, according to a spokeswoman for ICE.
Hours after his removal, several neighbors on the leafy street repeated a story Mr. Palij had told them — one he also shared with The New York Times in an interview in 2003. He had been forced to join the Nazis at age 18, he said, fearing for his family’s life. “I know what they say, but I was never a collaborator,” Mr. Palij said then.
On Holocaust Remembrance Day for the past 15 years, more than 200 students and faculty members from the Rambam Mesivta high school in Lawrence, N.Y., have convened in protest outside of Mr. Palij’s house on 89th Street. “Many people in the neighborhood saw him as a nice old man. People said to us, ‘He’s 95-years-old,’” said Rabbi Zev Meir Friedman, the school’s dean.
Richard Grenell, the new United States ambassador in Berlin, pushed Germany to accept him.
In an interview with the newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, the German foreign minister, Heiko Maas, explained the country’s about-face. “We accept the moral obligation of Germany, in whose name terrible injustice was committed under the Nazis,” Mr. Maas said.
That Mr. Palij remained in Jackson Heights for so long filled Ventura Luna, a chef at Que Rico Taco, just across the street from his home, with horror. He stood beside the griddle in the restaurant, visibly shaken as he recounted watching on Monday as agents took the man away.
As she hustled to work on Tuesday, Ana Ponce, whose house backs up to Mr. Palij’s, said on warm days she would frequently see him sitting on that small back staircase, silently crying.
