MIAMI — An unlikely candidate stopped the Mets’ longest home run drought in more than three years.
That man was Jose Reyes, who hit a two-run homer on Sunday to help the Mets beat the Miami Marlins, 4-3.
Reyes’s fourth home run of the season was the Mets’ first homer since Jeff McNeil went deep in a 6-4 win against Cincinnati last Monday night. The four-game drought was the Mets’ longest since a six-game stretch from July 19 to July 24, 2015.
Michael Conforto also connected for the Mets, who took two of three in the weekend series.
“Anytime you see the ball go out of the park, it feels good,” Conforto said.
Noah Syndergaard (8-2) pitched seven innings, improving to 4-1 in his past five starts. He allowed three runs and seven hits, struck out seven and walked two.
Seth Lugo worked around two hits in the ninth to record his first career save.
Bryan Holaday had two hits and drove in two runs for Miami after he hit a game-ending single in the 11th inning of Saturday night’s 4-3 victory. Rafael Ortega added two hits and swiped two bases in the series finale.
The Marlins left-hander Wei-Yin Chen (4-9) allowed four runs, two earned, and four hits in six innings.
The Mets jumped in front on Wilmer Flores’s sacrifice fly in the first, but Starlin Castro hit a tying R.B.I. single in the bottom half.
The Mets went ahead to stay in the second, taking advantage of an error by first baseman Derek Dietrich that put Jose Bautista on with one out. After Kevin Plawecki flied out, Reyes hit a drive to left for a 3-1 lead.
“I didn’t really execute that high pitch well, and Reyes is pretty good at hitting inside pitches, so he did damage on that pitch,” Chen said.
Conforto added a solo drive in the sixth for his 15th homer.
Holaday hit R.B.I. singles in the fourth and the sixth.
The Mets’ David Wright (shoulder/back) played five innings at third base in his first rehab assignment with Class A St. Lucie and went 0 for 3 with two strikeouts. “He came out of it feeling really good, so we’re going to evaluate him when he comes in tomorrow and see what the next step is,” Manager Mickey Callaway said.