President Trump asked the Securities and Exchange Commission to consider eliminating requirements that publicly traded companies post quarterly earnings reports, a move that could do away with a cornerstone of American capital markets.
In a message posted on Twitter early Friday, the president wrote that he had directed the regulator to study moving corporate America to reporting earnings twice a year, saying such a move would allow greater flexibility and cost savings.
In speaking with some of the world’s top business leaders I asked what it is that would make business (jobs) even better in the U.S. “Stop quarterly reporting & go to a six month system,” said one. That would allow greater flexibility & save money. I have asked the SEC to study!
The directive does not mean the imminent demise of quarterly earnings reports, which keep investors informed on the financial health of publicly traded companies. The disclosures are required under federal securities law. The commission is independent of the executive branch, although the White House nominates the chairman of the S.E.C. and the other four commissioners, who all serve staggered, five-year terms.
Mr. Trump’s suggestion is not unheard-of. In 2013, the European regulators abolished requirements that publicly listed companies file quarterly reports. On the other hand, Japan has moved closer to current American rules, requiring quarterly reporting starting in 2008.
Still, any move away from the system of quarterly reporting would be a significant shift for investors, who have come to rely on the regular financial disclosures on the performance of publicly held companies.
Martin Lipton of the law firm Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz, one of the most ardent defenders of big corporations, has already called on the S.E.C. to consider letting companies step off the quarterly reporting treadmill.
There is some evidence that public companies spend less than private firms on plants, equipment and research. A paper published in the Review of Financial Studies in 2014 found that privately held companies were more responsive to changes in opportunities than publicly listed companies.
The paper also found that once companies go public, their appetite for capital spending tends to diminish. That finding is consistent with the idea that being a public company can promote short-term thinking, perhaps because of the scrutiny of disclosures such as quarterly earnings reports. But the authors of the paper also emphasized that other explanations could also be responsible for the shift.
Investors, on the other hand, are less likely to support the idea floated by Mr. Trump, which would cut down on the information available about how the companies were performing.
James Chanos, a well-known investor who specializes in shorting stocks, or betting on their decline, agreed.
He added, however, that some elements of the quarterly reporting process should be re-examined, including the “rampant” release of quarterly numbers that do not conform to the standard set of accounting rules used in the United States, a practice that often makes a company’s financial results look better.
Others argue that longer stretches without corporations providing public information could lead to to abuse by those with inside information.
Even those who criticize quarterly earnings may not want to abolish them altogether. In an essay published in The Wall Street Journal this summer, Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, and the billionaire investor Warren E. Buffett said that they favored eliminating quarter-earnings guidance, which are the targets companies hope to hit, but not the quarterly earnings results themselves.
