Credit...Christopher Griffith for The New York Times. Styling by Paul Frederick; hair by Yoichi Tomizawa; makeup by Lennie Billy.
The 20-year-old is poised to burst into the top tier of women’s tennis. Can she also burst Japan’s expectations of what it means to be Japanese?
The temperature in Boca Raton had soared above 90 degrees, but on a side court at the Evert Tennis Academy, Naomi Osaka was just digging into one of her last training sessions before the summer hardcourt season. Wearing leggings and a tank top — her magnificent mane of frizzy blond-tinted hair emerging from the back of her Adidas cap — the 20-year-old smacked crisp topspin groundstrokes with her coach, Sascha Bajin, a German of Serb descent best known for working as Serena Williams’s hitting partner for eight years. On the sideline, Osaka’s Japanese mother, Tamaki, sat in the shade in a denim jumpsuit and sunglasses, her daughter’s miniature Australian shepherd sitting by her feet. Pacing on the grass alongside the court was her Haitian-born father, Leonard Francois, a taciturn man in a baseball cap who trained her from age 3 and still tracks nearly every shot she hits.
Yet Osaka’s rise is accompanied by a curious tension: She is half-Japanese, half-Haitian, representing a country whose obsession with racial purity has shaped her own family’s history. Though born in Japan, Osaka has lived in the United States since she was 3. She is not fully fluent in Japanese. Yet nearly a decade ago, her father decided that his two daughters would represent Japan, not America. It was a prescient move. Osaka’s success — and her tweeted affection for Japanese manga and movies — has endeared her to Japanese fans hungry for a female tennis star.
In mid-June, Osaka’s mother, Tamaki, posted a tweet that was different from all the tennis, food and puppy updates that had filled her page before. This tweet featured a collage of three photos: one of Francois, shortly after the two met, wearing a black-and-white track suit; one of a younger Tamaki, smiling in a leather jacket; and one of their two toddler girls, with cherub-cheeked Naomi in front, two braids falling across her face. Above the nostalgic photos, Tamaki wrote a message that seemed at odds with the happy images: “was ‘disgrace’ to the family, had been in the desert&jungles for decades, I’m still surviving.” It was followed by two emojis — a flexed arm and a red heart — and a hashtag: #HappyLovingDay.
Japan’s long history of guarding against foreigners dates back to the 1630s, when the Tokugawa shogunate cut off the archipelago from the rest the world. The sense of separatism cultivated over the centuries remains strong today, especially in places like Nemuro, the coastal town where Tamaki grew up. In a country with one of the least ethnically diverse populations in the world, Nemuro — on the eastern tip of Hokkaido, Japan’s northern island — is a bastion of homogeneity. Tamaki’s world would open up, however, after her mother sent her to a high school in Sapporo, Hokkaido’s capital.
Among the early wave of foreigners coming to Sapporo around 1990, Tamaki met a handsome college student from New York. Leonard Maxime Francois was Haitian by birth and one of only a handful of black men in all of Hokkaido. The two started dating, keeping their relationship secret from her parents for several years. Tamaki says that when she was in her early 20s, her father wanted to talk about omiai, the matchmaking process that would lead to her arranged marriage. The truth then spilled out: Tamaki was already seeing someone — a foreigner who also happened to be black. Her father erupted in outrage, excoriating her for bringing disgrace on the family.
For Osaka, the five years on Long Island evoke cultural memories too. “I grew up surrounded by both Haitian and Japanese culture,” she says. Her father’s parents, who spoke no English, filled the air with Haitian Creole and the aroma of spicy Haitian stews. Her mother spoke to her and her sister in Japanese, preparing seaweed-and-rice-ball snacks for them at school and dressing them in kimonos for international day.
Their Asian side won out in another essential way. Instead of taking their father’s last name, the girls used their mother’s name — a Japanese surname that, improbably, is the same as the city of their birth. It was mostly a practical matter when they lived in Japan, helpful for enrolling in schools and renting apartments. But as the girls grew up in America, their name would become a constant reminder of the homeland that they would one day represent.
The family moved to southern Florida in 2006 to focus on tennis full time. As other children went off on the school bus, the sisters trained most of the day on the Pembroke Pines public courts and were home-schooled at night. The girls grew in strength and talent, and in time, Tamaki decided they should meet their Japanese family, from whom she had been largely estranged for nearly 15 years. And so, when Naomi was about 11, she and her sister visited their grandparents in Japan. It wasn’t as joyful a homecoming as Tamaki might have hoped. Her parents took an interest in the girls, she says, but ridiculed their regime of home schooling and tennis training. Tennis was a hobby, they grumbled, not a profession.
Back in Florida, the girls skipped many of the usual circuit of junior tournaments and, eventually, started competing against older players on the pro satellite tours, just as the Williams sisters had done. With a growth spurt in her early teens, Naomi soon towered over Mari. Video clips of the girls’ matches and training began circulating among coaches and agents, but neither sister had an impressive junior ranking or much tournament experience. The United States Tennis Association showed little interest in helping them develop. Rather than vie for support with hundreds of other talented young players in America, Francois made a pivotal decision: His daughters, from age 13, would play for Japan, the nation they left behind nearly a decade earlier.
“My dad thought that since I grew up around my mom and I have a lot of Japanese relatives ... I don’t know. ...” says Osaka, letting the sentence drift off. Despite growing up in United States, with all the cultural references of a typical American youth, she told me: “I don’t necessarily feel like I’m American. I wouldn’t know what that feels like.” Her sister speaks almost fluent Japanese, but Osaka’s grasp on the language is more tenuous. “I don’t know if you guys know this, but I can understand most Japanese, and I speak when I want to,” she tweeted earlier this year, adding: “That applies to my family and friends.” She says she is too shy — and too much of a perfectionist — to speak the language publicly. Her reluctance can create awkward moments at news conferences, with Japanese reporters asking questions that she answers in English.
The decision to play for Japan has had major repercussions in Osaka’s life, from the way she is perceived in Japan and the United States to the size of the endorsement contracts she can now command as a top Japanese athlete ahead of the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. Though some in the tennis world wondered whether the decision was influenced by commercial prospects — the Japanese star Kei Nishikori’s massive endorsements were no secret — the family insists that the girls were too young and unproven for that to be a factor. The Japan Tennis Association, facing a drought of top female players, offered them an opportunity. But for Tamaki and Francois, who spent many years in Japan himself, it was natural for the girls to play in the country where they were born, even if the parent’s own memories of the place were tinged with anger and regret.
The bearded man on stilts bellowed into a microphone, exhorting the crowd to chant her name: “Na-omi! Na-omi!” The hype machine was revving up for a World Team Tennis match, a nonranking format designed to turn the sport into popcorn-eating entertainment. In the stands of the Washington arena on this July evening, cheerleaders in slit white miniskirts and tight red tops swung their pompoms while young men paraded around twirling enormous cutout posters of Osaka’s likeness. Above the tennis court — a Mondrian-like matrix of green, purple, blue and red boxes — four giant screens broadcast images of its headline act on the court below.
For the women’s singles match, one first-to-five-game set, Osaka was pitted against Taylor Townsend, an American ranked 44 places below her. It was expected to be a comfortable win for Osaka and her team, the Washington Kastles, but the circus atmosphere — and the pressure to win every game for a team that had brought her in just for this event, to help propel a playoff run — seemed to throw her off. Her first three service returns careered out of the court. As the errors piled up, a sore right calf got worse. At one point, the Kastles’ announcer pumped up the crowd. “Refuse to lose!” he yelled. “Get ’em up, get ’em up, get ’em UP!” Osaka still lost in a tiebreaker, dumping the final ball in the net and trudging off the court.
As the match dragged on, Osaka huddled with her personal team to discuss the situation. Her trainer warned against staying out late and dancing on her sore leg just two days before the summer’s first hardcourt tournament began. Her father agreed. Osaka and her sister, conferring quietly in Japanese so the others wouldn’t overhear, made the final decision together. After so many years of training and studying together, with few other friends or distractions around, Mari and Naomi have developed an indissoluble bond.
Early on, Mari was the focus of attention.  Mari had phenomenal drive and balance — she even mastered the unicycle — and could hit the ball on the rise at an early age. Naomi showed little promise at first and was sometimes relegated to a side court with her mother while Leonard trained Mari. In a way, this shielded her from the pressure that piled up on Mari as their parents learned by trial and error how to coax the most out of their daughters.
Today, as Naomi arrives at top tournaments and Grand Slams with a sizable entourage, Mari usually travels alone to low-level satellite events, often in small towns and cities. Even so, the sisters constantly conspire to hang out. Last year, the two played doubles together in a Tokyo tournament. “Here comes trouble, and make it double,” Naomi tweeted. In July, they joined the mobs at the Overwatch esports final at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, screaming every time a competitor was (virtually) shot. And they scored tickets for a Drake concert at Madison Square Garden just days before the start of the U.S. Open.
On this night in Washington, as the W.T.T. carnival ended, Osaka slipped into the locker room and emerged moments later wearing a chocolate-colored pantsuit, her hair unleashed Beyoncé-esque. The Kastles’ owner was holding a team meeting on court, but the two sisters strode toward the exit without looking back.
All the tennis fans could see at first were Osaka’s bright pink visor and her bundle of hair, bobbing up and down rhythmically. It was her first match of the summer hardcourt season, and Osaka was arriving at the Washington Citi Open’s grandstand court with her head down, blasting Kendrick Lamar on her headphones. The afternoon crowd — with a contingent of Japanese fans and journalists — applauded her arrival, but Osaka couldn’t hear them over Lamar’s lyrics. Music is part of the ritual that Osaka has used to block out distractions, gird for battle and confer good fortune. “I’m superstitious,” she told me. “If I win, I keep listening to the same song. I only change it when I lose.” Osaka hoped to listen to Lamar for many days to come, perhaps all the way to the summer’s culminating event, the U.S. Open.
The first round in Washington presented a different challenge. Pera, ranked No. 95, is a solid player who could test whether Osaka’s focus on consistency and foot speed was working — and whether her calf injury would hinder her, as an abdominal strain had before Wimbledon. At 2-1 in the first set, Osaka winced as she stretched wide for a shot, reaching down to rub her calf. She recovered and, with a series of bullet forehands and serves, finished off the set 6-2 in a half-hour. But then she lost her mojo. Pera broke her serve twice with a series of deft drop shots. Osaka laughed sarcastically at her own missed shots, but she fought back each time, ultimately tying up the set, 6-6. At 5-4 in the tiebreaker, she cracked a backhand winner down the line, clenching her first with a “Come on!” that would have made Serena proud. A point later, the match was over.
Team Naomi put a positive spin on the match. “It was better for her to struggle a little bit,” Bajin said, “because it showed she can come through adversity.” Even so, Osaka didn’t look her dominant self. In the second round, against the Polish counterpuncher Magda Linette, she forced a third set by reeling off a series of high-risk winners. During the break, she massaged her ears and did some Zen deep-breathing exercises. It didn’t help: Her patience seeped away, and so did the deciding set, 6-3. In the next two U.S. Open warm-up tournaments, in Montreal and Cincinnati earlier this month, Osaka lost in the first round each time, leaving observers to wonder how she might rebound on the big stage of the U.S. Open.
The realm of sports has been more welcoming. Unlike Miyamoto, Osaka has been embraced by Japanese media, companies and fans hungering for a female tennis star. Nissin, one of the world’s largest instant-noodle companies, has already signed her to a lucrative deal, as has Wowow, the tennis channel that broadcasts her matches in Japan. The Osaka camp plans to announce a large new endorsement deal before the U.S. Open, and other Japanese multinationals are circling. Osaka’s biggest payday may come at the end of the year, when her Adidas shoe-and-apparel contract expires — just in time for the prelude to the 2020 Tokyo Olympics.
Osaka has already shifted attitudes in one small town in Hokkaido. In 2014, when Osaka, then 16, scored a stunning upset over the former U.S. Open champion Samantha Stosur, her grandfather noticed the jubilant coverage in the Japanese media. His disparagement of Osaka’s tennis dreams has gradually shifted into support. He has sent Osaka text messages, phone greetings and earrings (because she told him all the top players are pierced). In April, after her breakthrough in Indian Wells, he even spoke to reporters in Nemuro to about her Japanese roots. “I heard people on Twitter saying, ‘Does she really have relatives in Japan?’ ” he said, “so I thought I should come out.” Hanging from Osaka’s tennis bag is her grandfather’s latest gift: an omamori, a small silk pouch on a string, blessed at a temple and designed to bring good luck.
