Climate|Big Environmental Rollbacks Are Pending. Here’s How You Can Weigh In.
Big Environmental Rollbacks Are Pending. Here’s How You Can Weigh In.
This week: An abridged guide to civic involvement. A pastor who’s reviving the Poor People’s Campaign, once led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and including environmental justice. And, before the long weekend, some recommended listening.
It’s one of the most consequential environmental rollbacks proposed by the Trump administration: an overhaul of fuel-efficiency standards for cars and light trucks that would significantly weaken one of former President Barack Obama’s signature policies to combat global warming.
Now, that proposed rollback is going to the American public — that could mean you, dear reader — for a period of public comment.
But do public comments make a difference? And how exactly do you get involved?
One former official with broad experience of the rule-making process, Margo T. Oge, who led the transportation and air quality office at the Environmental Protection Agency, said that hearings can leave a lasting impression on officials. That’s because they give the public a chance to interact with representatives from industry and other groups, like environmental organizations.
Ms. Oge recalled a public hearing that included the mother of a child with severe asthma sitting next to an oil executive. The proposal in question was to reduce sulfur in diesel oil, a measure designed to prevent respiratory and other illnesses, especially asthma in children.
The oil executive spoke first, and complained about the costs of meeting the standards.
The government is legally required to respond to what it hears from the public — if not to individual comments, then to the main issues raised in them.
David Friedman, a former acting administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, pointed out that if the Trump administration’s rollback is challenged in court, as expected, public comments — both for and against — will most likely become evidence in the case.
There are two ways to make your voice heard. You can travel in person to a daylong public hearing in late September at one of three locations. The hearings start at 10 a.m. local time and continue until 5 p.m. or until everyone has had a chance to speak.
Sept. 24 at The Grand, 1401 Fulton St. in Fresno, Calif.
Sept. 25 at The Dearborn Inn, 20301 Oakwood Blvd. in Dearborn, Mich.
If you want to speak at these meetings, remember to register at least 10 days in advance by writing the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration’s point person for the meetings, Kil-Jae Hong, at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| There’ll be a lot of speakers, so plan to limit your comments to about five minutes.
When I headed to North Carolina to see the Rev. Dr. William J. Barber II in action, I wasn’t sure what to expect. He is reviving the Poor People’s Campaign, once led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and is updating its mission to include environmental justice. But issues of poverty and environmental degradation don’t necessarily draw big crowds.
What I found was two people, Dr. Barber and former Vice President Al Gore, who had the ability to do just about anything else with their time, but they were wholly devoted to this issue. And I found a community of people who were depending on their support.
For those of you who are interested in climate change (and you’re reading this newsletter, aren’t you?) I put out a call for favorite podcasts that talk about this vital issue. I checked in with the audio connoisseurs in the New York Times Podcast Club, a Facebook group with 25,000 members that’s a little like a book club for podcast fans. (You have to apply for membership, but it’s freely given.) The group took to the challenge and came up with great suggestions, including exhaustive lists in the Player FM app and at the podcast search engine Listen Notes.
Some podcasts with a more political bent included “Think 100%: The Coolest Show on Climate Change” and the bipartisan “Political Climate.” Another show, “No Place Like Home,” approaches climate change through personal stories.
Individual episodes of other podcasts can also be gems. This episode of “Orbital Path” discusses the world’s response to the ozone hole and the possible lessons for dealing with climate change. My colleague Brad Plumer recommends this one from the great series “99% Invisible” about planting oyster beds to protect shorelines from climate change. And call me biased, but I loved hearing another member of the Times climate team, Somini Sengupta, talking with Terry Gross on “Fresh Air” recently.
I’ve got my listening cut out for me! And now you might, too.
