New York|In Defending Trump, Is Giuliani a Shrewd Tactician or ‘Untethered’?
In Defending Trump, Is Giuliani a Shrewd Tactician or ‘Untethered’?
Rudolph Giuliani, President Trump’s lawyer, offered the first detailed look at his strategy for representing the president, in blunt and divisively political terms.
The man identified these days as President Trump’s lawyer seems vaguely familiar. It’s in the way he feigns genuine laughter. How he clasps his hands. How he widens his eyes, as if he’s just been handed a birthday cake with a firecracker for a candle.
He is, of course, Rudolph W. Giuliani, whose public utterances of late have people debating whether he is a shrewd manipulator of public opinion or just — befuddled. But all agree that he relishes the limelight, every microphone a corkscrew capable of unleashing the spirits of his considerable id.
Mr. Giuliani was once seen as a kind of national healer — America’s mayor, he was called, in tribute to his leadership of New York City in the fresh wake of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Many thought he embodied a country’s resolve.
Some who are close to the man say that Mr. Giuliani’s calculated and cutthroat approach channels his client, and serves as a tactical attack on the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, into Russian interference with the 2016 presidential election. Given the Justice Department’s longstanding policy and the view of many legal scholars that a sitting president cannot be indicted, Mr. Giuliani is exercising his lawyerly skills in the court of public opinion to ward against the mutterings of impeachment.
Others are much less charitable, with several of the former mayor’s old associates expressing concern and collectively asking: Who is this man pretending to be Rudy Giuliani?
The two men often crossed paths at the same fund-raisers, cocktail parties, power breakfasts — even a surprise party for the comedian Joan Rivers. In 1999, when Mayor Giuliani was contemplating higher office, Mr. Trump sent a $6,900 check to City Hall, forcing a deputy mayor to explain in a “Dear Donald” letter that the money should be sent to the campaign, not the mayor’s office.
Mr. Giuliani recalled that after his disastrous candidacy for the presidency in 2008, he found refuge on Trump property. “I spent a month at Mar-a-Lago, relaxing,” he said, referring to Mr. Trump’s Florida resort.
But their mutual admiration was not rooted only in expedience. In 2000, Mr. Giuliani revealed at a news conference that he was separating from his second wife, Donna Hanover — which was news to her. The public unraveling of his marriage and his courtship of his future wife, Judith Nathan, recalled Mr. Trump’s own connubial travails several years earlier, when his affair with Marla Maples, while still married to Ivana Trump, was the gift that kept on giving to the city’s tabloids.
Mr. Giuliani’s divorce led to an estrangement with his son, Andrew — which, he says, Mr. Trump helped to heal by counseling the young man over games of golf at his course in Westchester.
As Mr. Giuliani’s political fortunes waned, those of Mr. Trump improbably soared. The former mayor campaigned tirelessly for his friend during the 2016 presidential campaign, most notably during the Republican National Convention, when he delivered an endorsement speech so apocalyptic — “There’s no next election!” he hollered. “This is it!” — that some openly questioned his mental stability.
But after Mr. Trump’s election, Mr. Giuliani’s attempts to offer his services as the next secretary of state went nowhere. Declining the job of attorney general, he was relegated to the Republican backbench, at the edge of the limelight.
That is, until March, when the president’s lead lawyer, John Dowd, quit after deciding that his counsel was not being heard. Given the president’s reputation for not being especially open to legal advice, there was no rush of candidates to fill the position.
Another Trump lawyer, Jay Sekulow, resurrected the Giuliani name, and soon, over a private dinner at Mar-a-Lago, the president asked Mr. Giuliani how he would handle the Mueller investigation if he were retained.
Mr. Giuliani said he explained that if public opinion was in Mr. Trump’s favor, he would have a stronger hand in a possible impeachment battle, and a much weaker one if public opinion was against him. “His day in court is happening right now,” he said in the interview on Thursday.
Mr. Giuliani said he spent a couple of weeks reading reams of documents, then met with Mr. Mueller to stake out some understandings — including that the special counsel does not have the power to indict a sitting president.
Ever since, Mr. Giuliani has been a central player in the ever-unfolding political drama of an administration chafing under the scrutiny of an independent investigation. Along the way, he has seemed to go off-script, improvising, riffing — distracting.
His remarkable moments include his surprise revelation on the Fox network in May that Mr. Trump knew, despite prior claims to the contrary, about a hush-money payment that his former lawyer, Michael D. Cohen, made to the adult film actress, Stephanie Clifford, better known as Stormy Daniels.
Then, of course: “Truth isn’t truth” — a comment he later said was meant to convey the “he said/she said” quandary.
All of this has played out while Mr. Giuliani’s private life has been in upheaval. His third wife, Judith Giuliani, recently filed for divorce.
His change in behavior often seemed at odds with the Rudy Giuliani who seemed transformed by the tragedy of Sept. 11, somehow rising above his petty gripes and personal failures to lead with the resolve of one of his heroes, Churchill.
Those close to him remember the Giuliani of September 2001, who turned away during a news conference so that people would not see him weeping; who arranged for psychiatric counseling for aides immersed in the tragedy’s aftermath; who worked hard to choose his words carefully when discussing the number of dead.
John S. Martin Jr., a former United States attorney who has criticized Mr. Giuliani in the past, said the former mayor had been “acting solely and exclusively” as Mr. Trump’s “public relations agent,” and mainly antagonizing Mr. Mueller.
“He’s not doing his client any good vis-à-vis the one person he should be concerned about — which is the special prosecutor,” Mr. Martin said.
But Marc L. Mukasey, a prominent defense lawyer and Mr. Giuliani’s friend and former law partner, most recently at Greenberg Traurig, dismissed such criticism. “Rudy is trying the case in the only viable forum, which is the media,” he said.
On Memorial Day, Mr. Giuliani went to one of his favorite New York sanctuaries, Yankee Stadium. When the public address system announced that it was his birthday, the man who led this city through trauma 17 years ago was loudly booed.
Then again, some hours after his erratic appearance on “Meet the Press” earlier this month, Mr. Giuliani dined at a seafood restaurant on Manhattan’s Upper East Side. His friend, Marc Mukasey, who was there, recalled that patrons frequently interrupted Mr. Giuliani to ask for autographs and selfies — and to thank him for his work on behalf of the president.