Staring at the faded blue-and-white stripes of a woman’s concentration-camp uniform, I wondered how many members of my family died wearing one. I only know the names of those who lived. I arrived at the exhibit called “Women in World War II,” at the International Museum of World War II in Natick, Mass., expecting to see uniforms belonging to those who served in the armed forces during the war. As a former intelligence officer in the United States Navy, I was eager to encounter the stories of women who paved the way: code breakers, radio operators, spies and saboteurs. I wasn’t expecting reminders of just how unlikely it was that enough of my relatives survived that I got to be born, decades later, in New York.
Displaying the role of women tells the story of the war itself: Everyone participated, and often in jobs that were once unheard-of for women. Most visitors are surprised to learn that women’s wartime roles went beyond Rosie the Riveter-style industrial work, according to Sue Wilkins, the museum’s education director.  In the 1950s, the impulse to glorify the war and return to traditional values obscured the full extent of women’s contributions. Artifacts in the exhibit leave no doubt: a radio hidden under the false bottom of a baby carriage, used by the Resistance in occupied France; United States Army Capt. Alice Burger’s Distinguished Flying Cross, pinned to her uniform jacket. More than 350,000 women served in the United States military; British women were drafted into civil defense roles in the Auxiliary Territorial Service. (Queen Elizabeth, then an 18-year-old princess, volunteered.) In the Soviet Red Army, women served in front-line combat roles. Women’s functions were sometimes contradictory: The Nazi death machine was simultaneously obsessed with life, and to propagate the so-called “master race,” the government rewarded women with a medal called the German Mothers’ Cross of Honor, for having four children or more. The Lebensborn program created birthing centers for women of “Aryan” descent, who were encouraged to have children — typically out of wedlock — with SS officers.
The museum doesn’t take positions on current debates, Rendell said; even so, it’s impossible to not see parallels with contemporary issues. When I joined the military in 2009, ground combat jobs were still closed to women by Department of Defense policy. But the sprawling post-9/11 conflicts had no definite front lines and no end in sight, and operational realities led commanders to exploit every loophole possible to deploy women in combat roles, even if it wasn’t reflected in their official job titles. I spent three years in a special-operations unit whose primary mission was to deploy alongside Navy SEALs and Green Berets. Women’s presence was seen as a necessary inconvenience: These units needed intelligence, medical and logistical support, and often the best person for the job was female. In some cases, women were specifically recruited in order to work with the local population. In the United States’ war efforts, special operations have been gender-integrated from their beginnings under the direction of the secretive Office of Strategic Services during World War II. When all roles were officially opened to women, in 2016, it was a case of policy formally recognizing what had been practiced for decades. The commander of United States Special Operations Command at the time, Gen. Joseph Votel, released a video message supporting the policy, citing the role of women in World War II.
In one of the last display cases, a playing card depicts a female Navy officer. She’s wearing the female-specific “bucket cover,” a hat developed for officers in the WAVES (Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service) and still in service today. This item is much-beloved by female officers precisely because of its historical significance. Unlike other uniform items, which are often called “unisex” but are truly designed for men, the bucket cover was specifically designed for women. This October, female officers will be required to retire this uniform item in exchange for the men’s version. Many female officers, myself included, think that eliminating one of the few traditions unique to women amounts to an erasure of our history and heritage. It erases a connection to both the work that women did during World War II and how hard they had to fight to do it in the first place.
The march to war is conducted step by mundane step. Everyone has a role, whether through action or inaction. Driving home from the exhibit, I considered that perhaps the commitment to “never forget” is a responsibility to consider the everyday. I called my dad. I asked where he kept the memoirs my grandmother wrote to record her experiences in a country that was slipping toward dictatorship, genocide and war. The details that are most likely to be forgotten or erased contain the lessons that are most critical to learn.