Nearly two decades ago, Richard A. Jones was convicted of aggravated robbery after being picked out of a lineup by witnesses who said he stole a cellphone in a Walmart parking lot in Kansas.
But while Mr. Jones, who maintains he is innocent, was serving his 19-year sentence at Lansing Correctional Facility, inmates told him he looked like a prisoner named Ricky.
That resemblance would eventually lead to his freedom.
Last year, a judge threw out Mr. Jones’s conviction after the original witnesses were shown side-by-side photographs of the two men and said they could not tell them apart. Now Mr. Jones, 42, is trying to get his life back on track.
On Wednesday, he filed a petition in the 10th Judicial District Court of Kansas, seeking more than $1.1 million in compensation from the state — or about $65,000 for each year of the 17 years he spent in prison for a robbery he said he did not commit, starting when he was 25 years old and a father of two young daughters.
He is also seeking help with tuition, housing and counseling.
His daughters are now 24 and 19, he said, and he is a grandfather.
“It was a hard pill to swallow,” Mr. Jones said.
“This compensation is relatively small given the unfathomable hardship of 17 years of wrongful imprisonment,” the petition says.
The petition, reported by The Kansas City Star on Wednesday, is the latest twist in what has been described as the “doppelgänger case,” which is set out in court documents that trace the nearly two decades of Mr. Jones’s ordeal of arrest, conviction, imprisonment and, finally, freedom.
Mr. Jones’s case highlights the flaws in convictions based on eyewitness identification, which is the single greatest cause of wrongful convictions in the United States. Eyewitness identifications play a role in more than 75 percent of convictions overturned through DNA testing, according to the Midwest Innocence Project, which helped him win release.
In Mr. Jones’s case, there was no physical evidence placing him at the scene in the Roeland Park parking lot on May 31, 1999, according to the petition. That day, he was at his home in Kansas City, Mo., cleaning up after a party with his girlfriend and her sisters, the petition said.
But in Roeland Park, across the state border, at 8 p.m. the same day, a man tried to grab a woman’s handbag as she got out of her car. She resisted but he escaped with her phone, and she saw the back of his head, she told a detective.
Two other people saw the attack, but the three descriptions ranged from a light-skinned black man to a dark-skinned Hispanic to a tanned white man, the petition said.
The getaway car was traced to a man who said he and friends were in search of money for drugs and picked up a man they barely knew as “Rick.” He was shown hundreds of photographs in a database of men with similar names and features, according to the petition, and erroneously chose Mr. Jones as the one he had driven to the parking lot robbery.
Mr. Jones was arrested in April 2000, the petition said. In a lineup, his photograph was the only one among the six images to be that of a light-skinned man.
“Witnesses were presented with no other option but to choose Jones in the lineups as created,” said Alice Craig, one of the lawyers and researchers at the University of Kansas School of Law’s Project for Innocence who helped win his release.
“None of the other photos matched the description provided by the witnesses,” she said in a statement after he was released from prison in June 2017.
During a jury trial, the witnesses, seeing Mr. Jones in person, said they were not sure whether he was the attacker, the petition said. But Mr. Jones was convicted and sent to prison in 2000.
In prison, he was told about Ricky Amos when inmates started confusing the two. “I took it with a grain of salt,” Mr. Jones said Thursday.
Mr. Jones sought the help of the Project for Innocence, and Mr. Amos’s photograph was tracked down, the project said.
Mr. Amos’s address was identified as the place where the getaway car had stopped to pick up “Rick,” the petition said. A spokesman for the Johnson County district attorney did not immediately return a call about Mr. Amos and the status of the robbery case.
Mr. Jones filed a motion for postconviction relief, the petition said, and Judge Kevin Moriarty held a hearing last year. Two of the witnesses recanted their identifications.
On June 7, 2017, Mr. Jones walked free.
“I just want my name to be clear,” he said.