Style|Is This the Suitcase of the Summer?
Is This the Suitcase of the Summer?
Wired millennials appreciate Away’s bright colors and charging capacities.
Save for Louis Vuitton steamer trunks, luggage has never had a particularly sexy connotation.  The 1 percent of yore hired people to carry their belongings, and some celebrities still glide through airports with nary a suitcase in sight.
But about a year ago, amid the sea of black polyester-nylon that dominates most airports, I started noticing something new: sleek, colorful, grooved hard-shell rolling suitcases with built-in chargers.
They’re made by Away, a two-year-old luggage start-up with $81 million of investment. Fans include Rashida Jones, Karlie Kloss and Dwyane Wade, all of whom have designed limited editions with the company.
In December, at an airport in India, I saw a woman fight back tears when a gate agent told her that she might have to check her Away carry-on, owing to overhead compartments that were more compact than average. In April, at Away’s light-filled store in West Hollywood, I watched a woman storm in, demanding to know all the colors the carry-on came in because she wanted to add something “fresh” to the navy and black pieces she owned.
Cults have formed around merchandise like face cream and butt-lifting leggings. But rolling suitcases?
In 2015, Jen Rubio was working in brand marketing for the British fashion label AllSaints. She found herself traveling a lot for work, and while wheeling her black nylon “no name” bag through the Zurich Airport, a zipper burst, spilling her clothes all over the floor.
Thanks to some duct tape, the bag made it back to London, where Ms. Rubio lived at the time. She relayed her travel woes to her friend Steph Korey, who she met while working at Warby Parker. As young people are wont to do these days, they figured they could make something better.
They interviewed hundreds of friends and associates and conducted anonymous online surveys before introducing Away’s first suitcase, a polycarbonate carry-on that came in four colors.
Away fills the space in the middle. Its most popular suitcase is the $245 “bigger” carry-on, which comes with an ejectable lithium-ion battery for charging smartphones, tablets and other USB-cord-addled devices.
The first iteration of the suitcase required a screwdriver to remove the battery, and last year, when airlines changed their rules regarding lithium-ion batteries because some of them had burst into flames mid-flight, Away scrambled to reach its early adopters and retrofit their luggage.
They weren’t able to contact everyone. Earlier this month, the actress Emmy Rossum tweeted, in all capital letters, about how United Airlines confiscated her Away suitcase and made her stuff her belongings in plastic bags because her carry-on wasn’t compliant with its rules. “Can anyone explain this to me?!?!” she asked the ether.
Other luggage brands are also trying to entice a new generation of wired travelers. Tumi, which was founded in New Jersey in 1975 and named after a Peruvian ceremonial knife used for sacrifices, corralled a group of Instagram personalities to post about its bags to promote 19 Degree, its first aluminum luggage collection. It’s hard not to see the line’s rose-gold suitcase as millennial catnip.
In December, the German brand Rimowa, which hails from 1898, erected a temporary shop in Beverly Hills, Calif., and invited celebrities with large social media followings, including Pharrell Williams and Alessandra Ambrosio.
But most hard-shell suitcases from the fancier brands start at around $1,000, and Away says it offers the same quality for a lot less. Its suitcases range from $190, for a child-size carry-on, to $595, for a large aluminum check-in.
NPD Group, the market research firm, estimates that some 47 million suitcases were sold in the United States in the 12 months from June 2017 to June 2018. Since February 2016, Away has sold about 500,000, according to the company.
This may explain the preponderance of young professionals at Terminal A, Away’s recent temporary shop in SoHo, which offered cold-brew coffee on tap and a cheeky “departures” board. (The status of a fake flight bound for the fraught Fyre Festival: crashing and burning).
Nearby, Ivan Olivo, a 22-year-old employee of Virtue, Vice Media’s creative agency, tried to convince his roommate, Michael Martinez, also 22, to buy a suitcase.
