TAIPEI, Taiwan — Taiwan has had a rough time of it lately.
Just last week, international airlines stopped using its name; it lost hosting rights to a youth sports festival; and even a local children’s choir took a blow, prevented from singing at a United Nations building in Vienna.
Amid those and other recent setbacks — blamed on pressure from China, which claims the self-governing island as its territory — has come a welcome bit of recognition. Taiwan has been chosen as the first Asian host for the Oslo Freedom Forum, an international human rights conference.
The forum hosts rights campaigners, dissidents, philanthropists and tech entrepreneurs from around the world. Speakers at the Nov. 10 event in Taipei, Taiwan’s capital, are scheduled to include Mu Sochua, a Cambodian opposition politician living in exile, and Yeonmi Park, a North Korean defector.
For Taiwan, which China has used its clout to keep out of many global organizations, it amounts to a kind of international validation — from the world’s dissidents, if not its governments. Jason Hsu, a lawmaker with the opposition Kuomintang party, said the event would underscore Taiwan’s growing role as a democratic model in the region, while contrasting it with authoritarian China.
“Taiwan has fought long and hard for its democracy, and with the pressure we’re under from China, we’re still fighting for it today,” said Mr. Hsu, who was involved in bringing the event here.
“We have a lot of experiences to share with other countries in this area, but we can also learn from other countries’ experiences as well,” he said.
The forum, run by the New York-based Human Rights Foundation, has been held in Oslo every year since 2009. It is expanding for its 10th year, with conferences in Mexico City and Johannesburg, as well as in New York, where it has held satellite events before.
He said the selection of Taiwan reflected its role as a regional leader in democracy and human rights. “There aren’t that many fully fledged, multiparty democratic countries in East Asia,” he said.
Activists in South Korea who draw attention to human rights abuses in the North have said that President Moon Jae-in’s government, which has focused on rapprochement with Pyongyang, is less friendly to their cause than its predecessors were.
She said she was concerned about China’s influence in Cambodia. Its enormous financial investment there has helped the long-ruling prime minister, Hun Sen, reduce his reliance on Western aid, which often came with the expectation that his government would hold fair elections and show progress on human rights.
“We urge China to respect the human rights of our people,” she said.
This week, Mr. Hun Sen’s party swept national elections that Western governments dismissed as a sham. Ms. Mu Sochua’s Cambodia National Rescue Party, which almost won the 2013 national elections, was not on the ballot, having been outlawed last year. Ms. Mu Sochua, the party’s vice president, fled Cambodia after being warned that she faced arrest.
Besides Ms. Mu Sochua and Ms. Park, the North Korean defector, scheduled speakers at the Taipei forum include Omar Sharif Jr., an Egyptian actor and L.G.B.T. rights activist; Megha Rajagopalan, the China bureau chief and Asia correspondent for BuzzFeed News; and Vladimir Kara-Murza, a Russian democracy activist.
Ketty Chen, vice president of the Taiwan Foundation for Democracy, which supported the Oslo forum with a grant, said Taiwan’s own path from dictatorship to democracy can serve as a reminder to Asian countries with authoritarian governments that things can improve.
