Christine Hallquist, a Democrat from Vermont, is the first transgender candidate to be nominated for a governorship by a major party.
You know, I must say I’m incredibly honored. Incredibly honored to have all your support and all of the things that I heard were said. You know tonight, we made history. We already made history. I can handle all the bigotry and all the grief in the world to know that I’m supporting people in a marginalized community. And it’s not just about the transgender community. It’s not just about the L.G.B.T. community. It’s about all marginalized communities. All Phil has is no new taxes. I have a plan to grow Vermont’s economy. You know it’s one thing to just fight over the scraps on the table. But we’ve got to put more food on the table. And when you look at my five-year plan and the plan to build our communities with tax income and financing, Vermont needs a 20-year vision. Vermont needs a vision that goes beyond the candidate, beyond the governor. And that’s what leaders should be doing.
See full results and maps from the Vermont primaries.
Mr. Scott’s popularity fell, however, especially among conservatives, after he signed gun control measures this year. Still, a poll in July by public media organizations in the state found two-thirds of Vermonters supported the law, and nearly half of Democrats had a favorable opinion of Mr. Scott. Only 18 percent of Democratic respondents in the same poll said they had a favorable opinion of Ms. Hallquist, and 55 percent did not yet know who she was.
Before she ran for governor, Ms. Hallquist spent 12 years as the chief executive of the Vermont Electric Cooperative, an in-state power utility that she helped to bring back from near ruin. Her transition from male to female took place in 2015, while she was at the helm of the company, and was the subject of a documentary film made by her son.
As a candidate, she made it part of her stump speech, drawing knowing laughs from her female supporters at a fund-raiser this summer as she talked about what it was like to experience life as a woman for the first time.
Ms. Hallquist — who voted for Mr. Scott in 2016, according to the newsweekly Seven Days — also sought to tie her victory to the broader Democratic backlash against President Trump.
With 96 percent of precincts reporting by late Tuesday night, Ms. Hallquist had easily beaten a Democratic field of other little-known candidates, including Ethan Sonneborn, a 14-year-old who garnered 8 percent of the vote.
Vermont is a socially liberal state that in 2000 became the first in the nation to establish civil unions, and Ms. Hallquist’s gender identity seemed to fade into the background for many voters.
