The call to arms came in the form of a memo.
Marjorie Pritchard, the deputy managing editor of The Boston Globe, reached out to editorial boards at other newspapers last week.
“We propose to publish an editorial on August 16 on the dangers of the administration’s assault on the press and ask others to commit to publishing their own editorials on the same date,” the memo said.
As of Tuesday, more than 200 newspapers, including The New York Times, had signed on.
The Globe’s effort to rally editorial writers across the country came in reaction to the president’s stepped-up attacks on the media.
Last month, at a news conference in Britain, he refused to call on the CNN White House correspondent Jim Acosta, saying, “CNN is fake news. I don’t take questions from CNN.” A week later, the White House barred another CNN reporter, Kaitlan Collins, from attending a public appearance by President Trump in the White House Rose Garden, after she had called out questions during a photo opportunity earlier in the day.
The newspapers participating in the effort include large-circulation dailies like The Houston Chronicle and The Miami Herald, as well as smaller publications like The Oakridger in Oak Ridge, Tenn., and The Griggs County Courier and Steele County Press in North Dakota.
Each newspaper will prepare its own editorial to be published Thursday.
James Bennet, the editorial page editor of The Times, cited the public stance of the newspaper’s publisher, A. G. Sulzberger, in laying out the reason for the newspaper’s participation in the initiative. “Our publisher has put a stake in the ground on this issue, and at a time when newspapers around the country are under real commercial and political pressure, we think it’s important to show solidarity,” Mr. Bennet said.
The Radio Television Digital News Association has joined The Globe in promoting the effort, encouraging TV and radio stations to release editorials on their websites or on the air.
“I hope that what we’re doing with broadcast and digital journalists will be able to amplify their efforts and to call attention to the fact that we’re not fake news, we’re not the enemy of the people and here are the things we do every day by covering the news,” said Dan Shelley, the association’s executive director.
Ms. Pritchard said she hoped that the editorials would bring attention to how the president’s rhetoric has affected the body politic.
