Arts|A Robot Walks Into a Bar. But Can It Do Comedy?
A Robot Walks Into a Bar. But Can It Do Comedy?
LONDON — One recent evening at a London pub, Piotr Mirowski, 39, stood in front of several dozen comedy fans to prove that an artificially intelligent computer program could perform improvised comedy.
In one hand, he held a bug-eyed toy robot, its lines voiced by the program. With the other, he pretended to grip a steering wheel. The robot was playing Mr. Mirowski’s partner; they were taking a scenic drive together.
“I am not trying to be angry,” the robot said, suddenly breaking the mood.
“I don’t want you to be angry — this is our quality time,” Mr. Mirowski replied.
“I’m sure that you will find love,” the robot said after an awkward pause, drawing a firm end to the couple’s relationship, and prompting laughter from the audience. “I’m so tired,” it added. Mr. Mirowski made a final attempt to save things, but the robot would not listen. “You are not me. You’re my friend,” it said, emotionless.
For someone who had just been dumped in front of a paying audience, Mr. Mirowski looked happy. Why? Because the A.I. he created had worked, and stuck to the topic at hand — a rare event, he said later in an interview.
For the past few years, A.I. has been generating attention — and alarm — in many areas of arts and culture. Start-ups and tech giants are developing A. I. systems that can write music, for example, while others are using the technology to generate art. Some fear these projects will put musicians and artists out of work.
Mr. Mirowski was born in Poland, but spent most of his childhood in France, playing role-playing and video games, he said. He fell in love with improv at college, both the challenge and playfulness of it, and kept doing it after he graduated and started working in A.I.
He long thought of combining his passions, but said he had only realized it was possible in 2014, partly because of systems that could quickly analyze large volumes of text, spot patterns and then produce sentences in response. Mr. Mirowski decided to apply that to improv skits.
The system he built was remarkably simple. A.L.Ex (which stands for Artificial Language Experiment) has been fed the subtitles from more than 100,000 films, from action movies like “Deep Impact” to the pornographic film “Deep Throat.” When someone talks to it, the system uses a tool called a neural network, vaguely modeled on the brain, to analyze similar exchanges in its database and compose its own response.
A.L.Ex is now at the point where the pair are happy for other improvisers to work with it. In recent shows in London, Mr. Mirowski also used the system to feed a performer lines through a headset.
In a Skype interview, Mr. Mathewson agreed that the joy of working with an A.I. system came when you managed to do a show that didn’t just rely on the randomness of the responses for humor, but which kept a story going.
His early shows were failures in that respect, he said. In one, he swore in exasperation, and the machine replied, “Swearing is often cathartic.” Now he has improvised with it publicly more than 50 times. When shows are a success, they are more celebrations of human creativity than anything to do with A.I., he added.
Mr. Mirowski watched behind several laptops from the side of the stage. He was smiling. His A.I. was making no sense. But it was getting laughs.