SEATTLE — The story is as bizarre as it is tragic: An airline worker who had no business being in a cockpit somehow took off from a major airport in a turboprop passenger plane, dipped and soared in the skies above the Seattle area, and then crashed into an island on Puget Sound.
It was all over in about an hour. But the consequences of the unauthorized flight on Friday evening are monumental, aviation experts and investigators said.
The man — a ground service agent identified as Richard B. Russell, according to a law enforcement official — exposed a troubling reality of airport security in the post-9/11 era. While many visible aspects of commercial flight that affect the routines of passengers have been hardened, parts of the system that are behind the scenes, but just as important to public safety as cockpit doors and screening machines, remain vulnerable.
Mr. Russell took off around 7:30 p.m., according to the authorities. He chatted sometimes calmly and sometimes in a frenzied stream of consciousness with air traffic controllers who tried to guide him to a safe landing, as jets from the Air National Guards of Washington and Oregon flew alongside him, ready to take action. The plane came down in a fiery crash on Ketron Island, about 30 miles from the airport. No one else was believed to be on board, and officials confirmed Mr. Russell was killed.
Richard Russell speaking with an air traffic controller at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport.
It was not immediately clear how Mr. Russell, who worked for Horizon Air, a subsidiary of Alaska Air Group, had managed to take off in the plane. But Debra Eckrote, the chief of the northwest regional office of the National Transportation Safety Board, said on Saturday that it was conceivable that a ground service agent would be able to start an airplane.
At a news conference on Saturday, the chief executive of Horizon Air Industries, Gary Beck, said Mr. Russell did not have a pilot’s license.
Alaska Airlines officials said Mr. Russell had worked for Horizon for three and a half years, and was responsible for handling luggage and cargo and for towing aircraft. He had worked his shift on Friday.
Mr. Russell had cleared all the necessary background checks and was meant to be “on the secure side” of the airport, where the plane was, Mr. Tilden said. The plane was not scheduled for a flight when Mr. Russell commandeered it.
In recordings of Mr. Russell’s remarkable conversation with air traffic controllers, he speaks admiringly of the Olympic Mountains at sunset, complains of lightheadedness and muses about potential prison time if he were to land the plane safely.
At one point, an air traffic controller asked if Mr. Russell felt comfortable flying.
At times, Mr. Russell was contrite.
Videos taken by onlookers during Mr. Russell’s flight showed the plane doing deep dives, broad loops and at least one upside-down roll. At the Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, thousands of passengers in the terminal or left sitting in planes on the tarmac were delayed.
The episode raised questions about the little-known details of life on the tarmac, in the loading, fueling and cleaning operations of airplanes — unglamorous work that is critical to public safety but often poorly paid.
Tim Orr, who also works at the Seattle-Tacoma airport, and who said he had known Mr. Russell since they were both 12, said his friend had been frustrated that his airport job did not pay the $15 minimum wage that many other airport workers receive, and had talked about leaving to do something else. But Mr. Russell, his friend said, also loved the travel opportunities that came with working for an airline.
At a news conference on Saturday, Mike Mathews, a family friend, read a statement on behalf of Mr. Russell’s family. “We are stunned and heartbroken,” according to the statement, which described Mr. Russell as a faithful husband, a loving son and a good friend.
Airplane theft, as opposed to hijacking — taking over control in flight, with passengers aboard — is actually not uncommon, though it usually involves private aircraft, not commercial airliners. Colton Harris-Moore, nicknamed the Barefoot Bandit, was sentenced in 2011 for stealing small planes, which he had learned to fly himself as a teenager after reading flight manuals. Drug trade across the United States-Mexico border often happens in stolen planes.
The F.B.I. field office in Seattle, which is leading the investigation, said it would cast a wide net in finding out what happened and why. “We are going to be thorough, which means taking the time needed to scour the area, delve into the background of the individual believed responsible, and review every aspect of this incident with all appropriate public and private partners,” the office said in a statement.
But “it allows me to do some pretty cool things, too,” he added, segueing to footage of a flight tour over Ketchikan, Alaska, followed by images of several countries including France, Ireland and Mexico.
