Aneesh Chaganty narrates a sequence from his film.
At its core, “Searching” is like any number of thrillers about tracking down a missing person: John Cho plays David Kim, a single father whose teenage daughter Margot (Michelle La) doesn’t come home one night or make it to school the following morning. Distraught, David combs through the trail of her online presence and passes along findings to Rosemary Vick (Debra Messing), the lead detective on the case. Days go by and the clues don’t turn up Margot, but they are revealing: David learns he does not know as much about her as he once thought. He takes things into his own hands, suspicious of those around him and increasingly unsatisfied with Vick’s investigation.
What sets Aneesh Chaganty’s feature debut apart is its meticulously constructed storytelling device, which calls to mind “Unfriended (2014),” the horror film about a group of teenagers whose video chat is interrupted by the presence of an online phantom, and its sequel “Unfriended: Dark Web,” released earlier this summer. Every shot of “Searching” plays out on a screen — a computer, a phone, through the lens of a clandestinely placed camera.
It mostly works: It unveils a clever approach to character building, as during the opening montage of family photos, home videos and emails providing intimate details about the Kim family over several years. Occasionally, the effort to commit fully to the conceit feels strained or shows its limitations, as when a grainy camera recording from a distance undercuts the intensity of a particularly dramatic confrontation.
Throughout, David’s emotional journey feels wholly tangible — many of Mr. Cho’s scenes involve him interacting with other actors on FaceTime, yet he deeply inhabits his character’s distress and still-unprocessed grief over a different kind of loss chronicled in the film’s first few minutes. While a somewhat silly reveal in the final act feels ripped from a “Law & Order” episode, the combination of clever concept reflecting the prevalence of screens in everyday life, and the pleasure of watching a typically underused Mr. Cho take on a meaty lead role make “Searching” a satisfying psychological thriller.