WASHINGTON — Summoning the Alamo, Roman gladiators and the First Amendment, the right-wing conspiracy theorist Alex Jones is calling on his Infowars followers to rise up against anti-Trump “sociopaths” who he says are behind the removal of his Infowars programming from most major social media platforms.
Over the past several days, Apple, Facebook, YouTube and Spotify have removed most of Mr. Jones’s programming from their services in a sweeping effort to rein in those who traffic in online misinformation that draws hundreds of thousands of followers and results in harassment and threats to their targets. Stitcher, LinkedIn and Pinterest have also removed Infowars content.
The moves drastically reduce the audience for Infowars, which sells diet supplements and survivalist gear through a radio broadcast, videos and online stories spreading bizarre conspiracy theories and misinformation.
YouTube’s termination of Mr. Jones’s channel cost him access to his 2.4 million subscribers and resulted in the removal of all his past videos. Those videos had amassed billions of views, in part because YouTube continued to recommend them to users who had shown interest in conservative topics.
Mr. Jones has been trying to compensate by promoting his website and mobile app. On Tuesday, after news of Mr. Jones’s bans spread, Infowars was Apple’s fourth most popular news app, outranking those from every mainstream news media organization. Before the ban, it ranked 33rd on average since July 12.
Money, he said in a follow-up interview on Saturday, was not a prime motivator for him. “Money is the jet fuel for the jet bombers I use to drop truth bombs,” he said.
Mr. Jones is eager to characterize his fight as a stand for constitutionally protected speech, but the private companies that have removed his programming from their platforms have broad latitude to control content, especially if it violates their written terms of service.
Facebook removed Mr. Jones’s pages for violating its policies by “glorifying violence” and “using dehumanizing language to describe people who are transgender, Muslims and immigrants.” YouTube terminated Mr. Jones’s channel for repeatedly violating its policies, including its prohibition on hate speech. Spotify cited its own prohibition on hate speech as the reason for removing a podcast by Mr. Jones.
But Vera Eidelman, a fellow with the American Civil Liberties Union’s Speech, Privacy and Technology Project, sided with Mr. Jones.
Over two decades, Mr. Jones has built a profitable business selling diet supplements, survivalist gear, and air and water filtration equipment as he spread bizarre theories, including that the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, were an inside job, and that various government-orchestrated plots are responsible for poisoning Americans’ water, air and food.
False claims spread by Mr. Jones, including one that the 2012 mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., was a government-backed hoax and that the victims’ parents were lying about it, have resulted in multiple defamation lawsuits against him. On Tuesday, lawyers for one victim’s family sparred with Mr. Jones’s lawyers over their demand that the parents submit their dates of birth and current address in a filing evidencing the parents’ monetary damages.
Mark Bankston and Bill Ogden, who represent the parents, Leonard Pozner and Veronique De La Rosa, said in a court filing that requiring the Pozners to disclose the information in a public document could subject them to “further harassment or attack.” Death threats and harassment by Mr. Jones’s followers have forced the Pozners to move seven times, and they live in hiding.
Mr. Jones has promoted himself and Infowars as near-solitary truth tellers in a news landscape dominated by left-leaning “corporatist” media — even though the popular Drudge Report website broadcast his show on Monday. Now, what he calls his “de-platforming” has only increased his sense of grievance, and that of his followers — even as it shrinks his reach before the November midterm elections.
So far, Mr. Trump, who praised Mr. Jones during an appearance on his radio show during the presidential campaign, has remained silent as Mr. Jones issues appeals to Trump supporters. Democrats have praised the takedown of Infowars content as long overdue.
On his show, Mr. Jones is using the moves against his business to raise money and encourage his followers to migrate to his Infowars website, where he has posted the content removed by other platforms. He is also asking followers to donate to him — and buy his merchandise.
“Don’t forget the financial support; that is the strongest thing you can do to make sure that we continue on and are strong in the fight,” he said. Referring listeners to his online store, he said, “Go there today and send them a strong message that you stand for the First Amendment, you stand for us and get air filtration, water filtration, optics, preparedness gear, high quality storable foods, supplements that are so good for you and your family.
“Feed your gladiator,” he urged.