In a still from video captured by security cameras last month, and first broadcast Sunday on the television program Fantástico, Luís Felipe Manvailer can be seen assaulting his wife, Tatiane Spitzner.
SÃO PAULO, Brazil — The scenes, captured by security cameras, are gruesome: A man pummels and kicks his wife in the garage of their building. She tries to flee, but he forces her into the elevator. They go up to their fifth-floor apartment.
Less than 20 minutes later, he takes the elevator back down — to fetch her bloody, lifeless body, which had plummeted to the sidewalk below.
The footage from the night of July 22, first broadcast Sunday on the popular television program Fantástico, has been playing repeatedly on national television. The graphic, blow-by-blow view into what domestic violence really looks like is challenging the widespread notion that you shouldn’t “stick a spoon” in marital disputes.
Portions of the video posted by a local newspaper show the woman repeatedly trying to get away.
It also set off a nationwide debate about domestic abuse in Brazil, where almost a third of women say they have suffered violence. According to a 2017 nationwide survey, over half of the attackers were current or former partners.
The images also show the man, Luís Felipe Manvailer, trying to wipe blood stains off the elevator walls before driving away just as the police arrived. He was quickly apprehended and is being investigated for the murder of his wife of five years, Tatiane Spitzner. Mr. Manvailer denies the accusations, and he told the police that his wife jumped off the balcony.
One of the most shocking aspects of the videos is what viewers can’t see: the 15 minutes in which the fighting and beatings are believed to have continued and neighbors reportedly heard desperate screams for help.
Ms. Spitzner and Mr. Manvailer married in 2013. The authorities say they found no complaints filed against Mr. Manvailer before the episode in the southern Brazilian town of Guarapuava.
Many on social media also used the hashtags #feminicidio and #MariaDaPenha, noting that the violence occurred just before the anniversary of a groundbreaking 2006 domestic abuse law imposing long sentences on offenders and named in honor of a survivor of violence, Maria da Penha.
The first issue is that only a quarter of women who suffer violence report it to the police.
Brazil has the seventh-highest rate of femicide in the world, with 4.4 murders per 100,000 women, according to a 2012 Brazilian survey called the Map of Violence. That’s more than double the rate in the United States.
Ms. Canineu said that even when women did muster the courage to report violence, the police force’s lack of resources and training often mean the perpetrators did not face any repercussions. Victims are encouraged to go to special police stations for women — but there are very few of these, and they have limited hours.
Juliete da Silva Oliveira, a 24-year-old housecleaner, agrees. She said the police laughed at her when she tried to file a restraining order against her former boyfriend, who left death threats on her phone when she tried to leave him. The police dismissed her concern, saying it was normal for guys to get mad when they’re dumped.
