Reality Winner, the former Air Force linguist and intelligence contractor who pleaded guilty in June to leaking a top-secret government report on Russian hacking, was sentenced on Thursday to five years and three months in federal prison.
Ms. Winner, 26, is the first person to be sentenced under the Espionage Act since President Trump took office. Prosecutors said her sentence was the longest ever imposed in federal court for an unauthorized release of government information to the media.
She was arrested in June 2017 and was held for more than a year while prosecutors built a case. She pleaded guilty in June 2018 to one felony count of unauthorized transmission of national defense information, for giving a classified report about Russian interference in the 2016 election to a news outlet.
Prosecutors said on Thursday that Ms. Winner’s actions merited a stiff sentence.
Ms. Winner was fresh out of the Air Force and a few months into a job as a translator for the National Security Agency in May 2017 when prosecutors say she printed a report from her work computer that detailed hacking attacks by a Russian intelligence service against local election officials and voter registration databases. She later told investigators that she smuggled the report out of the Augusta, Ga., offices of the contractor, Pluribus International, in her pantyhose, and then mailed it to the online news outlet The Intercept.
Following a trail of clues, the F.B.I. soon arrested Ms. Winner two days before the Intercept published the classified report.
Addressing Chief Judge J. Randall Hall in court on Thursday, Ms. Winner said she took “full responsibility” for the “undeniable mistake I made.” She said she “would like to apologize profusely” for her actions.
Joe Whitley, a former federal prosecutor who was another of Ms. Winner’s lawyers, highlighted her military service, including assisting with more than 800 intelligence missions that he said had “removed” 100 enemies.
The judge imposed the sentence that prosecutors recommended.
In federal leak cases, the sentences are generally aligned with the scale of damage done to national security, according to Robert Cattanach, a former lawyer in the Justice Department’s civil division who represented security agencies. He said Ms. Winner’s sentence seemed to be an outlier.
The Justice Department prosecuted Ms. Winner under the Espionage Act, a World War I-era law that made it a crime to disclose secrets that could be used to harm the United States or aid a foreign adversary.
Prosecutions under the law for leaking sensitive information to the news media, rather than to a foreign government, were once rare, and usually led to little if any prison time. But in recent years the Justice Department has been cracking down on such leaks.
Perhaps the best-known leaker, Chelsea Manning, was tried and convicted in a military court-martial, not a civilian court, for sending a vast archive of military and diplomatic documents to WikiLeaks. She was sentenced to 35 years, but served only about seven years; President Obama commuted the remainder of her sentence.
In 2013, a former F.B.I. agent was sentenced to 43 months for leaking classified information to The Associated Press about a foiled bomb plot in Yemen. That same year, a former C.I.A. agent, John Kiriakou, was given a 30-month sentence for revealing the identity of an undercover agent. In 2015, another former C.I.A. agent, Jeffrey Sterling, was sentenced to 42-months for leaking classified information to The New York Times about a secret operation to disrupt Iran’s nuclear program.
Ms. Winner, who grew up in Texas, seemed in some ways not to fit the popular image of someone who might try to circumvent the rules. A part-time yoga instructor who was fond of kale, owned rescued pets and drove a Nissan Cube with a bumper sticker saying “Be truthful, gentle and fearless,” she had passed several security screenings and had no history of disciplinary problems in the military.
Some advocacy groups have championed Ms. Winner as a whistle-blower, saying that the leak of the report alerted states to the dangers posed to elections by outside hackers — something that security agencies had been slow to do, according to a Senate report.
The Intercept, which published the material that Ms. Winner leaked, contributed financially to her defense. In a statement on Thursday, the organization’s editor in chief, Betsy Reed, said Ms. Winner had done a public service.
Under the plea agreement, Ms. Winner will be transferred to the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ medical center in Carswell, Tex., where she can receive treatment for bulimia and be relatively close to her family.
Standing in front of the courthouse, one of her lawyers, Titus Nichols, disputed that her actions had been a “nefarious plot that she enacted to harm the country.” But he said that, in light of all the facts, he thought the sentence was fair.