LOS ANGELES — “Crazy Rich Asians,” powered by jubilant reviews and pent-up demand for a major Hollywood film led by Asian stars, took in a strong $25.2 million at North American theaters over the weekend, easily enough for No. 1.
“Crazy Rich Asians,” which cost an estimated $30 million to make and tens of millions more to market, took in $34 million since arriving on Wednesday. (The film will roll out overseas in the weeks ahead.) To compare, the hit romantic comedy “27 Dresses,” starring Katherine Heigl, took in the same amount over its first five days in domestic theaters in 2008, after adjusting for inflation, going on to collect $200 million worldwide.
The movie business has changed dramatically in the last decade, however, making the turnout for “Crazy Rich Asians” all the more impressive. As living room entertainment services like Netflix and Amazon have grown in popularity, filling seats in theaters has become much harder. To compete, studios have moved to the extremes: horror movies made on shoestring budgets, and lavishly expensive franchise films aimed at the broadest possible audience.
In turn, studios have largely abandoned mid-market movies like romantic comedies and uplifting sports dramas.
Netflix almost beat out Warner Bros. for the film rights to “Crazy Rich Asians,” which was directed by Jon M. Chu and based on Kevin Kwan’s best-selling book. But Mr. Chu and Mr. Kwan decided at the final minute to forego the Netflix offer, which included generous upfront payments and the guarantee of a “Crazy Rich Asians” trilogy. The men decided that it was important for their film be seen on big screens and backed by a thundering studio marketing campaign.
“Crazy Rich Asians” offers an extreme example of prosperity, but a study shows that Asian-Americans are the most economically divided racial group in the United States.
For the weekend, “The Meg” (Warner) placed second, collecting $21.2 million, for a two-week global total of roughly $300 million, according to comScore, which compiles box-office data. Third place went to “Mile 22” (STXfilms), which took in $13.6 million, a bit below what most analysts had expected. “Mile 22,” which cost about $35 million to make, stars Mark Wahlberg as an elite intelligence officer.
“Billionaire Boys Club,” which was already available as a video-on-demand release, is about affluent high school boys in Los Angeles who get involved in a Ponzi scheme. Filming was completed before accusations against Mr. Spacey surfaced in October. The film’s distributor, Vertical Entertainment, justified the release by saying the rest of the cast should not be penalized.