THE DIPLOMATS at Ford Amphitheater at Coney Island Boardwalk (Aug. 18, 8 p.m.). This Harlem quartet — Cam’ron, Jim Jones, Juelz Santana and Freekey Zekey — bridged the narrowing gap between glossy, braggadocious pop-rap and the genre’s more esoteric, lyrics-driven side with music that married bombastic beats with unforgettable, instantly repeatable quips. Their 2003 release “Diplomatic Immunity” and its sequel were the only two albums produced before the group dissolved because of internal strife, but fans can expect to hear hits from the members’ prolific solo careers as well. This set is the finale of a summer-long reunion tour, co-starring Dave East, a fellow uptown M.C.
EMERGING MUSIC FESTIVAL at Bryant Park (Aug. 17-18, 5 p.m.). For two nights, this Midtown lawn will turn into a destination for genre-agnostic music discovery. The self-described “garage-soul” band Evolfo headlines on Friday; the grunge-driven singer-songwriter Katie Von Schleicher, on Saturday. Madison McFerrin, daughter of renowned vocalist Bobby McFerrin, is slated to perform her own a cappella stylings — a fresh take on her father’s signature sound. Also on the festival’s bill are the beachy rock band EZTV, the Afrobeat modernists Underground System, the power-pop harmonizers Ohmme and the contemporary bluesman Blind Boy Paxton.
MARK ERNESTUS’S NDAGGA RHYTHM FORCE at Pioneer Works (Aug. 17, 8 p.m.). While African pop music gains global clout, savvy listeners have been hip to its less radio-friendly iterations for decades. A longtime fixture on Berlin’s techno scene, the D.J. and record store owner Mark Ernestus first heard mbalax, a rugged variety of Senegalese dance music, in 2007; since then, he has worked to bring the genre to international listeners, most recently with the Ndagga Rhythm Force — something of a supergroup of the music’s most storied practitioners who create hypnotic jams through lush percussion and guitar arrangements. Two of the members, the vocalist Mbene Diatta Seck and the dancer Fatou Wore Mboup, will appear alongside Mr. Ernestus for their first performance in the United States.
MITSKI at Elsewhere (Aug. 18, 7 p.m.). “Be the Cowboy,” the follow-up to this New York singer-songwriter’s critically acclaimed 2016 album, “Puberty 2,” comes out on Friday. This CD release show will be the last chance to see the ascendant indie rocker in a relatively intimate venue before she embarks on a larger-scale fall tour. The title of her new project, which mostly consists of confessional songs that don’t lose their danceable, hooky core, is intended as a rallying cry of sorts — literally adopting the attitude of a stereotypical cowboy “to achieve things that maybe I don’t believe I can achieve,” as she told NPR. The show is sold out, but tickets are available on the resale market.
OPEN MIKE EAGLE at Elsewhere (Aug. 17, 6 p.m.). This alternative rapper from Los Angeles is also the co-host of a wrestling podcast called “Tights and Fights,” a fact that makes the theme of his upcoming Brooklyn show more comprehensible. The performance is billed as an unofficial kickoff for SummerSlam, the annual WWE spectacle taking place at the Barclays Center on Sunday. The rapper will perform unreleased wrestling raps along with some of the darkly absurd music he has spent the past decade refining. Mega Ran, who describes his take on hip-hop as “nerdcore,” and the sibling duo Tron and DVD will open.
GILAD HEKSELMAN TRIO at Smalls (Aug. 20-21, 7:30 and 9 p.m.). This guitarist doesn’t need to be slick to sound commanding. When he starts to scamper in a single-note line, he’s usually quick to cut himself off — interrupting his own train of thought and grabbing your ear. A strong new album of original tunes, “Ask for Chaos,” is out next month. He appears at Smalls alongside the bassist Rick Rosato and the drummer Jonathan Pinson, who form one of two trios featured on the record.
NEW MASTERS at the Jazz Gallery (Aug. 19, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Jazz labels appear stubbornly committed to supporting supergroups of young (male) improvisers who play in a hip-hop-influenced mode. (See also R+R=NOW, NEXT Collective, etc.) So the model must be good for something. The New Masters is the latest such band, featuring Keyon Harrold on trumpet, Immanuel Wilkins on alto saxophone, Gilad Hekselman on guitar, Sullivan Fortner on piano and keyboards, Burniss Earl Travis on bass and Eric Harland on drums. The group’s repertoire centers on original arrangements of songs from contemporary hip-hop and R&B radio: Drake, Kendrick Lamar and the like. The New Masters will enter the studio soon to record an album for Sony; this performance is the ensemble’s debut.
MEG OKURA AND THE PAN ASIAN CHAMBER JAZZ ENSEMBLE at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (Aug. 20, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). “Ima Ima” is the new album from this impressive violinist and bandleader, and her fourth with the Pan Asian Chamber Jazz Ensemble. It’s a record of grandiloquent beauty that transitions easily from grooves to big cascades to buoyant swing. She composed it with syncretism in mind: Ima means “now” in Japanese and “mom” in Hebrew, the language of Ms. Okura’s recently adopted Jewish faith. Here she is joined by her 10-piece ensemble, which includes the eminent trumpeter Tom Harrell, a featured guest on the album as well as at the show.
NICHOLAS PAYTON UPTOWN TRIO at Ginny’s Supper Club (Aug. 17, 8 and 10 p.m.). Mr. Payton, a virtuoso trumpeter, is quick to issue a critique. But one of his strategies is showing love and scorn in equal measure to all sides of the argument. Case in point: Mr. Payton performs at Ginny’s in Harlem on Friday with a group he’s calling the Uptown Trio — the bassist Ben Williams and the drummer Marcus Gilmore. Tonight he appears at Nublu on the Lower East Side with a so-called Downtown Trio. He’s making an obvious, partway-arch reference to the old dichotomy between the more bebop-oriented method associated with clubs in Midtown and Harlem, and the formally experimental, Western classical-influenced approach of “downtown” players. As ever, Mr. Payton’s way is to rummage around and find something of value in both.
MATANA ROBERTS at the Jazz Gallery (Aug. 18, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Ms. Roberts, a riveting saxophonist and multimedia artist, uses her instrument, her voice and a mixture of visual media to communicate a strong, rooted message about inheritance and memory and vision. Her saxophone sound is insistent, mournful and devout, all at once; mostly, it’s inspiring. She’ll perform a solo set here at 7:30 p.m., followed by a performance at 9:30 with Gerald Cleaver, a formidable drummer who’s at home in almost any context.
BRANDEE YOUNGER QUINTET at Jazz Standard (Aug. 21-22, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Ms. Younger’s harp playing can be airy or imagistic, but it’s usually grounded in a groove. Over the past decade, she’s proven adept at bringing the instrument into contexts where it had rarely gone: jazz infused with neo-soul; springy post-bop; experiments alongside Afro-Cuban improvisers. On Night 1 of her brief run at Jazz Standard, the classically trained harpist will appear in an electrified quintet with some of her most accomplished contemporaries: Keyon Harrold on trumpet, Chelsea Baratz on tenor saxophone, Rashaan Carter on electric bass and Marcus Gilmore on drums. On Night 2, a different but equally impressive group joins her in an acoustic format: Mr. Harrold, as well as Anne Drummond on flute, Dezron Douglas on upright bass and E. J. Strickland on drums.
