The Republican leader is walking away. Don’t ask him about Trump anymore.
Paul Ryan has a thing about punctuality and routine. They bring a sense of order to the chaos that he otherwise must try to maneuver through. We sat down at 9 a.m. sharp in the ornate offices of the speaker of the House at the United States Capitol. It was a Wednesday in late July, and Ryan had a packed morning, starting with an appearance on “Fox & Friends” and ending with a meeting at the White House with President Trump — if there is even a difference.
This is among the headiest commendations a Republican could hope to receive in Donald Trump’s Washington. “That happens to me a lot,” Ryan added, referring to his post-TV attaboy. But it’s important to seize openings, and he used the opportunity to steer the conversation to the subject of trade policy. The speaker had met the day before at the Capitol with the top trade officials from the European Union, who later that day would be meeting with Trump. He and the president compared notes. Ryan said he encouraged him to emphasize their shared goal of reducing and eliminating trade barriers. Trump seemed to get the message, or Ryan hoped he had.
Ryan announced in April that he would not be seeking re-election, ending a 20-year run in Congress that, for most of it, seemed to be on a straight-up trajectory. Ryan’s official reason for leaving was that his “family clock was ticking” and he no longer wanted to be a “weekend dad.” But it’s easy to suspect otherwise, and not just because that is a clichéd excuse: Ambitious 48-year-old politicians at the peak of their powers don’t suddenly just decide to quit because they’ve discovered that their teenage children are growing up fast back in Wisconsin. Ryan should, by rights, be riding out of town at the pinnacle of his starlit Washington career. Yet he remains a distinctly awkward match to a moment — and president — that seem certain to define much of his legacy.
As has been strenuously noted, Trump and Ryan are stylistic and philosophical opposites: Trump the blunt-force agitator vs. Ryan the think-tank conservative. Trump lashes out while Ryan treads carefully. Ryan still fashions himself a “policy guy” and a man of ideas: In high school, he read the conservative philosopher Ayn Rand and was captivated by her signature work, “Atlas Shrugged.” He bills himself as a guardian of the free-trading, debt-shrinking notions that Republican-led governments used to stand for before Trump crashed the tent. The speaker says he tries to encourage good behavior in the president.  (It was apparently an innocuous tweet about trade.) The speaker’s words carried the vaguely patronizing tone of a parent affirming a potty-training milestone.
Trump used to call Ryan “Boy Scout.” “I thought it was a compliment,” said Ryan, a former altar boy and habitual people-pleaser. But after the Republican-controlled Congress passed a few bills Trump announced to Ryan that he would stop using the nickname. “So I guess he meant it as an insult all along,” the speaker said. “I didn’t realize.” Ryan shrugged.
Questions about Donald Trump have been an inescapable companion to Ryan’s final months in office. They have trailed Ryan since the billionaire showman first incinerated the Republican Party as he knew it and reduced the boyish speaker to his most puzzled-over foil. “It was shocking to me,” Ryan told me of Trump’s rise. “I didn’t see it coming. It threw me off.” What would the supposedly principled conservative speaker tolerate? What would he fight for? Would he fight at all?
Ryan’s defiance to Trump, such as it is, can carry an almost pro forma quality. He will avoid or claim ignorance if possible (“I didn’t see the tweet”), chastise the president if he must (rarely by name), wait for the latest outrage to pass, rinse and repeat. “Frankly, I haven’t paid that close attention to it,” said Ryan at a June news conference in which he was asked about the job status of Scott Pruitt, the scandal-drenched E.P.A. administrator who was finally run out of office in July and whose mounting offenses over several months would have been impossible for even the most casual news consumer to miss.
Ryan hears such assessments all the time. “I’m very comfortable with the decisions I’ve made,” he told me. “I would make them again, do it again the same way.” He is quick to present his counterfactual. What if he were to pick a fight with Trump every time he said something that offended? “I think some people would like me to start a civil war in our party and achieve nothing.” Why should Ryan, despite his own misgivings, make himself the vehicle for anti-Trump wish-fulfillment?
The counter-counterfactual is this: Are Republican leaders so unwilling to condemn Trump because their voters support him so vigorously, or do these voters support Trump so vigorously because so few Republican leaders have dared condemn his actions? Chicken, meet egg.
The last few months have been a particularly checkered stretch of Paul Ryan’s finale. He agreed to a series of exit interviews during a tumultuous summer, over which Trump would blowtorch his way through a tour of Europe, call the European Union a top foe of the United States, feud with NATO, embrace Vladimir Putin and absolve the Russians for election meddling — and then came home to insinuate himself into Republican primary campaigns, escalate his attacks on Robert Mueller and threaten to shut down the government if he didn’t get his border wall.
There was no mention of the elephant in chief in the room, at least until the questions started, as they inevitably do.
Far from any unified governing philosophy, the animating objective for much of today’s Republican Party has been reduced to whatever Trump does or wants. The main goal of many elected Republicans is to curry the approval of the president, avoid provoking him (or, worse, a tweet) and thus not inflame the “base.” Being deemed an infidel inside the Church of the Base can be lethal for even the most ensconced incumbent (Mark Sanford, a South Carolina representative and a persistent Trump critic, was primaried out of his misery in June).
As speaker of the House, the Republican lawmaker should be at the peak of his powers. Instead, he’s walking away.
After beginning his day with his regular yoga-and-spin class, Ryan invited me to ride along en route to a speech at a downtown hotel, hosted by the Economic Club of Washington, D.C. His remarks were followed by a question-and-answer session with David Rubenstein, the billionaire financier and philanthropist who also hosts a talk show on Bloomberg. Rubenstein jumped from questions about things like Ryan’s upcoming transition back into civilian life (“Do you have to get a new license?”) and why Ryan insists that sleeping on a cot in his congressional office saves time. Rubenstein also sprang a question about whether Ryan thought it would be proper for Trump to pardon anyone caught up in the Mueller investigation.
“I’m not going to touch that one,” he said. Rubenstein followed up with a related question about whether Trump should be allowed to pardon himself. Ryan laughed. “I’m good, thanks,” he said, as if he were resisting a plate of hors d’oeuvres — not touching that either.
Rubenstein eventually touched down elsewhere, but the pardon question lingered, at least with me. It came off as a quintessential example of Ryan glibly blowing off what could be a monumental abuse of presidential power and a potentially gigantic crisis. I raised this in the car heading back to the Capitol. His eyes bulged for an instant, as if some defense enzyme had been released.
“I don’t spend a lot of time thinking about that stuff,” Ryan said of the pardon issue.
“I don’t think he’s going to do things like that,” Ryan said of Trump.
“He already has,” I said, referring to Trump’s pardoning of lawbreaking allies (Sheriff Joe Arpaio, Dinesh D’Souza).
“No, I’m talking about firing and things like that,” Ryan said.
I pointed out that if Trump fires Mueller, it might be too late for Ryan to do anything even if he wanted to, and the country could already be well into a constitutional crisis.
Ryan was hardly coy about his ambivalence to Trump during the 2016 campaign. He withheld his endorsement until Trump became the presumptive nominee in June, denounced his attacks on a judge of Mexican heritage as “the textbook definition of a racist comment” and distanced himself almost entirely after the “Access Hollywood” tape was revealed in October.
Trump’s signature across the Republican tax-reform bill gave both men their chief legislative accomplishments. In Ryan’s case, the bill supersized the deficit and made a mockery of the “debt crisis” that Ryan used to talk endlessly about during the Barack Obama years. The bill has also failed to attract the widespread approval in polls that tax cuts typically do, and has become only less popular over time.
Even so, Ryan himself has managed to remain relatively well regarded as legislative leaders go (a little like being the best ice-fisherman in Florida, but still). In a June Gallup survey, Ryan’s approval rating, 40 percent, came in decisively better than those of Nancy Pelosi, the House minority leader (29 percent); Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader (24 percent); and Chuck Schumer, the Senate minority leader (29 percent). “I’m the least-unpopular leader in Congress,” Ryan boasted playfully.
Ryan has always been unrestrained, even ostentatious, in advertising that he never wanted to be speaker. Reluctance, for a politician, is always a deft humblebrag. Being courted lends cachet, and it’s even better to be begged, which is pretty much what congressional Republicans resorted to when it became clear that Ryan was the only one with the votes or (barely) the stomach to take the job after John Boehner stepped down in 2015.
“I do think Paul wishes he was still chairman of the Ways and Means Committee,” says Representative Tom Rooney, a Florida Republican who also is not seeking re-election. Rooney guesses that Ryan would not be retiring if he were still Ways and Means chairman. “He made a deal with the devil to become speaker,” Rooney told me.
Rooney posits the example of his home-state colleague, Representative Ron DeSantis, who is running to be governor of Florida. DeSantis had been trailing the former congressman Adam Putnam, now the state’s agriculture commissioner, in the Republican primary race. DeSantis undertook a strategy of getting on as many Fox News shows as he could and defending Trump as adamantly as possible. “MAGA is the dogma,” Rooney says. DeSantis’s devotion to scripture won the attention and endorsement of the almighty himself; DeSantis now leads Putnam by double digits. He recently unveiled an ad in which he is seen reading a bedtime story to his infant son, who at one point is dressed in a red “Make America Great Again” onesie. “Then Mr. Trump said, ‘You’re fired,’ ” the loving dad reads.
Ryan told me that he has always been motivated by promoting ideas and winning debates. By contrast, today’s party, under Trump, is about pledging allegiance. “I don’t know that Paul knows how to rally around Trumpism,” Rooney says.
Kevin McCarthy, the House majority leader, told me that Trump and Ryan are “just wired differently, like most people are.” McCarthy, a strategic-minded operator with pillowy hair, has forged a genuine bond with Trump — arguably more so than any other lawmaker. Still, like most elected Republicans, McCarthy treads carefully, wary of poking the orange bear. It’s hard to overemphasize the degree to which Trump lives in the heads of elected Republicans. You get a sense of everyone on edge, waiting for the next tweet to drop — as if a tornado siren should accompany its arrival. When I visited McCarthy at the Capitol, the majority leader kept toggling between on and off the record. I asked McCarthy if he thought Ryan wished he could speak out more forcefully on some things the president does that might offend him.
“On the record or off the record?” McCarthy asked me.
On, I would prefer.
McCarthy paused and proceeded with care. “I think history will say that Paul spoke his own mind,” he said.
When people talk about “temperament” in politics, it’s often in connection with presidents. The swap from Obama to Trump offered pretty much the starkest contrast in presidential temperaments imaginable. I asked Ryan if it was an adjustment for him to serve with two presidents of such radically distinct disposition.
“Yeah, yes,” he said. Ryan said he “personally liked” Obama and, yes, appreciated his temperament; it’s similar to Ryan’s in certain respects — serious, disciplined and not terribly emotional. I asked if he preferred one style of presidential temperament over another. “I just did not like Obama’s policies,” he said, answering a different question.
Ryan and Obama have not spoken since the speaker saw the departing president out the back of the Capitol and onto a helicopter. “It was pleasant,” Ryan recalled.
The event was hosted by the American Enterprise Institute, the conservative think tank you could easily imagine Ryan sliding into after he leaves Congress — if not sooner. To wit: “Paul Ryan Would Be ‘Perfect Fit’ to Lead A.E.I., Republicans Say,” read a headline that appeared a few days later in the Capitol Hill newspaper The Hill.
“Well, I know how much you love responding to the president’s tweets in real time,” I said.
“I haven’t seen today’s — what did he do now?” Ryan asked me. This was three days after the president’s fateful news conference in Helsinki, in which Trump steamrollered the conclusion of United States intelligence agencies that Russia meddled in the 2016 election while accepting that Vladimir Putin was “extremely strong and powerful” in his denial. Ryan, who issued a relatively pointed statement after Helsinki (“The president must appreciate that Russia is not our ally”) grabbed a printout of the hour-old tweet I had helpfully brought along and read it silently to himself, except for a few phrases that he spat out under his breath (“summit,” “great success,” “fake news media”).
“Uh, yeah, O.K., whatever,” Ryan said, shaking his head and smirking. “Didn’t he do one like that two days ago?” This tweet was just another episode of the same sitcom, in other words.
“He’s just trolling you guys,” Ryan said, unveiling a new line to explain away Trump. This was a twist on Ryan’s go-to evasion of dismissing the medium of “tweets,” rather than condemning their words or intent. It is also an implicit declaration from the speaker of the House that the president’s words are not to be taken seriously because his goal is to merely troll. Therefore, any reaction by “you guys” reflects a lack of judgment and proportion: He is essentially chiding people for allowing themselves to be distracted.
In his Suburban, I presented Ryan with a possible real-world consequence of something he was trivializing: Even if Trump were “just trolling you guys,” what about the people who take the president’s words seriously and who look to him for guidance? I mentioned to Ryan that according to an online poll released that morning by Axios and SurveyMonkey, 79 percent of Republicans approved of Trump’s news conference in Helsinki.
This struck me as Ryan’s best attempt to explain Trumpism, if not one of those “Where we are as a country” moments that seem to occur every day now, or every minute on Twitter. But it’s still useful to lay down a marker sometimes. We have, in this case, a Republican speaker of the House explaining away a president’s intentions as nothing more than an effort to get a rise out of people.
I asked Ryan who the “you guys” being trolled were.
“The country,” he said, chuckling.
