SYDNEY, Australia — An Australian senator filed a defamation suit on Wednesday against a fellow lawmaker who she says made a sexist remark to her on the Senate floor during a debate about violence against women.
Senator Sarah Hanson-Young, a Greens Party member who was once the youngest woman elected to Parliament, has said that Senator David Leyonhjelm, a Liberal Democrat, told her to “stop shagging men” during a June debate on relaxing import restrictions for pepper spray, a change that advocates say would allow women to better protect themselves.
Mr. Leyonhjelm has acknowledged making the remark.
“The defamatory statements Senator Leyonhjelm made and continues to make are an attack on my character, and have done considerable harm to me and my family,” Ms. Hanson-Young said in a statement, released soon after filing her lawsuit with the Federal Court of Australia in Sydney.
Since Ms. Hanson-Young first publicized Mr. Leyonhjelm’s comment, the two lawmakers have engaged in an increasingly acrimonious war of words.
The suit contends that Mr. Leyonhjelm defamed Ms. Hanson-Young by doubling down on his comment in a series of news interviews. In those interviews, according to the complaint, Mr. Leyonhjelm suggested that Ms. Hanson-Young was a “hypocrite” and “misandrist” because she attacked men in public but had sex with them in private.
Mr. Leyonhjelm said the suit was baseless and he was willing to go to court to fight it.
The flap has again raised questions about a culture of sexual harassment and scandal in Canberra, the capital, and the lawsuit comes on the heels of a newly announced national inquiry into workplace sexual harassment.
In February, Barnaby Joyce was forced to step down as deputy prime minister after admitting to an affair with a staff member, prompting Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull to ban members of Parliament from having sex with their subordinates.
Ms. Hanson-Young told the Senate in June, soon after Mr. Leyonhjelm made his comment, that she had walked over to the senator and confronted him about it. “Shocked, I told him that he was a creep,” she said.
Mr. Leyonhjelm has been asked only to withdraw a comment once, the remark he directed at Ms. Hanson-Young, according to the report.
Ms. Hanson-Young’s lawsuit comes just as lawmakers are to begin a national inquiry into workplace sexual harassment, trumpeted as the most comprehensive investigation of its kind anywhere in the world. To be conducted over 12 months, it is likely to result in the implementation of sweeping new standards and the introduction of new criminal laws.
More than 20 percent of Australians over 15 report having experienced sexual harassment at work, according to the Australian Human Rights Commission. Female members and employees of Parliament have said they, too, are victims of harassment in the workplace.
Fewer than a third of Australian lawmakers are women, and some experts said the controversy over Mr. Leyonhjelm’s remarks was likely to deter more women from entering politics.
When discussing sexism in Australian politics, experts often cite Julia Gillard, who after becoming Australia’s first female prime minister in 2010 was the subject of vitriolic attack campaigns.
In 2011, Tony Abbott, then the opposition leader, spoke at a rally in front of a “ditch the witch” poster. Ms. Gillard later said the incident should have ended his career, but Mr. Abbott went on to become prime minister.
