Book Review|William T. Vollmann Would Like a Word or Two About Climate Change. Or 1,200 Pages.
William T. Vollmann Would Like a Word or Two About Climate Change. Or 1,200 Pages.
601 pp. Viking. $40.
Vollmann’s many fans are drawn to his literary hoarder aesthetic, and they will not be disappointed. The first volume, “No Immediate Danger,” deals mostly with the nuclear disaster at Fukushima; the second, “No Good Alternative,” takes on coal, oil and natural gas. He has stacked his reporting high, giving us interview after interview with local people in places ravaged by our need for power and by our wastefulness: those living near the nuclear plant, occupants of West Virginia hollers whose communities have suffered environmental wreckage from coal mining, unhappy neighbors of fracking pads, coal workers in Bangladesh and oil workers in Abu Dhabi.
As someone who writes about climate change for a living, I can tell you that if we continue down the path we are on, things will get very bad. Coastal cities will be severely damaged, and some lost; international climate migration will uproot the lives of millions. Changed climate patterns will worsen drought and wildfires in some areas, and river flooding and hurricanes in others. And because carbon dioxide persists so long in the atmosphere, even if we magically flipped a switch today, things are already pretty certain to stay very bad for hundreds of years to come.
All of that is awful enough, without having to go full-on Cormac McCarthy. I’m a fan of scientists like Katharine Hayhoe, who warns against overdosing on unwarranted gloom. As she puts it, “Doomsday messaging just doesn’t work.” Too much scare, and people give up hope and stop trying to bring about change.
Reading these two books did have an effect on me; I became even more conscious of the resources I waste in my own life. I found myself wondering why I burn fossil fuels by driving two miles to a lovely park where I take my morning run, instead of trotting around my own neighborhood. It’s not that I stopped doing it, but I do feel worse about myself.
Maybe that’s what the work was for.