VAIL, Colo. — On paper, the Vail Dance Festival looks more repetitious than it is. Lil Buck, Herman Cornejo, Tiler Peck and others return here year after year: Isn’t this just a club or clique?
When in Vail, though, what you see is how these returning artists extend themselves here — tackling new idioms, developing new partnerships, working on choreographic premieres — as nowhere else. You haven’t seen their full range if you’ve missed them here. And each year also brings new artists.
The festival itself, directed by Damian Woetzel since 2007, has been growing more sophisticated, ambitious and ethnically diverse. The International Evenings of Dance used to feature too many sets of 32 fouetté turns (the most renowned piece of ballet virtuosity) each evening; this year there were none. New choreography has always been a factor; but now multiple choreographers work here, show public workshops of pieces in progress, and even collaborate.
Who 10 years ago could have imagined two top-level choreographers making and dancing a duet together here? It happened on Friday, when Michelle Dorrance and Justin Peck joined forces for the world premiere of a tap duet, “They Try to Tell Us,” a perfect example of the sweet repartee that can turn tap, with its capacity for give-and-take rapid dialogue, into the medium of tenderly high-spirited feeling between two people.
The Cunningham immediately created a world, as satisfying at different times to observe as a galaxy or a new species. Most of its 14 performers were ballet dancers new to Cunningham, but all showed the choreography’s rich and rigorous imagination. Melissa Toogood was exemplary; Jason Collins and Victor Lozano expressed something close to ecstasy amid the material’s challenges; and Miriam Miller and Devon Teuscher were eye-catchingly stylish. Exceptional, too, was Mr. Cornejo, the American Ballet Theater principal, an artist so uncannily versatile as to merit the word “genius” more than any other dancer today. And in “Suite of Dances” he was a dream of peak artistry.
Live music, often played onstage, is a far more regular ingredient than it was in the early years of Mr. Woetzel’s leadership. Nothing in “They Try” was more enchanting than the singing of Kate Davis, a returning artist in recent years: the innocent, high firmness of her vocal lines enchanted.
Several famous scores were rearranged, though this wasn’t invariably successful. Debussy’s “Prélude à l’Après-midi d’un Faune” adapted for flute and piano lost some of its potency. Even so, it was wonderful to see Calvin Royal III of American Ballet Theater dance the Robbins “Faun.” His combination of elegance, grace and — above all — inwardness drew you deeply into the “Faun” world.
Lil Buck, the world-famous exponent of Memphis jookin, whose vocabulary he has enlarged, remains a phenomenal performer. But he’s also now a master of cuteness, and in danger of remaining too much the same: of deploying, always musically, the same array of wow physical tricks — the rippling upper body, the rapid currents of sliding and pulsating footwork — as if he were afraid of being either calmly objective or simple.
He danced two world premieres here: the solo “38109,” with music by himself and the composer-performer Caroline Shaw, and “Ascending Bird,” a sextet amalgamating jookin with tap, in which he and Ms. Dorrance led four other performers, including Ron Myles and Phyouture “Lil P,” both marvelously individual jookers. Ms. Dorrance was in torrential form, a nonstop source of cascading rhythm: You could see the heightened inspiration she brought to all her colleagues.
Ms. Peck, one of New York City Ballet’s foremost ballerinas, on Friday danced George Balanchine’s “Tschaikovsky Pas de Deux.” She was bravura liquefied, gloriously playing with music, balance and time; she also danced William Forysthe’s “Händel Duet,” a forgettable exercise in pretty ballet conventionality.
On Saturday, Ms. Peck stepped way out of her comfort zone, twice. The baroque grandeur of the minuet pas de deux from Balanchine’s “Chaconne” (a Suzanne Farrell creation) is exactly the kind of role that Ms. Peck hasn’t yet mastered — it usually goes to tall, statuesque divas. It was good to see how much of it she had already conquered; this was highly intelligent dancing against the grain. She also sang and moved in a big number (“The Music and the Mirror”) from “A Chorus Line”: her singing was undistinguished, her dancing — in heeled shoes — a brilliant but synthetic display of Broadway-ballet style.
Her “Tschaikovsky Pas de Deux” partner was the sensational young Roman Mejia, a first-year member of New York City Ballet. His jumps and turns certainly thrill, but his knockout quality comes from the power and length of his action-packed phrasing. No matter how high or fast or precise any individual step, it’s just a connecting part of a larger thought. He also delivered superlative sparkle (with City Ballet’s Lauren Lovette) in the pas de deux from August Bournonville’s “William Tell.” He is 18: another sure sign that the Vail Dance Festival keeps renewing itself.