The wildlife scientist Delia Owens has found her voice in WHERE THE CRAWDADS SING (Putnam, $26), a painfully beautiful first novel that is at once a murder mystery, a coming-of-age narrative and a celebration of nature. The author, with her husband, Mark, of three books about southern Africa, Owens here surveys the desolate marshlands of the North Carolina coast through the eyes of an abandoned child. And in her isolation that child makes us open our own eyes to the secret wonders — and dangers — of her private world.
In the end, Owens goes a bit too far as she attempts to make amends for Kya’s lonely childhood and solitary life. But it must be said that Kya has earned it.
A college student named Stephen O’Connor has a vision, described in elegiac and frightful detail by William Kent Krueger in DESOLATION MOUNTAIN (Atria, $26). In this dreamlike revelation, a boy shoots an arrow into the air and brings down a mighty eagle. The next day, a private plane crashes on the Iron Lake Reservation, slamming into a mountain the Indians call “Devil’s Eye” and killing Senator Olympia McCarthy. Cork O’Connor, Stephen’s father and the standup hero in this thriving series set in northern Minnesota, insinuates himself into an inquiry that draws investigators from several government agencies, along with some beefy guys wearing camo and carrying serious weapons.
Krueger dismisses the “zoo of federal agencies” that officially take over the case to concentrate on the O’Connors and their Indian friends, who understand and respect Iron Lake and its legends. That pays off in dynamic action scenes on the mountain as well as manly-man moments in a sweat lodge, around a fire ring and over bison burgers at Sam’s Place.
Marcia Muller was among the first to send a female private detective down the mean streets of modern American crime fiction when Sharon McCone, Muller’s San Francisco sleuth, solved her first case in 1977, doing investigative work for the All Souls Legal Cooperative. More than 30 books into the series, McCone is still on the job, now working for her own firm.
“Life sped by in Vientiane like a Volkswagen van on blocks,” Colin Cotterill drolly informs us in DON’T EAT ME (Soho Crime, $26.95), the latest installment in the curious life of Dr. Siri Paiboun, formerly the national coroner of the People’s Democratic Republic of Laos, but now a quirky amateur sleuth. The discovery of a corpse half devoured by animals leads to a grim story about the illegal trade in wildlife and other living things, caused in part by embargoes imposed by neighboring Thailand.
To take our minds off these horrors, Siri has acquired a movie camera to film his screenplay for a Lao version of “War and Peace.” It’s a worthy project, but not without difficulties since everyone from Comrade Phooi of the Ministry of Culture to the powerful women’s union feels entitled to rewrite his script.