Illustrated. 488 pp. Knopf. $28.95.
You approach a book with the subtitle “Tales From My Momma’s Table” with trepidation, expecting treacly bits of maternal wisdom stirred into a creamy bowl of heartwarming anecdotes. Happily, Bragg doesn’t truck in treacle. Instead, he delivers rollicking stories from rural Alabama about a possibly murderous great-grandfather who knows how to conjure dessert from a bit of flour and a tin of condensed milk, a grandmother who takes unseemly pleasure in choosing which chicken’s neck to wring and a cousin who cusses like a stevedore as she pats out a meatloaf. Bragg writes stories about family, in other words, and he does it better than almost anybody else. His just happens to be a family of excellent cooks who do much of their relating through the food they grow, hunt, prepare and occasionally steal.
Nowhere does Bragg acknowledge that much of what his white, working-class kin ate originated with Africans and Native Americans whose lives were even harder than their own. But some of the most moving chapters — which also manage, miraculously, to be laugh-out-loud funny — focus on the grinding years of the Depression, when the family genius for resourcefulness was taxed to breaking. Even then, their devotion to good taste never entirely disappeared; an heirloom recipe for squirrel brains — which “taste like you have licked the inside of an old, smutty beer can” — calls for mixing in scrambled eggs to disguise the metallic taste.
“We’re not a soup, we’re a stew,” a woman says at a Swedish-American pancake breakfast in Seattle, and you know Lee would like to kiss her for her Nordic precision. She’s describing her fellow Scandinavian descendants, but the words summarize Lee’s vision of America as a whole.
The child of Korean immigrants, Lee is fascinated by ways in which the ingredients and techniques of the world’s cuisines recombine on American shores, carried here by migrants who may try to cling to their traditions, but invariably see them transformed in the mash-up culture of their new home. Here he sets out across the country to find some of their more striking stories.
Lee’s travels take him to Lowell, Mass., where he meets Sam, who fled Cambodia in the 1970s and later reinvented himself as a chef. Sam’s menu skews to the spring rolls and noodles that Americans favor, but Lee susses out a profoundly unadapted mudfish sauce that, although it makes him gag, earns the cook’s trust. In Houston, home to the country’s largest Nigerian population, he learns to make a beef curry whose key ingredient — besides Knorr bouillon cubes — is cow skin. And in Dearborn, Mich., where he lands during Ramadan, Lee’s fasting earns him entree into culinary secrets he would otherwise be denied.
Bastianich is one of our great culinary matriarchs, so it comes a tonic, in these days of Muslim bans and DACA threats, to learn that she arrived in this country as a refugee. In this autobiography, plainly told but gently gripping, she recounts how she went from asylum seeker to the embodiment of America’s most enduring myth about itself.
As a child, Bastianich and her family fled Istria, which was ethnically Italian but annexed to communist Yugoslavia in the aftermath of World War II. They spent more than two years in an Italian refugee camp before finally making their way to the United States, a country almost unrecognizable in its generosity. A little luck and a lot of hard work later, Bastianich and her husband had launched a restaurant empire, raised children who would join and advance the family business and played a significant role in America’s food revolution.
If the general contours of Bastianich’s story are familiar, the specifics add savor. Her sentimental education in gastronomy takes some unlikely turns: As a young child, she learns to eat and cook — locally, seasonally and utterly predictably — at her Italian grandmother’s and aunt’s sides, but abandons all that in her new country, where she prefers the Spam and Wonder Bread that seem like fast tracks to the new identity she craves.
When she and her husband, Felice, open their first restaurant in Queens, the menu is comprised largely of the red-sauce dishes and oozing slabs of cheese that most people then took to be Italian. But gradually dishes of her native Istria sneak onto the menu, and by the time they open Felidia on Manhattan’s Upper East Side in 1981, Bastianich — now a chef but not yet a cookbook and television star — is able to use their acclaimed new restaurant to introduce the notion of regional Italian cuisine to America.