Rose McGowan, one of the leading voices of the #MeToo movement, said Monday that her partner had exchanged text messages with the actress and director Asia Argento in which Ms. Argento said that she had indeed slept with the actor Jimmy Bennett — an act that Ms. Argento recently denied.
In a lengthy statement, Ms. McGowan also said that her partner — the model Rain Dove — told her that in text messages, Ms. Argento had said that she had been receiving unsolicited nude photos of Mr. Bennett since the time he was 12 years old and had not informed the authorities or told him to stop sending the photos.
A spokeswoman for Rain Dove confirmed in an email that everything Ms. McGowan said in her statement was factual.
In the statement of more than 1,000 words, Ms. McGowan took pains to both explain why she had grown close to Ms. Argento as well as suggest that she had more recently distanced herself after allegations emerged that Ms. Argento sexually assaulted Mr. Bennett when he was 17.
Ms. McGowan released her statement a few days after the celebrity news website TMZ published screenshots of what it said was a text-message conversation between Ms. Argento and a person the website called “a friend.” The spokeswoman for Rain Dove confirmed on Monday that Rain Dove was the friend.
A phone call to the office of Carrie Goldberg, a lawyer for Ms. Argento, was not immediately returned on Monday. No one responded to emails sent to Ms. Goldberg’s office or to her communications director. In a statement last week, Ms. Argento said she had not had sex with Mr. Bennett.
“I am deeply shocked and hurt by having read news that is absolutely false,” she said last week in a statement circulated on social media.
Gordon K. Sattro, a lawyer for Mr. Bennett, did not immediately respond Monday to an email seeking comment about Ms. McGowan’s remarks and the allegations they contained.
Last fall, Ms. Argento was among the first women to publicly accuse the producer Harvey Weinstein of sexual assault. Around the same time, a New York Times article detailing Mr. Weinstein’s behavior reported the existence of a previously undisclosed settlement between Mr. Weinstein and Ms. McGowan related to an episode in a hotel room. Soon after the publication of the Times article, Ms. McGowan became one of Mr. Weinstein’s most vocal accusers.
This month, The Times reported that Ms. Argento had arranged to pay Mr. Bennett $380,000 after he accused her of sexually assaulting him before he had reached the age of consent in California. Mr. Bennett notified Ms. Argento last November that he would sue over their May 2013 encounter in a hotel room in Marina del Rey, Calif., The Times reported.
Although Ms. Argento has disputed the contents of the Times article, a company spokeswoman has said The Times stands by it.