Small things can have huge ramifications.
Fiskars scissors, designed by Olof Backstrom in 1967.
For years I was against the idea of paper planners. I thought they were cumbersome, wasteful and, in the age of Google Calendar, simply unnecessary. The pinnacle of redundancy.
Friends, I was so, so truly wrong.
There are both concrete and intangible benefits of using a paper planner to structure your life, goals and tasks. Physically writing out the way I want to organize my day brings a sense of ownership and responsibility that I never feel from typing it into my laptop or telling Siri to handle it. It’s a tangible manifestation of your goals you can hold in your hands, which to me adds permanence and accountability.
My favorite paper planner is the Self Journal, which helps you plan your day, write goal-oriented to-do lists, track progress toward long-term goals and more. (My favorite feature is that it forces you to build time for reflection daily and weekly.) Wirecutter, a New York Times company that reviews and recommends products, has a ton of great planner picks, too.
And yes, I am fully aware that I’m very late to the pro-paper-planner party — Smarter Living, of all places, has argued for them. But if you’re like me and always wrote them off, give them a try. In the short time I’ve been using one, it has affected my productivity in ways few other things have.
Assuming you’ve taken my advice to heart about paper planners, you’re going to need some new pens.
Writing with a really nice pen is like watching a movie in 4K for the first time: It’s still the same thing you’ve done a million times, but it’s better in every conceivable way and you wonder how you got by before.
Wirecutter’s favorite pen — and one I personally love — is the Uni-ball Jetstream. 
O.K., so I’m sort of breaking my own rules here: Wireless earbuds are not cheap. But a good pair is absolutely worth the price.
I’ve written before about the joy of wireless headphones, but wireless earbuds — two separate pieces not connected by a wire — are truly in a different league. Just like the experience of using a really nice pen, you’ll wonder how you ever got by without wireless earbuds. 
Wirecutter’s pick is the Jabra Elite 65t. If you’re looking for a pair you can wear while exercising, Wirecutter recommends the Jabra Elite Active 65t, which is the pair I use (and love).
I’m handing this one (handle-side first) to a friend of Smarter Living, Michael Gold: Nothing makes you appreciate the value of a good pair of scissors like moving. I know this because I had to use my house keys to slice through multiple layers of packing tape while I searched for the scissors I’d haphazardly thrown in the bottom of a box.
This was annoying. Having good scissors would have made it less so.
Forgive me for being redundant, but we all need a budget. Money has a way of disappearing without a trace, but tracking your spending means you’ll never feel the disappointment of seeing less money in your bank account than you thought.
Wirecutter’s favorite tool is You Need a Budget, which is on the higher end of cheap(ish) at $84 per year, though it is currently offering three months free to Wirecutter readers.
If you can’t get past the idea of paying for something that should save you money, here are two free tools worth looking at: PearBudget and this more detailed QuickStart Budget template.
Just remember: The best budgeting system is the one you’ll stick with, so pick something that resonates.
Simple Desk Improvements That Make an Open Office Easier to Bear Sitting in an open floor plan office or having flexible, unassigned seating at work is a challenge to be sure, but these tips can make your work space a bit more bearable.
How to Ask for Help and Actually Get It People want to help you. You just have to ask.
The Case for a Breakfast Feast Upon waking, eat like royalty.
When We Eat, or Don’t Eat, May Be Critical for Health A growing body of research suggests that our bodies function optimally when we align our eating patterns with our circadian rhythms.
How to Read a Food Label All the information stacked on food packaging can be confusing, but we’ll show you what you should focus on to really know what’s in your food.
How to Have Better Family Meals Sometimes it’s hard to find the time to eat as a family. It’s important to take advantage of whatever opportunity you have to nourish the mind, soul and stomach of everyone at the table.

An argument against to-do lists.
Monday mornings are the best time to shop.

I can’t stop laughing at this tweet!