Smarter Living|Talking About Failure Is Crucial for Growth. Here's How to Do It Right.
Talking About Failure Is Crucial for Growth. Here's How to Do It Right.
Research shows that talking about failure makes for happier, more productive workers.
We’ve all flopped on a big presentation.
After weeks of careful preparation and practice, you feel ready to knock it out of the park. But the day comes and, for whatever reason, every joke seems to fall flat, you bumble through all your numbers and your technology seems to be working against you.
Even though most people prefer to process failure internally and quickly move on for fear of causing a scene or seeming unprofessional, taking the time to reflect on and communicate about unwanted outcomes can go a long way in creating more congenial, trusting and ultimately productive workplaces.
But first, we have to talk about it.
After failing — publicly or privately — it can be nerve-racking to initiate a conversation about what happened with your co-workers or boss, particularly if you’re still in the early stages of your career and don’t feel confident that you have a lot of professional capital to work with.
It can be tempting to hide behind the safety blanket of Slack or email, but having face-to-face conversations around failure can be especially effective in building stronger relationships among colleagues. The ability to convey tone, body language and other non-linguistic reactions often plays a positive and humanizing role in these conversations, and all of that is lost in email, Mr. Staats said.
It’s also worth putting thought into how you frame the incident: A long-winded, venting session can be cathartic, but it also has the potential to sound self-centered or melodramatic.
It goes both ways. When our co-workers ask us questions, we’re more likely to develop a positive opinion of them because we see that they’re humbly turning to us as someone they perceive as having valuable knowledge, according to Mr. Staats.
“When that happens, you actually take it as a compliment,” he said.
“On Instagram and Facebook, people post these curated, shiny, beautiful personas of themselves, which contributes to this general belief that other people don’t experience as many failures as we do,” Ms. Brooks said.
Ultimately, the researchers found that talking about failure — both during the fact and afterward — can help to cultivate closer relationships with colleagues.
Other than helping you seem more approachable and likable, talking about failure and encouraging your peers to do the same can also make you a more efficient worker.
The latter two have the greatest potential to promote learning in the workplace.
Ms. Edmondson added that it’s difficult to assign responsibility for complex failures, but that staying vigilant about these kinds of mistakes can help improve existing processes.
Similarly, intelligent failure occurs when we’re working in areas in which we don’t have expertise or experience, or in areas that are uncharted in a broad, industrywide sense.
“We might launch a new product that’s never been launched before, and it’s a failure. We should tell everybody!” Ms. Edmondson said.
When an intelligent failure is buried or goes undiscussed, others risk repeating the exact same mistakes. The result? Increasingly inefficient organizations that replicate, instead of learn from, the same mistakes.
According to Sara Canaday, executive coach and author of “You — According to Them,” the rise of start-up businesses has made it much more acceptable to openly celebrate intelligent failure.
“Suddenly, people are saying things like, ‘fail fast or fail forward.’ Those are brand new words in the nomenclature of business,” she said.
By linking resiliency to innovation and growth, start-ups contribute to a general professional culture that frames failure as a positive learning experience. Likewise, many hiring managers are increasingly looking for resiliency in job candidates. That means it can be in your best interest to thoughtfully embrace the too-common interview question about a time you failed at work and how you overcame the challenge.
Ms. Eurich recalls an interview process in which a candidate was unable to acknowledge or reflect on any professional mistakes he had made.
Even when you grow comfortable with the prospect of sharing your failures at work, it’s important to remember that not every company has a culture that will welcome or even tolerate this kind of openness.
That’s not to say employees can’t create “safe spaces” among themselves to share their struggles. In fact, Ms. Edmondson encourages it, but factors like seniority are likely to impact how conversations about failure are received.
In a recent article, Ms. Brooks talked about the Princeton professor Johannes Haushofer, who published a “CV of Failures,” composed of a long list of “positions, grants and awards” that he had unsuccessfully applied for.
In fact, most of the positive emails he has received since putting the CV of Failures on his website have come from younger Ph.D. students, who have expressed relief at finding solidarity for their struggles.
“If a first-year Ph.D. student who is relatively unknown published a CV of their failures, well, it might not work as well,” said Ms. Brooks. She acknowledged that talking about failure is riskier for young professionals across the board, but said that if junior workers find the right audience — namely people who are professional peers, not superiors — to talk about failures with, the trust-building and humanizing benefits are worth it.
