A police sergeant who was under investigation in connection with the off-duty shooting of an unarmed man in the face in Brooklyn was fired on Friday, a police official said.
Moments after the shooting on Aug. 2 in the East New York neighborhood, video surveillance footage captured the sergeant, Ritchard Blake, patting down the man, Thavone Santana, as if looking for a weapon.
The sergeant then pulled a sheath knife out of his back pocket and dropped it out of its covering beside Mr. Santana. After briefly pacing, Sergeant Blake picked it back up, the video shows.
Mr. Santana, 21, survived the shooting.
The surveillance video, which was described by two law enforcement officials and later posted by NBC New York, raised questions about what had happened, and the Brooklyn district attorney’s office said it would conduct “an independent and thorough” review.
A spokesman for the office said on Saturday that the episode remained under investigation but declined to comment further.
The police official who disclosed the firing did so on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss it. Neither the Police Department nor the Sergeants Benevolent Association responded to questions on Saturday, and efforts to reach Sergeant Blake were unsuccessful.
He had previously told officers that he was worried about the safety of his girlfriend, whose relationship with the two men had been a source of simmering friction between them.
Around 5 a.m. on the day of the shooting, Sergeant Blake was walking away from the woman’s home and headed to work at the 109th Precinct in Queens, law enforcement officials said. Mr. Santana followed and got Sergeant Blake’s attention.
The video shows Sergeant Blake holding his arms out at his sides and talking. Mr. Santana moves closer with one hand in the pocket of his shorts.
The police gave conflicting accounts of what led to the shooting.
The Police Department said on Thursday that the sergeant fired because a man pretending to have a gun tried to rob him. A police official later said Mr. Santana had told Sergeant Blake that he had a gun, but not that Mr. Santana had been trying to rob him.
Sergeant Blake fired his gun twice, hitting Mr. Santana once in the face. He then called 911 to report an off-duty shooting. He was stripped of his gun and badge and placed on modified duty.
He was already on a form of administrative probation after being charged with assaulting a woman in 2016. He was suspended for 36 days and placed on dismissal probation, according to a New York Daily News article on police discipline published in March. That designation allows officers who have been disciplined to continue to work but gives the police commissioner the power to fire them without a trial during a yearlong probation.
The spokesman for the Brooklyn district attorney’s office declined to discuss that case and said it was sealed.