An ancient city with a new art and food scene that’s growing up around its beautiful temples and natural beauty, Chiang Mai deserves a spot on your bucket list. Before you go, pack these items to make the most of your trip.
A beautiful, ancient riverside city deep in northern Thailand, Chiang Mai is a laid back destination known for its temples, wildlife and, today, buzzing food, cocktail and local art scene. It’s well worth a visit, but before you go, pack these essentials for your trip.
Above all, and perhaps most obviously, you should prepare for tropical weather, Ms. Krajangsri said. Wear loose and breathable clothes that will be comfortable in the heat and dry quickly when wet from either sweat or rain. Average temperatures in the area can soar above 90 degrees Fahrenheit, or well over about 33 degrees Celsius, and that’s even in the soaking rainfall of the rainy season.
But Ms. Krajangsri also cautions that in December and January, Chiang Mai can get chilly enough that you’ll be grateful to have a warmer layer tucked in your bag for the evenings. Ms. Misra recommends the trusty Arc’teryx Squamish jacket, which packs down small, and will provide some protection from wet weather. If you’re visiting between July and October, when rains are heavier and temperatures are higher, Ms. Misra suggests you opt for an actual rain jacket, like the Patagonia Torrentshell, a Wirecutter favorite, especially if you plan to go out hiking or explore Chiang Mai’s natural beauty.
Only a couple of hours’ drive from Chiang Mai, the mountainous, waterfall-filled Doi Inthanon National Park is home to more than 360 bird species, making it one of the country’s best spots for bird-watching, particularly during the spring and summer months.
Ms. Misra and Ms. Krajangsri both suggest you bring a pair of binoculars and a camera. The Pentax AD 8x25 WP binocs are compact enough to carry in a jacket pocket, and the professional ornithologist who evaluated them for Wirecutter found the images crisp and the colors clear, Ms. Misra said. She also suggested a superzoom camera, which lets you take a wide-angle shot and then quickly focus in on a single bird perched on a far-off branch, without the need to stop and swap lenses. Nikon’s Coolpix B700 has an impressive zoom capability of up to 60x, is simple to use and can also shoot 4K video, if you want to capture some of those birds in motion, too.
Chiang Mai is known for its vibrant markets, where you can find beautifully wrought craftworks you’ll want to take home with you. Ms. Krajangsri suggests, in particular, looking out for clothing, woodwork and textiles (especially the region’s famous silks).
You’ll need a bag to stash your purchases as you find them, though. Ms. Misra recommends the Patagonia Lightweight Travel Tote, which sheds water well enough to withstand a brief shower, and it converts into a surprisingly comfortable backpack for longer walks. It also has side pockets to hold a water bottle, like this Nomader collapsible bottle.
Ms. Krajangsri recommends wearing a pair of supportive running shoes that can handle both the city streets and, say, the 300-plus steps leading up to Wat Phra That Doi Suthep, one of her favorite sights. Saucony’s Peregrine 7 trail runners offer a good mix of cushioning and a grippy sole that held the ground well even in wet conditions all through Wirecutter’s tests, Ms. Misra said.
Along with a good bug repellent and sunscreen, bring a wide-brimmed hat — the sun in Chiang Mai is strong year-round. Tilley’s LTM6 AirFlo Hat is stylish enough to wear in the city, but Ms. Misra notes it’ll keep you cool and provide a convenient perch for a personal mosquito net, like this one from Outdoor Research.