She was the first African-American woman to headline a concert at Carnegie Hall, but she didn’t care for her stage name, “the Black Patti,” which compared her to a white diva.
Since 1851, obituaries in The New York Times have been dominated by white men. With Overlooked, we’re adding the stories of remarkable people whose deaths went unreported in The Times.
Sissieretta Jones forged an unconventional path to singing opera, becoming the first African-American woman to headline a concert on the main stage of Carnegie Hall, in 1893.
She sang at the White House, toured the nation and the world, and, in a performance at Madison Square Garden, was conducted by the composer Antonin Dvorak.
But there were color lines she never managed to break, like the one that kept the nation’s major opera companies segregated, denying her the chance to perform in fully staged operas.
“They tell me my color is against me,” she once lamented to a reporter from The Detroit Tribune.
When another interviewer suggested that she transform herself with makeup and wigs, she dismissed the idea.
Jones was perhaps the most famous of an early generation of African-American singers who shattered racial barriers in classical music, more than a half-century before Marian Anderson became the first black artist to sing a leading role at the Metropolitan Opera in New York.
“Thirty years out of slavery for African-Americans in this country, here she was on the stage of Carnegie Hall,” Jessye Norman, who became a great African-American diva in the late 20th century, said in an interview.
Nicknamed “the Black Patti” for publicity purposes — a comparison to the white diva Adelina Patti — she became the star of a touring company called the Black Patti Troubadours. All the performers were black, but the managers were white.
Performances would open with skits that had roots in minstrel shows, including songs in dialect called “coon songs.” But they would close in another key entirely: with Jones as the star of an “Operatic Kaleidoscope.” An early show that began with a skit called “At Jolly Coon-ey Island” ended with Jones singing arias by Verdi and Offenbach — in costume, backed by a chorus.
The Troubadours began touring in 1896, and she held the stage with them and a successor company for nearly two decades.
Matilda Sissieretta Joyner was born in Portsmouth, Va., in either 1868 or 1869 (records disagree); her father was a carpenter and pastor who was born into slavery, and her mother sang in the choir at the nearby Ebenezer Baptist Church. The family moved to Providence, R.I., where a young Sissieretta sang in church and began her vocal training. Her marriage to David Jones ended in divorce; their daughter, Mabel, died at the age of 2.
After studying singing in Providence and Boston, she began appearing in concerts in New York, New England and Philadelphia, and in 1888 went on her first tour, of the Caribbean and South America. On a tour of England, she performed for the Prince of Wales. She sang at the White House in 1892 for President Benjamin Harrison, her first of several appearances there.
But Jones attributed her success to an engagement months later at Madison Square Garden billed as a “Grand Negro Jubilee.” After several instrumentals played by the band, some songs by the Jubilee Chorus and a fight scene, Jones took to the stage of the Garden.
She followed in the footsteps of earlier African-American concert singers who upended racial stereotypes, including Elizabeth Taylor Greenfield, who began her singing career before the Civil War, Flora Batson and Marie Selika Williams, the first black singer to perform at the White House, in 1878.
Jones became one of the most successful, though, amassing a large collection of medals from international admirers that she often wore at concerts, and becoming one of the best-paid African-American performers of her day, according to modern scholars.
But she frequently had to endure racism, and all manner of indignities.
Segregated hotels turned her away, and not only in the South. The same year the Troubadours were founded, 1896, the United States Supreme Court allowed racial segregation in its Plessy v. Ferguson decision, which held that “separate but equal” facilities were constitutional. That fall, when Jones’s young company tried to tour Hartford, every hotel refused them, according to The New York Times.
She eventually got a private rail car to live in while on the road.
When a contract dispute with her powerful white manager, Maj. James B. Pond, landed in court, the judge chided her for ingratitude. And singing for black and white audiences was not always easy in a segregated era.
After an 1893 concert in Louisville, where black patrons were restricted to the packed upper gallery while some of the best seats, reserved for whites, sat empty, Jones spoke out.
“I think people of my race ought not to be shut out in this way,” she told The Louisville Commercial.
She retired from the stage in 1915 to look after her mother in Providence, slipped from view and ran through her savings. When she died on June 24, 1933, relatively few took notice.
And Norman, the soprano, is developing a project exploring Jones’s life that will be presented at National Sawdust, the performance space in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. She hopes that projects like hers will spread Jones’s fame wider.
But she has one overarching wish: finding a recording of her voice.
There are no known recordings of Jones. The Library of Congress notes that black artists rarely performed on early recordings. Gino Francesconi, the director of Carnegie Hall’s archives and Rose Museum, said he was still searching for such a track.
