The prize, bestowed every four years to mathematicians 40 years or younger, is often described as the subject’s Nobel Prize.
This year’s recipients, announced on Wednesday at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Rio de Janeiro, include one of the youngest ever: Peter Scholze, a professor of mathematics at the University of Bonn who is 30 years old.
By custom, Fields medals are bestowed to mathematicians 40 years old or younger. That means Dr. Scholze would have still been eligible for another two rounds of medals. The medal, first awarded in 1936, was conceived by John Charles Fields, a Canadian mathematician. The youngest winner, Jean-Pierre Serre in 1954, was 27.
The other Fields medalists this year are Caucher Birkar, 40, of the University of Cambridge in England; Alessio Figalli, 34, of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich; and Akshay Venkatesh, 36, of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton and Stanford University in California.
Four years ago, Maryam Mirzakhani of Stanford University became the first woman ever to receive a Fields Medal. (She died in 2017 of cancer.) All four medalists this year are men.
Dr. Scholze gained prominence when he was still in graduate school in 2010, simplifying a complicated book-length, 288-page proof to a novella-size 37-page version. In his mathematics, he works with fractal structures that he calls perfectoid spaces.
“I once heard a senior number theorist, who I will not name, say that Scholze had kind of ruined his to-do list for the next 20 years,” said Jordan Ellenberg, a mathematician at the University of Wisconsin.
Dr. Birkar’s field is algebraic geometry, which investigates connections between numbers and shapes. A set of solutions to a set of equations can be represented by a geometric space. He and his collaborators are looking at “minimal models,” where the solutions can be replaced by a simpler set that captures the important qualities but are easier to understand.
Recently, Dr. Venkatesh and Brian Lawrence, one of Dr. Venkatesh’s former graduate students, found a different way to prove a groundbreaking theorem from the 1980s that stated that one could tell whether a set of equations had a finite number of solutions or infinitely many just by looking at the form of the equations. Although the result is not new, their novel approach could lead to further progress in understanding the solvability of equations.
