The actor and his business partner, the visual artist Alexandra Grant, have created X Artists’ Books, an imprint full of esoteric titles.
IN THE MODERN pastime of thinking about Keanu Reeves, a few images endure: the monastic undercover F.B.I. agent in “Point Break,” the monastic prophesied savior of an oppressed future in “The Matrix,” the monastic emissary from an alien planet in “The Day the Earth Stood Still.” Of these, “monastic art-book publisher” is perhaps less immediate, though, as of last year, it’s no less accurate. Since the summer, X Artists’ Books, a small press that Reeves launched in Los Angeles with the visual artist Alexandra Grant, has been producing aggressively esoteric titles of the kind that wouldn’t fly at larger imprints.
REEVES HAS BEEN acting since the mid-80s, embodying characters that have shaped American popular culture, yet he usually seems at odds with his celebrity. These days, his public identity — which combines the reticence of a downbeat bodhisattva with a penchant for glowering — occupies more of the collective imagination than his oeuvre does, or perhaps it’s just that his persona and his characters have become inextricable: The concepts for both “Ode to Happiness” and “Shadows” feel borne out of an indelible 2010 meme of Sad Keanu, photographed on a New York City park bench staring morosely into his sandwich.
That latter book, which was also presented as a series of gallery exhibitions, first at the erstwhile Acme gallery in Los Angeles and last year as part of PhotoSaintGermain in Paris, prompted Grant and Reeves to consider the experimental capabilities of book publishing. “Part of the genesis of X Artists’ Books was that these projects might become a performance or an exhibition,” Grant says. They tested this theory with the first full English translation of “The Words of Others” — the Argentine artist León Ferrari’s 1967 polemic against the Vietnam War and American imperial politics — which became a seven-hour staged reading at L.A.’s Redcat theater last year.
They recently released “(Zus),” a visual essay by the French photographer Benoît Fougeirol with text by Jean-Christophe Bailly, structured around the 11 “Zones urbaines sensibles” of Paris’s banlieues that presents the Brutalist peripheries as a failure of both the state and imagination. Reeves had been working with Fougeirol, whom he met through family friends, on that book before launching his imprint, helping finance things like helicopters for the aerial shots as well as bodyguards for the team when visiting the neighborhood’s rougher quarters.
Not that Reeves is simply X’s money man. He and Grant make most business decisions together, including what to publish. They don’t accept submissions and haven’t worked with agents, preferring instead to unearth what Grant calls “secret books” — knotty concepts that might seem unpublishable. Their titles are stocked at art bookstores like Otherwild in Los Angeles, Printed Matter in New York and Yvon Lambert in Paris, as well as through an online subscription program ($130 for the first four releases; there are five more in the works).
In many ways, this model was inspired by working with Steidl, yet X Artists’ Books also feels indigenous to Los Angeles, its books the spiritual descendants of Ed Ruscha’s inexpensive self-published ones or the work of Mike Kelley, whose art delights in the weirder reaches of society’s margins. (The ‘X’ in X Artists’ Books is meant in the collaborative sense, but it also, as their website notes, “stands for treasure, uncharted territory, the core of infinity.”) For the main run of “(Zus),” they enlisted a communally owned printer in Rennes, France, but also produced a limited-edition series of prints that have been acquired by the permanent collections of the Centre Pompidou and the Bibliothèque Nationale de France. “In terms of where the printing happens, the quality of the paper, the haptic feel, that’s something that’s important to us,” Reeves says.
