AUSTIN, Tex. — In the more than five years since a mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School, the conspiracy theorist Alex Jones has used his Infowars media operation to spread false theories that the massacre was a hoax staged by the government in an effort to tighten restrictions over firearms.
The families of nine Sandy Hook victims — including that of Noah Pozner, who was 6 when he was killed — have filed cases against Mr. Jones, whose operation is based in Austin.
The hearing Wednesday was the first in three defamation cases to reach a courtroom. Among the thornier questions it raises: Does speaking publicly about the killing of a child turn the child’s parents into public figures, making it more difficult to win their case?
The broadcast is central to the case brought by Noah’s parents, Veronique De La Rosa and Leonard Pozner, because it aired within Texas’ one-year statute of limitations for defamation cases, and because it features, their lawyer said, a crucial, false theme spread by Mr. Jones: that the shooting was staged, and the parents were lying about it. Followers of Mr. Jones who believe those false claims have stalked and harassed the Pozner family, forcing them to live in hiding.
Mr. Jones is seeking to have the case dismissed under the Texas Citizens Participation Act, which protects citizens’ right to free speech against plaintiffs who aim to silence them through costly litigation. Lawyers for both sides continued to file documents hours before the hearing began.
Judge Scott Jenkins of the District Court of Travis County, who had not had access to the latest filings before the hearing, instructed both sides to reach an agreement that the record was complete. Once it is, he will have 30 days to dismiss the case or allow it to go forward.
In his remarks, Mr. Jones’s lawyer, Mark Enoch, said that he was unfamiliar with Mr. Jones and his Infowars programming before he was hired to represent him. But, Mr. Enoch said, his client’s bizarre, incendiary claims were exactly the type of “fringe speech” that the First Amendment seeks to protect.
“This is not about Sandy Hook,” Mr. Enoch said, adding that Mr. Jones was “sorry” for the Pozner family’s loss and “acknowledges” the death of their child.
In April 2017, according to court documents, Mr. Jones aired a clip of Ms. De La Rosa’s interview with Anderson Cooper of CNN after the shooting. Mr. Jones notes that when Mr. Cooper turns his head, “his nose disappears repeatedly because the green screen isn’t set right,” implying that the interview was not filmed near the scene of the shooting, but was staged in a studio.
Mr. Enoch played a half-hour montage of news and movie clips, which Mr. Jones said suggested examples of lies by CNN, the federal government and politicians. Displaying a narrow series of quotes from the hourslong original broadcast on poster board, Mr. Enoch said those remarks by Mr. Jones did not defame Ms. De La Rosa.
Instead, he said, Mr. Jones was criticizing lies by the mainstream news media, the “vampires” who were part of the Sandy Hook plot — accusations that were Mr. Jones’s opinion, not fact, and therefore largely protected under the First Amendment.
Mr. Enoch also argued that Mr. Pozner and Ms. De La Rosa became public figures when they spoke out in favor of a ban on assault-style weapons like the rifle used to kill their son. To win a defamation case, public figures must prove actual malice, meaning that Mr. Jones knew that the statements were untrue and broadcast them anyway or that he demonstrated reckless disregard as to their accuracy.
The lawyer for Mr. Pozner and Ms. De La Rosa, Mark Bankston, argued that the excerpts from the April 2017 broadcast chosen by Mr. Enoch did not include multiple “monstrous” false statements that Mr. Jones presented as fact, like the false claim that the parents were actors in a government plot.
Mr. Bankston said Mr. Jones’s remarks about Ms. De La Rosa’s CNN interview fit into a pattern. Over five years, according to court filings, Mr. Jones repeatedly used the segment as a basis for false claims that the shooting was staged.
Judge Jenkins noted that “it’s a very interesting question of law” as to whether one can be an “involuntary” public figure by dint of suffering a tragedy and publicly speaking about it.
The hearing comes as Mr. Jones faces increased scrutiny of the Infowars material he posts on social media. Last week, YouTube removed four of his videos. Facebook also removed his personal page for 30 days.
On Wednesday, Spotify announced that it removed an unspecified number of episodes of Mr. Jones’s podcast, “The Alex Jones Show: Infowars,” for violating its policy against “hate content,” which the company defines as inciting hatred or violence against specific groups.
Spotify has been criticized in recent days for hosting the podcast, with some users threatening to cancel their subscriptions if the company did not drop the show.