BANGKOK — An 11-year-old bride to a Malaysian man 30 years her senior has returned to her native Thailand, where she is under the care of the local social welfare department.
Ayu, who is being identified only by her nickname for her protection, was married in June as the third wife of Che Abdul Karim Che Abdul Hamid, a Muslim rubber trader from the northern Malaysian state of Kelantan. The case has provoked soul-searching in Malaysia, where the prevalence of child marriage belies the Southeast Asian nation’s modern outlook.
Earlier this month, Thai officials picked up Ayu and her parents in a Thai town on the border with Malaysia, said Surapol Prommool, the governor of Narathiwat Province in southern Thailand. She is now being cared for in a Thai government institution by an all-female staff of social workers, psychologists and doctors.
Mr. Che Abdul Karim has not been allowed to visit her there, Mr. Surapol said.
Malaysian law allows for child marriage in certain cases. Muslims, who are bound by Shariah law in many civil affairs, can wed below the age of 16 if they receive permission from a religious court. Non-Muslims between the ages of 16 and 18 can marry with the consent of state-level ministers.
Last year, Malaysia passed a law against sexual grooming, in which an adult creates an emotional bond with a child for the purpose of sexual exploitation. An effort to ban child marriage, however, failed. One legislator from the then governing party, who had also served as a Shariah court judge, said a 9-year-old girl could be marriageable if she had gone through puberty.
But Malaysia’s new government, which took power in May, has said that it is committed to combating underage marriage, which is most common among younger children from the country’s Muslim Malay and indigenous populations.
Ms.  While Mr. Che Abdul Karim said that he would not “touch” Ayu until she was 16, the pair went on a holiday together to a Malaysian hill retreat, according to a social media post seen by his second wife.
Last month, Mr. Che Abdul Karim was fined $450 by a Kelantan Shariah court for marrying Ayu in Thailand without the court’s permission.
Ayu’s abrupt transfer to Thailand has also raised eyebrows.
Ms. Wan Azizah, the Malaysian deputy prime minister, said that given Ayu’s nationality, it made sense for her to return to Thailand.
Although Ayu was born in Thailand, she has lived most of her life in northern Malaysia, where her father struggled to make ends meet as a rubber tapper. The family lived in a wooden shack with no running water, and Ayu did not attend school.
She does not speak Thai, and it is not clear whether her parents have the means to support themselves should they remain in Thailand.
Ayu’s marriage was conducted in Thailand, with her parents and a friend of Mr. Che Abdul Karim present as a witness. Mr. Surapol, the governor of Narathiwat, noted that Mr. Che Abdul Karim had a leadership role at his mosque in Malaysia and said that the union appeared to be religiously sound.
He said it was premature to engage in speculation about whether charges should be pressed against Mr. Che Abdul Karim for taking an 11-year-old wife.
