Russ Heath, a prolific comic book artist who was known for viscerally illustrated combat stories — and for either inspiring or being outright copied by the Pop artist Roy Lichtenstein, depending on whom you ask — died on Aug. 23 in Long Beach, Calif. He was 91.
The cause was cancer, his daughter Sharon Heath Herzel said.
Mr. Heath was a versatile artist who began his career shortly after World War II and was still drawing into this century, having worked on series for comics publishers like DC and EC and for magazines like Playboy and National Lampoon.
Although his work included fantasy, he was especially known for his drawings of tanks, planes, soldiers and other real-life subjects. He bought helmets and uniforms from Army surplus stores to use as references and sometimes built models before drawing a piece of machinery.
“Russ may have been the best realist ever in comic books,” the comic book writer and historian Mark Evanier said by email. “When he drew monsters and space aliens, they were fine, but when he drew the real world he was so accurate, that was scary!” Other artists, Mr. Evanier said, even used his renderings of tanks and airplanes for reference instead of photographs.
A different kind of artist also used Mr. Heath’s drawings for reference: Lichtenstein, whose Pop Art paintings in the early 1960s reproduced and altered images from comic books and advertisements. Some were by Mr. Heath, whose influence can be seen in Lichtenstein works like “Whaam!” (1963), a diptych of an exploding plane that is in the collection of the Tate Modern in London, and “Blam” (1962), another aerial combat image, in the Yale University Art Gallery collection.
Both works made considerable use of Heath images from an issue of the DC Comics series All American Men of War, with “Blam” in particular retaining much of Heath’s original look and detail.
The art world has long debated whether Lichtenstein, who died in 1997, and other artists who worked in this way were creating art or merely copying it. Aficionados of comic book art, who have always felt that the work they love has not gotten the proper respect, are especially defensive of Mr. Heath and others whose drawings were borrowed; admirers of Lichtenstein say he altered and elevated the source material to transform it into an artistic statement. The art critic Tom Lubbock was one who thought that Mr. Heath and others deserved more credit.
“The cartoon artists, though highly productive, were not naïve, anonymous hacks,” he wrote in 2004, reviewing a Lichtenstein retrospective at the Hayward Gallery in London for The Independent. “A lot of the innovations in Lichtenstein’s pictures are innovations that they came up with first. They were responsible for adapting the convention of the cinematic close-up to the still image. They worked out the dynamic interaction of image, caption, speech bubble and sound effect. They devised those dramatic compositions from which Lichtenstein’s work gets much of its impact.
Russell DeHart Heath Jr. was born on Sept. 29, 1926, in Manhattan. His father was a cowboy in Arizona from 1917 into the 1920s and later became a chemical engineer. His mother, Margaret (Longnaker) Heath, was a homemaker.
Young Russell grew up in Montclair, N.J. His attention to detail in his drawings may have come from his father, who, he said in a 2011 interview with The Montclair Times, used to take him to the movies. Westerns were their favorite, and his father’s time as a cowboy made him an expert critic of the genre.
He graduated from Montclair High School, though he admitted he was a somewhat inattentive student.
Mr. Heath enlisted in the Army Air Corps during World War II, his daughter said, and had just finished basic training and was awaiting deployment when the war ended.
He had done some drawing for comics as a teenager, and after working briefly in advertising after the war he turned to comic book art full time.
He worked for Timely Comics, a predecessor of Marvel, mostly on westerns like Two-Gun Kid. As his career went along he began drawing more and more war comics, including work on G.I. Combat for DC Comics.
Mr. Heath also drew suspense, mystery and romance comics, and even the occasional Batman story, though, he said in a 2007 interview, he wasn’t very good at rendering the Caped Crusader. “When I drew him, he looks like somebody standing there ready to go to a costume party,” he said.
His work also included “Plastic Sam!,” a Plastic Man parody, for an early issue of Mad magazine. He drew a raucous parody called “Cowgirls at War” for The National Lampoon Encyclopedia of Humor in 1973.
In the late 1970s Mr. Heath moved to California and worked as a layout artist or designer on a number of animated series, including “The Karate Kid” and “G.I. Joe.” And eventually his comic book art gained more respect.
A 2001 exhibition at the New-York Historical Society called “Out of Time: Designs for the 20th-Century Future” included a 1957 black-ink drawing by Mr. Heath that was a parody of Sputnik mania. It was a machine that looked like what a satellite and a 1950s car might produce if they mated.
Mr. Heath’s marriage to Joyce E. Rupp, in 1947, ended in divorce in 1960. In addition to Ms. Herzel, he is survived by two other daughters, Arleen Heath Chaidez and Maureen Heath Kosa; a son, Russell DeHart Heath III; six grandchildren; and seven great-grandchildren.
Late in life, Mr. Evanier said, Mr. Heath was sought after by aficionados.
