This 18th-century limestone house is on Gozo, the rural, westernmost island of the three-island Republic of Malta, which is about 100 miles south of Sicily in the Mediterranean Sea. Despite an extensive renovation, this commanding structure retains a sense of history, on an island that was once home to the Knights of Saint John religious military order, said Svetlana Podgorska, an agent with Malta Sotheby’s International Realty, which has the listing.
The five-bedroom, five-and-a-half-bathroom house is approximately 6,000 square feet, and it was in shambles when the owners bought it in 2003. “Part of the roof was missing; it was a complete wreck,” said Pauline Sandars, an interior designer who is one of the owners. During the renovation, they also installed air-conditioning and an elevator.
The front door opens into an entry hall, with a second hallway to the right and a courtyard straight ahead. The second hall connects to a reading room and the kitchen, which opens onto an outdoor eating area. The living room, dining room and a sitting room form a single elongated space beyond the reading room, running nearly the length of the house. It has a vaulted ceiling punctuated by a series of stone arches, typical of Maltese country homes from the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries, Ms. Podgorska said. At the opposite end of the house are the elevator, a half bathroom and a study.
Near the entrance is a combined half bathroom and laundry room, as well as a staircase up to a long gallery connecting the five bedrooms. The master bedroom has an en suite bath, while two of the bedrooms share a full bathroom and two more have separate access to a full bathroom and a half bathroom. Some bedroom walls feature original frescoes, and one bedroom has a terrace. The house, which is being sold furnished, includes pieces from Morocco, India, China and Malta, Ms. Sandars said.
The lot is 12,917 square feet, with a two-car garage and a garden with a lawn. The centerpiece is an 82-foot lap pool surrounded by vine-covered stone walls.
Gozo, about nine miles from one end to the other, draws outdoor sport enthusiasts with scuba diving, hiking, biking and abseiling, Ms. Podgorska said. The property is a two-minute walk from the main piazza of the village of Xewkija, which has a population of around 3,000. It is a 10-minute drive to the ferry port, where a boat to the main island of Malta takes 25 minutes. Malta International Airport is on the main island, about a 30-minute drive from the port.
Malta’s housing market has been strong in recent years, with prices rising and demand steady, real estate agents said. Foreign buyers once sought second homes there, but increasingly they are buying to relocate, often because businesses that employ foreign workers — including multinationals, financial services, and internet gaming and gambling companies — have set up offices in Malta in the past decade.
Prices have increased around 5 or 6 percent annually for the past two years on properties of all types, agents said. Kevin Buttigieg, chief executive of RE/MAX Malta, said he has seen prices in some areas grow by as much as 20 percent.
Most foreigners tend to buy either move-in ready seafront apartments or older palazzos in need of renovation, Ms. Podgorska said. Prices for high-end apartments start at 2,750 euros (or about $3,220) a square foot, she said, adding that in exclusive, waterfront areas popular with foreign buyers, one-bedroom apartments start at 900,000 euros ($1.05 million) and two-bedrooms can sell for 1.5 million euros ($1.75 million). Prices per square foot for villas are lower, she said, but asking prices are higher, starting at 3 million euros ($3.51 million) for a modern villa with a pool and 5 million euros ($5.86 million) for restored historic properties with a water view and ample land.
Michael Hili, the managing director of John Taylor Luxury Real Estate Malta, said that Malta’s priciest homes have also seen an increase, with an average sale price of 10 million euros at the top of the market.
In luxury developments in areas where foreigners can buy homes without restrictions, prices range from 1,375 euros ($1,609) a square foot to about 3,975 euros ($4,651) a square foot, Mr. Buttigieg said.
But Gozo, a 25-square-mile island that is less developed than the main island of Malta, has lower prices, Ms. Podgorska said: A traditional villa there might cost 50 to 75 percent of what it would fetch on the main island.
Ms. Podgorska said her agency’s luxury buyers — about 80 of whom are foreign — are evenly split between people moving to Malta for work and those buying vacation homes. Malta has traditionally attracted mostly British and Scandinavian buyers, she said, but in the past two or three years she has been seeing more buyers from the United States, Canada and Russia.
Mr. Buttigieg said that, in the past year, about a quarter of his agency’s buyers — and 10 to 12 percent of those who bought high-end properties — were foreigners, most of them from Britain, Russia, Germany and Italy. Buyers also came from South Africa, Egypt, Libya, Algeria and Nigeria, he said.
Malta also attracts residents of neighboring countries looking for economic stability and lower taxes, said Mr. Hili, whose agency has worked with buyers from France and Italy in the past year, as well as those from Germany, Sweden, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
Buyers from countries outside the European Union are subject to restrictions on residential purchases, said Kevin Dingli, the managing partner of Dingli & Dingli Law Firm, in the Maltese capital of Valletta. They have three options: They can obtain a permit from the Ministry of Finance, which takes about eight weeks; they can buy property in a designated area above a certain price threshold; or they can participate in Malta’s citizenship-by-investment program.
Buyers pay for notary services, which cost between half a percent and three-quarters of a percent of the sale price, he said. A lawyer can be useful for drawing up a legally binding preliminary sale and purchase agreement, ideally before a notary is involved, Mr. Dingli said. The legal fee is typically 1 percent of the sale price, he said.
Other closing costs include searches by the notary; a stamp duty that is typically 5 percent, but is reduced in some cases; and an 18 percent value-added tax on any legal or notary services.
There are no property taxes in Malta, Ms. Podgorska said.
