The hospital’s chief executive, Dr. Craig B. Thompson, disclosed his relationship with companies including the drug maker Merck, and Dr. Jedd Wolchok, a noted pioneer in cancer immunotherapy, listed his affiliations with 31 companies.
The corrections followed the resignation in September of Dr. José Baselga, the cancer center’s chief medical officer, who had failed to disclose his company ties in dozens of articles in medical journals, including prominent publications like The New England Journal of Medicine. Dr. Baselga’s omissions, including payments totaling millions of dollars, were first reported last month by The New York Times and ProPublica.
Since then, medical centers around the country, including Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston and N.Y.U. Langone Health, have urged their researchers to review whether they properly reported relationships to outside companies.
According to a correction posted Sept. 17 in the Journal of Clinical Investigation, Dr. Thompson’s conflict-of-interest statement had not been included in an article published in January. The updated disclosure noted his role as a founder of Agios Pharmaceuticals, a cancer start-up, and his position on the boards of two publicly traded companies, Merck and Charles River Laboratories, which assists research in early drug discovery.
Dr. Thompson received $300,000 from Merck in 2017, and was paid $70,000 in cash by Charles River, plus $215,050 in stock, according to the companies’ financial filings. His compensation package as Memorial Sloan Kettering’s chief executive is $6.7 million.
Dr. Thompson resigned from both company boards on Oct. 2, after weeks of internal turmoil at the nonprofit hospital and public scrutiny of its leaders’ financial relationships with for-profit companies.
Some of the omissions were extensive. In an updated disclosure, Dr. Wolchok, director of the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at the hospital, outlined his ties to many companies, including receiving consulting fees, owning stock options or being a co-founder. The list of companies that pay him range from major manufacturers like Bristol-Myers Squibb and Merck, for whom he works as a paid for consultant, to start-ups like BeiGene, Apricity and Adaptive Biotech, in which he reports owning stock options.
He corrected two articles in the journal Cancer Cell and a third in the Journal of Clinical Investigation. Dr. Wolchok is a widely regarded expert in immunotherapy, having treated some of the first patients with a drug based on the work of Dr. James P. Allison, who along with Tasuku Honjo won this year’s Nobel Prize for Medicine.
Other Memorial Sloan Kettering researchers on Dr. Wolchok’s papers also updated their interactions with industry, including Dr. Matthew D. Hellmann, Dr. Taha Merghoub and Dr. Michael A. Postow.
Dr. Wolchok did not disclose most of his 31 relationships in articles recently published in other journals, including the New England Journal of Medicine, JAMA and Lancet Oncology. Dr. Wolchok has been paid more than $90,000 from major drug companies since 2014, according to a federal database that only includes payments from companies whose products received approval from the Food and Drug Administration. Most of his relationships are with early-stage start-ups.
Dr. Wolchok said he conducted a review of more than 300 articles and decided to submit updated disclosures on some of them “out of an abundance of caution.” Some journals, including Cancer Discovery, “have rejected these updates because they have determined they are not relevant to the subject matter,” Dr. Wolchok said in a statement.
Mr. Morey said that existing disclosures in the other articles, including those published in the New England Journal of Medicine, were appropriate, based on Dr. Wolchok’s interpretation of the journals’ guidelines.
Dr. Craig B. Thompson, Memorial Sloan Kettering’s C.E.O.Credit...
Other corrections involved Dr. Michelle Bradbury, who is the head of a research laboratory at Memorial Sloan Kettering and a director in the radiology department. In two corrections published Monday in the journal Chemistry of Materials, Dr. Bradbury and other study authors said that they should have disclosed that two of them, as well as their institutions — Memorial Sloan Kettering and Cornell University — have a financial interest in Elucida Oncology. The original articles were published in 2017.
The corrections also said that “one or more” patent applications had been filed by the authors on topics related to the articles. The corrections to Dr. Bradbury’s studies were first reported by the website Retraction Watch.
A third correction involving Dr. Bradbury was posted Thursday. That article, for which Dr. Bradbury was one of several authors, was published in Applied Materials & Interfaces in 2017.
“In a handful of cases, even though the research in these publications was very early stage and rooted in basic science, my co-author from Cornell and I decided we would update them,” Dr. Bradbury said in an email. A spokesman for Cornell referred comment to Memorial Sloan Kettering.
Dr. Baselga has also corrected his conflict-of-interest disclosures in several journals, including two in the New England Journal of Medicine, three in Clinical Cancer Research and two in Cancer Discovery, where he is still one of two editors in chief. The American Association for Cancer Research, which publishes Cancer Discovery, said it had formed a panel of experts to evaluate whether he should remain in a leadership role.
Beyond revisiting disclosures, Memorial Sloan Kettering is undertaking a broader review of its staff’s interactions with the health care and pharmaceutical industries, including whether senior leaders should sit on the boards of publicly traded companies. It also said it would hire an outside law firm to investigate specific allegations made following Dr. Baselga’s departure.
