A portrait of Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman at the Gitex 2018 exhibition in Dubai earlier this month.
McKinsey & Company was in the spotlight on Monday after The New York Times reported that the consulting firm had prepared a report that may have played a role in Saudi Arabia’s effort to target its online critics.
Back story: After the country announced economic austerity measures in 2015 in the hopes of offsetting low oil prices and controlling a widening budget gap, McKinsey measured public reception of the policies. The company’s report highlighted three people who drove the largely negative conversation about the moves on Twitter. One of the Twitter users was subsequently arrested and a second said that two of his brothers had been arrested and that his cellphone had been hacked. The account of a third user, who was anonymous, was shut down.
The response: McKinsey said in a statement that the report was an internal document based on publicly available information and not prepared for any government entity. McKinsey said it had seen no evidence of the report being misused, but added that it was “horrified by the possibility, however remote” that the document played a role in a crackdown on dissidents. The company said it was investigating how the document was shared.
The context: McKinsey was harshly criticized this year for its role in a vast government corruption scandal in South Africa that led to the resignation of the country’s former president, Jacob Zuma. The ensuing crisis was the most serious in McKinsey's 92-year history. McKinsey also stopped working for Immigration and Customs Enforcement in the United States after the disclosure that it had done more than $20 million in consulting work for the agency prompted questions from employees. The decision to cut ties with the immigration agency came amid widespread anger over the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” policy on illegal immigration that resulted in children being separated from their parents.
The risk: Being tied to another scandal-tainted government endeavor may cause further financial and reputational harm. In the wake of the problems in South Africa, several clients, including Coca-Cola’s unit in the country, said they would stop doing business with McKinsey until investigations were concluded.
It’s another big week of earnings. Halliburton, Hasbro and Kimberly-Clark report quarterly results today.
Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain updates the House of Commons on Brexit. She is expected to say that 95 percent of her withdrawal agreement with the E.U. is settled. The remaining 5 percent includes the contentious Irish border issue.