Well, that was some week: Canada cut a major trade pact and Quebecers had a memorable vote.
A flurry of last-minute deal-making means that Nafta will morph into the U.S.M.C.A. The new acronym doesn’t exactly roll off the tongue. But it has prompted several remixes of a certain song by the Village People.
On Thursday, Oct. 11, we’re offering Times subscribers an opportunity to hear firsthand about the trade agreement and what lead to the talks’ conclusion in a conference call with an all-star group of our experts in Washington: economics editor Deborah Solomon, economic policy reporter Alan Rappeport, economic and tax policy reporter Jim Tankersley and White House correspondent Mark Landler. You can register and find all the details here.
Those of you who weren’t checking your inbox Monday evening might have missed the special edition of the Canada Letter, which featured an inside peek into the how the deal came together from Alan, and a variety of stories on its contents and consequences.
Catherine Porter, our Toronto bureau chief, took Canada’s temperature in the days following the announcement. Her finding: While the trade deal has been salvaged, there’s been no healing of the damage to relations between Canada and the United States.
Do not consider the friendship resurrected. The feeling up here is that Canadians will not soon forget the treatment from our supposed ally. We are a small nation that will never have much of an impact on the U.S. economy, however there is a collective “sour taste” left in the mouths of many Canadians.
Lela Moore at The Times’s Reader Center has gone through those comments and compiled some of the highlights.
As you may have seen in our articles, the U.S.M.C.A. still has to make its way through Congress, which is far from a certainty. As always, we’ll post stories updating its progress on our Canada page.
As for Quebec, voters there elected a government controlled by neither the Quebec Liberal Party nor the Parti Québécois for the first time since 1966. The vote half a century ago returned a right-of-center party, the Union Nationale, to power. This week’s outcome also sent the province to that end of the spectrum, though this is the first time that the Coalition Avenir Québec has held power.
Both the Parti Québécois, which had a humiliating result and lost official party status, and the Liberals saw their leaders quit politics. And within hours of becoming premier designate, François Legault fired up the perpetual debate about the place of immigration in the province. My colleague in Montreal, Dan Bilefsky, will be there to follow it all.
Finally, a bit of housekeeping. All week the inbox of the Canada Letter email account has been filling up with thoughtful and sometimes provocative notes from many of you about the role of handguns in Canada. It’s clearly a top-of-mind issue for Canadians. We’ll have samples from your messages in a future newsletter.
Also shaping the news this week was a meticulous debunking of President Trump’s longstanding claim that his wealth was his own doing, and that he received little help from this father, Fred C. Trump, a real estate developer. David Barstow, Susanne Craig and Russ Beuttner found that the current president received at least $413 million (after adjusting for inflation) from his father and that much of it came through dubious tax dodges. If you read only one long story this week, make it their deeply reported investigation.
Sue, as she’s known to those of us who work with her, is originally from Calgary and once worked at the Calgary Herald. Some of you may remember her as the reporter who received some of Mr. Trump’s tax filings in an envelope during 2016. She also reported back then that his real estate empire rested on a heavily indebted financial maze. And, yes, Sue does regularly make it back to Canada.
Legal recreational marijuana makes its debut in Canada on Oct. 17. If there’s anything you would particularly like to know about how the system will work and the changes it may bring, please drop us a line |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| There’s still one more week to let us know what you think about the Canada Letter through our survey.
A confession: I’m not really all that crazy about roast turkey. But at Thanksgiving, my vote to put something else in the oven is overruled. Melissa Clark at NYT Cooking has the definitive guide to roasting turkeys for those of you joining me in that task this weekend.
Whatever will grace your Thanksgiving table, please accept my best wishes for you and your family.
—Donna Strickland, an associate professor of physics at the University of Waterloo, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics, along with French physicist Gérard Mourou and Arthur Ashkin, an American scientist. The last time a woman received the award was 55 years ago.
—The Times described the first attempt at an opera by the Canadian-American musician and composer Rufus Wainwright as “chic and pointless.” Undeterred, he’s trying again, this time telling the story of Hadrian, the Roman emperor, and his male lover, Antinous.
—The hockey season opened this week and Andrew Knoll is bravely offering some Stanley Cup predictions that will warm fans of a Canadian team not known for winning the sport’s top prize.