1. Nikki Haley, the U.N. ambassador, above, said she would resign at the end of the year.
“It was a blessing to go into the U.N. with body armor every day and defend America,” she said, seated next to President Trump in the Oval Office.
The announcement caught some in the White House off guard, but the president said Ms. Haley told him roughly six months ago that she wanted to take a break after finishing two years with the administration. Mr. Trump said he would name a replacement in the coming weeks.
2. “Hurricane Michael is a monstrous storm, and the forecast keeps getting more dangerous,” Florida’s governor, Rick Scott, warned residents.
The storm, swirling northward through the Gulf of Mexico, was upgraded to Category 3 and is expected to make landfall on Wednesday with powerful winds, torrential rains and a potentially devastating storm surge.
Residents of Alabama, Mississippi and Florida are being urged to evacuate or to fortify their homes. Above, a resident of Mexico Beach, Fla., boarding up a shop.
Forecasters predicted Michael would veer northeast after landfall — through Georgia, North Carolina and South Carolina — before heading into the Atlantic on Thursday night.
3. Why aren’t American farmers cheering?
President Trump’s new trade agreement with Canada and Mexico gives them greater access to Canada’s dairy market. It helps the auto industry, too, requiring that more of each car be produced in the U.S.
“The celebration is muted because of the tariffs on steel and aluminum,” explained one dairy company C.E.O.
The metal tariffs, combined with retaliatory taxes that foreign governments have placed on American products, are undercutting the concessions that Mr. Trump won in the deal. And they do not appear to be ending anytime soon.
The court heard two hours of arguments in three cases, all pretty deep in the constitutional weeds.
In a first for the court, all four of Justice Kavanaugh’s clerks are women. All graduated from top law schools and worked as clerks for conservative federal judges.
We asked readers what lessons they will pass on to the next generation from the Kavanaugh confirmation battle — and 40,000 women across the political divide replied.
5. Investigators in Turkey are poring over the movements of Saudi officials who flew into Istanbul on the day that Jamal Khashoggi, a Saudi dissident journalist, disappeared, and flew out hours later. They also have been given permission to search the Saudi consulate, where he was last seen.
Turkish authorities believe Mr. Khashoggi was killed or abducted. Saudi Arabia denies the claims, but international calls to explain his disappearance are mounting. Above, a demonstration in Istanbul for the missing journalist.
6. Amazon won praise last week when it announced a new minimum wage of $15 an hour.
But not everybody is happy.
Many Amazon employees are fuming that their total compensation may shrink, just in time for the holiday season, because the company is eliminating stock grants and bonuses.
Some workers are pushing back in meetings and venting on Facebook. Senator Bernie Sanders, who celebrated the pay hike, has asked for clarification.
Company officials said they would adjust the pay of some employees to make sure they did not end up losing money with the changes.
7. One new trend in books: A growing wave of female-centered dystopian fiction.
For example, “The Water Cure,” an unsettling debut novel by Sophie Mackintosh, above, grew out of a simple, sinister question: What if masculinity were literally toxic? It centers on three sisters raised in isolation, sequestered from an outbreak.
8. Forgive Pati Jinich for never visiting a Taco Bell — until she was urged to by her fans on social media.
Now a Dallas resident, she sees Mexican food as a bridge between her two countries that can unite both sides of the political divide.
“Immigration makes the culture more vibrant and more alive on both sides of the border,” she said.
9. The Rock & Roll Hall of Fame announced its 2019 nominees, a diverse crowd representing folk, new wave, hip-hop, R&B, heavy metal — and of course, rock ’n’ roll.
Roxy Music, Devo and Todd Rundgren were nominated for the first time. Artists become eligible 25 years after releasing their first recording.
Repeat nominees include Janet Jackson, above; Radiohead; and Rage Against the Machine. LL Cool J was nominated for the fifth time; if chosen, he would be the seventh hip-hop inductee.
The 2019 class, chosen by fans and industry insiders, will be announced in December.
10. Finally, how do you capture a man-eating tiger?
One way: Seduce it with Calvin Klein cologne.
The authorities in India are trying to lure and trap an elusive tigress with the Obsession fragrance, which uses a compound called civetone, said to make big cats go wild.
Have a sweet evening.