“You know your daughter is having a Montana wedding when…” Senator Steve Daines joked this month on Instagram, posting a photo of the returned invitation engraved with gilded cornstalks.
Mr. Daines, Republican of Montana, has a conflict of his own: He may be pulled away from his duties as father of the bride at his eldest daughter Annie’s rural Montana wedding to cast a vote 1,800 miles away to send Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court.
But late Friday, Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, said that she would be recorded as “present” rather than “no” during Saturday’s vote as a courtesy to Mr. Daines, making his vote unnecessary if no other senators change their vote from cloture.
The timing of the vote had added yet another twist to a grueling, often vicious confirmation fight. Even before Ms. Murkowski’s announcement, it looked unlikely that Mr. Daines would be needed to ensure Judge Kavanaugh’s confirmation after two undecided Republicans, Senator Susan Collins of Maine and Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona, and one Democrat, Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia, announced their intent to vote to confirm Judge Kavanaugh.
But in a sign of how cautiously Republicans were approaching the next 24 hours, a spokesman for Mr. Daines confirmed on Friday afternoon that he would be monitoring the vote over the weekend, and would remain at the ready in case his vote was needed.
In a call late Thursday night at his desk in Washington, Mr. Daines, who has supported Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination from the beginning, personally told the judge that if it is necessary, he would not refuse the request to travel for the vote on the day of his daughter’s wedding. Even if he was not needed, he had indicated he wanted to cast his vote.
In order for Mr. Daines to do so, Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, would have to hold the floor vote open — potentially for several hours — to allow Mr. Daines to fly back to the Capitol and cast his vote late Saturday night or early Sunday morning.
That task may be made easier thanks to Representative Greg Gianforte, also a Republican of Montana and one of the wealthiest members of Congress, who had offered up his private jet to whisk Mr. Daines away from the wedding and to Washington.
Ms. Daines, 27, a graduate of her father’s alma mater, Montana State University, frequently makes cameos on her father’s social media, appearing in campaign ads, alongside him at Washington events, and at home on their ranch, hunting and riding horses.
Mr. Moss is the founder of Shop Dog Industries, a company based in Bozeman, Mont., that creates agriculture machinery implements. He proposed in April, according to a Facebook post.