The first lady took questions about President Trump and Brett M. Kavanaugh while on a trip to Africa.
Nobody discussed that with me. And I never heard him saying those comments and that was an anonymous source. And I would leave it at that. If we are talking about the Supreme Court and Judge Kavanaugh, I think he’s highly qualified for the Supreme Court. I’m glad that Dr. Ford was heard. I’m glad that Judge Kavanaugh was heard, F.B.I. investigation was done, is completed, and Senate voted. Reporter: “Did you believe Christine Ford?” I will move on that. And I think the, all the victims, they need, we need to help all the victims. I don’t always agree what he tweets. And I tell him that. I give him my honest opinion and honest advice. And sometimes he listens, and sometimes he doesn’t. But I have my own voice and my opinions. And it’s very important for me that I express what I feel.
CAIRO — No one can say Melania Trump, the first lady, doesn’t understand the power of an image.
Standing in front of one of the best known but most enigmatic monuments of the ancient world, the Great Sphinx, Mrs. Trump — one of the most mysterious first ladies in modern times — agreed to take questions from a group of journalists.
Mrs. Trump — wearing another white hat — used the symbolic backdrop as a moment to discuss her six-day trip to Africa, including whether any of her hosts had brought up the disparaging comments her husband has reportedly made about African countries.
When asked about Mr. Trump’s claim, made in response to the accusations of sexual assault against Brett Kavanaugh, that it was a “very scary time” for men, Mrs. Trump walked a line between saying victims needed to be heard and supporting Mr. Kavanaugh, whom she called highly qualified to join the Supreme Court.
Mrs. Trump appeared irritated when asked about the white pith helmet, a symbol of British colonial rule, that she had worn in Kenya.
“I wish people would focus on what I do, not what I wear,” she said. Mrs. Trump made her “Be Best” initiative a focus of the trip.
