Style|I’m a Closeted Teenager in a Conservative Town. Get Me Out of Here!
I’m a Closeted Teenager in a Conservative Town. Get Me Out of Here!
A high school student struggles to come out as her authentic self — even to like-minded peers. Where does she go from here?
I’m a female high school student living in a conservative town in North Carolina with my parents and no siblings.  I’m also non-Christian, pro-choice and an advocate for equality. I have like-minded friends, but they don’t know I’m gay. My family members are homophobic. My parents are devoted Christians who read the Bible every morning.  I have little trust in them, and I do my best to generate zero conflict in our house, to just nod my head and hide my feelings.
I feel oppressed and silenced every day, which has resulted in me feeling angry, depressed and unmotivated. Deep down I know that I do not want a relationship with my parents. I know that will hurt them, but then I remember how much pain they’ve caused me. I would love to go to college out of state, but financially I don’t think that’s an option. I want to get away and escape and leave all the pain behind. I want to come out and date and feel loved. I want to live without being judged, criticized and oppressed by the people around me.
How do I move on when I feel like a sitting duck? Is it even possible to create distance when you live under the same roof? Also, when does protecting your feelings go too far?
 It means you have to work that much harder to gain love and acceptance. But I know you can do it because your letter tells me so. You possess something rare and true: You know who you are and what you want. What you need right now, more than anything, is to recognize that you have options beyond a miserable acquiescence to the dogma of your home life. One is to devise an escape plan, to be persistent in its execution and patient in the meantime. Another is to begin to be honest about your sexuality, at least with those like-minded friends. Yet another would be to hop on the internet and seek a connection with other gay teenagers, many of whom struggle with the same covert yearning and anguish as you. In other words, become a champion of your own happiness. Don’t let the bigotry and disapproval of loved ones silence you. Don’t grant them sovereignty over your one and only heart. Reclaim that power for yourself.
Cheryl Strayed: I’m shouting yes to everything Steve said and most of all to this: Devise an escape plan. You signed your letter Cornered Without an Exit, but I don’t think that’s an accurate description of your situation. The truth is, you’re cornered with an exit in view — and the day you’re legally old enough to move out of your parents’ home, you’re free to walk through it. Hold on to that, Cornered. Don’t imagine yourself a sitting duck. Instead, picture yourself as a bird flying away. Let your vision of leaving behind the homophobes who’ve silenced and oppressed you be the beacon that lights your path through these high school years. It makes sense to me that you’ve chosen to remain closeted to protect yourself, but there will come a day in the not-too-distant future when you won’t have to do that anymore. There are so many of us who will accept you as you are, who don’t care who you’re dating or how you identify. It’s hideous that your family isn’t capable of doing that (and may never be), and it’s heartbreaking too. But you will soon be out from under their command.  Your letter is proof to me that you’re already doing that.
SA: In your letter, you speak of the pain your parents have caused you, and of your desire to leave all that behind. But the sorrow of our childhood is something that travels with us, especially when we have unresolved feelings toward the people who raised us. Escaping your parents’ custody may allow you to live a more honest and joyful life. But it won’t magically dispel their psychic hold on you, especially as an only child. For this reason, I urge you to be as open with them as you feel you safely can. This may confirm your worst fears about them. But it may also force them to re-examine their prejudice. In either case, you will be rejecting the notion that your true self should be hidden away. As clear as you are about your need to escape your parents, I advise you to do so not in a spirit of scorn alone. Forgive them as much as you can, not for their ignorant beliefs or hurtful actions, but for the parts of them that have tried to love you as best they can. Let me recommend, also, a short book that might help: “On Forgiveness” by the Scottish theologian Richard Holloway, a former bishop who left the church and has been an outspoken L.G.B.T.Q. ally.
CS: I’m less forgiving than Steve is in this case. I’m not convinced your parents’ motives are rooted in love. Gone are the days when we could chalk up homophobia to ignorance. Those in the L.G.B.T.Q. community have been courageously telling the truth about their lives for decades. Scientific research and common sense long ago repudiated the once-held view that homosexuality is pathological. Normal, healthy sexuality exists on a continuum. If you’re an adult who doesn’t know that to be a fact in this nation in this era, you’ve decided not to know. If you’ve used your religious beliefs to justify the condemnation of an entire group of people based on who they love, then your religion is unjustifiable. Homophobia is a willful act of hate. I do hope you someday have a sense of love and connection with your family, Cornered. I hope you feel accepted and seen by them. I know for certain it’s possible that they, like many families, will open their minds and hearts to you — out and gay — because they realize the price they’d have to pay in losing you is too dear. But if they don’t, if it really does end up that you have to leave them, I want to tell you that you won’t be alone. You will be loved. There are so many good people out here.