For four seasons, the writers of “Saul” have slowly been transforming Jimmy McGill into the slimy Saul Goodman. In this video, they broke down a pivotal scene before the season finale.
For four seasons, the writers of “Saul” have been slowly transforming Jimmy McGill into the slimy Saul Goodman. Here, they break down a pivotal scene from an episode late in Season 4.
What compels otherwise decent people to choose a path of destruction? And what are the stories they fashion to live with the consequences? These questions drove AMC’s “Breaking Bad,” in which a high school teacher transforms himself into a ruthless drug lord, as they have that show’s prequel series, “Better Call Saul,” about a good-hearted lawyer with a slippery past (Bob Odenkirk) whose fate, as we know, leads to perdition.
Or to a panic attack at an Omaha Cinnabon — to each his own version of hell.
For four seasons, the writers of “Saul” have been building the slow arc of Jimmy McGill’s dissolution into the slimy Saul Goodman, lawyer and money launderer to the Albuquerque underworld. As the co-showrunner and executive producer Peter Gould explained in an interview, the specific contours of that arc were largely undetermined through the end of last season, when the writers began to understand that “Saul Goodman isn’t the inevitable result of Jimmy McGill.” His transformation had to arise from a series of choices. And by the season finale, Jimmy’s choices had begun to drag him past the point of no return — and his girlfriend, Kim (Rhea Seehorn), along with him.
In Episode 8, after Jimmy’s associate Huell Babineaux (Lavell Crawford) assaults a police officer, Jimmy and Kim enact an elaborate scam to keep Huell out of jail. It briefly brings them closer, but as we head into Monday’s season finale, there are signs the scheme marked an important threshold — a moral compromise too many, from which their relationship, and Jimmy’s chances at an honest life, may never recover.
Huell’s predicament and the details of Kim and Jimmy’s plan presented a complicated challenge for the “Better Call Saul” writers’ room. Multiple ideas were pitched, but only one seemed to believably get Jimmy out of the jam they had written him into while also shoving him toward his shyster destiny. Here, in interviews with Gould and the episode’s writer, Gordon Smith, we dug into how the writers solved that challenge and where it left our favorite ambulance-chaser before Monday’s finale.