Is the enemy of the enemy of the people my friend?
Bret Stephens: Gail, we have a lot of ground to cover on the political front, but first I’d like to broach the subject of Jamal Khashoggi, our murdered Washington Post colleague. This story isn’t just about our relationship with Saudi Arabia. It’s about the safety of journalists and what becomes of their safety when the leader of the free world deems the news media an “enemy of the people.” Your thoughts?
Gail Collins: We’re not going to have any differences on this one, Bret. I thought Donald Trump had lost the capacity to shock me, but his celebration of assaulting journalists really did send me reeling. As I’m sure you know, at a rally in Montana last week, he congratulated a congressman who had body-slammed a reporter — for asking a question about health care.
Bret: There’s an old saying that when the United States catches a cold, the rest of the world gets pneumonia. By a similar token, when the president of the United States celebrates a physical assault on one journalist, the rest of the world will feel free to murder another. It’s an example of the way in which the corrosion of liberal values at the core of the free world leads to their destruction at the periphery.
All of which makes me that much more dismayed that Trump’s approval rating is creeping up. I blame Democrats, of course. What’s up with you guys blowing yet another election?
Gail: Yeah, right, blame the victim.
It is true that the Democrats don’t have much of a platform. I don’t think that’s surprising — a party basically represents what its presidential candidate wants to represent. And since nobody is going to wave around “the Hillary Clinton agenda,” we’ll have to wait until after primary season to see what they build.
Also, I think it’s perfectly fair for them to warn that the Republicans want to take away Medicare and Social Security.
O.K., I take that back a bit. Not totally fair since Congress is not going to touch entitlements. But most Republicans, if they had the chance, would whittle away at them and that is something the American people do not want.
Bret: I’m going to play the tedious-conservative-blowhard card on you and observe that “pre-existing conditions” is often another way of saying, “Wait until you get sick before taking out insurance,” which in turn is a recipe for higher premiums. But I do agree that politically it’s a potent issue that puts Republicans on the defensive.
Gail: Actually, it’s a way of saying, “If you want protection when you’re sick, we need a system in which everybody has to have insurance — young, old, healthy or ill.” But we’ll return to that another day. Go on.
Bret: My main problem with the Democrats is that they think they can win by relitigating 2016, which was never a good idea and is especially bad if Robert Mueller’s investigation fizzles, which by some reports it might. They also won’t win by saying things are just awful when unemployment is low and economic growth is strong.
But they especially can’t win by riding a wave of rage rather than a wave of hope. That’s why I think Chuck Schumer’s political strategy with Brett Kavanaugh’s nomination — oppose at all costs — was such a dumb idea. It put red-state Democrats at risk for the sake of appeasing the political interests of blue-state Democrats.
With the election just two weeks out, what’s your best estimate for how it plays out?
Gail: I’m always amused when commentators talk about the Democrats’ “demographic advantage” in the House races. What that means, basically, is that the Democrats win because they have more supporters.
Bret: That’s why we need gerrymandering, Gail, as a check on your pesky demographics!
Gail: As to the Senate, I suspect the teeny-tiny population of North Dakota voters will decree that their seat will switch to the Republicans. That should be enough to keep the majority in Mitch McConnell’s hands.
But outside of the grand question of House and Senate control, there are a lot of fascinating individual races to watch. Which are your favorites?
Bret: Montana, for starters. Trump really wants to unseat Senator Jon Tester, who is living proof you can be as far from a coast as possible and not be a Republican. That race has gotten a lot tighter in the last few weeks, so it will be an interesting, um, test-er. (How bad was that one?) New Jersey is another one: Robert Menendez should be walking away with this one, but the fact that he’s struggling in such a blue state tells you about how vulnerable he is on the corruption front.
Gail: New Jersey is a great test of whether you vote for the person or the party. The Democratic leadership should have tried to get rid of Menendez and nominate someone who manages to get through life without expensive trips and other favors from a guy whose business runs off government funding.
Not totally sure what I’d do if I lived in New Jersey. But while being careful to point out that the jury in Robert Menendez’s corruption trial never reached a verdict, I do recall that old Louisiana adage about how, when all else fails, you “Vote for the crook: It’s important.” I don’t think I’d ever vote right now to make life easier for the Trump agenda.
Gail: The Georgia governor’s race. Stacey Abrams is a great candidate and the idea of Georgia electing a black woman governor is awesome. But we will see if her opponent, who also happens to be the official in charge of voter eligibility, will manage to knock out enough black voters to keep her out.
I would love, love, love to see Representative Duncan Hunter defeated in California. You will remember he’s the guy who was indicted on charges of misuse of campaign funds for family expenses, including the famous plane trip for the pet rabbit.
He’s running against a former Obama staffer named Ammar Campa-Najjar, who Hunter is trying to portray as a terrorist sympathizer. You remember what I said about the Menendez race and voting for the party? Well, if Menendez was also trying to portray an opponent with a Muslim background as a terror threat, I would vote for the opponent.
Fortunately, Menendez is running against the former head of a pharmaceutical company with a nasty history of fighting for high drug prices for cancer patients. Phew.
Bret: I feel just the same way about Duncan Hunter. A man whose defense for misusing campaign funds is that it’s his wife’s fault is asking for both marital and electoral divorce. Then again, what a perfect representative of the G.O.P. under Trump: Worse than a crime, it’s a mistake.
For all of our focus on the midterms, I suspect we are probably making too much of them. I keep hearing that it’s the most important midterm election of all in American history, but people should remember that, whatever happens, it won’t matter all that much for 2020, and that’s the one that counts. I have no hope for the Republican Party mending its ways, so it leaves me to say: Democrats, please stop screwing it up.