Through Jan. 27; americansonplay.com.
Kerry Washington was a few years from fame the last time she was on Broadway, in David Mamet’s 2009 drama “Race.” The rest of that show’s cast (James Spader, David Alan Grier, Richard Thomas) all had bigger names. Then along came Shonda Rhimes with her ABC crime series “Scandal.” For seven seasons, until the show ended last spring, Ms. Washington burned up the screen as the glamorous and deeply flawed Washington fixer Olivia Pope.
Oct. 13; ticketmaster.com.
Through Jan. 13; moma.org.
A 1943 pencil and charcoal portrait of the singer and activist Paul Robeson is an excellent précis of Charles White’s prolific career as a painter and illustrator. White started out in Chicago in the late 1930s, and his Robeson has the stylized monumentality with which many artists of the period imparted dignity to labor.
Oct. 10-13, bam.org.
The acts performing at the BAM Fisher, the smallest performance space at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, can seem overshadowed by those appearing at the organization’s nearby opera house and Harvey Theater. But this fall, it hosts a rare treat: The Trisha Brown Dance Company. The stage is just right for the group’s intimate program of vintage dances.
Oct. 8 and 9; pbs.org.
Who doesn’t remember their first circus — the razzle-dazzle of the ringmaster, the thrill of the flying trapeze and the animal acts, the awe of gazing up into the big top? “The Circus,” a two-part “American Experience” documentary airing Monday, Oct. 8, and Tuesday, Oct. 9, on PBS (check local listings), traverses the high-wire of this distinctly American art form — from its birth in Philadelphia in 1793 and its rise in 1825 as roving entertainment to the nation’s agrarian communities to its transformation into an out-of-this-world spectacle by the late 19th-century impresarios P.T. Barnum and James Bailey.
And who didn’t dream of running away with the behemoth Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus — a traveling town with 28 tents, more than 1,100 employees and a menagerie of nearly 2,000 beasts, including 735 horses, which last performed under a big top tent in 1956?
Through Oct. 14; filmlinc.org.
Tickets to Week 2 of the 56th New York Film Festival are going, going and in some cases gone. But it never hurts to dream — and check the standby page. Three big draws on the main slate: “If Beale Street Could Talk,” Barry Jenkins’s follow-up to his best picture Oscar winner, “Moonlight,” adapted from the James Baldwin novel and starring KiKi Layne as a pregnant woman in 1970s Harlem trying to exonerate her fiancé (Stephan James) after he’s falsely arrested by a white cop (Oct. 9, 11 and 14); Joel and Ethan Coen’s “The Ballad of Buster Scruggs,” an anthology of western tales with Tim Blake Nelson, James Franco, Liam Neeson and Tom Waits loping through them (Oct. 9 and 13); and Julian Schnabel’s “At Eternity’s Gate,” the closing night selection, in which Willem Dafoe channels Vincent Van Gogh in his shattering final days — and Mr. Schnabel occasionally wields the paintbrush himself (Oct. 12).
Oct. 11-13; bam.org.
