EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Now 33 and still known as All Day, Adrian Peterson, the Washington Redskins’ punishing running back, concluded his work with a jog up the ramp to the visitors’ locker room on Sunday. He carried with him a memento: the jersey of the Giants’ rookie running back Saquon Barkley, who had written Peterson a message in black marker on his No. 26 when the two exchanged uniforms after the game.
It was one more acknowledgment of Peterson’s place in the game’s annals. He rushed for 149 yards and scored two touchdowns on Sunday in Washington’s 20-13 win over the Giants, and along the way he passed Tony Dorsett to claim No. 9 on the career rushing yards list.
Peterson’s odometer now sits at 12,863 yards, but he still showed off impressive speed in pulling away for a 64-yard touchdown run in the fourth quarter. With Washington ahead by 13-6 and 3 minutes 16 seconds remaining in the game, guard Brandon Scherff pulled to the right — “ready to hunt,” as Washington Coach Jay Gruden said later — and cleared a path.  Aware that a defender would be looking to dive at his feet in a last-ditch effort, Peterson kicked his legs up after 25 yards.
He then trained his eyes on the stadium video board in front of him to track the distance between him and two defenders. They did not catch him until he crossed the goal line, and one pulled him down by his collar, drawing a penalty. Peterson shrugged it off.
Since signing with the team in August, Peterson has rushed for at least 90 yards five times, and Washington has won all five of those contests. The Redskins are now 5-2 and in first place in the N.F.C. East, while the Giants continued their tumble to 1-7 and last place in the division.
Washington quarterback Alex Smith has enjoyed the front-row view to Peterson’s revival.
“I think it’s the same thing over the course of his career that people have talked about: the combination of the size, the speed and the physicality,” Smith said. “It’s such a unique combination to see those three things, and I don’t feel like he’s slowed down much.
Peterson has put pain behind him this season. In a Week 5 loss to the New Orleans Saints, he sustained a dislocated shoulder but insisted that he could take a pounding along the way to show his teammates what it takes to win. After fumbling against the Giants, he followed his own advice by keeping his attention trained on the end game.
“For me, it was about locking in, letting that play go,” he said after the game.
As locker room attendants picked up discarded ankle tape and packed his helmet and pads into a burgundy travel bag, Peterson folded Barkley’s blue jersey into a backpack, and said he planned to give his two touchdown footballs to his sons.
He talked about the breakaway run with the reserve quarterback Colt McCoy by his locker stall. McCoy marveled at Peterson’s ability to keep running with defenders giving chase.
