Marouane Fellaini has played a decade in the English Premier League, with Everton and Manchester United.
MANCHESTER, England — Marouane Fellaini’s first manager in England made up his mind at the final moment.
It was not until 10 p.m. on Aug. 31, 2008 — transfer deadline day — that David Moyes, the coach at Everton, took a private jet to Brussels to complete the deal. He had been vacillating for some time: money at Everton, then, was tight, and Moyes made a point of not spending it lightly, not taking unnecessary risks. Fellaini eventually agreed to a contract in an airport hotel room with only minutes to go before the transfer window closed.
Moyes was Fellaini’s first manager at Manchester United, too. They worked together for five years at Everton, but even after that, Moyes was not quite sure, so he consulted former colleagues. He spent much of the summer of 2013 hoping to bring in a more glamorous signing to draw scrutiny away from Fellaini.
Louis van Gaal — Fellaini’s second permanent manager at Old Trafford — had no such doubts: As soon as he arrived, he told Fellaini he was not in his plans. “He said I was not his first choice, second choice, third choice, fourth choice,” as Fellaini remembered it. Van Gaal soon changed his mind.
His third, José Mourinho, telephoned him almost as soon as he had taken the job to assure him he had his faith. He would not be allowed to leave while Mourinho was in charge, Fellaini was told. But that did not necessarily represent a sea change at every level of the club. United’s hierarchy dallied, last year, over extending his contract. More than once, his manager and his teammates have been forced to rally to his defense after a bout of discontent from at least some of the club’s fans.
It is a whisker over a decade, now, since Fellaini arrived in England. In that time, he has racked up 254 appearances in the Premier League; scored 54 goals; played as a defensive midfielder, an attacking midfielder and a striker; won an F.A. Cup, a League Cup and the Europa League; and played in two World Cups, most recently helping Belgium to a semifinal, and a European Championships.
Those who have worked with him offer an almost endless list of on-field attributes — energy, industry, more skill than he is given credit for, aerial prowess and “the best chest control anywhere,” according to Andy Holden, his first team coach at Everton. “A player who can do everything,” in his words, and one determined to get better.
Many of his opponents have different memories, but no less admiring ones. Steven Gerrard, a longtime foe in games against Liverpool, has described him as being “horrible” to play against. His teammates prove these are not just pretty words. When Mourinho’s team, earlier this month, found itself two goals down at home to Newcastle, with the crowd on the verge of mutiny, the squad gathered in the changing room at halftime. Mourinho asked Paul Pogba what changes he would make. Pogba asked to be played in a deeper role in midfield and requested Fellaini be brought on to play ahead of him.
For all the achievements, though, and for all the testimonies of friends and foes, even Fellaini acknowledges that he has not quite won English soccer over, not fully; the doubts, the same ones Moyes, van Gaal and the others exhibited, linger on in some quarters. After a decade, England is still not entirely sure what it thinks about Marouane Fellaini.
The previous night had exemplified that as well as any. It had been a sort of distilled, clichéd Fellaini performance: Introduced as a substitute — “People think I don’t play, but I do. I play” — he had scored a 95th-minute equalizer against Derby County in the Carabao Cup, hurling his body to head home a cross to take the game to penalties.
Fellaini scored a 95th-minute equalizer against Derby County in the English League Cup.
It is typical of his approach: to himself, to his work. Fellaini is Belgian; his parents are Moroccan. But by both style and inclination, as a player, there is something very English about him. The way he plays — brave, scrappy, industrious — and the way he thinks — modest, humble, unaffected — are the values that English soccer has traditionally attached to itself.
Fellaini is under no illusions that he is the sort of player who is going to “dribble past seven people” and score, but that sort of thing has not tended to matter to English fans. Often, indeed, it has been much more likely to arouse suspicion. Much more important are the intangible areas — hunger, desire, character — in which few would argue Fellaini excels.
“My journey, my life, has not been easy,” he said. “I have had to fight.” He was not reared in the cloistered surrounds of a major club’s academy. He was rejected by Anderlecht, Belgium’s biggest team, as a teenager. He scrambled his way back up through various smaller programs, guided by his father, until Everton, and then United, came calling.
That approach has stood him in good stead. In his first year at United, in particular, he was the target of some particularly pernicious abuse. That was the hardest period of his career, he said. “There was a lot of pressure, a lot of criticism. It was not a good experience, but it was an important one to live through. I came out of it stronger. I passed the test. I won my place. I won trophies.” He was, in many eyes, the key figure in the win against Ajax in 2017 that secured the Europa League triumph, the most important result of Mourinho’s tenure.
He proved that he has those qualities England cherishes in spades, in a way that others, perhaps, do not. “You need courage to play for Manchester United,” Fellaini said. “Personality, mental strength. There are big expectations. It is a big club, the biggest in England. Everyone wants to beat you.” He does not say it, but it is fair to say not every player he has encountered in his five years at Old Trafford has met those requirements.
Why, then, does his relationship with his own fans remain less than straightforward?
When the club played in Bern recently in the Champions League, Mitten even noticed a song in the Belgian’s honor doing the rounds among fans. He concedes, though, that it is unlikely to become an anthem. To too many, the presence of Fellaini — or a player like him — represents the club’s relative “decline” in recent years. “He symbolizes where United is now,” he said.
Fellaini himself gives little thought to how he is perceived outside Old Trafford, beyond admitting that hearing opposing fans “whistle and boo” him tends to act as inspiration, rather than discouragement. “You want to show how good you are,” he said.
That he is not quite afforded the respect others with his record might command could, of course, be seen as a compliment. As Gerrard said, he is horrible to play against. But perhaps here, too, more lies beneath: Perhaps he is a manifestation of values English soccer has convinced itself are antiquated, relics of a hurriedly forgotten past.
Gerrard, in the same breath as he confessed to his admiration of his former rival, described Fellaini as an “effective Plan B,” the player a team could turn to when it needed to be “ugly.” Even Holden admits that he is not always “easy on the eye.” At a time when aesthetics are king, that is enough to attract scorn.
It does not matter to him if he is seen as artful, subtle: The goals he scores might not always be pretty, but they are not worth any less. “From a corner, from a free kick, from a penalty, a goal is a goal,” he said.
For a long time, England would have been his natural habitat. Now, it seems a little reluctant. It does not need to be. Fellaini has been here for 10 years. He has convinced five managers, dozens of teammates, thousands of fans. He knows he belongs.