Readers discuss a new regime at the E.P.A. and the effects of climate change on our health and our children’s.
The validation of predictions is an essential component of the scientific method, and scientists are pleased when their predictions are realized. But there is no pleasure in seeing the outcome of predictions of a diminished role of science in the Environmental Protection Agency stemming from the installation of Andrew Wheeler as that agency’s acting administrator.
The E.P.A.’s website declares that its efforts to reduce environmental risks are “based on the best available scientific information.” Elimination of the Office of Science Advisor will undermine the foundational role of science in supporting credible decision-making to safeguard human health and ecosystems from environmental pollutants.
If the agency is to live up to its mandate, it needs accurate data and the expertise of a fully qualified science adviser to ensure that this data is correctly interpreted and appropriately applied to achieve the agency’s mission.
The writer is director of physical sciences, sustainability and engineering at the New York Academy of Sciences.
I realize that there are many Americans who love President Trump. They shout praise at his rallies. Applaud his crude attacks on enemies and Democrats.  Believe his very distortion of the truth. Cheer him on in his every decision, irrespective of its plausibility.
But when his actions and his presidential orders are detrimental to the well-being of their own children and grandchildren, the cheering must stop.
One more thing you can do: Become educated on the health effects of climate change and share this information with others. Broader awareness and understanding of this interconnection is crucial for progress to occur.
With climate change accelerating, we need an educated public and a cadre of informed clinicians and health workers who can prevent, reduce and respond to the resulting health effects.
Health-profession schools must provide the training and education, and in so doing develop a vital resource: tomorrow’s leaders and caregivers.
Our future doctors, nurses and public health professionals need this training, as it will make individual and public health more resilient, and provide a powerful, informed voice that can advocate for reducing greenhouse gas pollution, for mitigating climate change and cleaning our air, soil and water.
As health is an essential right, we must all better recognize how that right is linked to the environment we are radically altering.
The writer is director of the Climate and Health Program at the Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health.