It took years, and a special friendship, to find the ideal two-family home in Ridgewood.
Shaylin Clay and Wyatt Wolfram were both in the class of 2009 at Syracuse University, but they didn’t meet until after graduation, through mutual friends.
Around four years ago, the couple moved to a closet-free railroad apartment in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, where their rent eventually rose to $2,450 a month. They became good friends with the neighbors across the hall, sharing a dog-walking service and getting a “sibling discount” for households with two dogs.
But Ms. Clay, who founded a child care agency called Mighty Minds and invests in real estate with her brothers as a partner in Clay Property Group, had her heart set on buying a two-family house in Ridgewood, Queens, where she had worked with a small development firm.
“Wyatt thought it was a crazy idea,” said Ms. Clay, 31, who had been visiting open houses for years.
“Shaylin would say, ‘I have 30 minutes left on this open house; can you get over here?’” said Mr. Wolfram, 30, who then worked at an independent record label and now commutes to the Yale School of Management, where he is a student.
About two years ago, the couple began hunting seriously for a two-family home for less than $1 million. “We were looking for the sweet spot between a gut renovation and a fully renovated place,” Mr. Wolfram said. Though both are handy — he fashioned a makeshift closet out of rope and wood for their Williamsburg apartment — “neither of us had the cash flow or stomach for a total renovation,” he said.
When they found a house listed for $886,000 in an appealing spot, sandwiched between two quiet dead-end streets, they thought they had hit the jackpot: The house came with a detached two-car garage in the back.
“Imagining us pulling into our garage had us googly-eyed,” Ms. Clay said.
But an architect friend learned that the house had been built on an easement, which the seller was unaware of. Any expansion would require a waiver from the city’s Board of Standards and Appeals. The situation was daunting, and they backed out.
“The house had this interesting geography, and that was also its downfall,” Mr. Wolfram said. It later sold for $859,000.
Only a few of the homes they saw had been recently renovated, including a barrel-front rowhouse that garnered a lot of interest. The couple offered slightly below the asking price of $1.2 million.
Their offer was declined.
“In retrospect, it was not renovated to our style, something that bothered me a little,” he said. It later sold for the asking price.
They soldiered on, thwarted at every turn. Agents seemed more a hindrance than a help. “We would ask questions we knew the answers to already, and they wouldn’t be able to answer them,” Mr. Wolfram said.
At another house in the neighborhood, they got as far as wiring the down payment. But the sellers changed their minds and refused to accept the money.
She went for a visit. “The house had good vibes, but it was super-outdated,” she said, with orange kitchen cabinets and dark wood paneling. And at $1.2 million, the price seemed high. Also, she was preoccupied with a trip to Europe they were planning a few days later.
At the airport, however, the couple discovered that Ms. Clay’s passport was invalid — it expired in five months, rather than the requisite six, which meant they had to obtain an expedited passport and fly out two days later.
“That ride back to our apartment was a real low point,” said Mr. Wolfram, who was planning a surprise proposal in Paris.
With an unexpected day free, Ms. Clay suggested they both go to see the house. “It had this worn, dusty coat, but it had this warmth about it,” Mr. Wolfram said.
Knowing the sellers were willing to negotiate, they offered exactly $1 million and settled at $1.045 million, receiving word as they waited to board their flight, valid passport in hand. Upon their return, the couple, newly engaged, proceeded with the home inspection, and were relieved that the house didn’t have lead pipes, as so many others did.
The top-floor unit had been used as a rental and was in good shape. “We would be able to get renters in immediately while we refinished our own floor at our own pace,” Mr. Wolfram said.
But how to find renters? Then they had an idea: Maybe their Brooklyn neighbors from across the hall could be convinced to come with them.
The two couples now share the yard and the big basement, which has gym equipment, music gear and a workshop with a table saw that the sellers were willing to leave. And the dogs still share a dog walker.
But with no garage or driveway, Ms. Clay and Mr. Wolfram, who were married in the spring, park on the street.
