RBG (2018) on Hulu. As the country held its breath awaiting the latest developments in the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh on Monday, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. noted during the first meeting of the court’s current term that it was the 25th anniversary of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s investiture. “We all look forward to sharing many more years with you in our common calling,” he said. Justice Ginsburg’s status as a pop-culture figure has been solidified recently through memes, books, a popular blog and, earlier this year, this documentary, which traces her rise. It pays particular attention to Justice Ginsburg’s victories in a handful of sex-discrimination cases earlier in her career. Ample screen time is also given to Justice Ginsburg’s fabled workout regimen, complete with crunches and weight lifting, to reassure fans that the 85-year-old justice intends to stay in the ring.
RAGING BULL (1980) on Hulu. In his 1980 review for The New York Times of Martin Scorsese’s black-and-white boxing tragedy, Vincent Canby wrote, “Though ‘Raging Bull’ has only three principal characters, it is a big film, its territory being the landscape of the soul.” The soul in question is that of the boxer Jake LaMotta, played by Robert De Niro. Mr. Scorsese’s exploration of LaMotta’s worst tendencies (envy, anger and violence among them) is bolstered by a sharp screenplay by Paul Schrader and Mardik Martin and by supporting roles from Cathy Moriarty and Joe Pesci.
KING LEAR on Amazon Prime. Anthony Hopkins is ready for his “King Lear” — again. The last time Mr. Hopkins played Shakespeare’s mad king was in a 1986 production at the National Theater in London. “It was a terrific production, but I soon realized I wasn’t going to hit the mark,” he recently told The Times. The epic play and its notoriously difficult title role (a rite of passage for many late-career actors) is here presented as a made-for-streaming film, cut by its director, Richard Eyre, to a speedy 115 minutes and thrust into a modern setting.
MONTY PYTHON’S LIFE OF BRIAN (1979) on Netflix. With Monty Python’s 50th anniversary coming up, now is a great time to revisit this quasi-biblical classic from that British comedy troupe, which features the Eric Idle-penned song “Always Look on the Bright Side of Life” — a favorite of sporting events and funerals. Asked whether he would have the song played at his own funeral, Mr. Idle recently told The Times’s Sopan Deb: “I don’t know. I won’t be there.” For a double feature, MONTY PYTHON’S THE MEANING OF LIFE (1983) is also on Netflix.
JOHN WICK: CHAPTER 2 (2017) 8 p.m. on Cinemax. This sequel to the well-received 2014 action film “John Wick” is “an altogether more solemn affair weighed down by the philosophy that more is always more,” Jeannette Catsoulis wrote in The Times. But Keanu Reeves remains, she wrote, “superstoic and hyper-pliable” as the title character, slashing and shooting his way through meticulous fight scenes.