FOXBOROUGH, Mass. — They met near midfield, Tom Brady and Patrick Mahomes, moments after a field goal sailed through the uprights in the final seconds to give the New England Patriots a 43-40 victory over the Kansas City Chiefs on Sunday. They shook hands, tapped each other’s shoulder and leaned in for a couple of words.
Brady, 41, spoke first, as he deserved. Age and accomplishments should always precede precociousness. Mahomes, 23, listened. After all, he was born the year Brady entered the University of Michigan as a freshman. He was in first grade when TB12 won his first Super Bowl.
Brady now has 200 N.F.L. regular-season victories, a record for a quarterback. Mahomes? He is sitting on six career victories (one of them the final regular-season game of the 2017 season) and had just tasted defeat for the first time.
Over the previous 60 minutes, the duo had combined for nearly 700 passing yards and six touchdowns and alternated highlight-reel passes — across-the-body, frozen-roped, rainmaking heaves — and old-fashioned grit that swirled together to account for 83 points on the scoreboard.
Brady made it woefully clear that he was not ready to become the ghost of quarterbacks past (see Eli Manning).
In the fourth quarter, he broke loose from what was a certain sack, lowered his shoulder and bulled his way 4 yards for a touchdown run. With 51 seconds left, Brady threw a feathery touch pass that Rob Gronkowski snagged on the run for 39 yards to set up Stephen Gostkowski’s game-ending 28-yard field goal.
Forgive Brady for being matter-of-fact on why he was looking for Gronk.
There were times Brady looked his age, however, missing first Josh Gordon and then Julian Edelman on short passes to the end zone on the opening drive of the second half. They had to settle for a field goal — one of five Gostkowski booted.
Later in the third, Brady not so much scrambled out of the pocket as he shuffled, making himself an easy target for Chiefs linebacker Breeland Speaks to strip him of the ball that teammate Allen Bailey smothered inside Patriots territory. It took Mahomes just moments to find Tyreek Hill for a 14-yard touchdown pass.
Suddenly, New England’s 24-9 lead at halftime had vanished, and it was 27-26, Patriots, heading into the fourth quarter.
“We missed some opportunities out there,” said Brady, who finished 24 of 35 for 340 yards and one touchdown pass.
Showtime Mahomes lived up to his nickname and enormous talent, but his age (as in tender) showed, too.
He threw two interceptions; Dont’a Hightower returned the first one to the Chiefs’ 4-yard line, leading to a Patriots touchdown. In the waning seconds of the first half, inside New England’s 20-yard line, Mahomes scrambled, found no one open but tried to finesse a fastball through three defenders to Travis Kelce.
Bad idea. Instead, it ricocheted between them before New England defensive back Duron Harmon came up with it.
“Just got a little greedy,” said Mahomes, whose four touchdown passes against the Patriots brought his season total to 18.
One of the blessings of youth is the ability to look past your mistakes, to look ahead and forget what has happened. In the locker room at halftime, Mahomes told Hill, Kelce and Coach Andy Reid what he tells them before every half of football.
He did, completing 9 of 13 for four touchdowns, including a short one to Hill in the end zone that he conceded — slyly — was a broken play.
“A magician never reveals his tricks, so I’ll leave it at that,” he said.
If Mahomes made a mistake in the second half, it was perhaps scoring too quickly with the game-tying touchdown. Down by 40-33 with 3:03 left to play, Mahomes waltzed onto the field and on the first play from scrimmage launched a rocket 75 yards to Hill for a touchdown.
From the New England bench, Brady saw Hill catch the ball on the Patriots’ 30-yard line and streak down the sideline.
Yes, they had plenty. And when Gostkowski put his kick through the uprights to cap another game-winning drive for TB12, a “to be continued” stamp should have been tattooed on the field here at Gillette Stadium.
Over 60 minutes against the N.F.L’s standard for sustained excellence, Kansas City (5-1) demonstrated that its offense is, indeed, explosive and that Mahomes is a generational talent. The Kansas City defense came in here ranked last in the N.F.L., partly because of injuries and partly because it cannot stop anyone by air or land. Still, for those loyal subjects of the “Chiefs Kingdom,” hope always springs eternal.
New England (4-2) proved it was not in as bad a shape as many had thought — or at least hoped. Yes, the team’s quarterback is old, and Coach Bill Belichick remains perpetually cranky. And even if Brady and Belichick are tired of each other, as is always rumored, they know how to get along where it counts.
In very few words, Mahomes said that was the message Brady conveyed to him in their postgame exchange: Keep grinding and they will see each other in the playoffs.
