A South Carolina man who the authorities say ambushed law enforcement officers, fatally shooting a police sergeant and wounding six other officers, had 129 guns stockpiled at his home and fired about 39 rounds at officers, a local sheriff said on Tuesday.
Those details were offered at a news conference as law enforcement officials said they had completed processing what the sheriff, Leon Lott of Richland County, S.C., said was “one of the worst” crime scenes he had ever seen. For days, local and federal investigators combed the gunman’s home — and six blocks around it — where deputies arrived earlier this month expecting to serve a search warrant and interview the man’s son in connection with a criminal sexual assault case.
The tallies they took were grim: About 390 shell casings from bullets fired by the police; three different weapons — a pistol and two military-style assault rifles — used by the gunman to fire on the authorities; and an additional 126 guns he did not fire, but apparently legally owned.
Sheriff Lott’s latest update on the hourslong standoff came less than two weeks after Frederick T. Hopkins Jr., 74, was charged with the murder of Sgt. Terrence Carraway of the Florence Police Department. He was also charged with six counts of attempted murder — one for each law enforcement officer who was injured. During the Oct. 3 shooting, Mr. Hopkins barricaded himself inside his upscale, 6,500-square-foot home in Florence, S.C., and began firing from the home’s second floor when deputies arrived to execute the warrant, the authorities have said. Solicitor Ed Clements has said it is too early to decide whether to seek the death penalty.
Since the shooting, the authorities have gradually offered more insight into why they were there. They have said the case began as an investigation into a possible criminal sexual assault by Mr. Hopkins’s adopted son, Seth Hopkins, who is in his late 20s. Seth Hopkins lives at the home, and county investigators had arranged to come interview him, Sheriff Lott has said. The investigators did not have an arrest warrant, but they did have a search warrant, he has said.
Sometime after the shooting, Seth Hopkins was arrested and charged with second-degree criminal sexual conduct, the sheriff said. He did not provide any additional details about the case. Citing an arrest warrant, The Associated Press said that the charge was criminal sexual conduct with a minor and that two different girls were involved: one who was younger than 11 when the abuse happened years ago; the other who was between 11 and 14 when she was abused in the past year.
On Tuesday, Sheriff Lott said that in addition to Fred and Seth Hopkins, another adult and two children were inside the home at the time of the shooting. Sheriff Lott did not identify them or say if or how they are connected to Mr. Hopkins.
Three Florence County sheriff’s deputies injured in the confrontation remain hospitalized, including two who the authorities said Tuesday were in critical condition. Sergeant Carraway, who would have been on the force 31 years this month, was the first Florence officer to be killed in the line of duty in 29 years.
Attempts to reach Mr. Hopkins and his son by phone on Tuesday were unsuccessful. It was not clear whether they had lawyers. The authorities have not detailed how they took either of them into custody or discussed any injuries they may have sustained during the standoff.
The shooting, in the Vintage Place subdivision in Florence, a northeastern South Carolina city of about 37,000 people, began late on a Wednesday afternoon when Mr. Hopkins opened fire at a distance, first wounding three law enforcement officers. Other law enforcement officers responded, including four city police officers who were soon wounded.
The shooting earlier this month was anything but.
