BOSTON — Dig back more than a century in the World Series archives, and the line scores look familiar and reassuring.
The opening game of the 1916 edition, just a mile or so down Commonwealth Avenue at old Braves Field, included 11 runs and 18 hits, with the Red Sox prevailing over the Brooklyn Dodgers. In the rematch on Tuesday at Fenway Park, the Red Sox again won the opener. The teams scored 12 runs and collected 19 hits.
Yet the more things stay the same, you might say, the more things change.
Consider the method of collecting outs. In the 1916 opener, the starting pitchers got 47 outs, and the bullpen four. On Tuesday, the starters got 24 outs, and the bullpen 27. And these were not just any starters, either.
They were Clayton Kershaw of the Dodgers and Chris Sale of the Red Sox, both seven-time All-Stars who specialize in keeping hitters off the bases. Only three pitchers in baseball history with at least 1,000 innings have a lower career WHIP (walks plus hits per inning pitched) than Kershaw and Sale: Addie Joss and Ed Walsh, who were born in the 1880s, and a reliever, Mariano Rivera.
So what happened in Game 1? Kershaw and Sale combined to allow 12 hits, five walks and eight runs in just eight innings. Neither starter worked more than four innings, something that had happened just three other times in the previous 113 World Series openers.
If you love watching great starting pitching, it was an ominous start to a series that might become a bullpen parade.
The Red Sox used seven pitchers in their 8-4 victory, and the Dodgers used five. Not too long ago, in 1985, the Kansas City Royals used six pitchers — total — to win a seven-game World Series. Now, in a World Series pitting the highest-scoring teams in each league, the managers will deploy relievers early and often.
In theory, the Red Sox want starters to pitch deep into games — unlike the Dodgers’ last postseason opponent, the Milwaukee Brewers, who emphasized relievers. Brian Dozier, who led off for the Dodgers on Tuesday, said the plan was to exploit the Boston bullpen.
To that end, the Dodgers stacked their lineup with right-handers; incredibly, it was the first time in World Series history that a team fielded a lineup with nine right-handers and not a single lefty or switch-hitter. But the Dodgers should have been careful of what they wished for.
The Red Sox bullpen turned out to be much more effective than Sale, allowing just a run and three hits in five innings. In the last four games of the American League Championship Series and the first game of the World Series — all victories — Boston’s bullpen had a 2.21 earned run average. A perceived weakness has been a strong point.
“A lot of people outside of our clubhouse had doubts about our bullpen, and they were the only people who had doubts,” said reliever Matt Barnes, who started the bullpen relay on Tuesday and was credited with the win.
The Dodgers had hoped Kershaw could reprise his masterpiece from last year’s Game 1 in Los Angeles. That night, Kershaw held the Astros to one run in seven innings, with 11 strikeouts and no walks.
It may have been asking too much, because that was the only game in the last three World Series (2016, 2017 and now) in which a starter lasted seven innings. And this version of Kershaw, with a diminished fastball and without his usual biting slider, is not the same one who earned three Cy Young Awards.
Asked if he had been surprised to see Roberts come to get him in the fifth, after a walk and a single and just 79 pitches, Kershaw conceded he did not deserve to keep going.
“I wasn’t pitching well enough to make a case the other way,” he said.
The Red Sox led the majors with a .268 batting average — nine points higher than any other team — and showed off their offensive versatility all night. They scored twice in the first inning with three singles and a stolen base, and scored three times in the seventh on a pinch-hit homer by Eduardo Nunez.
In one sentence, Kershaw enumerated all the ways the Red Sox can frustrate and churn through opposing pitchers. That resourcefulness, instilled by Cora, makes them the favorites to win this World Series, no matter how many moves Roberts makes in response.
