Book Review|His Short Story Inspired ‘Rashomon.’ His Life Has Inspired a Novel.
His Short Story Inspired ‘Rashomon.’ His Life Has Inspired a Novel.
Illustrated. 311 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $26.95.
Fragmented and adrift is a pretty good description of the structure of “Patient X,” which consists of 12 loosely connected tales based on Akutagawa’s writings and events from his life. For readers unfamiliar with Akutagawa — who is probably less well known to American readers than such near-contemporaries as Natsume Soseki and Junichiro Tanizaki, both of whom figure in the novel — Peace’s book provides a vivid, if challenging, introduction. “Patient X” is an uncanny act of ventriloquism, fusing Akutagawa’s jagged storytelling voice with Peace’s own pulsing narration.
Akutagawa’s early life, in Peace’s telling, was scarred by trauma. His mother, “born of samurai stock” and married to “a parvenu beneath herself,” succumbed to mental illness six months after Ryunosuke’s birth. In a harrowing early scene, the reluctant child is taken to see her, “her tiny face ashen, her tiny body lifeless, as though already no longer really here,” a living ghost. For the rest of his life, Akutagawa, who was farmed out to live with an uncle’s family in a shabby industrial ward in Tokyo, feared he would inherit his mother’s madness.
Akutagawa was initially dismissed, by both his colleagues and the literary critics, as a mere “mosaicist,” lacking in originality. But for Peace, such literary appropriation links Akutagawa to our own postmodern world of blurred genres and textual borrowing, of which “Patient X” is a distinguished example.
 A serial womanizer like his father, he felt guilty about his affairs and his neglect of his children — “his sins, his countless, countless sins.” Disturbed by the human cost of the Japanese empire, he was troubled by conflicting newspaper accounts (shades of “Rashomon”) of the ritual suicide of General Nogi, a hero of the ruinous turn-of-the-century wars with China and Russia.
