Sports|N.F.L. Week 5 Picks: Can the Jaguars Slow Down Patrick Mahomes?
N.F.L. Week 5 Picks: Can the Jaguars Slow Down Patrick Mahomes?
The N.F.L.’s best defense gets a crack at Kansas City, the Rams are heavy favorites in Seattle and the Eagles try to get back on track.
Passing, passing and more passing. The N.F.L. is on a record-setting pace for points, mostly because enough teams have fully embraced that the game has gone vertical. Far from making games uncompetitive, it has resulted in an average margin of victory of 9.9 points, which, according to the league, would be the lowest such mark since 1932 were it to continue.
Week 5 will provided an intense matchup between the Kansas City offense and the Jacksonville defense. It will probably also provide another sea of 400-yard passing games. But leave time to celebrate should Drew Brees throw for 201 yards for the Saints on Monday night, thus passing Peyton Manning to become the N.F.L.’s career passing leader.
Here is a look at N.F.L. Week 5, with all picks made against the point spread.
This could be the week Patrick Mahomes returns to earth. Either that or he should start making room on a shelf for a Most Valuable Player Award. Mahomes, the N.F.L.’s most exciting offensive player, will face off against its most devastating defense. It should be incredible to watch.
Much has been written about the offensive attack of the Chiefs (4-0). Kareem Hunt is among the league’s most versatile running backs. Tyreek Hill is a potential touchdown on every play. At tight end, Travis Kelce is the surest thing not named Gronkowski. It has all come together under Mahomes, a 23-year-old who does not seem to know things shouldn’t be this easy.
The Jaguars (3-1), however, are the team best equipped to slow him down. Jacksonville has elite defensive players and will try to fluster Mahomes with a pass-rush led by Calais Campbell and Yannick Ngakoue and a secondary headlined by Jalen Ramsey.
Those who claim they expected these teams to have these records heading into a rematch of last year’s N.F.C. championship game are lying. The Vikings (1-2-1) are coming off a pair of losses: They were blown out by Buffalo and then nearly kept up with the high-powered Rams, which at least showed some versatility. The Eagles (2-2) have yet to have a game in which they looked like defending champions, and the return of Carson Wentz has hardly given them a boost. He is 1-1, including a loss to Tennessee last week.
So where do they go from here? Minnesota, beyond off-field issues with Everson Griffen, seems to be in a fine spot. Its record is unfortunate, but Kirk Cousins has looked good enough to believe in the offense, and the defense should come around as well. Philadelphia has more questions, including some uncertainty about when Wentz will be 100 percent.
The Packers (2-1) managed to win, 22-0, last week, but after throwing an interception and losing a fumble, Aaron Rodgers was not ready to have the team pat itself on the back. “It was as bad as we’ve played on offense with that many yards in a long time,” he told reporters.
