Cicely Berry, whose unorthodox exercises released actors’ minds to feel the sound and muscularity of Shakespeare’s verse for nearly a half-century as the Royal Shakespeare Company’s voice director, died on Oct. 15 in Cornwall, England. She was 92.
Her daughter, Sara Moore, confirmed her death and said Ms. Berry had recently had two small strokes.
Ms. Berry was not an acting teacher, but her passionate work as a voice director influenced the stage and screen performances of generations of British actors, including Sean Connery (whom she coached at her home in the 1960s before she joined the R.S.C.), Judi Dench, Emily Watson and Patrick Stewart.
Ms. Berry, who was known as Cis, used her understanding of Shakespeare to help actors absorb the rhythms of his language and the weight of his words. It was not enough to grasp his literal meaning, she argued; one had to feel his vowels and consonants and to appreciate the beats of the iambic pentameter in which he wrote.
Only then, she said, would an actor’s voice be capable of evoking Shakespeare’s poetry and musicality.
In a soothing but commanding voice that she leavened with profanity, Ms. Berry took actors at the Royal Shakespeare Company, one of Britain’s leading theater organizations, through movements designed to bring them a new understanding of Shakespeare’s resonant language.
She would tell a group of actors to read, in unison, the prologue from “Romeo and Juliet,” while appearing to walk aimlessly around a rehearsal room.
“The exercises took away the fear and over-concentration that actors used to approach Shakespeare,” Jeffrey Horowitz, founding artistic director of Theater for a New Audience in New York City, which is devoted to Shakespeare and other classics, said in a telephone interview. Ms. Berry held annual workshops with his troupe in New York.
Mr. Horowitz described one exercise in which several actors held the actress playing Ophelia in “Hamlet” and had her push against them while reciting the “O, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown” speech.
Cicely Frances Berry was born on May 17, 1926, in Berkhamsted, northwest of London. Her father, Cecil, was a city clerk, and her mother, Frances (Batchelor) Berry, was a part-time dressmaker.
Cicely became enamored with poetry as a youngster, often escaping her boisterous older siblings by retreating to the bathroom to read aloud Shakespeare, Keats, Shelley and Auden, sometimes to Micky, her dog.
After graduating, she was hired by the school as a voice instructor. Her reputation steadily grew — in part through private lessons with actors like Mr. Connery — and led Trevor Nunn, the R.S.C.’s artistic director at the time, to hire her as the company’s first voice director in 1969.
She said she was fortunate to work for three very different directors there: Mr. Nunn, John Barton and Terry Hands.
While at the R.S.C., she also taught at Nós do Morro, a theater company in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro, as well as in various British prisons. She also directed productions of “King Lear” at theaters in Stratford-upon-Avon and London, wrote several books, including “Voice and the Actor” (1973) and “The Actor and the Text” (1987), and was the dialogue coach for two Bernardo Bertolucci films, “The Last Emperor” (1987) and “Stealing Beauty” (1996).
In addition to her daughter, she is survived by her sons, Aaron and Simeon Moore; four grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren. Her husband, Harry Moore, an American-born actor who was later a producer for the BBC, died in 1978.
The cadence, flow and power of language that transformed Ms. Berry as a girl in poetry’s thrall guided her into her 10th decade.
