VATICAN CITY — With pews emptying and clouds of scandal hanging over the church, the Vatican on Wednesday opened a three-week assembly to discuss how to bring young people into the fold.
The pope has said he wants to hear the doubts and criticisms of young people. But the scene not far from the Synod of Bishops, as the assembly is known, suggested that the Roman Catholic Church has its work cut out for it.
As synod participants chanted and prayed, some two dozen survivors of clerical sexual abuse were protesting just off the road to St. Peter’s Basilica. They had traveled from parts of Italy and elsewhere in Europe to denounce what they see as the Vatican’s indifference to their demands that abusive priests — and those who covered up for them — be pursued.
In a first, some three dozen Catholics under 30 will participate at the Vatican assembly, alongside nearly 270 clerics. They will discuss a variety of issues, including sexuality, pornography and video games as well as a “throw-away culture” that wears away human dignity.
One of the protesters praised the decision to include the youths, saying it was “very positive.” But the protester, Matthias Katsch, a German clerical abuse survivor and member of the recently formed group, Ending Clergy Abuse, said the pope needed to go further.
 The signs were in Italian and English, one of the organizers said, so the message would be heard beyond Italy’s borders.
Pope Francis, for one, has not gotten it, they said.
Despite repeated assurances that under his watch the Vatican will enforce zero tolerance of clerical abuse, the pope’s record so far “is disastrous,” said Francesco Zanardi, the representative of Italy’s principal clerical survivors group, Rete L’Abuso.
While the church was buffeted by sex-abuse scandals during the papacies of John Paul II and Benedict XVI, fresh disclosures of abuse and its cover-up in Australia, Ireland, the United States and Germany have undermined Francis’s credibility.
A survey released by the Pew Research Center on Tuesday found that 62 percent of Catholics in the United States believe the pope is doing an “only fair” or “poor” job in addressing the problem.
Asked this week whether the latest scandals risked undercutting the synod, Cardinal Lorenzo Baldisseri, the secretary general of the assembly, said he did not “see an obstacle.” The synod, he said, could show young people what the church is really about.
Earlier in the day, during a homily, Francis choked back tears as he welcomed “for the first time” two bishops from mainland China. Bishops Guo Jincai of Gengde and Yang Xiaoting of Yan’an were present as a result of a provisional agreement reached last month with China over bishop nominations. “We offer them our warm welcome,” Francis said.
As the scandals wear away the church’s authority, the synod, which ends on Oct. 28, faces a daunting task: convincing young people that the church remains relevant.
“They have to discuss how they want to build the church in the future,” he said.