FLORENCE, Italy — As fascinating as Leonardo da Vinci’s musings on the nature of the world and what makes it tick are, the intellectual and visual denseness of his treatises — which embrace a wide array of his interests, from mechanics to botany, engineering, mathematics, architecture and more — don’t always translate into captivating shows.
The exhibition “Water as Microscope of Nature: Leonardo da Vinci’s ‘Codex Leicester,’ ” which opens this week at the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, on the other hand, offers the visitor the pleasure of losing oneself in the mind of a genius. The show runs through Jan. 20.
It’s one thing to pore over a page of Leonardo’s experiments on the ratio of the volume of steam to water, quite another to see his reflections come to life in animated form. That is the case, here, of his ruminations on the flight of birds, the luminosity of the moon, or the unbounded nature of water, which is the main object of Leonardo’s scrutiny.
The “Codex Leicester,” named after an 18th-century owner, Thomas Coke, earl of Leicester, is a compendium of ideas and investigations, and the expository panels are a refrain of firsts: an instrument that anticipated the modern odometer; observations on the speed of river flows, and detailed descriptions of waves and their impact; and a device to stay underwater for a long time, which Leonardo did not describe in detail “because of the evil nature of men,” who might use it to sink enemy ships and cause deaths, he wrote. One note Leonardo wrote to himself reads “Make eyeglasses to see the moon larger.” The first known record of a telescope came around a century later.
As usual, Leonardo’s musings were written backward, starting from the right side of the page and moving to the left, so that the words appeared normal only when seen with a mirror. Theories abound about why he did this: One simple explanation is that he was left-handed, and that writing this way didn’t smudge.
The codex now belongs to the Microsoft co-founder and philanthropist Bill Gates, who bought it at auction at Christie’s in 1994 for $30.8 million. Until last year, when the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints bought the printer’s manuscript of the Book of Mormon for $35 million, it was believed to be the most expensive manuscript ever sold.
Next year is the 500th anniversary of Leonardo’s death, as well as the 25th anniversary of Mr. Gates’ ownership of the manuscript. “We felt the codex needed to be part of the picture,” said Fred Schroeder, the curator of the “Codex Leicester” for Mr. Gates, and as homecomings go, Florence was the logical site for that celebration. “It’s exciting for the codex to pay visit to its birthplace,” Mr. Schroeder said.
The exhibition uses technological tools to better explain the codex “and the extraordinary value of ideas it contains,” said the Leonardo expert Paolo Galluzzi, who is the director of the Museo Galileo in Florence and the curator of the codex exhibition. The digital animations, which were developed by a team at the Museo Galileo, are a “way of exploding his ideas,” he said.
Leonardo wrote much of the codex from 1504 to 1508, when he was living in Florence. An interactive map at the Uffizi indicates where he spent time in the city, painstakingly measuring the Arno river, carrying out dissections at the Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova, and studying the works of others, primarily at the library of the Convent of San Marco, whose few remaining friars were recently evicted.
With its three paintings by Leonardo that amply illustrate his “scientific observations on water,” the Uffizi was the “right place for the exhibition,” the gallery’s director, Eike Schmidt, said in an interview.
He described the “Baptism of Christ,” a joint effort by Leonardo and his teacher Andrea del Verrocchio, where the ripples of water around the feet of Christ and John the Baptist “fully show Leonardo’s scientific mind.” Water in its various manifestations is also detailed in Leonardo’s “Annunciation” and in the preparatory drawing for the “Adoration of the Magi,” exhibited again this year after a five-year restoration.
All three Leonardo paintings were moved to a new room in the Uffizi this year, close to another refurbished room with works by Michelangelo and Raphael.
“Leonardo couldn’t have painted as he did without his scientific observation of nature,” Mr. Schmidt said. The presence here of the “Codex Leicester,” which is exhibited with pages from other Leonardo treatises, like the “Codex Atlanticus,” the “Codex Arundel” and the “Codex of the Flight of Birds,” “is an opportunity for visitors to see his writings in conjunction with the three paintings,” he said.
Leonardo’s observations of fossils begged to differ. “Part of the ‘Codex Leicester’ is dedicated to a not explicit but clear polemic with Genesis,” said Mr. Galluzzi, in particular with the question “of the Great Flood.” Leonardo’s observations of fossils and geological stratification had convinced him that the world was much, much older than the Bible suggested.
Had he published his considerations, he would undoubtedly have run afoul of the church, “instead these were jottings he kept in his pocket,” Mr. Galluzzi said.
Leonardo’s gloomy predictions for the future of the planet appear more prophetic in the age of climate change.
