It should have been an easy swipe at an opponent.
Keith H. Wofford, one of two black major-party candidates running for New York attorney general, used an appearance in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, to draw attention to a city program accused of mistakenly taking multimillion-dollar homes from mostly minority owners.
“We have a public advocate who lives somewhere nearby, says she is the ‘people’s lawyer,’ and they are literally stealing millions of dollars in equity from elderly black homeowners and she says nothing,” Mr. Wofford said of his opponent, Letitia James, the Democratic public advocate in New York City, who is favored to win on Nov. 6.
But even though the underlying message may have been welcome, the messenger was not.
Mr. Wofford is the Republican nominee, and in this part of New York City, that affiliation carries more weight than the color of Mr. Wofford’s skin or the tenor of his speech.
No matter who wins the race between Mr. Wofford and Ms. James, who is also black, New York is poised to have its first black attorney general on Jan. 1, and black leaders across the country are celebrating the milestone.
But in a volatile political moment where issues of race are fueling the domestic political conversation, and the participation rates of black voters can make or break a campaign, part of the contest between Ms. James and Mr. Wofford is about the candidates persuading black voters that they support issues that affect black communities, political observers say.
On the campaign trail, Ms. James is trying to weaponize Mr. Wofford’s support of President Trump. Because Mr. Trump received only 8 percent of the African-American vote in the 2016 election, and 86 percent of black voters disapprove of the job he’s doing, according to a recent Quinnipiac University poll, “there is a bigger expectation” that black candidates and officeholders will be on board with resisting Trump administration policies, Professor Theoharis said.
That was the message Ms. James sought to spread about Mr. Wofford at the headquarters of the Rev. Al Sharpton’s National Action Network in Harlem, days after winning the Democratic primary.
“There is a gentleman who voted for Donald Trump. Who is supported by Donald Trump. Who has represented the interests of Donald Trump. Who is fund-raising from individuals who have supported Donald Trump,” Ms. James said about Mr. Wofford, whipping the black audience into a frenzy.
The political calculus of Ms. James and her campaign team makes sense to many political observers. A recent Siena College poll shows Ms. James with a 14-point lead over Mr. Wofford, but she is doing far better among blacks: She leads him by 78 percentage points; among Latino voters, she holds a 70-point lead. Ms. James has 77 percent of the vote in New York City, compared with Mr. Wofford’s 14 percent.
But among whites, Ms. James’ lead narrows significantly to just three points. Mr. Wofford has the support of 45 percent of upstate voters versus 38 percent for Ms. James. Ms. James holds a 46 percent to 39 percent lead over Mr. Wofford in New York City’s suburbs.
Mr. Wofford, 49, is the first black candidate to win the Republican nomination for attorney general. He acknowledges voting for Mr. Trump but also says he voted for President Obama, donating more than $30,000 to Mr. Obama’s inaugural committee and campaign.
He said he doesn’t agree with everything that Mr. Trump and Republicans say or do. He doesn’t think families should be separated at the border, and he supports the New York attorney general’s lawsuit seeking to block the Trump administration from asking for citizenship information on the 2020 Census.
The state attorney general’s office currently has dozens of legal and administrative actions pending against the Trump administration, including a lawsuit against the Trump Foundation, and an action with other attorneys general around the country to halt family separations at the border. The office could also play a role in the federal investigation of Russian interference in the 2016 presidential elections.
Republicans are betting that Mr. Wofford can chip away at Ms. James’ overwhelming support among black voters, and win enough votes upstate and in the suburbs to pull out a victory. They believe that Mr. Wofford may be insulated from some of the criticism of being associated with President Trump that a white conservative candidate might otherwise face in this environment.
On a chilly recent Sunday morning, Mr. Wofford’s campaign bussed a group of mostly black residents, who had their properties seized by the city, to Gracie Mansion, the residence of New York City’s mayor, to protest. One man standing next to Mr. Wofford held a sign that read, “Where Are Our BLACK Elected Officials When We Need Help.” Ms. James’ campaign had called for a temporary freeze to the program.
“Does that mean she just wants to stop them from stealing black and brown folks’ homes for a little while, just until after the election is over?” Mr. Wofford asked.
Ms. James’ campaign pointed to her long support of people facing foreclosure while she worked in the attorney general’s office, and her work on the worst landlord’s list as the public advocate.
She has also sought to portray Mr. Wofford as a wealthy Republican lawyer specializing in bankruptcy proceedings, not as someone who represented someone facing eviction or a young black man facing an unjust criminal justice system.
Mr. Wofford bristled at the notion that he enjoyed a privileged life; he talked about having lived in communities of color for most of his life, and how for 14 years he owned property where he lived in Harlem.
Mr. Wofford’s longtime friend and campaign chairman, Denver G. Edwards, who is black, also took issue with Ms. James’ comments. He emailed to a reporter a two-page list of civic activities involving African-Americans that Mr. Wofford participates in, supports financially or both. Mr. Wofford, he said, has had to deal with similar criticism since he was a student at Harvard.
Ms. James’ campaign did not back off her remarks.
That both major party candidates for attorney general are African-American suggests that blacks have changed as a political force, said Kirsten John Foy, the northeast regional director of the National Action Network. The vice-like grip the Democratic Party has had on black voters over the last few decades has not always been a good thing, he said.
