New York|He’s Atop the Ballot, Yet Virtually Broke. And G.O.P. Donors Are Not Coming to the Rescue.
He’s Atop the Ballot, Yet Virtually Broke. And G.O.P. Donors Are Not Coming to the Rescue.
With Marcus J. Molinaro, the Republican candidate challenging Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, lagging far behind in almost every measurable way, Republican donors appear to be moving their focus to other races.
Mr. Molinaro, the Dutchess County executive, is entering the homestretch of the governor’s race virtually broke: He reported only $210,000 in cash on hand. Mr. Cuomo still has $9.2 million in the bank, according to his campaign.
Put another way, Mr. Molinaro has about as much left for the final month as Mr. Cuomo was spending every 12 hours at the end of the primary against the actress Cynthia Nixon.
Given Mr. Molinaro’s financial and polling deficit, Republican attention and cash appears to be shifting to the State Senate, where Republicans are clinging to a one-seat majority, the party’s lone foothold on power in Albany.
Despite New York’s Democratic tilt, Republicans have controlled the State Senate for all but two years in the last century. But the threat of a “blue wave” nationally and a spate of Republican retirements has put that majority in dire risk.
“The funding class are investors, and they want to invest in something where they would see a return,” said Chapin Fay, a Republican strategist. Some Republicans had viewed Mr. Cuomo as potentially vulnerable, but his dominant win against Ms. Nixon in the Democratic primary mostly dashed those hopes, he said. “Any path to a statewide victory evaporated for Republicans on that day,” he said.
A spokesman for the Senate Republicans, Scott Reif, said they had raised $500,000 just since last Monday — which is more than Mr. Molinaro has raised since mid-July — and had more than $3 million heading into the final month, across two party accounts.
“The case we’re making is that checks and balances are important,” Mr. Reif said.
Of course, implicit in that is the idea that Mr. Cuomo will be re-elected to a third term in November.
There are contested Senate seats across the state, but much of the battleground is in Nassau and Suffolk Counties, where campaigns can be particularly costly. State Senator Elaine Phillips, a Republican incumbent from Nassau, had more than twice as much cash, $477,000, as Mr. Molinaro for her re-election effort to a district seat.
In another statewide race, Keith Wofford, the Republican candidate for attorney general and a former partner in the law firm Ropes & Gray, has raised nearly $1.8 million this year, including a $50,000 personal loan. He reported $400,000 cash on hand. Both totals eclipse Mr. Molinaro’s, who is atop the ticket.
Last Monday, a who’s who of top Republicans held a fund-raiser for Mr. Wofford, including Paul Singer, a hedge fund manager, Kenneth G. Langone, the Home Depot co-founder, and Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of the American International Group.
Mr. Wofford currently has more money than Letitia James, the New York City public advocate who is the Democratic nominee for attorney general, by a small margin. She reported $384,000 on hand, after a bruising and expensive Democratic primary.
Among Ms. James’s recent donors was Sheryl Sandberg, the Facebook executive, who contributed $5,000 in late September.
All told, Mr. Molinaro has raised $1.3 million in his bid for governor; $223,500 of the funds came from the New York Republican Party and its chairman, Edward F. Cox.
It has been more than 15 years since Republicans won a statewide race in New York.
Katy Delgado, a spokeswoman for Mr. Molinaro, accused Mr. Cuomo of “threatening donors, pollsters and civic organizations to try and deprive Marc’s campaign of resources.” She did not provide any specific examples of those alleged threats.
“Marc Molinaro’s campaign is a true grass-roots movement that will neither be intimidated nor extinguished by the corrupt Cuomo political machine,” she said.
Mr. Cuomo’s third-party opponents are outmatched financially, as well: the Green Party nominee, Howie Hawkins, has $31,000; the Libertarian Party nominee, Larry Sharpe, has $24,000; and Stephanie Miner, a Democrat and the former mayor of Syracuse who is running on a new party line called the Serve America Movement, has $55,000.