BERLIN — With the effortless skill of a chef of a Michelin-starred restaurant, Patrick Wodni quickly assembled the ingredients he would need for the day’s lunch special, an onion tart. But this time, instead of putting them into his favorite stainless steel mixing bowl, he poured the sour cream, eggs, cumin, fenugreek, red pepper and turmeric into an industrial-size vat and mixed it with both hands.
Even without the ideal wine pairing, most of the patients and staff at Havelhöhe hospital in Berlin agree that Mr. Wodni’s cooking is a lot tastier than the typical German hospital fare. Part of an unusual experiment — one that Mr. Wodni left his job as a chef at one of Berlin’s hottest restaurants to lead — the hospital has replaced its standard-issue schnitzels with locally grown organic vegetables, grass-fed beef and catfish raised at an environmentally conscious aquafarm.
Mr. Wodni and his team discussing menus with doctors. “He’s a star chef, so he can make things delicious,” one of the hospital’s directors said.
Many hospitals and medical clinics simply reheat frozen meals brought in from outside, but Mr. Wodni, who combines a gentle demeanor with a penchant for cursing, has shown it is possible to improve the quality of hospital food while keeping costs low.
“When I started, I took the budget, and said, ‘What’s doable with what we have?’ ” Mr. Wodni said early one recent morning in the large, aging, but adequate hospital kitchen. Pausing to take a bite of a carrot grown on an organic community farm just down the road (the skin was sweet, so he told the white-jacketed kitchen apprentice that there was no need for peeling), Mr. Wodni explained that, in keeping with industry standards, Havelhöhe spends 4.74 euros, about $5.50, on food per person, per day.
Mr. Wodni’s first move was to stop ordering from the company that had supplied most of the hospital’s food. “You couldn’t tell if it was minced meat or a sponge,” he said, shaking his head.
“My main goal with this was to build a direct local trade relationship between farmers, gardeners, bakeries and fishermen with the hospital,” said Mr. Wodni, who used to be a vegan but changed, he said, when he realized that his jealousy of other people’s cheese sandwiches was making him unpleasant to be around.
Working directly with producers has an impact on more than just the bottom line. “Sourcing good ingredients is actually the most important part of my job,” Mr. Wodni said, with a glance at the kitchen’s colorful stacks of rainbow chard, celery root, long red radishes, green onions and irregularly shaped tomatoes.
He liked the work, he said, but he did not feel fulfilled. Then he began learning about biodynamic farming, and got a job catering organic meals for children. “For the first time in my life, I didn’t have to ask myself, what the … am I doing?” he said, using another expletive. From there, Mr. Wodni moved to Berlin, where he worked for a fishmonger before he started cooking in the upper echelons of the city’s gastronomical circles.
Not everyone at the hospital is completely onboard. There has been some grumbling, for example, about Mr. Wodni’s decision to drastically reduce the amount of meat served — it used to be twice a day, now it’s three times a week, plus a Friday fish dish — in favor of things like chickpeas and couscous.
As Mr. Wodni began slicing fish into uniform servings, saving the scraps for a broth, he said that now that the Havelhöhe program was up and running, he was stepping out of day-to-day cooking and into a more supervisory role. This was in part because his wife, an art historian, had landed a teaching job a good distance away, in the Eifel region outside Cologne, where they live with several other families in a commune in an old castle.
