A Michigan woman said she was denied a medication for her miscarriage by a pharmacist at a supermarket who refused to fill the prescription because of his religious beliefs, then declined to help her obtain the drug elsewhere.
The pharmacist was no longer employed at the supermarket chain, Meijer, a company spokeswoman said Thursday.
The woman, Rachel Peterson, 35, of Ionia, Mich., became pregnant earlier this year, but an ultrasound at the end of June revealed that the fetus no longer had a heartbeat. She and her husband headed to a family member’s home in northern Michigan, more than three hours away, to decompress.
Her doctor prescribed her misoprostol, a drug that would make the miscarriage process happen faster and could help her avoid an invasive surgical procedure.
“It was conveyed to me by my doctor that if things hadn’t progressed in the next couple of days, that I was instructed to start the medication,” Ms. Peterson said. The days came and went, and still nothing.
Ms. Peterson, who works in a hospital as a cardiovascular sonographer, said she was “baffled.” She has lived in Michigan her entire life, she said, and had never been denied a prescribed medication.
She explained to the pharmacist, whom she identified as Richard Kalkman, that her fetus was no longer viable and that she needed the medication to complete the miscarriage safely.
He also refused her requests to speak to another pharmacist or to the manager, she said.
Mr. Kalkman could not be reached for comment.
It is also a violation of the guidelines set forth by the Michigan Pharmacists Association, a professional organization of which Mr. Kalkman was not a member. But Michigan law does not bar pharmacists from engaging in conscientious objection, said Larry Wagenknecht, the chief executive of the organization.
Oftentimes, she said, women choose to use misoprostol because it is more autonomous, discreet and self-directed than other methods.
“Some women derive empowerment from a situation where they might otherwise feel helpless,” she said.
When Ms. Peterson realized she wasn’t going to receive the medication at the pharmacy in Petoskey, she called the Meijer pharmacy in her hometown, and connected with a pharmacist who helped her fill her prescription that day. She and her husband cut their trip short, and made the three and a half-hour drive back home.
She reported the episode to a Meijer manager, and received a call from a regional director at the company, who said the company would be investigating.
But nobody from corporate contacted her, she said, so she approached the American Civil Liberties Union, which filed a complaint on Tuesday.
The A.C.L.U. complaint said that if a man had requested the same medication, which is also used to treat stomach ulcers, he would not have been denied, but because Ms. Peterson is a woman, the pharmacist incorrectly assumed she wanted to terminate her pregnancy.
Lara Chelian, the director of advocacy and development at the Northland Family Planning Centers, said a pharmacist’s choice not to fill a prescription for religious reasons is a case she has seen time after time.
Her organization has had to call “multiple times,” Ms. Chelian said, to tell the pharmacist to give the prescription back to the patient.
In speaking out about her experience, Ms. Peterson hopes to help other women who could encounter the same treatment.
