The rating on Italy’s debt was slashed on Friday by Moody’s Investors Service to one level above junk in a reaction to the Italian government’s decision to accept higher budget deficits in coming years.
Moody’s also highlighted the fact that higher deficits would keep Italy’s debt at its current high levels of 130 percent of the overall economy.
Italy’s populist government wants to increase expenditures in a bid to stimulate a dormant economy, despite European Union rules that require all members to reduce budget deficits.
For months now, global investors have fretted that Italy’s new government would challenge European economic orthodoxy, leading to a potential exit from the euro.
The war of words between Rome and European leaders in Brussels and Frankfurt, where the European Central Bank is based, has increased in recent weeks, prompting a prolonged sell-off in Italian 10-year bonds.
Yields of these bonds — which move in the opposite direction of their price — have more than doubled since May to 3.5 percent. Italian bond yields are approaching the 5 to 7 percent levels of 2012, the depth of the European Union debt crisis.
The brinkmanship between Italy and the rest of Europe is feeding worries that the eurozone might experience another debt crisis, similar to what happened when Greece could no longer sell its bonds to investors and was bailed out by the International Monetary Fund.
However, the Italian economy is 15 percent of the total eurozone economy, compared with Greece’s 2 percent. And a blowup in Italy, one of the most indebted countries in the world, would not only rattle Europe but spread throughout global markets.
“Italy has the ability to change the direction of global markets,” said Julian Brigden of Macro Intelligence 2 Partners, an independent research company in Vail, Colo., in a research note on Friday.
The rating on Italy’s debt is Moody’s lowest before a bond is considered junk. But Moody’s pointed out in its note that Italy had advantages, including a large, diversified economy and a trading surplus with other countries. For these reasons, Moody’s said, the broader outlook for the country remains stable.
The Moody’s downgrade is not likely to be the only one, because rating agencies tend to move in unison. And unless the authorities in Rome decide to reverse course, the debt controversy will continue for some time.
The Italian debt standoff is occurring at a jittery time for global investors. The United States stock market, by far the best-performing large-equity market in the world over the past year, has been in a rut, with investors uncertain about corporate earnings, rising interest rates, a trade war with China and global growth.
European markets have been under pressure because of fears of slowing growth and worries over the health of the region’s largest banks — especially those in Italy. Italian banks are among the largest holders of Italian bonds. So the more the bonds fall in value, the worse it is for the large banks.
Shares of UniCredit, the largest bank in Italy, have fallen 26 percent this year.