Carmen Electra, a shining vision of American success, keeps totally making it.
LOS ANGELES — Carmen Electra, the Prince protégé who fled Paisley Park for Hollywood, married and divorced Dennis Rodman, and launched her acting career in a tiny red “Baywatch” regulation swimsuit, recently did one of the riskiest things she’s ever done, professionally speaking.
Ms. Electra isn’t often scared to try something new. In her impressive entertainment career spanning almost three decades, she’s racked up hundreds of IMDb credits and five Playboy covers, sang and danced on a stage in lingerie hundreds of times, launched a wildly successful aerobics video collection, and broadcast her courtship, engagement and wedding to the rock star Dave Navarro on MTV years before that was a thing celebrities were really doing.
But her latest professional endeavor — a photo shoot with Eli Russell Linnetz, Kanye West’s preferred collaborator — stripped her down in a new way. He wanted her without shoes.
The photo shoot produced a series of frosty glamour shots that wouldn’t look out of place hanging on the wall of a body shop — but fashion. In some of them, she does wear shoes. The most striking images are the ones where she doesn’t. She says she loves the results.
Clothing can act as a sort of metaphysical armor, and Ms. Electra found out early on you don’t need much of it to protect yourself from the world. Describing herself as painfully shy offstage (“I wasn’t ever shy to dance, but I wouldn’t read a book report in front of the class,” Ms. Electra said), she pushed herself to dress with the confidence of, well, a young Carmen Electra, even as she was chickening out of auditions.
She was figuring out who she wanted to be after years of being told who she was. It was the artist formerly known as Prince who renamed Ms. Electra, the Ohio native formerly known as Tara Leigh Patrick, after he discovered her in 1991 auditioning for a girl group on his record label. She didn’t get the singing gig, but weeks later, he tracked her down to where she was staying at a Holiday Inn in Glendale, Calif., and offered to make her a solo star instead.
From Paisley Park, Prince produced her 1993 album, “Carmen Electra,” and took her on the road opening for him in Europe on his Diamonds and Pearls tour. He also helped Ms. Electra hone what would become her signature look at the time — big, Priscilla Presley-inspired eyelashes, a corset and hot pants under a cashmere coat, and heels — a mix of athletic street style dressed up under a veil of Hollywood glamour. “I remember him saying, “Are you a blonde or a brunette?” And I was so young that I’m like, ‘I’m a brunette,’ you know?” said Ms. Electra, who is now blonde.
But Ms. Electra, who was 18 when they met, felt too young, at least emotionally, for the romance that bloomed alongside their artistic partnership. It may have ended when she started dating someone in L.A. without Prince’s knowledge, but it was definitely over by the time he found out and summoned her to hear his new song, “Eye Hate U,” an ode to her infidelity.
“I understood where it was coming from. I think some people didn’t really understand it. He was a very private person, so I would never tell anything or talk about anything that was deeply private, but in a case where everyone knows he wrote ‘Eye Hate U’ about me, I’ll just say, I was young and naïve, and we were together, and I found out some things, but really didn’t know how to communicate properly,” Ms. Electra said.
Prince gave her an ultimatum: stay with him in Minneapolis and live under his rules, or go for it on her own in L.A. She chose L.A., in part because she thought that, “If I can’t make it on my own, then I don’t deserve it.” But Ms. Electra says her choice was also bolstered by the fact that she believes that Prince wasn’t all that faithful to her, either.
“Now that I think about it, I would’ve handled it a completely different way. But at that age, I was hurt. It wasn’t the right thing to do. But I was naïve and hurt, and I just met someone, and kinda, that was it,” Ms. Electra said.
And that was it, until it wasn’t. At one point after Prince, she’s said previously, she became homeless, with not much more than a pair of Versace shoes to her name.
At one point, she confided in Prince about how badly things were going, and he offered her a lifeline: a weekly dance show called Erotic City at his legendary club, Glam Slam LA.
Ms. Electra appears to be on good terms with many of her famous bad-boy exes, a coterie that includes the basketball player-turned-North Korean envoy Mr. Rodman, the Mötley Crüe drummer Tommy Lee and Mr. Navarro. (“I found that people that have walked on the edge of life, people that have gone through a lot, if they have gotten help and gotten therapy, whatever their system is, it’s a completely different type of relationship,” Ms. Electra says of her romantic ideal.) Not that all of her relationships ended well. Ms. Electra says one ex pointed a loaded gun at her head, and she and Mr. Rodman were both arrested in 1999 over a domestic incident, though the charges were later dropped.
In those days, Ms. Electra would take out what little cash she had from an A.T.M. on Melrose and have eye-popping dresses custom-made for events. In a sea of stars in black, she tended to shine — regardless of the shock it caused to the sartorial nervous systems of People magazine editors. Not for nothing, the variety of dresses that reliably landed her on the “Worst Dressed” lists have recently been worn to much editorial acclaim by most members of the extended Kardashian-Jenner family. Ms. Electra remembers wearing one of those “Melrose outfits,” a long, shiny, tight number, to crash a red carpet event with her first publicist.
“I wasn’t invited, we just went, and literally he said my name, and they started taking photos of me, and so I walked the entire red carpet. And we didn’t even have tickets, and we just walked right in,” Ms. Electra said. A week later, she saw a picture of herself hanging in a window on Hollywood Boulevard.
Her handlers wanted her style to reflect the preferred look for young stars at the time — simple, covered-up and “blank, like a blank slate.” When she landed her first Maxim cover during the “Baywatch” years, she wore leather pants and a crop top because her publicist didn’t want her doing swimwear photos.
Nowadays, when not at home in the Hollywood Hills, she sits front row at New York Fashion Week, cheering on designers she cares about, like Christian Siriano and Naeem Khan. “It’s just so creative. I kind of laugh about it, because we spend three hours getting into hair and makeup, and then you go to the show. It’s a performance almost,” Ms. Electra said. She was at the Harper’s Bazaar Icons party this year, where Cardi B threw a shoe at Nicki Minaj, but left before the melee began. She’d rather be at home listening to the motivational speaker Tony Robbins or watching documentaries about nordic aliens than out in the club.
“I’m fascinated with human behavior and psychology,” Ms. Electra said, something she first noticed after her impromptu 1998 Las Vegas marriage to Mr. Rodman. The event took place just months after her mother died from brain cancer and her sister died from a heart attack.
And though Ms. Electra might have come to L.A. in the mid-90s, she’s only recently started to feel, in the second half of her career, that she’s arrived. When her aerobic striptease DVDs became hugely popular in the early aughts, she knew she’d reached a turning point.
She’s still acting, and dancing, and hosting, and singing, just now it’s on her terms. In 2013, for example, she debuted new music at the Palm Springs White Party before a crowd of 30,000 people, and it ended up doing better on the charts than the singles she cut with Prince.
