And here’s what the White House is going to do about it.
Mr. Navarro is assistant to the president for trade and manufacturing policy.
President Trump’s maxim that “economic security is national security” comes with an important corollary: A strong manufacturing base is critical to both economic prosperity and national defense.
Policies advanced by the administration under this banner include corporate tax cuts and a wave of deregulation to stimulate investment and spur innovation; steel and aluminum tariffs to bolster core industries; a stout defense against China’s brazen theft and forced transfers of American intellectual property and technologies; a significant increase in the military budget; expansion of Buy American rules for government procurement; and tough steps on trade to level the playing field for American workers, businesses and farmers.
To this long list of measures to improve America’s economic and national security, we should now add the actions recommended in a new Department of Defense report. This yearlong effort, carried out at the president’s order, constitutes the first governmentwide assessment of America’s manufacturing and military industrial base. It identifies almost 300 vulnerabilities, ranging from dependencies on foreign manufacturers to looming labor shortages.
For example, the report highlights several “single points of failure” involving the reliance on a single source of critical equipment or material, including propeller shafts for our ships, gun turrets for our tanks, fuel for our rockets and space-based infrared detectors for missile defense. A military-grade impregnated carbon product used in 72 different chemical, biological and nuclear filtration systems has only a single Defense Department-qualified source, and this current sourcing arrangement can’t keep pace with demand.
Or consider wrought aluminum plate — an essential component in armoring ground combat vehicles, constructing Navy ships and building military aircraft. According to the report, budget uncertainties, unpredictable demand from the Defense Department and the effects of foreign competition raise the risk of potential “production bottlenecks during a future surge in D.O.D. requirements” for the material. More broadly, “sharp peaks” followed by “significant breaks or valleys in production” have taken a heavy toll on the shipbuilding industry, a sector critical to constructing and maintaining our aircraft carriers, submarines and surface ships.
Even the lowly, but increasingly high-tech, tent is at risk. With much of the American textile industry moving offshore, the United States no longer has the capability to manufacture high-tenacity polyester fiber. A similar problem exists for rechargeable batteries, which are vital parts across myriad applications.
One of the biggest vulnerabilities identified in the report is a shortage of skilled labor for critical jobs. America is simply not generating enough workers in the science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields to fill jobs in sectors such as electronic controls, nuclear engineering and space. Nor are we training enough machinists, welders and other skilled trade workers to build and maintain our ships, combat vehicles and aircraft.
To address these vulnerabilities, the Trump administration will immediately begin implementing the report’s “blueprint for action.” It will rapidly expand the use of already available Defense Department funds to close identified supply-chain gaps. Starting fast out of the gate, the president will sign determinations authorizing the use of funds, set aside in Title III of the Defense Production Act, to expand manufacturing capabilities in such areas as lithium seawater batteries (critical for anti-submarine warfare) and cutting-edge fuel cells (for the Navy’s future unmanned, underwater vehicles).
An essential Pentagon mission will be to further modernize the “organic industrial base” to ensure American leadership in advanced manufacturing across industrial sectors. This government-owned and -operated network of depots, shipyards and arsenals sustains some 440,000 vehicles, 780 strategic missiles, 278 combat ships and almost 14,000 aircraft.
As part of the governmentwide effort, the president is also directing the secretary of labor to more precisely target occupations for current and future growth (e.g., systems engineers, high-skilled tool operators), expand worker training and education programs, and ensure appropriate incentives to recruit and retain workers. The secretary of energy is similarly charged with more aggressively addressing risks to the nation’s manufacturing and industrial base within the energy and nuclear sectors, using funding that will become available in 2019.
America has elected a president in the mold of William McKinley, Theodore Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan — presidents best remembered for short but profound maxims that directed their boldest strategies and biggest successes.
McKinley’s campaign slogan “Patriotism, protection and prosperity” led to strong tariffs and sound money policies that realigned the Republican Party and catalyzed strong economic growth. Roosevelt’s “Speak softly and carry a big stick” helped transform the Navy into a military force capable of projecting power around the world. And Reagan’s “Peace through strength” inspired an unprecedented rebuilding of the military that brought the Soviet Union to its knees.
History will judge whether Donald Trump’s “Economic security is national security” joins the ranks of great presidential maxims. The recommendations made in the Defense Department’s report will surely be a part of that discussion.
Peter Navarro is assistant to the president for trade and manufacturing policy and director of the National Trade Council.
