New York|Mayor at 19, New York Governor at 43? Molinaro Seeks an Upset Over Cuomo.
Mayor at 19, New York Governor at 43? Molinaro Seeks an Upset Over Cuomo.
Marcus Molinaro, the Republican candidate who finds himself unable to narrow a deficit in the polls, says his life’s struggles have helped define his campaign.
TIVOLI, N.Y. — For the sake of historical perspective, let the record show that Marcus J. Molinaro did not initially want to run for governor.
It was early January, and Mr. Molinaro, the Dutchess County executive, had emerged as a favorite among some Republican leaders in New York to challenge Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, the two-term Democrat with a gargantuan campaign war chest and millions of energized Democratic voters in a solid blue state.
Mr. Molinaro made it clear that he did not have the appetite for the uphill battle. But after some serious backslapping by the state’s Republican establishment, and what he said were pleas from constituents, Mr. Molinaro decided to disregard his apprehension and take on Mr. Cuomo.
A narrow path to victory seemed possible. Mr. Cuomo could be vulnerable on issues like the spotty upstate economy, New York City’s decrepit subway system, and corruption. And on paper, Mr. Molinaro was considered a potentially potent foe: young, energetic and accomplished, having once been elected the youngest mayor in the country in Tivoli, the Hudson Valley village where he came of age.
So far, however, it has not exactly worked out.
Just days before the election, Mr. Molinaro finds himself unable to narrow a yawning deficit in the polls, and struggling to raise money and awareness of his candidacy. He is stumping, but often for seemingly meager rewards, sometimes drawing little more than curiosity seekers to campaign events.
Yet for all of that, Mr. Molinaro, a boyish 43-year-old with a wisp of gray at the temples, insists he is still eager for the fight.
Mr. Molinaro is quick to laugh — a big, sometimes nearly nervous guffaw — when describing his life. But when he speaks about Mr. Cuomo, he does so with a disdain that seems to be borne as much out of his feelings about the governor’s personality as his politics.
It is hard not to feel that some of this animus comes from a class difference in the upbringings of each man. In the Republican’s view, the race pits Mr. Cuomo, the well-to-do, big-city scion of a political dynasty, against Mr. Molinaro, the lower-class son of divorced parents who grew up in this small village where he was elected mayor at the age of 19.
And to listen to Mr. Molinaro is to be constantly reminded of that of that disparity.
His family’s financial struggles are one of two events that appear to define Mr. Molinaro’s personal and campaign narratives. In some ways, his political philosophy seems to stem from an instance when he was a child: His mother was forced to use food stamps and was confronted by a disrespectful clerk at the Dutchess County Department of Community and Family Services, an agency he now controls.
The second driving force is his daughter, Abigail, who is autistic and suffers from seizures. Since formally announcing his campaign in April, he has made inclusion and services for people with disabilties a central element of his pitch to voters.
He has also been outspoken on mental health issues.
This, too, seems informed by his biography. After the loss of a young child in 1970s, Mr. Molinaro’s mother suffered from depression. She and her husband divorced when Mr. Molinaro was in elementary school.
His parents’ breakup caused Mr. Molinaro to “grow up very quickly,” he said, dealing with family business like the power and cable bills. His life settled after his mother remarried and moved to Tivoli, where Mr. Molinaro soon flourished as a precocious, if quiet, standout in government classes.
Steve Sutton, his social studies teacher at Red Hook High School, said Mr. Molinaro restarted a student council while he was a teenager.
During high school, Mr. Molinaro took an internship with a Democratic assemblywoman, Eileen Hickey. Shortly thereafter, he had his first encounter with the Cuomo family, meeting then-Gov. Mario M. Cuomo in the State Capitol.
Mr. Molinaro, who initially registered as a Democrat, seems to defer from making blanket partisan statements; he openly praises such Democratic Party legends as Harry S. Truman, Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Robert F. Kennedy, and sometimes appears almost reluctant to align with the broader Republican Party.
He added that his job at a county level has more to do with delivering services than political dogma. “I haven’t met the harshness, I haven’t seen the anger where I serve,” he said.
Mr. Molinaro is trying to thread a very narrow political needle while offering a vision of Republicanism that seems more attuned to former President George W. Bush’s idea of “compassionate conservatism” than President’s Trump more antagonistic and nationalistic approach. At the same time, however, Mr. Molinaro also appears aware that his slim chances of winning may be tied inextricably to whether Mr. Trump’s supporters turn out for him on Nov. 6.
In a debate last week with Mr. Cuomo, for instance, Mr. Molinaro tried with mixed success to put distance between himself and the president — who is deeply unpopular in the state — while still seeming to approve of some of his policies when they help New York.
But Mr. Cuomo and his surrogates have pounded Mr. Molinaro with a campaign catchphrase, dubbing him as a “Trump mini-me,” and have described him as part of a “extreme conservative” movement posing ample social and financial threats to the state.
The Cuomo campaign has consistently painted Mr. Molinaro as anti-woman and anti-gay, noting the Republican Party’s stance on abortion and Mr. Molinaro’s votes in the Assembly against same-sex marriage. In the debate, however, Mr. Molinaro said that he believed that Roe v. Wade was “settled law,” and that he now accepted the rights of gay people to marry. He said he opposes the Safe Act, Mr. Cuomo’s 2013 gun control legislation, on the basis of civil liberties.
Mr. Molinaro’s other major proposals have included a 30 percent reduction in property taxes and an “Albany accountability act” to fight corruption. Two former top aides to Mr. Cuomo were convicted this year on federal corruption charges.
Then there is the question of money. In political terms, Mr. Molinaro is once again living near the poverty line: His latest campaign filing showed him with some $311,000 left to spend, a pittance in a state where the bulk of the votes are in New York City, where advertisements are expensive to buy.
His long odds notwithstanding, Mr. Molinaro has a résumé studded with surprising electoral victories, including a 2006 primary win over an incumbent assemblyman, Patrick Manning, that gave him a four-year stint in Albany’s lower chamber.
Assemblyman Daniel J. O’Donnell, a Manhattan Democrat, remembers Mr. Molinaro as an affable colleague.
Mr. Molinaro has recounted the story of that election dozens of times — “I tell the joke, I ran home and asked my mom if it would be O.K. if I ran for mayor” — and he still lives near Tivoli.
His first marriage ended in divorce in 2014, and he remarried a year later to Corinne Adams, whose employment at an architecture firm that received business and subsidies from the county led to accusations of pay-to-play by the Cuomo campaign. Mr. Molinaro angrily denied this, calling Mr. Cuomo a “classless buffoon” for bringing his wife — due with the couple’s second child in late November — into the race.
For all of that invective, Mr. Molinaro said he remains proud of the race he has run, describing it as a chance for someone from his world to engage with he called “the power and grandeur and romance” that political world can sometimes contain.
