On the Tuesday episode of her show, Megyn Kelly made remarks on blackface Halloween costumes that caused a backlash. On Wednesday, she looked into the camera and apologized. On Thursday, she did not go to work, and a rerun of “Megyn Kelly Today” replaced the live broadcast of her show.
Ms. Kelly’s absence was a sign that she is not likely to return to the NBC airwaves.
Bryan Freedman, a Los Angeles litigator just hired by Ms. Kelly, has started negotiations with NBC about her potential exit from the network, according to two people briefed on recent discussions.
With another repeat episode of “Megyn Kelly Today” scheduled for Friday, Noah Oppenheim, the president of NBC News, and Jackie Levin, the show’s executive producer, told staff members on Thursday to prepare for a few days off. Mr. Oppenheim and Ms. Levin also informed them that they would be moved into new jobs at the network if the program was canceled, according to two people familiar with the meeting.
The offstage machinations took place two days after Ms. Kelly suggested, during an on-air round-table discussion, that it was appropriate for white people to dress in blackface as part of their Halloween costumes.
Ms. Kelly apologized for her comments on two occasions this week — once in an email to colleagues, and again on the air. But her demonstrations of contrition did little, it seemed, to improve her standing at the network.
And in an indication of how Ms. Kelly’s stock has fallen, she is no longer represented by a talent agent. Ms. Kelly cut ties with the Creative Artists Agency this week, and a rival agency that was poised to sign her on Wednesday, United Talent Agency, backed away in the wake of her “blackface” comments. Such a snub would have been unthinkable less than two years ago, when Ms. Kelly was a sought-after free agent looking to leave the Fox News Channel.
Adding to her difficulties, guests who had been booked to appear on future episodes of “Megyn Kelly Today” pulled out this week. They included the actor Gary Sinise, the director Ron Howard and the “American Ninja Warrior” host Matt Iseman, as well as lesser-known guests like Craig McManus, a medium based in Bergen County, N.J.
With no apparent support from her colleagues, her bosses or Hollywood, Ms. Kelly would seem to have a remote chance of remaining at NBC. And her tenure there seemed shaky even before this week.
After an extended period of pedestrian ratings, Ms. Kelly and Mr. Lack had a discussion this month on the possible winding down of her portion of the “Today” show by the end of the year, according to two people briefed on the conversation.
In addition to her apology, Ms. Kelly devoted part of her Wednesday episode to a discussion with the PBS host Amy Holmes and the journalist Roland Martin on the history of blackface. Partly because of her efforts to make up for her statements, Ms. Kelly believes that NBC executives have been using the “blackface” backlash as a pretext to oust her from the network, according to a person familiar with her thinking, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to reveal sensitive discussions.
In an odd twist, Mr. Freedman, Ms. Kelly’s recently hired lawyer, made a request to NBC asking that Ronan Farrow — a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter who has said NBC impeded his reporting on the Harvey Weinstein story last year — join the meeting where they plan to negotiate Ms. Kelly’s future, the person said.
Ms. Kelly’s incendiary remarks on Tuesday were part of a round-table discussion of how “the costume police are cracking down” on Halloween costumes, as she put it.
She went on to cite the example of Luann de Lesseps, a member of the cast of the Bravo reality show “The Real Housewives of New York,” who came under fire this year for dressing up as Diana Ross, complete with an outsize Afro wig. Ms. Kelly added that she found the criticism of the “Housewives” star perplexing.
When Ms. Kelly left Fox News in January 2017, NBC gave her a rich deal through 2020 and signaled that she would be a centerpiece of the network.
In addition to giving her the third hour of NBC’s morning franchise, “Today,” the network created “Sunday Night With Megyn Kelly,” meant to challenge the CBS stalwart “60 Minutes.” The plan also called for Ms. Kelly to provide a boost to election specials and Olympics coverage.
At Fox News, Ms. Kelly, a former lawyer, distinguished herself over 12 years as a sometimes prosecutorial interviewer who did not shy away from third-rail topics. She was No. 1 in her time slot, sometimes rivaling her colleague Bill O’Reilly as the biggest ratings draw in all of cable news.
As she prepared to make the move to a big network, she said a politics-free morning program was something she was “born to do.” She aspired to become a hybrid of Charlie Rose and Oprah Winfrey, she said at the time.
A month after her May 1, 2017, start date, Ms. Kelly’s Sunday magazine show debuted to middling ratings. And before long she became the scourge of parents of the Sandy Hook shootings when she interviewed the conspiracy theorist Alex Jones, who had falsely claimed that the 2012 school killings were a hoax, and posted a photograph of the two smiling together.
There were more missteps after Ms. Kelly became part of the network’s morning franchise in September last year. Throughout its run, “Megyn Kelly Today” has trailed the rival program “Live With Kelly and Ryan” by a significant margin. It even attracted a smaller audience than its predecessor, a genial hour that was hosted by Mr. Roker, Dylan Dreyer and Sheinelle Jones and did not depend on the magnetism of a star performer.
Early in her run as a morning host, Ms. Kelly displayed a penchant for offending celebrity guests, including Debra Messing, a star of NBC’s “Will & Grace,” who said after an appearance that she would not return to the show. Ms. Kelly later got into a dust-up with Jane Fonda — by asking her pointedly about her plastic surgery — in what would develop into a monthslong feud.
In an effort to convey a sunnier persona, Ms. Kelly danced awkwardly on the air with a “Today” show colleague, Hoda Kotb, to a Pitbull song. The clip of that moment was shared widely on social media (not in a good way).
 The host also did not shy away from reporting aggressively on sexual harassment stories that affected NBC News. Her examination of Matt Lauer, whom the network fired in November after sexual misconduct allegations, ruffled feathers within the network.
When the Winter Olympics rolled around, Ms. Kelly was not part of the NBC team that went to Pyeongchang, South Korea.
If Ms. Kelly leaves NBC, her next move is unclear. Rival networks that once expressed interest in hiring her may be reluctant now. And though there was speculation that she may attempt a return to Fox News, the network suggested Thursday that was not a likely outcome.
“We are extremely happy with our entire lineup,” the network said in a statement.