In their only scheduled debate, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and Marcus J. Molinaro were consistent on one thing: They each accused the other of lying.
After weeks of delays and posturing that had cast their debate into doubt, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and Marcus J. Molinaro wasted little time before going into attack mode on Tuesday.
Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat running for a third term, and Mr. Molinaro, the Republican challenger, sparred during an hourlong debate that featured more theatrics and bickering than substantive policy discussions. Still, the candidates practiced some revisionist history. Here’s a review of some of their statements where the truth may have been stretched.
Mr. Cuomo spoke of his economic achievements early in the debate. He said state spending under his watch has not exceeded 2 percent growth.
It is true that Mr. Cuomo has reined in state spending, but he has not met the 2 percent benchmark he highlighted. The Citizens Budget Commission, a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization, found that the budget for fiscal year 2019 increased 4.5 percent. The budget also surpassed 2 percent growth the year before.
Mr. Cuomo also boasted of his punctuality when it comes to passing state budgets.
“I passed seven budgets on-time, in a row,” he said.
That statement is demonstrably false. In 2017, for example, legislators passed the budget more than six days late.
The state of the New York City subways has loomed large over Mr. Cuomo’s tenure as governor because he controls the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the agency that runs the subway, but the system has rapidly deteriorated in recent years.
But, Mr. Cuomo has played a key role in the system’s demise by not providing it with sufficient funding. In fact, he has even diverted funding away from the subway. Moreover, he has repeatedly blamed Mayor Bill de Blasio for the state of the system, emphasizing the city’s ownership of the subway.
As state officials mull whether to legalize recreational marijuana, the candidates sparred over the process of legalizing marijuana for medical purposes, which the state approved in 2014. Mr. Cuomo blamed Mr. Molinaro and other Republicans for delaying the process.
“I think you should ask my opponent why he voted against it,” Mr. Cuomo jabbed.
Mr. Molinaro, who said he now supports the use of marijuana for medical purposes, did vote against a bill to legalize medical marijuana when he served in the State Assembly. When Mr. Cuomo pressed him on his vote, Mr. Molinaro deflected, saying he has not been in the Legislature for years.
But Mr. Cuomo has not always favored legalizing medical marijuana. During his first run for governor, Mr. Cuomo stated his opposition to medical marijuana, saying the dangers of the drug “outweigh the benefits.” He reversed course in January 2014, signing an executive order that allowed limited use of the drug by those with serious illnesses.
In recent months, as Mr. Cuomo has ratcheted up his attacks against President Trump, he has sought to portray Mr. Molinaro as “an acolyte of Donald Trump.” On Tuesday, Mr. Cuomo continued that effort, in one instance pointedly asking Mr. Molinaro if he supported Mr. Trump.
“Let’s get out of this conversation,” Mr. Molinaro said.
Although Mr. Molinaro has said he did not vote for Mr. Trump in 2016, he has not always been so evasive in seeking the president’s support.
Corruption in Albany has dogged the Cuomo administration, as some of the governor’s associates have been convicted of corruption-related charges. Mr. Molinaro criticized Mr. Cuomo for his record, saying he has “led the most corrupted state government in America.” Mr. Cuomo, in turn, sought to draw attention to corruption allegations during Mr. Molinaro’s tenure as Dutchess County executive.
Mr. Cuomo has questioned the employment of Mr. Molinaro’s wife, Corinne Adams, at Tinkelman Architecture, which has received thousands of dollars in contracts and subsidies from a Dutchess County development agency.
“Your County Legislature is calling for an investigation on you for kickbacks and perjury where you give a contract to a vendor and then a family member got a job and they got another contract,” Mr. Cuomo said during the debate.
“I find that entirely ridiculous,” he said.
Billy Joel or Jay-Z?
Did Mr. Cuomo confuse his favorite songs?
Some of Mr. Cuomo’s close observers were surprised when the governor said his favorite song was “Empire State of Mind” by Jay-Z and Alicia Keys.
An analysis of Mr. Cuomo’s music choices does not provide conclusive evidence, showing that both songs have appeared in his repertoire. In 2012, the Cuomo administration used the Jay-Z song in advertisements for a statewide business campaign. When Spotify announced it would relocate to 4 World Trade Center, Mr. Cuomo released his own Spotify playlist, which included both songs. (Mr. Joel’s song appeared second on the playlist, whereas the Jay-Z song was listed 13th).