Before “Hamilton” or “In the Heights” hit Broadway, Lin-Manuel Miranda honed many of his artistic skills by performing live, improvisatory hip-hop with a group of like-minded friends.
Now Mr. Miranda and his tight cadre of post-college collaborators are bringing that group, Freestyle Love Supreme, back to the stage; Mr. Miranda will be a producer and an occasional guest performer, but not a regular member of the cast.
Freestyle Love Supreme, which first hit the stage in 2004, performs spoken and sung numbers, accompanied by keyboards and beats, that are formulated in real time based on suggestions — words or themes — from audience members. The group’s name is a tribute to “A Love Supreme,” the John Coltrane jazz suite.
The group has performed at a variety of festivals and venues around the world and had a brief life on television. It will now reconvene for a sustained Off Broadway run from Jan. 30 to March 2 at the Greenwich House Theater; each show will be 80 minutes long.

The regular cast will feature Andrew Bancroft, Arthur Lewis, Bill Sherman, Chris Sullivan, Anthony Veneziale and Utkarsh Ambudkar; the producers hope guest performers will include alumni Christopher Jackson, James Monroe Iglehart and Daveed Diggs, all of whom have performed in “Hamilton,” as well as Mr. Miranda.
Embracing a practice used by some comedians, the show will require that patron cellphones be checked at the door.
Mr. Miranda is best known as a writer and performer and the creator of “In the Heights” and “Hamilton.” This run of Freestyle Love Supreme will mark his debut as a stage producer; the other producers include Thomas Kail, who directed “Hamilton” and “Heights” and directs Freestyle Love Supreme; Jill Furman, who is one of the lead producers of “Hamilton,” and Jon Steingart.
Freestyle Love Supreme, which was formed while Mr. Miranda and Mr. Kail were working on “In the Heights,” was originally among the first productions of the Off Broadway nonprofit Ars Nova when it moved to West 54th Street. Next year, Ars Nova is expanding its operations to the Greenwich House Theater, and it is renting the space to the Freestyle production; the Freestyle plans were announced Monday night at an Ars Nova gala.
