But on a recent afternoon, she was in the Jumping Bean, a favorite Mexican cafe here, dealing with a distinctly earthbound problem: parking.
Dr. Ewing, 32, can be a hard woman to slow down, keep track of, or sum up. To keep it simple, you could just say she’s a sociologist at the University of Chicago’s School of Social Service Administration, with a new book, “Ghosts in the Schoolyard: Racism and School Closings on Chicago’s South Side,” out this week.
But that would leave out the seemingly million other things she is doing.
In the past year, she has also published an acclaimed book of poetry; collaborated on a play about the poet Gwendolyn Brooks; and co-hosted the Chicago Poetry Block Party, a community festival she helped create. She also sold a middle-grade novel, coming in 2020; signed up as a consulting producer on W. Kamau Bell’s CNN series, “United Shades of America”; and began hosting a new podcast, “Bughouse Square,” inspired by the archives of another Chicago gadfly, Studs Terkel.
And then there’s her gig with Marvel Comics. In August, Dr. Ewing caused minor pandemonium on the internet when she announced that she had been hired to write “Ironheart,” the first solo title featuring its character Riri Williams, black girl genius from Chicago.
It’s tempting to see Dr. Ewing, who holds a doctorate from Harvard, as a real-life, grown-up version of Riri, a prodigy who builds her own Iron Man suit in her M.I.T. dorm room, without the benefit of Tony Stark’s millions.
But even if she playfully campaigned for the Marvel job with tweets pointing out their commonalities (down to her similar sweep of side-parted dark hair swirled with purple, since cropped closer and dyed blonde on top), she discourages pushing the analogy too far.
In “Ghosts in the Schoolyard,” published by the University of Chicago Press, Dr. Ewing uses the more staid tools of social science to dive deep into one of the most contentious episodes in the city’s recent history: the 2013 school closure plan that ultimately resulted in the shuttering of 49 public schools, most of them in African-American neighborhoods.
It’s a scholarly book, and also an unabashedly personal one. It focuses on Bronzeville, the storied African-American neighborhood on the South Side, where Dr. Ewing, as she notes in an impassioned introduction, taught middle school for three years after graduating from the University of Chicago.
She looks at the history of discriminatory housing and education policies that gave rise to intensely segregated, unequal, often overcrowded schools, which then suffered steeply declining enrollments after the public housing towers that once dominated the neighborhood were demolished.
Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot, the Harvard scholar of education who supervised Dr. Ewing’s dissertation research, called it a “wonderfully probing” book.
“The literature on school closings, and even on school reform that supposes there must be closings, rarely considers what Eve considers: How do people experience this?” she said.
Dr. Ewing’s books include a study of Chicago’s public schools, a collection of Afro-futurist-tinged poetry and “Ironheart,” an Iron Man spinoff coming from Marvel Comics.
The inside of Dr. Ewing’s left wrist carries a reminder of her teaching days: a tattoo of an apple, framed by the opening words of James Weldon Johnson’s “Lift Every Voice and Sing,” known widely as the black national anthem.
“I thought about how clean and beautiful and lovely the inside of our building was, and what it felt like to walk in every day, which was just the opposite of the stereotype being invoked,” she said.
Dr. Ewing grew up in Logan Square, a racially mixed (and now rapidly gentrifying) neighborhood on the northwest side, filling notebooks with writing and drawings on the long bus commute to Northside College Prep, a selective enrollment public high school.
As a teenager, she was active in Young Chicago Authors, a youth arts incubator whose open mic poetry events helped artists like Chance the Rapper, Noname and Jamila Woods get their start. It was there that Dr. Ewing, who worked on the organization’s magazine, met some of her current, close-knit circle of friends and collaborators.
Dr. Ewing got married in August, and as part of the wedding celebration, she and her husband, an economist, rented a bus and treated their guests to a custom history tour. “We showed them places like the stockyards, and talked about the history of redlining,” she said.
After the recent lunch at the Mexican cafe, she jumped in her car, made a U-turn — “one of Chicago’s greatest contributions to culture,” she joked — and offered an abbreviated version focused on Bronzeville.
She pointed out the site of a Civil War-era camp for Confederate prisoners of war, and the intersection of 47th Street and South Parkway (now Martin Luther King Jr. Drive) featured in “Black Metropolis,” the landmark 1945 sociological study by St. Clair Drake and Horace R. Cayton.
And more than once, she slowed down to comment in a goofy, affectionate voice about kids in neat uniforms, dawdling on their way home from school. “I just love this time of day,” she said.
Dr. Ewing said she had tried to write “Ghosts in the Schoolyard” in a way that would be accessible to ordinary people.
