Democrats paid a political cost for decades after F.D.R. tried it in the 1930s. They probably would again.
Packing the Supreme Court is back in the news. Frustrated with the rightward drift of the courts under President Trump, a growing number of liberals are contemplating the possibility of expanding the size of the Supreme Court should they regain power in 2020.
Liberals are considering the bold step because, they argue, the rightward shift in the judiciary has been obtained by a president operating under a cloud of illegitimacy and with the benefit of minority rule in the Senate. But the political risks for such a move by Democrats would be enormous, and potentially long-lasting.
An expansion of the Supreme Court is possible: The Constitution does not specify the number of justices who should serve. Even if Democrats fail in passing legislation to expand the court, proponents argue, the effort would still have a salutary effect by pressuring Chief Justice John Roberts to moderate his colleagues toward the center.
For precedent, they point to a similar move by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. After a Democratic landslide victory in 1936, Roosevelt tried to tame the Supreme Court. In his first term, the Democratic Congress had enacted a sweeping New Deal agenda that included economic regulations, protections for organized labor, public works spending and social safety net policies. But the Supreme Court ruled against two major programs — the National Industrial Recovery Act and the Agricultural Adjustment Act. Eager to take advantage of the election results, he proposed legislation that would allow the president to appoint an additional justice, up to a maximum of six, for every member of the court who was over age 70.
After several weeks of deliberation, the Senate Judiciary Committee voted 10 to 8 to send the bill to the floor with a negative recommendation. “The bill is an invasion of judicial power such as has never before been attempted in this country,” the majority stated upon sending its recommendation to the floor. Polls revealed that a majority of Americans consistently opposed the plan.
But the benefits of the move also came, critically, with enormous political costs that liberals would pay for almost four decades.
The court battle was a huge reversal of fortune for Roosevelt. Starting with the 1938 midterm elections, a coalition of Southern Democratic committee chairmen and Republicans came to power. They broke with the president by forming a powerful congressional voting bloc that had the muscle to stifle major initiatives at the high point of the liberal era.
The only real break for liberals finally came in 1964 and 1965, when an enormous grass-roots civil rights movement and huge Democratic majorities put into office during the 1964 election gave President Lyndon Johnson a brief window to pass Great Society legislation — a window that largely closed with the midterms in 1966. Ultimately, the conservative coalition that was born out of Roosevelt’s court-packing battles came apart only when congressional reforms in the mid-1970s brought the committee era to an end.
If Democrats place their bets on court-packing once again, the political backlash would probably be even more severe. The right now possesses huge institutional weapons — national news media outlets, well-established interest groups and think tanks, and vast sources of campaign money — that could quickly be deployed. They have invested heavily in reshaping the courts over the past few decades. Given that the Republicans have tended to care about the courts more than liberals, it is likely that court packing could be more effective at energizing Republicans than Democrats. Even if there is a Democratic Congress before 2020, proponents will never find the two-thirds support needed to overturn a presidential veto.
If liberals want to change the direction of the courts, they should do more to replicate the kind of long-term projects their opponents have undertaken since the 1980s to nurture judicial talent and create a deep pool for future appointments. Liberals need to do better at using congressional procedure and handling open hearings to diminish political support for conservative nominees — and obviously they need to win elections, starting in November.
Liberals must realize that without doing more to build effective grass-roots political campaigns in the home states of swing senators, the political logic of partisanship will rarely result in so-called moderates acting in “moderate” ways.
As much as liberals yearn for a dramatic plan like court packing that might in the near term break the lock that the right has on the judiciary, it would in the end strengthen the political forces fighting to dismantle voting rights, gun control, environmental regulation, abortion rights and the legacies of the New Deal and the Great Society.
