A 42-year-old woman went to a Brooklyn apartment in August 2016 to meet a self-described spiritual leader for what she thought was a “church ceremony.” She had met him at a religious goods store.
During the ceremony, the man, Nigel Kennedy, started chanting and poured a drink that tasted like alcohol into the woman’s mouth, prosecutors said. She passed out briefly, then regained consciousness and felt someone on top of her. The next morning she awoke naked on an unfamiliar bed, feeling nauseous and dizzy, and realized she had been raped, prosecutors said.
Mr. Kennedy, 51, pleaded not guilty on Wednesday in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn to charges of rape and sexual abuse. He is accused of drugging and raping two women in Brooklyn during separate religious ceremonies two years apart, and faces up to 25 years in prison if convicted of the top charge. Justice William Miller set Mr. Kennedy’s bail at $35,000, which he posted.

Reached by telephone, Mr. Kennedy declined to comment on the allegations on Wednesday afternoon. The telephone number is linked through records to the Psychic Kaballah Network. On its website, the business offers the assistance of a “proven international famed Kaballah master” who uses “mystical magic” to help people achieve their desires.
The Psychic Kaballah Network’s site claims the business operates with “certified psychics.” It also offers spells — described as being so effective at getting even with enemies that customers shouldn’t request them unless “absolutely necessary” — and magical objects that can protect against harm.
Mr. Kennedy previously owned a storefront religious goods shop in East Flatbush that no longer operates, the district attorney’s office said. He met both women there.
The women sought medical attention soon after the alleged attacks and forensic evidence was collected, prosecutors said. The second victim later identified Mr. Kennedy as her attacker, and he was arrested in early September after flying into John F. Kennedy International Airport from Trinidad.
