1. A huge Republican victory. At a cost.
Brett Kavanaugh was sworn in to a lifetime appointment as a justice of the Supreme Court after being confirmed by a 50-48 vote in the Senate on Saturday. His arrival swings the court to the right for what could be a generation. Above, Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader of the Senate, after the vote.
Democratic anger may move Congress to the left in midterm elections, just four weeks away, that will determine Mr. Trump’s prospects for the last two years of his term. House Democrats have already promised to investigate the accusations of sexual misconduct and perjury against Judge Kavanaugh should they retake the chamber.
Here is our reconstruction of the most dramatic confirmation fight in a quarter-century.
2. Adding to President Trump’s victories, he fulfilled a campaign promise by renegotiating Nafta — at the expense of relations with Canada.
Under the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement, rules will change on dairy exports, intellectual property and car manufacturing. Above, Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, met with autoworkers on Friday.
And the American economy is humming. The Labor Department reported that unemployment fell to 3.7 percent in September, the lowest rate in nearly 50 years.
3. President Trump has long claimed to be a self-made billionaire. But he received at least $413 million in today’s dollars from his father, Fred Trump, pictured above.
An investigation by The Times found that much of that reached Mr. Trump because he helped his parents dodge taxes, with sham corporations, improper deductions and real estate holdings undervalued by hundreds of millions. The schemes — some of them outright fraud — enabled the family to evade hundreds of millions of dollars in taxes on the transfer of over $1 billion to the Trump children.
Here are 11 takeaways from our report.
A lawyer for the president said “there was no fraud or tax evasion by anyone,” and Mr. Trump called the article an “old, boring and often told hit piece.” But officials in New York State and New York City are investigating.
Meanwhile, the first lady, Melania Trump, is returning to the U.S. after a week far from the bedlam of Washington. She seemed at ease on visits to Ghana, Malawi, Kenya and Egypt.  Follow her trip in photos.
4. 
Speculation on possible winners had included prime movers in encouraging North Korea to denuclearize. That process took another step today. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has met the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, and then the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in. Mr. Moon’s office said that a second U.S.-North Korean summit meeting had been agreed on.
5. The death toll from an earthquake and 20-foot tsunami that struck the Indonesian island of Sulawesi on Sept. 28 increased to more than 1,700.
Many more are believed to have died, been buried under soil, swept away by waves or trapped in a tangle of crushed buildings that will take months, possibly years, to clear. “They are finding devastation and tragedy everywhere,” a spokeswoman for one aid group said.
Liquefaction — when an earthquake turns land into roiling waves like liquid — obliterated whole villages and neighborhoods.
6. A breaking story: A collision between a limousine carrying a wedding party and another vehicle left 20 people dead on Saturday in upstate New York.
Here’s what we have so far. A team from the National Transportation Safety Board is en route.
Crowds outside a Chicago courthouse, above, had prepared to protest, but instead they cheered as Officer Jason Van Dyke was found guilty of second-degree murder for shooting Laquan McDonald, a black teenager, 16 times in 2014.
It was the first conviction of a Chicago police officer for an on-duty shooting in nearly 50 years. Whether it will ease decades of mistrust and anger between the police and black Chicagoans remains to be seen.
Nationally, in 15 prominent cases of black people killed in confrontations with the police since 2014, three officers have now been convicted.
The street artist appeared to pull off one of his greatest pranks. His work “Girl With Balloon” sold for $1.4 million before being shredded by a rigged frame at Sotheby’s auction house in London on Friday.
With two homers from Gary Sanchez and one from Aaron Judge, the Yankees won in Fenway Park to head home with the American League division series tied at 1-1.
They play again on Monday in New York, where the Yankees have won seven consecutive playoff games dating to last season. The Houston Astros will face the Indians in Cleveland on Monday.
In the National League, the Milwaukee Brewers take on the Colorado Rockies today (4:30 p.m. Eastern), and the Los Angeles Dodgers face the Atlanta Braves (8 p.m. Eastern).
10. There were no surprise celebrity guests on “Saturday Night Live,” so the show’s ensemble cast was on its own to address Brett Kavanaugh’s contentious confirmation to the Supreme Court.
The cold open: a celebratory Republican locker room, with Senators Mitch McConnell (Beck Bennett) and Jeff Flake (Pete Davidson), above.
11. Finally, black women mobilizing voters in the South, above; Eugene O’Neill’s San Francisco; and Denmark’s missing $2 billion: We have these stories and others in our Best Weekend Reads.
For more suggestions on what to read, watch and listen to, may we suggest these nine new books our editors liked, a glance at the latest small-screen recommendations from Watching, and our music critics’ latest playlist.
