Illustrated. 358 pp. Crown. $28.
On May 16, 1985, Oleg Gordievsky, the K.G.B.’s top spy in London, opened a telegram from his bosses in Moscow. He read it with growing apprehension. For more than a decade, Gordievsky had been a double agent, turning Soviet secrets over to the British. Now he was being ordered to return home at once. Was this a routine summons? Or had Moscow finally found him out?
“The Spy and the Traitor” is the latest of Ben Macintyre’s nonfiction narratives about spies of the last century, operating in wars hot and cold. The spy of Macintyre’s title is Gordievsky, the traitor is the American C.I.A. agent Aldrich Ames, although, in fact, both men were spies for, and traitors to, the country they served.
Gordievsky was born in Moscow in 1938, fraught times, even by Soviet standards. But Gordievsky actually had little to complain of. As the son of a K.G.B. agent and loyal party member, he led a privileged life — nice apartment, enough food, no members of his immediate family executed in the basement of the Lubyanka, or sent to a Siberian gulag. In time, his father’s status and his own obvious intelligence ensured his admission to Moscow’s most prestigious university. By the early 1960s, he had been recruited by the K.G.B. and embarked on a career he had reason to hope would give him access to foreign places.
So it happened that Gordievsky’s first cultural shock took place in East Berlin in 1961. The Wall was going up, and he was amazed to realize, as he later wrote, that “only a physical barrier, reinforced by armed guards in their watchtowers, could keep the East Germans in their socialist paradise.” A few years later he was assigned to Copenhagen, where the shock lay in the plenitude of the West, its material riches and cultural openness. The Soviet Union began to seem to him a “vast, sterile concentration camp … a form of hell.” And finally, in 1968, when Russian tanks rolled into Prague to crush Czechoslovakia’s attempts at liberalization, Gordievsky arrived at his “Kronstadt” moment — so-named for the crisis of faith that came to the Russian anarchist Alexander Berkman in 1921 when the infant Bolshevik Army brutally suppressed a rebellion by sailors in the port of Kronstadt, and later, to the American journalist and Soviet sympathizer Louis Fischer in 1939, with the signing of the Hitler-Stalin Pact. “Kronstadt” has entered history as a term for the moment when the ideological scales fall from the eyes of a believer, and the true nature of the Soviet regime is revealed. The crackdown following the Prague Spring was that moment for Gordievsky. Now completely alienated from the Soviet system, he was vulnerable to an approach by the proper stranger. British intelligence sources had been keeping an eye on him. In 1974 he offered his allegiance to the British, and gave over his life to the constant threat of exposure.
Ames was a dissatisfied man, a heavy drinker whose career was going nowhere. He felt underpaid and unappreciated. He had a wife whose extravagance was far beyond his means to gratify. He was desperate for money. On May 15, 1985, he met with a K.G.B. officer at the Soviet Embassy in Washington. In return he received a shopping bag containing $50,000, the first of many payments. It is still unclear whether Ames revealed Gordievsky’s name at that initial meeting, but over the course of nine years, he turned over reams of confidential material to the K.G.B., including the names of 25 C.I.A. assets whom he considered a threat to his personal safety. Gordievsky’s name was very likely among them. Most were executed by the Russians.
Ames was arrested in 1994, and will remain in prison for the rest of his life. Gordievsky, who was indeed under suspicion by Moscow, was able to escape from the Soviet Union by means of an elaborate plan worked out by British intelligence. He currently lives under an assumed name in an undisclosed location in England.
Macintyre has terrific material to work with, and in general he keeps a firm grip on it. But in recounting every aspect of espionage tradecraft, in addition to each problem that arises in the courtship of Gordievsky by British intelligence and the histories of all of the many MI6 agents who ran him, not to mention the ever-so-complicated details of Gordievsky’s “exfiltration” from the Soviet Union, Macintyre’s story sometimes bogs down. On the other hand, God is in the details, and it’s hard to imagine that there could ever be too many of those when the full account of our current engagement with Russian espionage and the Americans who have enabled it is finally written.