Opinion|Why Doesn’t Architecture Care About Sexual Harassment?
Why Doesn’t Architecture Care About Sexual Harassment?
Seven months after women accused Richard Meier of sexual misconduct, too little has been done to change the profession.
Ms. Lee is a founding partner of Bureau V, an architecture firm.
Seven months ago, I came forward with allegations of sexual misconduct against the architect Richard Meier. I shared my experience as a 21-year-old woman at his namesake firm — my first job out of college.  I felt shock, fear and trepidation. But in the days and weeks to follow, these feelings reverted to disbelief: What was he thinking?
Like many women before and after me, I simply moved on. I attended graduate school to study architecture and finished with honors. I worked for other well-known studios, became a licensed architect, joined the American Institute of Architects and co-founded my own practice: a woman-, minority-, and L.G.B.T.-owned award-winning architecture studio.
I have often thought that this would be my contribution to the profession and the future of women within it: the creation of my own work space, in which diversity and respect are supported — to lead by example.
Yet over the past year, as women across a number of industries have told their stories of abuse by powerful men and complicit workplaces, this dormant trauma began to stir.
When I first recounted my story to a reporter from The Times, the fear and rage came flooding back to me. I had hidden behind humor to tell this story to close friends in the past, but without this foil, I was stuck with telling the story in earnest, exactly as I remembered it, and all I was left with was the visceral horror of that moment.
This week Mr. Meier’s firm, Richard Meier and Partners, announced that he was stepping down from his leadership role. Yet this news, while a small victory in the campaign to hold sexually abusive men accountable, is also a moment to speak up again, this time about the architecture profession’s seeming unwillingness to address workplace discrimination and harassment.
When the scandal about Mr. Meier first broke — six other women joined me in detailing his abusive behavior — it felt like a dam was about to break, that other women would start to come forward, from his office and others. There were rumblings of revoking Mr. Meier’s Pritzker Prize. Architecture, we were told, was having its own #metoo moment.
But that didn’t happen. First, there was no reckoning within Mr. Meier’s firm. Most of those six women have left the firm, or even the profession; those who remain have stayed silent. And no wonder: Though Mr. Meier is stepping down from his leadership role and day-to-day involvement, he will remain at the firm, will continue to profit from its operation and will stay the majority shareholder. And the firm will still bear his name.
Rather than revoking his Pritzker, the prize’s administrators issued a weak statement declaring that they do not comment on the personal lives of the laureates — a confounding denial of the workplace context of much of Mr. Meier’s misconduct. This disappointing dodge only served to reveal the Pritzker’s own complicity in glossing over workplace abuse, within the same paragraph in which they claimed otherwise.
It’s not just about Mr. Meier. He did not act alone — as we know from countless #metoo stories, people like him have enablers all around them.
The day after Mr. Meier exposed himself to me, I approached my supervisor, who had worked with him for 15 years. Before I could explain in detail, she stopped me midsentence and let me know that it would be “taken care of.” This is when I knew that this harassment fit a larger pattern of behavior, and that senior management was well aware of it.
And yet nothing was taken care of. It seems my supervisor, as well as many others in the office, felt either powerless or, in some cases, indifferent to refuse Mr. Meier his requests for opportunities to prey on young women.
Those who occupied my junior position were particularly vulnerable bait for his advances. Several of us were tasked with working on his archives, which would plausibly lead us to work out of his home where he kept many of his sketchbooks. My supervisor certainly understood the risk of sending me to his home unaccompanied.
The problem extends beyond the confines of one office. Economic, institutional and social forces have erected a culture that support this behavior by powerful men who, as world-famous architects, offer a valuable brand as much as a service for clients and patrons. It is up to them to decide whether they will choose to work with the firm that bears Mr. Meier’s name or find talent elsewhere.
Institutions also need to step up. While some have issued statements and made supportive gestures, leadership in architecture as a profession, which should have been the first voice to speak up after our own, has stumbled.
Not long after our allegations became public, the Women in Architecture Committee, part of the New York chapter of the American Institute of Architects, organized a round-table discussion of sexual harassment. But a co-chairwoman of this committee is Vivian Lee, the sole female partner at Mr. Meier’s practice, creating a problematic disparity between her firm’s tone-deaf defensive statements and her committee’s declaration of support for victims of sexual harassment. How can women feel comfortable joining a local organization with this level of self-conflict, on what should be a clear voice on the matter?
And what are we to make of the Pritzker Prize, which has not only shown little interest in female architects in the past, but has also now effectively glossed over sexual misconduct at the workplace? What is the real value of these organizations to our discipline if they do not help support the women who also take part?
This is a start, but it needs to go further. Most architecture firms are small businesses with no dedicated human resources department; when the problem is coming from the top, how does this rule change the outcome for the employee? How does one actually foster “an equitable working environment” — and what do employees do when that doesn’t happen?
To really effect change, we need to focus on culture, and where it is solidified — in education. Architectural education is plagued by the mentality that suffering is a necessary part of its practice. Sleepless nights and poor self-care seem to be par for the course for creative production. As a guest juror at a university architecture department, I once watched in horror as a student fainted from lack of sleep during her presentation.
The acceptance of suffering easily slips into normalizing sexual misconduct and its suppression as simply part of the practice. Cultlike worship of the star architect only exacerbates this condition, and there are plenty of those who work for these so-called star architects, willing to sacrifice their time and integrity because they have been conditioned to believe that this mode of production is normal. It may be expected, but it is not acceptable.
Educational institutions need to prepare their students for the work force by fostering environments wherein students learn to respect their own time, are encouraged to manage it properly, and ensure that their bodies are respected.
I admire the women who held Mr. Meier accountable for his behavior and pushed for change within the office afterward. While our stories took place years ago, time does not erase them. Rather, they have now become an important part of Mr. Meier’s legacy. It is up to the rest of us to learn from mistakes and construct a new and better normal for future generations.
Stella Lee is a founding partner of Bureau V, an architecture firm.
