LAS VEGAS — John Toles-Bey wants to be clear: He loves Barack Obama.
Mr. Toles-Bey, a 62-year-old small-business owner, voted for the former president twice, after never participating in elections in his life. He now follows politics incessantly, an obsession he credits to Mr. Obama’s influence. He started a T-shirt company called You Can’t Trump God after Mr. Obama left office, because President Trump’s election sent him into a downward emotional spiral that only religion could counteract.
But even as Mr. Toles-Bey waited outside one of Mr. Obama’s recent rallies, he wondered aloud if his political hero’s signature idealism had a place in today’s flame-throwing political climate.
As Mr. Obama has crisscrossed the country in support of Democratic candidates, nerves are rattling among some members of the coalition that fueled his historic rise from backbencher in the Illinois Statehouse to America’s first black president. A week of domestic terrorism has shocked the political system ahead of the 2018 elections. And while Mr. Obama’s speeches this election cycle have largely stuck with his trademark themes of idealism and hope, some of his supporters wonder if they’re witnessing a living time capsule from a bygone era of civil political rhetoric.
Mr. Obama remains the top Democratic surrogate in the country, and he will be lending his star power to some of the most closely watched Democratic candidates during the campaign’s final week, including Andrew Gillum in Florida, Stacey Abrams in Georgia and Joe Donnelly in Indiana. But the election of Mr. Trump has tested the former president’s theory of measured change, his advisers acknowledge. It has also jaded some of the legions of voters Mr. Obama brought into the Democratic fold, including young people and minorities.
Mr. Obama’s advisers say the former president sees “resisting” Mr. Trump and inspiring voters as a false choice. They point to his speeches this summer that broke with long-held tradition by heavily criticizing Mr. Trump, even if he rarely mentioned the current president by name.
Obama Is Helping Democrats Punch Back at Trump: Will it Work?
Former President Barack Obama has leveled many attacks on President Trump heading into the 2018 midterm elections. These sharp rebukes, though, are a departure from how past leaders used their post-presidential campaign stops.
Former President Barack Obama has been out on the campaign trail offering very direct criticism of President Trump, something most ex-presidents haven’t done with their successors. “The president said he was going to pass a middle-class tax cut before the election. Congress isn’t even in session before the election.” That sort of violates the tradition that former presidents have had in recent decades, where they might get out there and campaign for members of their party, but they’d more or less avoid directly attacking their successor in the White House. A lot of Democrats have been saying that the only way to counter Trump is to be a little bit more like Trump, and that’s not Barack Obama’s style. He’s at his strongest when he’s most inspiring. “You can be saving somebody’s life just by voting. That power rests in your hands.” He’s at his strongest when he is directly taking on some of the arguments of the other side. He talks about rule of law, and the norms that President Trump has basically violated. “It should not be a partisan issue to say that we do not pressure the attorney general or the F.B.I. to use the criminal justice system as a cudgel to punish our political opponents.” It’s kind of a mismatch. Harvard Law School Review president against the reality show host. And it’s just a very different style of campaigning. I think the problem for President Obama is he won pretty convincing elections when he was on the ballot twice, and then the other three times he was campaigning while he was president, the Democrats lost. “The Republicans will take control of the House.” “Republicans will take control of the Senate.” The challenge for the Democrats is they don’t have a single leader right now who has the stature to go up against an incumbent president. And Barack Obama is the only one, basically, who can fit that role. He in effect represents the past, and they have yet to find somebody to be their leader for the future.
Still, like Mr. Toles-Bey, some supporters of Mr. Obama have come to want a fist, not a handshake, in an era when the new generation of progressives is hitting back harder at Mr. Trump than the former president usually does.
“For a long time, older generations have told us, ‘This is how politics is supposed to work,’ but we’re pushing back on that,” said Gabriella Lorance, a 20-year-old who went to see Mr. Obama with her two friends in Milwaukee. She was 10 when he was first elected president.
They took a moment to list their favorite politicians: Jason Kander, the former Missouri secretary of state; Beto O’Rourke, the Senate candidate for Texas; and Sharice Davids of Kansas, a former mixed martial arts fighter who could become the first lesbian Native American elected to Congress.
Mr. Obama didn’t make the cut.
“There has to be a reframing of how we go about making change,” said LaTosha Brown, an organizer and co-founder of Black Voters Matter. She said that although she respected Mr. Obama, particularly because he was a former community organizer, she had come to see him as a “constitutionalist” in a political era that requires more radical action.
The divide could be a preview of future fights among liberals. In the coming years, as voters search for Mr. Obama’s successor as the unifying face of the Democratic Party, questions over what tone is best to oppose Mr. Trump will be front and center, just as critical as issues of policy or ideology.
This year alone, some prospective contenders for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination have raised eyebrows for their willingness to take anti-Trump rhetoric to new levels. Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. said he would “beat the hell” out of Mr. Trump in a fight (he later apologized), and Michael Avenatti, a lawyer who has repeatedly clashed with Mr. Trump, challenged a member of the president’s family to a physical altercation.
Mr. Obama’s speeches are littered with appeals to conservatives, and in Milwaukee he oscillated between indicting the modern Republican Party and appealing to those he called “compassionate conservatives” interested in building a coalition.
But the next generation of Democrats may forgo such wavering in favor of a more uncompromising tone.
In the last week, amid an eruption of political violence, two members of that new group of progressive Democrats stood out for their forceful language: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York and Rashida Tlaib of Michigan.
Ms. Tlaib went even further.
Valerie Jarrett, a close adviser to Mr. Obama, said in an interview that he understands the frustration among Democrats during Mr. Trump’s administration. Ms. Jarrett said that while it might be “harder” for the president to try to “appeal to our better angels” during this political time, it remained necessary.
“We need conversations that begin from a place of civility,” Ms. Sebena said.
Other liberal voters said they had been so enraged by Mr. Trump’s administration that it changed what they look for in a Democratic messenger.
Maybe it should be someone who is more of a “fighter,” said Tom Mooshegian, 64, in Las Vegas.
Dana Williams, 41, who was waiting for Mr. Obama with her husband and daughter in Las Vegas, said she thought Mr. Trump had introduced a style of politics that prioritizes personal attacks. To combat him, Democrats may need to meet “fire with fire,” she said, borrowing a favorite phrase of Mr. Trump’s.
“When they go low, we got to go hard,” said Ms. Brown, adding that she was not convinced “people in high offices” understood the urgency of the moment.
Mr. Obama did not publicly respond to Mr. Holder’s comments, but repeatedly in his speeches this summer, the former president has made an impassioned plea for his brand of politics: hopeful, civil and driven by incremental progress.
Mr. Obama, who avoided the political arena for more than a year before returning this summer, has focused his efforts on states where Democrats are facing key races in the Senate. He also tends to hold rallies in urban areas with voters who are historically less likely to vote in midterm elections, including young people and minorities.
Jon Favreau, a former speechwriter for Mr. Obama who now runs a liberal media company, said the former president’s message has evolved on key issues such as voter suppression and structural racism. The Republican Party has become more overtly tied to white identity politics and immigration reduction, Mr. Favreau said, and Mr. Obama has become more explicit in his indictments. In doing so, he has laid out a pathway for how Democratic candidates can criticize while not resorting to mudslinging.
