How to furnish a space that will attract guests — and withstand the wear and tear that comes with them.
Renting out a vacation home — or even a spare room in your apartment in the city — is easier than ever, thanks to sites like Airbnb and HomeAway. But making your rental stand out in a crowd of online listings is another thing.
And even if you manage to attract guests, how do you decorate a space so that it withstands the damage that even the best behaved among them will do? We asked interior designers with rental homes of their own for advice.
Use neutrals as your foundation, she said, and then build on that with accent colors. When Ms. Rosenthal decorated a home in Southport, Conn., for a client who planned to rent it out, she used modern furniture in white, leather and wood, and accessorized with “big, happy art,” throw pillows and colorful vases and bowls.
More than 20 years ago, Mr. Nahem and his partner, Jeff Fields, bought a modest 1960s ranch-style oceanfront house on Further Lane, in East Hampton, N.Y., and then renovated it and prepped it for summer rental. After studying the competition, Mr. Nahem decided to plow the rental proceeds back into the property.
In fact, he plowed the whole house. The overhaul included tearing down the original structure and building a two-story home with expansive ocean views, a gym, a hot tub and a pool. Since then, renters have been willing to pay as much as $10,000 a night for the privilege of staying there (for a minimum of two weeks) — among them, the King and Queen of Jordan, Mr. Downey and his family, and Giada de Laurentiis, the celebrity chef. A few years ago, Mr. Nahem bought the house next door, which he now rents out for about $6,000 a night.
To elevate a rental’s décor if you’re on a budget, Mr. Nahem recommended mixing inexpensive furniture with high-end or vintage pieces.
When he outfitted his second house on Further Lane, he used a combination of vintage items he owned and bargains he found online. In the dining room, a Saarinen table from Knoll is surrounded by chairs bought from Wayfair for about $150 each. For the bathroom, he found porcelain tile that resembled marble for less than $10 a square foot at Stone Source and inexpensive shower hardware on Overstock.com. He upholstered two barrel chairs in the living room with durable outdoor fabric. And to add a touch of whimsy in the kitchen, he used handmade driftwood cabinet pulls he found on Etsy for about $10 apiece. “Those are the things that add personality,” he said.
“Rooms should always be functional for your guests,” said Cortney Novogratz, an interior designer known for making eye-catching spaces (and reality shows like HGTV’s “Home by Novogratz”) with her husband, Robert, and their seven children in tow. Among those spaces: a five-bedroom house with a pool, hot tub and trampoline that the family owns in Great Barrington, Mass., and rents out for $750 a night on Airbnb.
Each bedroom in the house is outfitted with bedside lamps, solar shades with blackout drapes and an ottoman, chair or bench, so guests “have an easy place to throw their bag or suitcase,” Ms. Novogratz said.
Ms. Bolognino’s house, which she rents on Airbnb, is part of a 20-acre retreat called Silent G Farms, and it tends to attract New Yorkers in need of rest, she said. To make them feel pampered, she focuses on details that a host might overlook, providing things like soaps, towels and burlap place mats monogrammed with her farm’s “G” logo, all of which she buys on Etsy.
At Mr. Gambrel’s Hamptons rental, you’ll find not only leather upholstery and high-end bedding, but also extra-thick, custom-cut sisal carpets. “There’s a certain level of warmth it provides,” he said of the sisal, noting that while it has to be replaced every few years, it adds character and elevates the overall design.
Don’t rely on your host to furnish all the niceties.
Grant K. Gibson, an interior designer in San Francisco, doesn’t own a vacation rental, but for the past three summers he has rented a cottage in Castine, Me. He brings his own vases, candles, sheets, pillows, tablecloths, plates, silverware, paper lanterns and other accessories to make it feel more like home. (To cut down on luggage, he has many of the items shipped to the house.) As soon as he arrives, he takes down the owner’s curtains, rearranges the furniture and hides any ugly rental décor in the spare bedroom.
