Cesar Sayoc Jr., whom the authorities have charged with sending mail bombs to prominent Democrats.
By Jack Healy, Julie Turkewitz and Richard A. Oppel Jr.
AVENTURA, Fla. — Cesar Sayoc Jr. was a volatile nobody desperate to become a somebody.
He styled himself as a bodybuilder, entrepreneur, member of the Seminole tribe and exotic-dance promoter in the status-hungry beachfront world of South Florida. In reality, Mr. Sayoc, a fervent supporter of President Trump who has been charged with mailing pipe bombs to prominent Democrats, was a bankrupt loner who spewed anger and spent years living in and out of a van, according to court documents and interviews with people who knew him.
He went on racist, anti-gay tirades at the Fort Lauderdale pizza shop where he worked as a night-shift deliveryman in 2017, telling his manager, a lesbian, that she and other gay people along with Democrats should all be put onto an island and then “nuked.” At a reunion event in 2015 with his college soccer team, he browbeat former team members with racist, sexist conspiracy theories.
And when Mr. Sayoc’s mother and sisters urged him to seek mental-health treatment, he furiously repelled their efforts and told his mother he hated her, said Ronald Lowy, a lawyer for the family who also represented Mr. Sayoc in a 2002 case in which he threatened to bomb an electric company during a dispute over a bill. He refused to even listen when his mother reminded Mr. Sayoc that he was Filipino and Italian, not Seminole, Mr. Lowy said.
When they first met, Mr. Lowy said, Mr. Sayoc brought in a scrapbook filled with notes and photographs he had collected from wrestlers, bodybuilders and strippers, table scraps from a world that he idolized.
Mr. Lowy said that Mr. Sayoc’s family members were Democrats and that Mr. Sayoc seemed to have no outspoken partisan views during the 2002 case. But he said that Mr. Trump’s angry rhetoric and his appeals to the “forgotten man and woman” during the 2016 campaign seemed to strike a deep chord with Mr. Sayoc, whose father had abandoned the family when he was a child.
“He was looking for some type of parental figure and being a loner, being an outcast, being the kind of person Trump speaks to, I think he was attracted to Trump as a father figure,” Mr. Lowy said.
Mr. Sayoc registered as a Republican and posted photographs of himself wearing a “Make America Great Again Hat” at one of Mr. Trump’s rallies.
On Twitter and Facebook, he railed against former President Barack Obama and Oprah Winfrey with misspelled racial epithets, threatened former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and praised President Trump and conservative causes. His social-media feeds were an electronic version of the white van carted away by law-enforcement officials on Friday morning, which was covered in stickers praising Mr. Trump, condemning liberals and putting cross hairs over an image of Hillary Clinton.
While Mr. Sayoc’s sisters are successful and his mother ran her own cosmetics business, Mr. Sayoc bumped between jobs, arrests, apartments and his van. He once lived in a comfortable neighborhood of single-story homes in the Coral Ridge Isles neighborhood of Fort Lauderdale, but lost the home in a 2009 foreclosure.
His finances deteriorated to the point that he filed for bankruptcy in 2012, saying that he had just $4,175 worth of assets. But he still struck an outward posture of success. During a 2014 deposition in a labor lawsuit between a DJ and the owners of a South Florida nightclub, Mr. Sayoc boasted that he had played professional soccer for A.C. Milan in Italy and arena football in Arizona. He also claimed he owned a dry-cleaning business and was studying to be a veterinarian.
“He was the kind of guy who was maybe sweeping floors at Apple, but would tell you he and Jobs invented the computer together,” said David M. McDonald, a lawyer in Miami who represented the nightclub owners in the labor dispute.
Just a day before he was arrested, with a huge national manhunt closing in on him, Mr. Sayoc showed up on Thursday to work as a D.J. at Ultra, a strip club in West Palm Beach, said the club’s manager, Stacy Saccal.
Mr. Sayoc worked at the club for about two months, and Ms. Saccal said there had been no concerns about his performance or behavior. But Ms. Saccal had begun to notice that Mr. Sayoc might be in financial distress: On Monday, she started to suspect he might be living out of his van. A bartender told her Mr. Sayoc was cooking something that smelled like fish in the D.J. booth.
Earlier in his life, he had pinged around the Midwest for a time. In 1995, he was charged with theft by swindle and possession of half a gram of crack cocaine in the Minneapolis area, according to a statement from prosecutors in Hennepin County.
He had a short-lived marriage to a woman identified in court papers as Roberta Altieri that ended in divorce in Oklahoma City in 2004, according to court records. Billie Mode, the mother of his ex-wife, said the couple worked in strip clubs and were married just two months.
Mr. Sayoc also had a long criminal record that included multiple shoplifting and theft charges. Once he was arrested while carrying $19,000 worth of cash.
In May 2015, he told the police that someone had broken into his van while he was working out at LA Fitness — where he had been showering — and stole about $45,000 worth of suits and costumes he needed for his business. It is unclear whether he actually had anything worth that much in the van, or whether he was making the report as pretext to make a false insurance claim.
Even then, he had an affinity for Mr. Trump: The Broward Sheriff’s Office report notes that of the 139 pieces he said were taken, 11 were the president’s clothing brand.
“He appeared to be his own island,” he said.
People who encountered Mr. Sayoc in recent years said their interactions were often angry or uncomfortable.
Mr.  He referred to Mr. Obama with a racist slur and said he was not a citizen. Years before he ran for office, Mr. Trump falsely claimed Mr. Obama was not an American citizen.
Ms. Gureghian was familiar with Mr. Sayoc’s white van, but she was not sure if he was living in it. Once when it was raining, she accepted his offer to drive her home although she was nervous, unsure if she was safe.
Teresa Palmer, 48, another manager, said that she also recalled the van, and that Mr. Sayoc would say “nasty things” about minorities. She remembered him mentioning Mr. Trump, but only recalled him saying that Mr. Trump made a “great” president. Mr. Sayoc left the pizza shop in January, telling colleagues he was going to work in long-haul trucking.
When Mr. Sayoc showed up to a dinner in 2015 honoring his soccer coach from Brevard College in North Carolina, other team members said they were glad to see him.
But they said he quickly made clear he was a fanatical supporter of Mr. Trump, and bombarded them with racist and misogynist conspiracy theories.
“He was like, ‘America needs to be made great again, and I’m working on the upcoming presidential campaign to make sure we get the right people in office,’” said Eddie Tadlock, who was at the event. Mr. Tadlock said the political invective was clearly out of place at an event where former teammates were reliving their glory days on the soccer pitch.
“If you want to have a dialogue about politics and policy, there’s a way to go about it, but the way he took the conversation was completely off course,” he added.
A few days later, Mr. Sayoc sent Mr. Tadlock a friendly congratulatory message on Facebook, but soon started barraging Mr. Tadlock with sexist, racist messages that were “off-the-charts crazy” and said that Mr. Trump would be the savior of the United States.
Just two weeks before the homemade bombs began showing up in the mail, Mr. Sayoc put on a three-piece suit, climbed out of a sticker-covered white van and walked into a West Palm Beach art galley to attend a Hispanic Heritage Month celebration, the gallery’s owner, Rolando Chang Barrero said.
It was 8:30 p.m. and most of the guests had already left, Mr. Barrero said. But Mr. Sayoc did not seem to mind. Ms. Miami International was there, as was the president of the Florida Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, and Mr. Sayoc stayed to pose for pictures with them.