MURPHYSBORO, Ill. — President Trump said on Saturday that “the hearts of all Americans are filled with grief” after a mass shooting at a Pittsburgh synagogue left at least 11 people dead, and he called on the country to combat hate crimes together.
Still, Mr. Trump again demonstrated that he would not be swayed from the call of the campaign trail during a politically volatile and violent midterm election season. Not as the death toll at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh mounted. And not as the authorities were still investigating how another suspect in a separate case this week went from being a loyal Trump fan to mailing explosive devices to several of Mr. Trump’s critics.
In minutes, Mr. Trump moved from a call for unity to attacking and name-calling Democrats, including his former presidential rival, Hillary Clinton, and leading lawmakers like Senator Elizabeth Warren and Representative Maxine Waters.
Rather than hang back at the White House, the president barreled forward to Illinois to support Representative Mike Bost, a Republican in a tight race for re-election. Mr. Trump received counterterrorism briefings on the road. He delivered real-time shooting “results” to the country between Air Force One stops and urged Americans to fight religious and racial prejudice. And he repeatedly said that the death penalty should be enforced.
On Saturday, Mr. Trump made a stop at an Indiana farming convention ahead of a busy schedule next week in the run-up to the elections, when at least 10 campaign events are scheduled. Mr. Trump also said that he intended to visit Pittsburgh, but did not give a time frame.
Hours before his latest rally — where he often voices his support of the Second Amendment — Mr. Trump said that the nation’s gun laws had “little to do” with the shooting and suggested that the synagogue should have had an armed guard in place.
Four police officers were among the injured, according to Wendell D. Hissrich, Pittsburgh’s public safety director. And Democrats, including Pennsylvania’s governor, Tom Wolf, quickly disagreed with the president’s assertion that gun laws had little to do with the shooting.
President Barack Obama, who was sent one of the explosive devices this week, called for a retooling of gun laws, as did Democratic leaders in Congress.
The attack was even more painful because it occurred at “a place of sanctuary and prayer,” said Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader, offering prayers for the victims and calling for an overhaul of gun legislation.
Amid a growing outcry, the president seemed to soften his tone as the day went on, even as he disparaged Ms. Pelosi in Indiana and delivered a partisan political message in Illinois. As he crisscrossed the Midwest, he spoke with his eldest daughter, Ivanka Trump, and son-in-law, Jared Kushner, who are both Jewish.
By the time he addressed the crowd at the farming convention in Indianapolis, Mr. Trump called for “the vile hate-filled poison of anti-Semitism” to be condemned.
“This wicked act of mass murder is pure evil,” Mr. Trump said, adding that Americans should stand up to “any form of religious hatred or prejudice.” He also referenced news reports that indicated that the synagogue had been hosting a bris ceremony before the shooting took place.
Both Mr. Trump and his vice president, Mike Pence, publicly suggested that the suspect, Robert D. Bowers, should pay the “ultimate price” for the shooting. On Saturday afternoon, Jeff Sessions, the attorney general, said in a statement that the Justice Department would file criminal charges against Mr. Bowers that could lead to the death penalty.
The president was not the only person in the Trump administration to hit the campaign trail after the shooting. Speaking at a rally in Las Vegas for Republican candidates running for office, Mr. Pence made reference to the mass shooting at a country music festival there a year ago, which left 58 dead.
At his rally, the president ended comments about the synagogue shooting by reiterating his belief that shooting suspects who target Jewish people should be put to death.
