WASHINGTON — For months, Republican officials have complained privately that President Trump lacks the ability to confront moments of crisis with moral clarity, choosing to inflame the divisions that have torn the country apart rather than try to bring it together.
It took the importuning of his Jewish daughter and son-in-law to craft a powerful statement of outrage at anti-Semitism after Saturday’s slaughter at a Pittsburgh synagogue. Then Mr. Trump went back into partisan mode, assailing his enemies. By the evening’s end he was tweeting about baseball, and on Sunday he went after another foe.
Mr. Trump’s mixed messages after the synagogue killings and the wave of bombs sent by one of his supporters to leading Democrats have thrust his leadership into the center of the national debate with about a week until fiercely contested congressional elections. Even some supporters call him tone-deaf, and critics say his fire-and-fury style has fueled a toxic moment in American history, while defenders bristle at what they consider opportunistic attacks by opponents interested only in tearing him down.
The deaths of 11 worshipers in Pittsburgh revived questions about what signals Mr. Trump has sent, intentionally or not, to the most radical fringe elements of society. As the president notes, members of his family are Jewish and he has been perhaps the staunchest supporter of Israel to sit in the Oval Office. Yet his castigation of “globalists,” seen by some as code for Jews, and his attacks on George Soros, the billionaire financier of liberal causes, have unsettled Jewish leaders.
Mr. Trump’s discordant approach to national crises was apparent long before the past week. He equated white supremacists with counterprotesters after the violence in Charlottesville, Va., last year and engaged in a long war of words with the mayor of San Juan, P.R., when she asked for more help dealing with Hurricane Maria. His response to the brutal killing of Jamal Khashoggi, a Saudi journalist and United States resident, focused on his desire not to lose arms contracts with Saudi Arabia.
The president has made clear he does not see national harmony as his mission. He mocks the notion of being “presidential,” and the crowds at his rallies egg him on, eager for him to “tone it up” rather than “tone it down,” as he puts it. He reads the dutiful words of unity and grief and determination that aides put in front of him, but he refuses to stick to the script. His people want a fighter, in his view, and he plans to give it to them. If the mandarins of Washington and the cable channels tut-tut over his language, it is because they are out to get him.
Inside the White House, advisers veer between resolve, resignation and resentment — struggling to get Mr. Trump to do and say what a typical president might, frustrated that he does not always heed their guidance and bitter that his critics are piling on. Sometimes they take it upon themselves to do what he will not.
Two White House officials, Jason Greenblatt and Avi Berkowitz, traveled to Pittsburgh on Saturday a few hours after the shooting, and were still there on Sunday. Urged on by his daughter Ivanka Trump and her husband, Jared Kushner, the president made plans to travel to Pittsburgh this week.
By Sunday morning, Mr. Trump was attacking another opponent who had been sent a bomb, “Wacky Tom Steyer,” the liberal California billionaire leading a campaign to impeach the president. “He comes off as a crazed & stumbling lunatic who should be running out of money pretty soon,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter after seeing Mr. Steyer interviewed on CNN.
Mr. Trump’s relationship with Judaism has long been complicated. During his campaign in 2016, he reposted Twitter messages from a since-suspended account called @WhiteGenocideTM, which was said to be located in “Jewmerica.” He also retweeted an image of Hillary Clinton against a backdrop of dollar bills with the phrase “Most Corrupt Candidate Ever!” in a six-pointed star that some interpreted as a Star of David.
Mr. Kushner insisted that his father-in-law “is not anti-Semitic” but merely “careless in retweeting imagery that can be interpreted as offensive.” Mr. Kushner and Ms. Trump have often joined the president in seeing criticism about his statements as partisan in nature.
The renewed scrutiny of Mr. Trump’s rhetoric and his party’s position on guns could complicate the final week of the campaign for Republicans. Mr. Trump in recent weeks helped consolidate support for Republican candidates on the right, mainly in solid-red states where he is popular and opposition to gun control runs strong. But even before the weekend, he was largely banished from the most competitive campaigns for the House and various governorships because of his unpopularity with swing voters.
The gun issue is unlikely to hurt Republicans in most competitive Senate races, which are being fought over overwhelmingly rural territory. But there are close races for governor where Republicans have struggled to regain support from moderate white voters alienated by Mr. Trump and where Democrats are running on gun control, including crucial battlegrounds like Florida and Ohio.
Mr. Trump had already voiced frustration that the attempted bombings diverted attention from his closing message during the campaign. With Mr. Trump indicating he will not cancel his rallies, some in his party braced for a split-screen week that they feared could drive even more moderates away: the president hurling bolts at Democrats while funeral services are held in Pittsburgh.
