Wim Kok, a trade unionist-turned-politician who became prime minister of the Netherlands as one of a new breed of pragmatic Social Democratic leaders who swept to power in Europe in the 1990s, died on Saturday in Amsterdam. He was 80.
Prime Minister Mark Rutte announced the death without providing other details. Some European news organizations reported that the cause was heart failure and that he had died in a hospital.
Mr. Kok hitched his Dutch Labor Party to the right-wing Liberal Party and to the centrist Democrats 66 to form two ruling coalitions that steered the Netherlands to economic recovery and then strong growth from 1994 to 2002.
Mr. Kok tightened spending on health care, pensions, education and benefits to children and promoted measures to increase employment. During his tenure the Netherlands recognized same-sex marriage and became the first country to legalize euthanasia.
He defused public unease about the marriage of King Willem Alexander and Queen Maxima by persuading Maxima’s father, Jorge Zorreguieta, not to attend the couple’s wedding in 2002. Mr. Zorreguieta had served as agriculture minister for two years during the 1976-83 dictatorship of Argentine president Jorge Videla.
Later that year, Mr. Kok resigned as prime minister along with his entire government following a critical report of the administration’s handling of the Srebrenica massacre in Bosnia in 1995, when United Nations peacekeepers from the Netherlands failed to prevent the slaughter of some 8,000 Muslim men and boys by Bosnian Serb forces.
A government-commissioned report harshly criticized the Kok administration for sending Dutch soldiers into a danger zone without a proper mandate or the weapons needed to protect about 30,000 refugees who had fled to the Dutch base in eastern Bosnia.
Mr. Kok with German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, front left, and British Prime Minister Tony Blair (pointing) at a European Union summit meeting in December 2000 in Nice, France. Behind them were Jaime Gama, foreign minister of Portugal, left, and Joschka Fischer, foreign minister of Germany, center.
One of Mr. Kok’s strongest selling points in a nation that nurtures a strong distrust of authority was his image as an ordinary man, a son of a carpenter who had made good — a trustworthy, down-to-earth realist.
During the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Mr. Kok and his wife, Rita Kok, decided to see more of the United States. Turning down the Secret Service’s offer of 24-hour protection, the Koks rented a Winnebago and struck out on their own. Their only concession to the security-conscious American authorities was to call the C.I.A. daily from a sheriff’s office to tell them where they were.
Mr. Kok was credited with being a founder of the Polder Model, a Dutch brand of consensus politics in which the government, employers and trade unions got together to thrash out deals on wages. Under the policy, unions agreed to belt-tightening measures in harsh economic times as long as employees were allowed to share in the profits when things went well, which they did, for almost a decade — a remarkable stretch of prosperity for the Netherlands.
A left-wing leader of the most powerful Dutch union before he moved into national politics, Mr. Kok shifted to the right of the political spectrum during his time in government. Despite that, his reputation for political honesty remained unscathed.
After his political career, Mr. Kok was a nonexecutive board member at Dutch multinationals, including Shell and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines.
Mr. Kok studied at the country’s prestigious Nyenrode Business University. After spending the early part of his career working for trade unions, he was elected to the Parliament’s lower house in 1986, serving as parliamentary leader of the left-wing Labor Party.
Three years later, he became finance minister in the third government of Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers. He became prime minister in 1994, when the Labor Party won 37 seats in the 150-seat Parliament, knocking Mr. Lubbers’ Christian Democrats out of power for the first time in the party’s history.
Mr. Kok was born on Sept. 29, 1938, in Bergambacht, in the Netherlands Province of South Holland, to Willem Kok III and Neeltje de Jager.
His survivors include his wife, Rita (Roukema) Kok; their son, Marcel; and her two children from a previous marriage, Carla and André, both of whom he adopted.