As a lawsuit challenging the use of affirmative action in admissions plays out, five freshmen reflect on why they beat the competition.
From left, Nadine Lee, Charlotte Ruhl, Lauren Marshall, Joseph Felkers and Iman Lavery, all 18 and first-year students at Harvard University, in their dormitory on campus in Cambridge, Mass.Credit...
CAMBRIDGE, Mass. — Two freshman friends sat across from each other in a common room, comparing notes on how exactly they got into Harvard. In some ways, their situations were opposites: One was a “double legacy,” with two parents who had received Harvard degrees. The other was the son of a police officer and on full financial aid.
The legacy student, Iman Lavery, remembered feeling self-conscious during a conversation when she first arrived at school: A classmate had contrasted people who were “super qualified to be here” with legacies. For her friend on financial aid, Joseph Felkers, it had been the frequent questions from new acquaintances of “What’s your thing?” — how did you get in? — that set him on edge, making him wonder if his “thing” was his passion for poetry, or simply that he was poor.
For many freshmen at Harvard who have started school as a lawsuit challenging the university’s use of affirmative action in admissions plays out in court, the case has been personal. It has sharpened the usual freshman-year doubts about how they ended up among the less than 5 percent of applicants chosen from a pool of 42,749. And it has forced uncomfortable questions about which circumstances beyond their control — like race, wealth, or legacy status — got them or their classmates here.
But late on a recent weeknight, the two sat down with Ms. Lavery’s three roommates — Nadine Lee, Lauren Marshall, and Charlotte Ruhl — to talk about the case and how it had made them reflect on their admission to Harvard and their experience so far.
The room was decorated with botanical prints and a poster of a landscape by the Japanese artist Hiroshige. Mr. Felkers, who wore wire-rimmed glasses and his hair in an undercut, perched on a white couch next to Ms. Marshall and Ms. Ruhl, who tucked their socked feet under them. Ms. Lavery and Ms. Lee, both in leggings and sneakers, sat across from them on a chair and a storage bench. As they talked, the students, all 18 years old, passed around a package of Double Stuf Oreos that Ms. Ruhl’s mother had sent.
The plaintiffs in the case have accused Harvard of discriminating against Asian-Americans by holding them to a higher standard than any other racial group. Defending itself, Harvard has been forced to reveal aspects of its admissions process that it kept closely held in the past, and some, like the special treatment given to students whose relatives made major gifts to the university, have been jarring.
Nadine Lee, 18, of Mill Valley, Calif., in her dorm room.
Two of Ms. Lavery’s roommates — Ms. Lee, who is Korean-American, and Ms. Marshall, who has a Chinese mother and a British father — said they thought that Harvard’s admissions process was biased against Asian-Americans.
Ms. Lee — who grew up in Englewood, N.J., Seoul and Marin County, Calif. — said she had long assumed that she would face discrimination in applying to college, partly because she had watched Asian friends with excellent grades and scores be rejected by their desired schools. She said she had thought a lot about how to stand out from other Asian-American applicants. Ultimately, she applied to join the United States Air Force Reserve Officers Training Corps. In her applications, she emphasized her enthusiasm for the military and her ambition to be a trauma surgeon.
“I knew that I didn’t — whatever this means — I didn’t want to be the typical Asian,” she said.
Ms. Marshall, who wore dark eyeliner and had a swirl of bleached hair, is an accomplished composer from just north of London. She said she had not felt as though she was competing against other students of Asian backgrounds to get into Harvard because her strengths were creative rather than strictly academic.
Lauren Marshall, 18, of Watford, England, in her dorm room.
Had her talents been in STEM — shorthand for science, technology, engineering and math — she would have felt differently, she said.
“If my grades were amazing and that was my hook — the fact that I’m an accomplished, like, STEM-field scientist or whatever,” she said, “I would feel a little bit — maybe I wouldn’t have ticked the Asian box” on the application.
She said that what she had read about the lawsuit, particularly that Asian-American applicants were rated lower on personality traits than applicants of other backgrounds, made her suspect that some admissions officers were probably prejudiced against Asian-Americans.
Still, while Ms. Marshall wanted Harvard to address the issue, she said she also opposed the plaintiffs’ effort to end affirmative action in the school’s admissions.
The lawsuit directly accuses Harvard of discriminating against Asian-Americans, but it also has shed light on an array of advantages for some applicants: legacies, for instance — who are admitted at five times the rate of nonlegacy students, according to court documents — recruited athletes, and those whose relatives have made major donations.
From reading online forums in which students compared their application profiles and discussed one another’s chance of getting in to different schools, Mr. Felkers had gleaned that his potential “hooks,” or advantages, were that he was from the Midwest, and that his parents were low-income.
Joseph Felkers, 18, from Caledonia, Mich., in his dorm room.
At Harvard, he said, his family’s poverty was often on his mind, especially when topics came up like what people’s parents did for a living or where they went to college. He said he frequently found himself debating how much to reveal.
“In a situation like this — we’re all just sitting around eating Oreos — I’m comfortable talking about my aid status,” he said.
For Ms. Lavery, who is from Seattle, the discomfort had lingered since the conversation — during an August pre-orientation program — in which a classmate had casually suggested that most legacies were not qualified to be at Harvard. After that, she said, she spent a lot of time thinking about whether to reveal that she was a legacy to the friends she was making in the program, some of whom came from low-income backgrounds.
“I was conscious of, ‘How am I going to tell that to them? Is it going to be a big deal when I tell them that? Is it going to change the way they think of me?’” she said.
Ms. Lavery’s maternal grandmother immigrated from Mexico and her maternal grandfather from India, so she checked three boxes on her application, indicating that she was Hispanic, white and Asian. She said she knew that her racial and ethnic background could have played a role in her admission, as well.
Iman Lavery, left, of Seattle, and Charlotte Ruhl, of New York City, both 18, in their dorm room.
Ms. Ruhl, who is white and graduated from Stuyvesant High School in New York City — where efforts to diversify the student body have left some Asian-Americans fearing that they will be excluded — was the one student in the room who said she had no idea what it was about her that had won her admission.
Earlier in the week, she had put in a request to see her own admissions file. Harvard has officially permitted students to see their admissions files since at least 1991, though the possibility of requesting such records gained new interest in 2015 after a group of Stanford students successfully used a federal education law to gain access. A Harvard spokeswoman said that the university had received roughly 200 such requests per month this fall.
In a moment when many people here are examining what has won some people admission over others, the chance to see one’s own file — complete with notes from admissions officers — can be tantalizing, though some students have said that they found the records cryptic.
Ms. Ruhl said she was simply curious. “This whole admissions process is such a mystery,” she said.
Ms. Lavery said she had requested to see her file, too.
“This is news to me!” Mr. Felkers said, about his friends requesting their files. He said that he had thought about requesting access to his file, but had not. And he did not think he would now.
