The more we learn about how people really think, the more we must rethink economic theory.
Changes in fundamental beliefs play a major role in the fluctuations of the economy. That’s the implication of two fascinating new studies that show how people systematically change their beliefs in thinking about the financial future. At the moment, the knowledge that economists have accumulated about this subject suggests that we should have a high degree of humility — not only in forecasting where we are going, but in describing where we have been.
In a 2018 paper, Julian Kozlowski of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Laura Veldkamp of Columbia University and Venky Venkateswaran of New York University attribute some of the economic pain that occurred after the 2008 financial crisis to a change in beliefs that may still be playing a role 10 years later.
Before financial tremors began to be felt in 2006, practically no one viewed a crisis of the magnitude of the Great Depression as being remotely possible, these authors say. The financial crisis changed that perspective, and people have continued to worry about this newly discovered threat, with the result that risk-taking has been inhibited and government-controlled interest rates — so-called riskless rates — have remained relatively low.
The scholars show that after an outlier event like the 2008 financial crisis occurs, standard statistical techniques show a sudden and persistent increase in the probability that such an event will occur again.
Now that such a financial crisis is forever in our data set, it is rational, they say, to continue to worry about another such crisis, even decades later. Those worries can hold back the economy.
Consider what this means for housing.
The real (inflation-corrected) S&P/CoreLogic/Case-Shiller National Home Price Index fell 36 percent from 2005 to 2012. Going all the way back to 1890, home prices had never fallen so sharply.
Before 2008, people might have rationally given the likelihood of such a fall a zero probability. Now that we have experienced it, the probability will never be zero again.
These scholars are correct, but the situation, in my view, is even worse than they imply. That’s because there is evidence from behavioral economics that people are not entirely logical, and do not actually rely fully on logic or standard statistical techniques.
This behavioral economic perspective is embraced by Nicola Gennaioli of Bocconi University and Andrei Shleifer of Harvard University in their remarkable new book, “A Crisis of Beliefs” (Princeton University Press, 2018).
Focusing on the stock market, Professor Gennaioli and Professor Shleifer demonstrate how changeable expectations for the future really are. People tend to believe that recent trends will continue, whatever they may be, and then, when things shift, they change their expectations again.
These authors, referring to previous research with Robin Greenwood at Harvard, examined six separate surveys of expected returns on the stock market, some looking at individuals, and some focusing on professionals. The surveys correlated substantially with one another, showing that they were actually measuring popular beliefs about the stock market.
But Professor Gennaioli and Professor Shleifer also showed that these expectations for future returns were systematically wrong, showing no ability to predict what actually happened.
These kinds of mistakes tend to follow certain psychological laws. Professor Gennaioli and Professor Shleifer stress that people have what they call “diagnostic beliefs,” a concept related to the “representativeness heuristic” described in 1974 by the psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky.
Diagnostic beliefs work like this: A physician, in trying to diagnose a patient’s illness, orders a blood test that reliably gives a positive result for all patients who have a certain disease. Unfortunately, the test also gives many false positives. It is easy to assume the patient has the disease. But the test may just be a false positive.
The market boom leading to the 2008 financial crisis was the result of mistaken beliefs like the doctor’s diagnostic errors, the researchers say. These diagnostic beliefs were based on what seemed to be a “kernel of truth,” Professors Gennaioli and Shleifer say: Investors had a high return in the market. But they exaggerated the meaning of that kernel of truth, creating a market bubble.
More broadly, fundamental beliefs about the economy change through time. Thus, for example, the remarkable performance in the United States stock market since 2009 and in the housing market since 2012 are a result of a newly emergent belief system, reinforced not just by presidential statements or even by tax cuts but by a psychological dynamic that operates according to well-defined psychological principles, based, erroneously, on the belief that past growth in market prices is strong positive evidence for more growth in the near future.
The problem for economics research today is to try to clarify these changing belief systems, their impact on the economy, and their duration. Further study may well show that the economic effects of beliefs founded on false premises can be profound for decades after the initial changes take place.