Some pioneering programs are teaching boys to question gender roles, both for their own well-being and as a way to prevent sexual violence.
“In here, we get to say stuff we wouldn’t normally say in front of other people. And we don’t judge each other,” said a seventh grader with dark curls. “Boys should have a safe space to talk about things that matter to us,” said another seventh grader with a hint of a Canadian accent.
The two were veterans of a weekly lunch time boys’ group at the Sheridan School, a K-8 private school in Northwest Washington, D.C., explaining the group’s purpose to new members.
Hands went up, thumbs and pinkies wagged back and forth in the shaka or “hang loose” hand gesture, which signifies full agreement at Sheridan. The group’s primary adviser, Phyllis Fagell, started an activity she called the “man box.” She called out a feeling or emotion, and the boys were supposed to determine if it belonged inside or outside of this figurative container of masculine stereotypes.
The 11 middle-school boys quickly agreed that none of the following belonged in the “man box”: trust, sadness, tenderness, patience, fear, insecurity, confusion, feeling overwhelmed and joy.
The 12- and 13-year-old boys had cut through the list without hesitation or debate. Still, they understood the gulf between knowing and practicing. “I’m still working on being able to express outside of this room, like, a quarter of what I express in here,” admitted the boy with the Canadian accent. Once again, a wave of hands raised, thumbs pivoting as if turning pages in a new script.
What’s happening at Sheridan is by no means the norm in most American schools, public or private. It’s first cousin to a vanguard of programs across the country, where educators and coaches are teaching boys, especially, about the ways to recognize and prevent sexual and gendered violence. While that is a desired outcome for many educators and administrators, it isn’t the primary reason many boys voluntarily attend such programs.
For all the progress toward helping girls and women break free of oppressive gender identities, boys are still tied, largely, to a limiting script of traditional masculine norms.
Experts say the more boys are encouraged to learn how to talk with emotional authenticity, respectfully, the healthier they are and the less likely they are to grow into the kind of men who leave destruction in their wake.
A comparative longitudinal study that examined the fallout from traditional gendered behavior in middle-school boys in both the United States and China discovered that boys in both cultures experienced higher rates of depression, lower self-esteem and lower quality of friendship when they followed the script. Among American boys, friendships suffered more and depression was worse.
Other research has found that middle school-aged boys who maintained close emotional ties with their mothers, siblings and peers enjoyed better psychological health. A paper presented to the American Psychological Association found that, among a sampling of 426 boys from racially and ethnically diverse backgrounds, those who maintained closer relationships with their mothers, especially, acted less “tough” and stoic by the time they reached eighth grade, which parlayed into closer intimacy with their friends and less depression.
Much of the disconnect for boys boils down to a reduction in their identity that often leads to isolation. This was illuminated in a defining question one educator posed during my research for a book: How can boys be authentic when we rob them of the language of their emotions?
Many of the boys at Sheridan mentioned “feeling alone” because of the thoughts and feelings they couldn’t express without being “judged” or, worse, bullied.
Opening up in front of other boys requires courage because competition, and the distrust that grows from it, is often central to male relationships. So, educators at the University School of Milwaukee were amazed when they started a boys’ lunch for the middle school football team members, and the constant blame and bullying that had become routine yielded to an “almost instantaneous effect of creating a better climate on the team,” said Will Piper, the middle school athletic coordinator, in an email.
Such efforts go beyond middle school. In Chicago’s South Side, one of the most notoriously violent urban areas in the country, a program called Becoming a Man (BAM) is meeting with success at the high school level. In BAM classes, created and overseen by Youth Guidance, a nonprofit organization that provides outcome-driven programs to Chicago public schools, participating ninth- through 12th-graders meet for one class period, once a week, to develop social-emotional learning skills and to discuss issues with a counselor-mentor about the responsibilities of their burgeoning adulthood.
At the close of the recent Boys’ Group meeting at the Sheridan School, Ms. Fagell asked the veterans if there was anything else the new members needed to know. “Yes,” said the boy with dark curls. He turned toward a new boy who looked a bit overwhelmed, his hands balled into fists.
“You don’t have to pretend in here in front of other guys,” said the veteran.  The new boy’s hands unfurled, as if holding a book. A new narrative.
Andrew Reiner has written about masculinity for Well and teaches at Towson University.