Television|‘Deutschland 83’ Was a Hit Abroad but a Flop at Home. What About ‘Deutschland 86’?
‘Deutschland 83’ Was a Hit Abroad but a Flop at Home. What About ‘Deutschland 86’?
BERLIN — When the spy series “Deutschland 83” had its premiere in 2015, it was portrayed as a breakthrough moment for German television. At that point, the country had yet to produce any prestige shows with an international following, unlike France and Denmark. The series, which followed a young East German soldier corralled into working as an undercover agent on the other side of the Iron Curtain, was the first German show to air on an American network, SundanceTV. In Britain it became the most-watched foreign-language drama ever.
Although Ms. Winger says the first season’s reception had little impact on their creative decision-making, “Deutschland 86” introduces an international setting and a more diverse cast. Its first episode finds East German foreign intelligence operative Lenora Rauch (Maria Schrader) working in South Africa with Rose Seithathi (Florence Kasumba) of the African National Congress. The spy been tasked with carrying out an illegal arms deal to help fill the coffers of the dwindling East German treasury. When the plan hits a snag, Lenora asks her nephew, Martin Rauch (Jonas Nay), for help, setting in motion a series of intrigues that take him across the continent.
Ms. Winger said they had always planned to use a second season to explore the ways East Germany saw the world outside of its borders. “You don’t often hear about how the East Germans felt their role was in global politics,” Ms. Winger said. The Wingers also wanted to examine lesser-known elements of the Cold War, settling on the attempts by communist and Western powers to influence politics in Africa. “The Cold War is now romanticized as this simple, black-and-white world, but if you look a bit closer, you find it was much more complicated,” Mr. Winger said.
Mr. Winger noted that RTL, a TV station known in Germany for its reality programming and police procedurals, was always an awkward fit for a prestige spy drama. He said the network was willing to broadcast a second season, but only if the Wingers tweaked it to be closer to its other, more popular series. “You should have seen the notes,” Ms. Winger said. Ultimately, the show’s production company, UFA Fiction, financed a second season with Amazon Prime as the German distributor, allowing the Wingers to maintain their original vision for the show.
Although Amazon Prime does not release viewing numbers for its shows, the critical reception for the second season in Germany has been generally positive. The Süddeutsche Zeitung newspaper praised it as “glamorous” and wrote that the show had “freed itself from the edifying pedagogical remit that governs historical subject matter.” Der Tagesspiegel, another newspaper, described it as “diverse” and “exciting,” and praised the second season’s cast.
Ms. Winger recalled attending a recent TV showcase for Amazon Prime in London, where she was struck by the geographical diversity of the series being presented. Like Netflix, Amazon Prime has moved into producing more original foreign-language series, including “Beat,” a coming crime series set in Berlin.
