Facebook had addressed the issue by Friday night.
The article highlighted the suffering of Yemeni civilians amid a devastating war pitting Houthi rebels and their allies against a Saudi-led coalition whose campaign of airstrikes, which are aided by American-supplied bombs and intelligence, have killed thousands of civilians. Economic warfare has worsened the despair for many Yemeni families, and the country is at risk of a catastrophic famine. The conflict began more than three years ago, and it received more attention when the killing of a Saudi dissident, Jamal Khashoggi, led to outrage and turned a spotlight on Saudi actions in the region.
In another article on Friday, New York Times editors explained why they decided to publish the photos of the starving children.
When Jarjieh Fang, a graduate student in Washington, saw the article about Yemen around noon on Friday, he found the photographs shocking. “I thought it would be something worth sharing, to sort of jolt people to start paying attention to what’s going on in Yemen,” he said.
He posted a link to the article on his Facebook page, and couple hours later, he got a notification. His post had been taken down, and there was a message from Facebook.

Dozens of people complained about similar issues on social media or in emails to the journalists who originally reported the story. But it is unclear how many people were affected. Tens of thousands of people shared the story on Facebook, and many posts — including the one on The New York Times’ own Facebook page — were not taken down.
The experience left Mr. Fang confused about Facebook’s policies. “I was disappointed when it was taken down so quickly, and that something so important was being scrubbed from people’s News Feeds,” he said.
Facebook uses a combination of algorithms, employees and flags from users to screen for content that may need to be removed. The company did not have information about the number of people whose posts were removed on Friday.
“We’re glad to hear that Facebook has reversed itself on this issue,” said Eileen Murphy, a spokeswoman for The New York Times. “It’s incredibly disappointing to think that this story would be blocked in violation of their community guidelines. The job of journalists is to bear witness and give voice to those who otherwise would not be heard.
Facebook’s temporary removal of the posts on Friday recalled a similar episode in 2016, when the social media company temporarily took down a post featuring a Pulitzer Prize-winning photograph from the Vietnam War. It shows a 9-year-old girl, Phan Thi Kim Phuc, fleeing napalm bombs in 1972.
And in 2015, Facebook had to revise its community standards after photos of women breast-feeding were removed from its pages.