SEOUL, South Korea — President Moon Jae-in of South Korea takes every opportunity to describe Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s leader, as a “young and candid” strategist, one who is ready to bargain away his nuclear arsenal to secure economic growth for his impoverished nation.
In doing so, Mr. Moon is attempting something that his predecessors who favored dialogue with the North also tried to do, but failed: changing North Korea’s global image as a regime that simply cannot be trusted.
If Mr. Kim wanted to change his image from nuclear madman to mature negotiator, it’s unlikely he could have found a better agent than Mr. Moon.
Mr. Moon brokered the unprecedented summit talks between Mr. Kim and President Trump in Singapore in June and is helping to arrange a second meeting between the two. He is also lobbying for Pope Francis to visit the North, which would be another first.
A central message in Mr. Moon’s diplomatic efforts is that Mr. Kim truly wants to be a great economic reformer for his country, as Deng Xiaoping was for China decades ago, and that the world must not miss the opportunity. Mr. Kim, he says, intends to negotiate away his nuclear weapons if Washington lifts sanctions and provides security guarantees, like a peace treaty ending the Korean War, so he can focus on economic development.
”Chairman Kim told me that besides the moratorium on testing nuclear weapons and missiles, he would dismantle the facilities that produce them, as well as all the nuclear weapons and fissile materials his country owns, if the United States takes corresponding measures,” Mr. Moon said this month.
Even leaving aside the question of his true intentions, Mr. Kim is a difficult figure to vouch for.
He has indeed taken steps to reform his country’s economy, allowing markets and private businesses to open, giving farmers more freedom to sell their crops and factory managers more autonomy to decide what to produce. Despite international sanctions, he engineered a building boom in Pyongyang, the capital, which Mr. Moon called “remarkable progress” when he addressed a cheering crowd of 150,000 there in September.
But Mr. Kim also had his uncle executed and his half brother assassinated in a foreign airport. And his country’s record on human rights is among the world’s worst.
In less than a year, Mr. Kim has made more concessions on his nuclear weapons program than Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush ever extracted from his father — though critics say that in truth, he has given up little of substance. He imposed a voluntary moratorium on nuclear and long-range missile tests and shut down the North’s underground nuclear test site. He also agreed to dismantle some missile-test facilities and — if Washington took “corresponding” steps — to dismantle the Yongbyon nuclear complex, a center for producing nuclear bomb fuel.
But he has yet to state in his own words whether, and when, he will scrap his nuclear arsenal.
Mr. Moon’s critics say he is playing into the North Korean leader’s hands. Mr. Kim’s ultimate goal, they say, is to get the world accustomed to the reality of a nuclear-armed North, while using negotiations to stall for time and create a false sense of progress.
But another South Korean analyst, Lee Seong-hyon, shared Mr. Moon’s vision, saying “a great transformation” was unfolding on the Korean Peninsula.
Even if Mr. Moon and Mr. Kim haven’t convinced every analyst, they have made a far bigger score with Mr. Trump, whose attitude toward Mr. Kim and the North has changed drastically.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has also expressed a willingness to give Mr. Kim the benefit of the doubt, at least to some degree. Mr. Kim, he said recently, told the Americans that he had made the strategic decision that the North no longer needs its nuclear arsenal.
But that transition is “a very difficult challenge for a North Korean leader,” Mr. Pompeo said, because the country has depended for decades on the nuclear program as the linchpin for its security. “To execute on that is complex and will take time,” he said.