Mr. Bolsonaro, who will take the helm of Latin America’s biggest nation, is further to the right than any president in the region, where voters have recently embraced more conservative leaders in Argentina, Chile, Peru, Paraguay and Colombia. He joins a number of far-right politicians who have risen to power around the world, including Italy’s deputy prime minister, Matteo Salvini, and Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary.
Hundreds of supporters gathered outside Mr. Bolsonaro’s seaside home in Rio de Janeiro, jumping and hugging one another when the results were announced. As golden fireworks lit up the sky, they chanted “mito,” or legend, paying homage to their president-elect.
Mr. Bolsonaro, 63, a former army captain who has been a member of Congress for nearly three decades, beat a crowded field of presidential contenders, several of whom entered the race with bigger war chests, less baggage and the backing of powerful political parties.
Part of the reason for Mr. Bolsonaro’s victory was the collapse of the left. Many cried foul after former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the longtime front-runner in the race, was ruled ineligible to run after he was imprisoned in April to start serving a 12-year sentence for corruption and money laundering.
His Workers’ Party had won the last four presidential elections, and Mr. da Silva, a former metalworker, retained a devoted following among poor and working-class Brazilians who felt represented by him personally and had benefited from his party’s social inclusion policies.
But many more Brazilians showed through their votes that they had had enough of the Workers’ Party, which steered the country from 2003 to 2016 through a boom-and-bust cycle that ended in an economic morass and the impeachment of his successor, President Dilma Rousseff.
Despite his influence, Mr. da Silva was not able to pull off the last-minute transfer of votes to the candidate chosen to replace him on the ballot, the bookish and urbane — but less charismatic — Mr. Haddad.
He vowed to give the police forces in Brazil — some of the most lethal in the world — expanded authority to kill suspects, saying with trademark bluntness that a “good criminal is a dead criminal.” He also promised to lower the age of criminal responsibility, impose stiffer sentences for violent crimes and ease Brazil’s gun ownership restrictions so civilians could better protect themselves.
Over the past two years, while many of Brazil’s traditional political parties and powerful kingmakers were busy defending themselves against corruption allegations stemming from the investigation known as Lava Jato, Mr. Bolsonaro flew around the country, drumming up support, particularly among young men, and in comparatively wealthier and whiter areas.
Opponents enjoyed far more advertising time on television and radio — which is allotted by party size — and rolled out slickly edited campaign materials. But Mr. Bolsonaro’s campaign drowned them out with a bare-bones, scrappy communications strategy. He and his sons broadcast shaky, poorly lit videos on Facebook and Instagram in which Mr. Bolsonaro cracked jokes, took aim at adversaries and bemoaned the state of Brazil.
Mr. Bolsonaro’s presidential ambition nearly ended on Sept. 6 when a man sliced a knife into his stomach during a campaign rally, slashing his intestines and several other organs.
After the first round of voting, in which Mr. Bolsonaro received just shy of the 50 percent required to win outright, some political analysts expected him to moderate his rhetoric in order to appeal to centrist or undecided voters.
For the Workers’ Party, Sunday’s presidential defeat leaves a political movement that won accolades from much of the population for affirmative action and inequality-reducing policies significantly weakened and effectively leaderless.
