Sports|Defending Champion Astros Sweep Their Way to A.L.C.S.
Defending Champion Astros Sweep Their Way to A.L.C.S.
CLEVELAND — When the pairings for the American League playoffs were set, there was little doubt where the prime-time cameras would be focused: on the Red Sox and Yankees, one of the most storied rivalries in sports played in two of the nation’s largest television markets.
The leftover series, between the Houston Astros and the Cleveland Indians, was crammed into the daytime hours, ensuring a smaller audience. It did not matter, it seemed, that the Astros were the defending World Series champions.
But they will be in prime time, now.
With pitiless efficiency, the Astros swept aside the Indians on Monday to advance to the American League Championship Series, the final blow coming via a smothering 11-3 victory on a summery day at Progressive Field as the Astros clinched the best-of-five series.
The Red Sox and Yankees may present a more intriguing matchup, and a more competitive series, but Houston may be baseball’s best overall team — and their domination of Cleveland reinforced that notion.
Next up, Houston will play the winner of the Yankees-Red Sox series that most everyone else — and now the Astros, too — seems to be watching.
Springer’s solo shot in the top of the fifth, which tied the score at 1-1, was his ninth career postseason homer, a franchise record. He hit his second in the eighth to extend Cleveland’s lead to 5-2, giving him seven home runs in his last seven postseason games dating to last year’s World Series.
The only other players to hit seven homers in a stretch of seven postseason games are Lou Gehrig, Reggie Jackson and Carlos Beltran.
“I’ll take it,” Springer said after glancing at the list on someone’s smartphone.
After their seven-game World Series win over the Los Angeles Dodgers last fall, the Astros traded for starting pitcher Gerrit Cole and then proceeded to win 103 games, second only to Boston’s 108. They seem like an afterthought in some circles.
Still, Alex Bregman and his Houston teammates largely said they didn’t feel disrespected over being relegated to the second-tier series.
“I know nobody else in Major League Baseball has forgotten about us,” Bregman said.
He gave the rest of the postseason field plenty of reason to pay attention on Monday, reaching base all six times and going 2 for 3 with a double, a run-scoring single and two walks. He was also hit by a pitch and reached base on a critical error.
The only other players to reach base six times in a postseason game are Kenny Lofton for the Indians in the 1995 World Series, and Stan Hack, who did it in 1945 for the Chicago Cubs.
Bregman got to first base in the seventh inning on the second of two throwing errors by Trevor Bauer, the Indians’ starter-turned-relief pitcher. Cleveland led at the time, 2-1, but Bauer melted down in the inning, allowing three Houston runs. He threw away a pickoff attempt at first base, and then had a chance to get out of the inning when he fielded a potential double-play ball hit by Bregman. But his throw was wide and all runners were safe.
Houston did not look back from there, adding six more runs in the eighth to run away with it.
For the Indians, it is another year of disappointment, the 70th since they won their last World Series in 1948. They came close in 1997 and 2016, losing the World Series in seven games both years. This year the Indians won the American League Central by 13 games, but found themselves at the wrong end of a mismatch in the playoffs.
As the Indians enter their eighth decade without a championship, the Astros are seeking to be the first team to win back-to-back World Series since the Yankees won three in a row from 1998 to 2000. But first, Houston will have to beat either the Yankees or the Red Sox in the A.L.C.S. beginning Saturday.
For most of the players celebrating under a shower of champagne and beer in the clubhouse after the game, it did not matter which city they visit next.
Houston has proved, too, that it can win at home or on the road. After it beat Cleveland twice in Houston, the Indians were hoping that home field advantage would help, even in the middle of the day. Bregman did admit that, although the Astros scored 11 runs, it was difficult for batters to see the ball well amid the afternoon sun and shadows of Progressive Field.
No shadows, indeed, and no more cruising under the radar as they reach yet another championship series.