Today around 70 percent of Americans connect over social media, according to the Pew Research Center. Although many of us are talking to people we know in real life, it’s easy to form connections with people we have never met in person.
More than ever before, we are using our smartphones and technology to form meaningful relationships with virtual strangers, both in romance and friendship; we celebrate one another’s successes, share our individual struggles, and despite geographical limitations, these bonds often span years. But what happens when the person on the other side of the screen dies?
She remembers frantically messaging Amy soon after, and waiting for the “read” indicator to pop up next to the message — only to have it remain unanswered.
Our ideas about which relationships are “real” have not caught up with the ways we actually live and connect, said Megan Devine, a Portland-based psychotherapist and author of “It’s OK That You’re Not OK.” She’s adamant that this deep sense of loss isn’t limited to in-person friendships.
One of the difficulties Ms. Pahr faced after Amy’s death was a lack of empathy from others. “Even well-meaning and compassionate people don’t place the same weight on your grief,” she noted, the way they would if you lost a friend you knew in person.
Understanding the unique challenges of cybergrief can validate how a person may be feeling. Here are five ways of coping with the loss of an online friend.
“In many ways, the grief is twofold,” said Dr. Kathleen R. Gilbert, author of “Dying, Death, and Grief in an Online Universe,” because a person isn’t only grieving their loss, they’re also grieving for the loss of support they had hoped they would receive from other people. Often times, Ms. Devine explained, it’s our in-person friends or family who can be confused or dismissive of our grief. But, she emphasizes, the first step forward is to acknowledge that all relationships are important, whether we see someone physically or not.
One of the things the internet does is expand our awareness of the world beyond the corporeal one we know. Social media allows us to develop a construct of another person, their hopes and dreams — and similarly, share our own. Many of us have spent years cultivating relationships based on words and images.
Whether or not we should contact the person’s family with our condolences can be tricky. On the one hand, we want to express how much they meant to us, but we’re also wary of intruding.
When it comes to attending the funeral, she cautioned that there are boundaries to keep in mind. While everyone has a right to grieve, if we aren’t in the epicenter of the loss — as in immediate relatives and loved ones — we might feel less recognized at in-person events like memorials or funerals. Even so, attending them shouldn’t be ruled out altogether. Go if it feels right, Ms. Devine suggested, but do not shove your way into the inner circle. “Your relationship is valid, but it’s different from the partner, parent, child, sibling, etc.,” she said.
While the pain of grief may lessen over time, Dr. Doka noted that we never really get over a loss, we learn to live with it. That includes cybergrief. “Even years later, people can have surges of grief,” he said. Though it will feel difficult at times, finding support through a trusted counselor or online bereavement community can be an invaluable way of receiving the validation we need.
