Everybody’s talking about it. How did the world’s most famous street artist manage to shred — or rather half shred — one of his iconic “Girl With Balloon” paintings moments after it had sold for $1.4 million at auction?
Acoris Andipa, an art dealer specializing in Banksy, based in the Knightsbridge district of London, is among the many people asking that question after Friday’s sensational goings-on at Sotheby’s.
The ever-elusive, ever-inventive Banksy has once again made a fool of the art world, and captivated millions. But has the joke itself slightly self-destructed? Banksy’s remotely shredded “Girl With Balloon” was meant to poke fun at the excesses of the auction market. Yet thanks to the huge amount of publicity generated by this ingenious prank, his prices look set to soar even higher.
Mr. Andipa said that he viewed the painting at the pre-auction exhibition and pointed out to Sotheby’s staff members what he termed the “disproportionate” thickness of the frame (concealing the shredding device). How did the auction house respond to that observation?
Mr. Andipa was also perplexed by the fact that this valuable painting, which he had never seen before, was tucked away on a wall near the back entrance of Sotheby’s during the pre-auction view.
“It was next to the catering,” said Mr. Andipa. “Access was challenging.” During the auction itself, the painting was hung next to the Sotheby’s staff members who take telephone bids, a favored subject for auction-house publicity shots.
In addition, Mr. Andipa was surprised — as were many others — by a $1.4 million Banksy being the 67th and last lot of the auction. By that point, many in the audience would have left the salesroom for dinner. “The running order of the sale was odd,” Mr. Andipa said.
Back in 2004, a stenciled image of a young girl releasing a red heart-shaped balloon appeared on a wall on London’s South Bank. It has become one of Banksy’s most celebrated and coveted creations, the stencil being repeated in an edition of 150 prints and 25 numbered paintings, as well as an unknown number of unique spray paintings in different sizes with variations, of which Sotheby’s $1.4 million painting was one.
That 40-inch-high example, “acquired directly from the artist by the present owner in 2006,” according to the Sotheby’s catalog, set a new auction high for a work solely created by Banksy. One of the smaller, 20-inch-high edition paintings of “Girl With Balloon” sold in March for 344,750 pounds, or about $480,000, at Bonhams in London, according to the Artnet Price Database. Mr. Andipa said that back in 2006 he was selling these smaller edition paintings for £30,000, or about $55,000 at the time.
If that were the case, wouldn’t the battery in the shredder have had to have been replaced at some point? This, in turn, poses the question: Was Banksy himself the owner who entered this stenciled painting, which may or may not have been made and framed “years ago,” into the sale? Sotheby’s, like all international auction houses, does not reveal the identity of its sellers, unless specifically requested.
And what about the identity of the man in the salesroom who remotely activated the shredding device? Could he have been the elusive “graffiti guerrilla” himself?
In 2008, the British newspaper The Mail on Sunday identified Banksy as Robin Gunningham, a former private schoolboy from the Bristol area of western England. On Saturday, the Daily Mail noted the similarity between the person identified as Mr. Gunningham 10 years ago and a man taking a cell-phone video in the Sotheby’s salesroom on Friday. Another man, who was seen activating a remote-control mechanism, was pictured in a post on the private Instagram page of Caroline Lang, chairwoman of Sotheby’s Switzerland. He, too, was identified as Banksy, by Ms. Lang.
Those who witnessed the incident said that afterward, Sotheby’s security staff escorted a noisily protesting man off the premises.
Sotheby’s declined to comment on exchanges between the individual and its security staff, and on whether the company has any plans to press charges.
