It was hard enough to be elected on promises of radical criminal-justice reform in Philadelphia. Now Larry Krasner is trying to keep them.
By a show of hands, half of the 80 students in the packed lecture hall said they wanted to go into public-interest law or become public defenders. They held the same low opinion of prosecutors. They were committed to fighting against district attorneys. And they were Krasner’s target audience. The head of one of the country’s largest prosecutor’s offices was making the case that the most effective way to transform the criminal-justice system — to make it more just — was from a position of authority within that system.
Before winning office last November, Krasner was an improbable — some people said unqualified — district attorney. He’d been a civil rights attorney for the previous 25 years. Before that he worked as a public defender. During his career, he had sued the Philadelphia Police Department for abuses on 75 separate occasions. Not once had he prosecuted a case. Of the largest cities in America, Philadelphia is the poorest and has the highest rates of incarceration and opioid-overdose deaths. Krasner argued that a slate of ambitious reforms — ending cash bail, decriminalizing low-level offenses, reining in police and prosecutorial misconduct — was the way to make the city not only more equitable but also safer.
The law students in Chicago were rapt. They had begun lining up an hour before Krasner’s arrival, forcing a move to a larger classroom. As Krasner spoke, you could sense careers in the balance. Hands shot up. The students had questions they needed answered.
Shouldn’t we do like you, and at least become a public defender first?

How can you call yourself compassionate if all you’re doing is charging and prosecuting a lesser sentence? How is that more just?
I’d been asking some of these same questions of Krasner for almost a year, since I started reporting on him after his election last fall. He was the most audacious of this new crop of district attorneys. He had become a model for other progressives seeking office — for outsiders with grass-roots support and uncompromising platforms for change, for D.A. candidates proclaiming themselves the next Larry Krasner.
Now, as Krasner neared the end of his first year in office, I wanted to understand just how much a progressive district attorney could and couldn’t change. In the arcane bureaucracy of Philadelphia’s criminal legal system, he had found himself at odds with police officers, judges and his own line attorneys. He had bumped up against the intransigence of Pennsylvania’s Republican-controlled legislature and the raids and bans of the Trump administration. The concept of justice in America has long been imagined narrowly — if someone is victimized, then someone else must be incarcerated. Responses to crime are often fueled by fear and prejudice and raw desire for revenge. Along with other reformers, Krasner was taking on the monumental task of trying to redefine the country’s values.
“I view this as the most important civil rights issue of our time,” he told the future lawyers in Chicago. “We’re going to turn the United States into not the most incarcerated place in the world. We’re going to turn the country into a place where criminal records are not documents of racism.” He was calling on the idealistic and the moral among them to join him in the City of Brotherly Love.
The three-year-old Special Committee on Criminal Justice Reform includes leaders from the City Council, the mayor’s office, the courts, the prisons, community groups and the public defender’s office. This type of collaboration was partly what led the MacArthur Foundation, in 2015, to name Philadelphia one of its Safety and Justice Challenge sites, with the goal of cutting the jail population of more than 8,000 by a third within three years. The average length of stay on State Road, as the city’s jails are known, was then 95 days, four times the national average. As part of the MacArthur initiative, Philadelphia figured out how to move people through the jail system faster, getting them a hearing; the city introduced an early review process for low-level offenders who couldn’t afford bail, releasing many more of them with electronic monitoring or into diversion programs that required treatment as an alternative to conviction. Two years into the effort, before Krasner’s first day as D.A., the city’s jail population had already shrunk by 20 percent.
Previous district attorneys in Philadelphia — Lynne Abraham, Ed Rendell and Arlen Specter among them — were famously “tough on crime,” building their political careers by racking up convictions. Abraham, in office from 1991 to 2010, earned the nickname Queen of Death for the frequency with which her prosecutors sought capital charges. Seth Williams, who succeeded Abraham to become Philadelphia’s first African-American D.A., was supposed to be part of the city’s collective efforts toward “decarceration.” But last year Williams was charged with 23 counts of bribery, extortion and fraud, and he is now serving a five-year prison term.
Community-activist groups in Philadelphia seized the opportunity, forming the Coalition for a Just District Attorney. The coalition’s different groups hailed from the city’s African-American, Latino and L.G.B.T.Q. communities and represented the Philadelphia populations most affected by the criminal-justice system: immigrant families, incarcerated teenagers, sex workers and victims of violent crimes. They joined forces with the young Bernie Sanders ground troops of Reclaim Philadelphia and the local chapter of the A.C.L.U. and the racial-justice group Color of Change. The initial hope was that Keir Bradford-Grey, the first African-American to lead Philadelphia’s Defender Association, would run to replace Williams. But she decided to continue working as a public defender. Krasner then entered the race, an extreme outsider talking about radical changes to the D.A.’s office.
Krasner grew up in St. Louis. His Jewish father was a letter carrier and a crime novelist; in high school, his mother became a teenage evangelical preacher known as Little Frazier. At the University of Chicago, Krasner majored in Spanish and literature, and during his first days at Stanford Law School, he met his wife, Lisa Rau, now a judge in the Pennsylvania Court of Common Pleas.
In the summer of 2000, when Philadelphia hosted the Republican National Convention, the city’s cops ran roughshod over free speech and the right of assembly, arresting about 400 demonstrators. Abraham’s office secured exorbitant bails for the protesters, charging many with felonies. For the next four years, Krasner worked pro bono to resolve a number of these cases.
It was during this process that he teamed up with Jody Dodd, a social-justice activist who started the Up Against the Law legal collective and now works in the D.A.’s office. Those arrested in the city for an act of idealistic protest often phoned Dodd, and through her reached Krasner. He went on to represent Occupy movement squatters and Black Lives Matter organizers, protesters of school closings and police shootings and Philadelphians opposing casino construction.
Krasner, without political or bureaucratic experience, could set policy, but he needed his assistant D.A.s to carry it out daily in the grind of the city’s courtrooms. “It only comes out later that people in this office have not followed my policies for months,” Krasner told me. So in January, on his fourth day in office, Krasner fired 30 of his prosecutors without warning. In Philadelphia’s parochial criminal-justice community, with its legacies and overfamiliarity, people called the dismissals the “Snow Day Massacre.” I spoke to some of the fired prosecutors who were “blindsided,” as one put it. They rejected the assertion that they or their colleagues were corrupt or unfairly punitive. The dismissals were proof, I heard repeatedly, of Krasner’s disdain for the practice he now oversaw. Within the traditional binary view of the legal system, you were either for victims or for criminals, and Krasner looked to many to be on the wrong side for a D.A. None of the fired lawyers I interviewed agreed to speak on the record — they were worried about their careers in the city.
By this spring, a total of 80 D.A. staff members had departed. Krasner said that in a tight legal market the office had managed to hire many of their replacements. He increased starting salaries and secured raises for 230 of his attorneys. The turnover, he said, was a plus: “There’s an opportunity for people philosophically uncomfortable to leave for other jobs and to have a more rapid culture change here.” His recruiting trips to law schools were a way to accelerate that change.
Sax sent me screenshots of texts he had received from a few attorneys and police officers complaining of Krasner’s office giving out “sweetheart” plea deals and undercharging for serious crimes. In one thread, a cop couldn’t believe the D.A.’s office refused to file a weapons charge against a fleeing suspect after the police said they found a gun along his escape route. Previous Philadelphia D.A.s accepted 97 percent of the cases brought to them by cops, as if the police and not prosecutors were the ultimate arbiter of what was a punishable offense.
On Twitter, two people claiming to be current Philadelphia prosecutors had started anonymous accounts to bombard Krasner with broadsides. The accounts regularly bemoaned the inexperience of the new assistant district attorneys, blamed Krasner’s reforms for abetting crime and defended the work of the city’s past district attorneys. Because this is Philly, there were also tweets interspersed about the Eagles, the Phillies and the Sixers. The names on the accounts are Wen Baxman and Mrs. Wen Baxman, both plays on Ben Waxman, communications director for the D.A.’s office. Waxman couldn’t say for certain that the two accounts were run by district-attorney staff, but he traded direct messages with one of the Baxmans. “We’ve had productive dialogue about policy, and they said some nice things about Larry’s work,” Waxman told me.
As district attorney, Krasner was using the discretion of his office to revise policies, to introduce new approaches to criminal justice. He was also testing the limits of his powers. I was in Philadelphia in January when he introduced the first of his new initiatives. With staff gathered in the mezzanine gallery of their building, Krasner began his address in Spanish. He described how Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents had been lying in wait at Philadelphia courthouses, snatching undocumented immigrants outside proceedings unrelated to citizenship. As a result, he said, people from immigrant communities were fearful to come to court as victims or witnesses, leaving everyone in the city less safe. He announced the creation of a new position, a counsel whose sole job would be to protect the undocumented from any collateral consequences of their involvement with the legal system.
In February, Krasner sent a memo to his entire staff with his next set of directives. Effective immediately, his attorneys would offer plea deals to nonviolent offenders below the bottom range of Pennsylvania sentencing guidelines. His assistant D.A.s were no longer to prosecute marijuana possession in cases in which there was no intent to sell. Nor would the office charge sex workers with a crime before a third prostitution conviction. And prosecutors were instructed to handle any retail theft with a value of less than $500 with a citation, the lowest possible offense under Pennsylvania law. “We’re going to prosecute to proportional common sense,” Mike Lee, who ran the nonprofit Philadelphia Lawyers for Social Equity before directing legislation for Krasner, told me.
For Krasner’s institutional partners, the “revolutionary transformation” the activists were demanding was too bold. “We like to take things slowly,” Marsha Neifield, president judge of the Philadelphia Municipal Court, said of the early bail review set up as part of the MacArthur grant. “We like to figure out what any problems are, so we can work out the kinks.” Krasner was proposing structural changes, challenging Philadelphians to conceive of crime and punishment differently. But as an elected official, he was bound to fall somewhere between the activists and the politicians, frustrating both.
As part of his February policy memo, Krasner instructed his attorneys always to state the projected cost to taxpayers of any prison sentence they asked for in court. He thought everyone would benefit if his attorneys had to explain why the length of a punishment was worth the roughly $42,000 price to lock someone up for a year. “We give out 75 years like we’re giving away candy,” he told me. But there were judges who simply didn’t tolerate that criminal-justice lesson in their courtrooms. A judge exercises much control over a young attorney’s professional life, and Krasner was aware that many of his prosecutors had decided it best to keep quiet on the price of a prison sentence.
Bail hearings in Philadelphia occur in the basement of the city’s main courthouse, in three round-the-clock shifts, seven days a week. Behind a glass partition, a prosecutor and a defender sit at opposite tables facing a magistrate. The defendants appear one after another on television screens, beamed in via video conference from various booking centers in the city. Generally, a defendant sits in a chair, alone in front of a cinder-block wall, and stares into a camera. Earlier this year, I watched a hearing for a woman accused of simple assault and resisting arrest. She had a history of prostitution, the public defender said, but no arrest in recent years. She was a mother of three, with a job. Bail isn’t supposed to be punishment; it’s the collateral to get the presumed innocent to return for court dates. But that’s not how it functions. Setting a bail amount the woman couldn’t afford would lock her up until trial. She might lose her job, home, benefits, the custody of her children. The longer people are detained, the more likely they are to take plea deals, even when they are innocent. The hearing lasted two minutes. The magistrate ruled that the woman would not have to pay for her release. The woman limped toward the camera, sobbing, saying, “Yes, sir, thank you.” Her face grew larger as she leaned closer to the lens, her eye suddenly filling the entire screen, before she bent to sign the document that was placed in front of her.
Krasner’s efforts to fix this broken cash-bail system — “imprisonment for poverty,” he called it — show just how complicated criminal-justice reforms can be. In February, his office announced that prosecutors would no longer ask magistrates for bail in cases involving any of 25 charges. Liam Riley, Krasner’s new supervisor of the pretrial division, told me they selected the 25 charges after reviewing five years of records, determining which low-level, nonviolent offenses most often left people in jail with bail they couldn’t pay. The charges they settled on had to be minor enough so that prosecutors didn’t seem to be “willy-nilly releasing people,” Riley said, and low enough so that other financially strapped departments in the city wouldn’t have to take on the burden of additional monitoring. The charges included retail theft, D.U.I., resisting arrest and some burglaries.
The new policy seemed to contribute to Philadelphia’s declining jail numbers, which had started to level off after the initial impact of the MacArthur initiatives. By the end of September, the jail population was down a total of 36 percent. (MacArthur doubled its investment this October, setting a new target of cutting the jail numbers by half by 2020.) With 3,000 fewer inmates, Philadelphia was on track to close its oldest prison in operation, the decaying House of Correction. Mayor Jim Kenney told me the savings from the closure would be reinvested in neighborhoods, initially in resource-starved schools. “The little kids need to know they matter,” he said.
While activists congratulated Krasner on this “historic change” to cash bail, they also said in a public statement that it fell far short of eradication and a “presumption of innocence for all accused people, regardless of their financial means.” Of the 40,000 cases it handles each year, Krasner’s office estimated that changes to just these 25 offenses would affect about 10 percent of them. What about the other 90 percent? What about people arrested for violent offenses who were in jail without a trial?
It also wasn’t clear whether Krasner’s guidelines on the initial 25 charges were being followed consistently in court, either by the magistrates hearing the no-bail requests or by the prosecutors who were supposed to be making them. Since March, the A.C.L.U. of Pennsylvania had monitored more than 700 bail hearings. In a letter it sent to the city’s two chief judges in September, the A.C.L.U. said that defendants were still given cash bail in more than 40 percent of these cases. “Money should not be correlated to safety,” Nyssa Taylor, of the A.C.L.U., told me.
Once in office, Krasner inherited several cases of what he called “police inflicting significant violence on civilians.” Additional cases turned up, all of them the confirmation that the new D.A. either hated cops, was finally holding them accountable or was little different from his predecessors. In the most contentious of these cases so far, a police officer named Ryan Pownall stopped a 30-year-old African-American man named David Jones, ostensibly for riding a dirt bike. It was the summer of 2017, and Pownall says he frisked Jones and discovered a gun. A restaurant’s surveillance camera captured what happened next: Jones ran, never looking back, and Pownall shot him twice in the back. The events were not especially uncommon in Philadelphia. Philadelphia police officers had shot and killed 50 suspects since 2010, and Pownall himself had shot another black man in the back while on duty eight years ago, paralyzing the suspect. The last Philadelphia officer to be charged with murder for an on-duty killing was in 1999, and a pair of judges tossed the case. Police Commissioner Richard Ross fired Pownall last year. But now that Krasner was D.A., it was up to him to handle the case. In September, his office charged Pownall with criminal homicide.
Not surprisingly, many people in law enforcement saw Pownall’s case differently. John McNesby, the head of the city’s police union, called the charges against Pownall a disgrace: “Today’s meritless indictment clearly illustrates D.A. Krasner’s anti-law-enforcement agenda.” At Pownall’s grand-jury hearing, 100 cops filed into the courtroom, many in shirts that read “Pownall, we have your back.” A week later, when the judge reduced the homicide charges to third-degree murder and released Pownall on bail, a cortege of on-duty officers met him outside the courthouse.
As a progressive with few political debts outside the activist community, Krasner has made some unconventional hires as district attorney. Down the hall from his corner office, I sat with one of them. Movita Johnson-Harrell started the Charles Foundation in 2011, after her son was murdered, to provide support to crime victims and witnesses. Krasner appointed her as supervisor of victims services. Her face framed by a dark turtleneck and a hijab, Johnson-Harrell said, “There’s never been a victim as the head of this office.” Her father was also murdered, and her brother as well. Under her leadership, the office was starting a new rapid-response program. Previously, the D.A. didn’t get involved with a family of a murder victim until after an arrest. Now advocates were to meet with relatives in those first days to help them navigate the paperwork, the police work and whatever else they needed. Krasner’s office hoped a byproduct of intervening with families sooner would be a decrease in retaliation.
That question, of course — of what job district attorneys can or should do — was anything but settled. Krasner and other recently elected progressive prosecutors were proof of the uncertainty. In June, Krasner’s office released a statement that it had secured guilty verdicts or guilty pleas in 70 of the 85 homicide cases it tried in court, as if it were necessary to point out that the D.A. was still fighting crime. And in October, Krasner made a show of announcing a lengthy drug-trafficking investigation led by his office, which resulted in 57 people charged. Ben Waxman said they weren’t embracing “law and order” tactics or claiming that convictions were the only measure of success. But there was misinformation out there that Krasner, as a result of his policy changes, was letting all the murderers and drug dealers go. “You can push for sweeping criminal-justice reform while also efficiently prosecuting serious violent crimes,” Waxman told me.
But in the weird alchemy of Philadelphia today, it didn’t seem like a fantasy to imagine those deeper structural changes moving forward. When the city decided earlier this year to allow nonprofits to run supervised-injection sites for drug users, Krasner described the reorienting of power and perception that was taking root in Philly. “What we have today is the celebration of the fact that government is following a movement that is showing them where to go,” he said.
The Eagles beating the Patriots in the Super Bowl in February felt to many in the city as if part of the world they knew had turned magically upside-down. The week after the underdog win, a veteran prosecutor named Chip Junod entered a room in the courthouse where two dozen people had been summoned. They had all been arrested for possessing small amounts of marijuana. Junod is 64, a lifelong Philadelphian, and he started at the district attorney’s office in 1987, with a stopover working as a court-appointed private defense attorney representing indigent clients. Under Krasner, he was made supervisor of diversion programs, and on this day he wore a suit coat over a No. 86 Eagles jersey. Philadelphia is a sports-mad city, its fans celebrating not infrequently by breaking things or climbing light poles greased by workers to impede just such ascents. In the City of Brotherly Love, people seemed to come together less out of some mutual affection for the home team than out of a shared sense of being downtrodden and needing to lash out.
But mutual suffering had also led to Larry Krasner, and to Junod’s delivering a Super Bowl speech to those arrested on drug charges. “I think I said, ‘Not only did the Eagles win, the district attorney is withdrawing all charges,’ ” he told me. Everyone there was free to go home — no diversion program, no fee, no arrest on their record. It was Krasner’s new policy. Most of the people arrested on these low-level offenses, Junod said, had been picked up in the city’s black neighborhoods. In other parts of Philadelphia, people caught smoking weed were issued citations or ignored. But in areas where officers targeted sellers, the police swept up buyers and smokers in their arrests. No more. The roomful of pot smokers remained silent as they gaped at Junod in his Eagles jersey and suit, trying to make sense of this prosecutor who just wanted to send them home.