From Harvey Weinstein to Brett Kavanaugh in one exhausting year.
Ms. Gay is a contributing opinion writer.
I watch a lot of “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit.” Many women I know do too. I’ve seen nearly every episode from 19 seasons, most of them several times. I will watch a dozen episodes of the show back to back, no matter how many times I’ve seen them. At times, it troubles me, my ongoing willingness to consume this show and the disturbing story lines about sexual assault and the terrible ways of the world, but there is something so very satisfying about watching it. The victims don’t always find justice, but they are, more often than not, believed by the S.V.U. detectives. Their stories are heard and respected. Justice may be elusive, but on the show, it exists within the realm of possibility.
In the real world, such is not the case. Despite everything we know about the prevalence of sexual assault and harassment, women are still not believed. Their experiences are still minimized. And the male perpetrators of these crimes are given all manner of leniency.
Over the past several weeks, we’ve heard from men who transgressed and fell from grace. In “Exile” by John Hockenberry, which appeared in Harper’s, the writer is mournful for the life he lost after he was accused, by multiple women, of sexual harassment. He is aggressively self-pitying throughout his essay, airing any number of grievances about the injustice of how he has been misunderstood. 
Jian Ghomeshi, the former CBC radio host accused of sexual assault and harassment, also wrote an essay utterly lacking in self-awareness. In “Reflections From a Hashtag,” published in The New York Review of Books, Mr. Ghomeshi takes an almost pithy tone as he reflects on his life since he was accused of various crimes and sexual misdemeanors. (He was acquitted of sexual assault charges in 2016.) He presents himself as the misunderstood hero of his own narrative, the rational man in an irrational world.
And those are essays in publications I once held in high regard. Even more impoverished accounts have been published elsewhere, men writing about how their lives have been derailed with no clear understanding of the lives they have derailed with their actions.
Starkly lacking in these accounts is any accountability or genuine recognition of the wrong done. They display entitlement and rage and contempt for being seen for who they truly are. The people who publish such pieces treat the perpetrators of sexual misconduct as intellectual curiosities. They reserve their empathy for these broken men, for themselves, rather than for women because, as a culture, we expect women to suffer. We gild women’s suffering with both inevitability and nobility. Time and again women splay themselves. Women share their painful stories. The world remains largely indifferent.
A year ago, when the allegations against Harvey Weinstein were first published, I wrote about what I hoped men might do in that moment of reckoning: “Men can start putting in some of the work women have long done in offering testimony. They can come forward and say “me too” while sharing how they have hurt women in ways great and small.” I was being naïve, I suppose. Or I was placing too much faith in decency. But I never imagined that instead of self-reflection, men would reflect on how they had been harmed by their own bad behavior.
I said that I watch a lot of “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit,” but for the past year, current events have offered a far more sinister version of the show, without the attractive cast or the satisfying payoff of occasional justice. Every day there is some new revelation about some man who has done some terrible thing. In this #MeToo era, women have repeatedly demonstrated the ways in which they have suffered at the hands of men. We have done so knowing we will be disbelieved, discredited and degraded. We have watched history repeat itself, time and again.
In 1991, Anita Hill testified in front of the Senate Judiciary Committee about the sexual harassment she said she experienced at the hands of Clarence Thomas. She took a polygraph test that indicated she was telling the truth. She was disbelieved, discredited and degraded. Mr. Thomas was appointed to the Supreme Court and continues to preside.
In 2018, here we are again. Another woman, Christine Blasey Ford, testified in front of a panel of mostly men about the sexual assault she says she endured at the hands of the Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh. She too has taken a polygraph test supporting her version of events. She is speaking her truth in front of the nation. Her entire life has exploded because she had the courage to come forward out of a sense of patriotic duty, the greater good. And still there are people who doubt her. Who do not find her credible. And if they do find her credible, they don’t think what she endured merits Judge Kavanaugh’s losing this career opportunity.
Judge Kavanaugh did not need to write down his woes in an essay. He was able to share them in front of an international audience, in real time. When he spoke on his own behalf, he was all rage and righteousness, ego and entitlement. He cried. He glared. It was a grand performance, more implausibly dramatic than any episode of “Law & Order.” Judge Kavanaugh interrupted nearly every Democratic senator who questioned him. A year after the allegations against Harvey Weinstein were first reported, a federal judge behaved as a self-indulgent brat, unwavering in his conviction that he deserves to be on the Supreme Court.
In his statements to the committee, Judge Kavanaugh said that the allegations against him had ruined his life even though he may well be confirmed to a lifetime appointment on the Supreme Court. Mr. Hockenberry and Mr. Ghomeshi also lament how their lives have been ruined. The bar for a man’s ruin is, apparently, quite low. May we all be so lucky as to have our lives so ruined.
History is once more repeating itself and will continue to do so until we, as a culture, begin not only to believe women but also to value women enough to consider harming them unacceptable, unthinkable.
Roxane Gay (@rgay), an associate professor of English at Purdue University, is the author, most recently, of “Hunger” and a contributing opinion writer.