PITTSBURGH — Wearing a sweatshirt and sweatpants, shackled and with a vacant expression, Robert Bowers sat before a federal judge in a downtown courtroom on Monday afternoon. Mr. Bowers, the man accused of killing 11 congregants in a hate-filled attack on a Pittsburgh synagogue named Tree of Life, arrived in a wheelchair pushed by a United States marshal.
The judge, Magistrate Judge Robert C. Mitchell, gave an overview of the 29 criminal charges against him and asked him if he had received a copy of the complaint.
“Yes,” Mr. Bowers replied firmly.
Those charges included obstructing the free exercise of religious beliefs — a hate crime, which can carry the death penalty, a sentence that federal authorities said Sunday they intended to pursue. He also faces state charges.
Mr. Bowers, 46, who had been shot by the police at the end of the attack before crawling out in surrender, showed no clear signs of injury in his courtroom appearance, though he moved very little. At the notice to rise for the judge, one of two public defenders representing him for the day’s hearing touched his arm, as if to assure him that they knew he would not stand.
Mr. Bowers declined to have the judge read the full criminal complaint, or the penalties should he be found guilty. He was ordered held without bail and his next hearing was scheduled for Thursday.
In the mostly empty front row, two members of the Dor Hadash congregation watched the hearing closely. Two of their fellow members had been setting up for Torah study on Saturday morning when the synagogue was attacked. One, Daniel Leger, is still in the hospital; the other, Dr. Jerry Rabinowitz, was killed.
Jon Pushinksy, her husband, sometimes practiced law in that same courtroom. He had steeled himself not to react, he said, though he said that Mr. Bowers did not present the face of villainy one might have expected from a person accused of such hatred and violence.
After the hearing, the White House announced that President Trump would be visiting Pittsburgh on Tuesday with the first lady, a decision that had drawn criticism — and prompted disagreement within Pittsburgh’s Jewish community — before it was even announced.
Two Jewish groups had called on Mr. Trump earlier in the day to back down from inflammatory rhetoric that they said seemed to be encouraging the most radical fringes of American society.
The letter, which had 26,000 signatures on Monday morning, said Mr. Trump’s language had given confidence to white nationalists.
The chairman of the board of Bend the Arc: Jewish Action is Alexander Soros. He is the son of George Soros, the billionaire philanthropist and major donor to Democratic candidates, who is Jewish and who survived Nazi occupation in Hungary.
Mr. Soros is repeatedly cited in right-wing conspiracy theories, and was targeted in last week’s wave of mailed pipe bombs.
Indeed, some in Pittsburgh’s Jewish community, including members of the congregations that were attacked, have said openly that they did not want Mr. Trump to come. Others said they would be glad for a visit from Mr. Trump, including Rabbi Jeffrey Myers of the Tree of Life synagogue.
The mayor of Pittsburgh, Bill Peduto, in comments to reporters before the announcement of the visit, said the White House should first ask victims’ families if they wanted a presidential visit.
“Our attention and our focus is going to be on them,” the mayor said, of the funeral services. He added, “We do not have enough public safety officials to provide enough protection at the funerals and to be able at the same time draw attention to a potential presidential visit.
The first funerals for the victims will take place Tuesday: a service for the Rosenthal brothers, Cecil and David, and one for Dr. Rabinowitz of Dor Hadash.
On Monday, the streets around the Tree of Life synagogue were still cordoned off with yellow police tape. A memorial of flowers, candles and handwritten messages to the dead had formed at a street corner nearby. A steady stream of people visited the memorial through the chilly and gray afternoon, as an officer in a police cruiser kept watch close by.
The Jewish Community Center in the Squirrel Hill neighborhood was serving as a base of operations for F.B.I. agents, and as a gathering area for elderly residents and for volunteers with the Red Cross and Salvation Army. Cathy Samuels, the center’s senior director of marketing and development, said the staff had barely paused since Saturday morning when they first got the news of the shooting.
“We quickly realized people needed a place to nestle and wait for information, so we became that place,” she said.
As the aftermath of the attack set in, survivors were still coming to terms with the horror of what occurred.
Until two months ago, Rabbi Myers had rarely carried his cellphone with him on the Sabbath, the holiest day of the week, on which some Jewish people avoid technology and electronics. But in August, a security expert told him that “it was a different world” and that he needed to have his phone nearby.
Rabbi Jeffrey Myers, who survived the massacre at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh, pleaded with elected officials to stop the spread of hate speech.
Because of that training, the rabbi was the first person to call the police on Saturday. He stayed on the phone for 20 minutes, until he was evacuated by SWAT officers.
In an interview on Monday on ABC’s “Good Morning America,” Rabbi Myers said that about five minutes after the Saturday service started at 9:45 a.m., he heard a loud sound in the lobby on the floor below. It sounded like a coat rack had fallen, he recalled. But then another loud bang rang out.
Rabbi Myers said about a dozen people were in the sanctuary when the firing started, and he yelled for everyone to drop to the ground and stay quiet. He began evacuating the congregants, starting with a handful of people at the front of the sanctuary. He moved them to safety. There were still eight people in the room, all in the rear, but it was too late to help them, he said.
The gunfire was getting louder. The gunman was moving closer to the sanctuary.
“There was no way for me to get back,” he said.
Seven of the eight people were killed, he said. The person who survived, a woman, was wounded but was expected to live.
The Justice Department said shortly after the shooting that the United States attorney for the Western District of Pennsylvania, Scott Brady, had initiated the approval process for seeking the death penalty against Mr. Bowers. The ultimate decision rested with Attorney General Jeff Sessions.
All capital punishment cases go through the Justice Department’s capital case section, which was created in 1998 to help the attorney general decide when to use the penalty.
But Mr. Pushinksy and Ms. Clickner, the two members of Dor Hadash who had come to Mr. Bowers’s hearing, were in agreement about the prospect of a death sentence.
“Haven’t we seen enough death?” Mr. Pushinksy asked.