President Trump, in announcing a new trade deal with Canada and Mexico, also fielded questions — and had a combative exchange with a reporter — about the open investigation into the Supreme Court nominee, Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh.
WASHINGTON — The White House authorized the F.B.I. to expand its abbreviated investigation into sexual misconduct allegations against Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh by interviewing anyone it deems necessary as long as the review is finished by the end of the week, according to two people briefed on the matter.
At an event on Monday celebrating a new trade deal with Canada and Mexico, President Trump said he instructed his White House counsel, Donald F. McGahn II, over the weekend to instruct the F.B.I. to carry out an open investigation, but the president included the caveat that the inquiry should accommodate the desires of Senate Republicans.
The new directive came after a backlash from Democrats, who criticized the White House for limiting the scope of the bureau’s investigation into Judge Kavanaugh, Mr. Trump’s nominee for the Supreme Court. The F.B.I. has already interviewed the four witnesses it was originally asked to question, and on Monday it reached out to others.
The broadening inquiry produced an unusual spectacle as friends and classmates from Judge Kavanaugh’s past provided dueling portraits of the nominee in his younger days — either a good-natured student incapable of the alleged behavior or a stumbling drunk who could easily have blacked out and forgotten inappropriate behavior at alcohol-soaked parties.
How far the F.B.I. will now delve into these questions beyond the original high school-era sexual assault allegation lodged by Christine Blasey Ford remained unclear. Senate Democrats sent the bureau a list of two dozen witnesses they insisted must be interviewed for an inquiry to be credible. Another accuser, Deborah Ramirez, has given the bureau the names of more than 20 people she said witnessed Judge Kavanaugh exposing himself to her during a college party or heard about it at the time or later, according to someone involved in the investigation.
Mr. Trump said on Monday that he wanted a “comprehensive” F.B.I. investigation and had no problem if the bureau wanted to question Judge Kavanaugh or even a third accuser, Julie Swetnick, who was left off the initial witness list, if she seemed credible. His only concerns he said, were that the investigation be wrapped up quickly and that it take direction from the Senate Republicans who will determine whether Judge Kavanaugh is confirmed.
Senate Republican leaders made clear that they did not expect the investigation to prevent them from confirming Judge Kavanaugh. Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, said the Senate would take a procedural vote by the end of the week so it could move quickly to final confirmation by the weekend or early next week.
The F.B.I. Investigation Into Kavanaugh Has Ended. Here’s Who Was Questioned, and Who Was Not.
Many who could have shed light on the sexual misconduct allegations were not questioned.
The revised White House instructions amounted to a risky bet that the F.B.I. will not find anything new in the next four days that could change the public view of the allegations. Republicans have resisted an open-ended investigation that could head in unpredictable directions, and the limited time frame could make it harder for the F.B.I. to resolve the conflicting accounts.
But Charles “Chad” Ludington, another Yale classmate, told reporters outside his home in North Carolina that he saw Judge Kavanaugh so drunk that he could have forgotten his actions. Mr. Ludington said he did not think that loutish behavior at age 18 or 21 should condemn a person for life, but lying to the Senate at age 53 should matter. “There were certainly many times when he could not remember what was going on,” he said.
Hey, I’m Alex Burns, a politics correspondent for The Times. Send me your questions using the NYT app. I’ll give you the latest intel from the campaign trail.
At the Rose Garden event, Mr. Trump again accepted Judge Kavanaugh’s denials and portrayed his confirmation process as deeply unfair. But the president added that he would rethink the nomination if the F.B.I. turned up something that warranted it. “Certainly, if they find something, I’m going to take that into consideration,” he said.
Mr. Trump ordered the one-week F.B.I. investigation on Friday after Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona and a key swing vote, insisted the allegations be examined before he committed to voting to confirm Judge Kavanaugh. But the White House and Senate Republicans gave the F.B.I. a list of only four people to question: Ms. Ramirez and Mark Judge, P.J. Smyth and Leland Keyser, three people Dr. Blasey identified as being at the house where she said Judge Kavanaugh sexually assaulted her when they were teenagers.
All three have said that they did not remember any such party. Mr. Smyth’s lawyer said on Monday that he told the F.B.I. “that he has no knowledge of the small party” that Dr. Blasey described nor of “any knowledge of the allegations of improper conduct she has leveled.” Agents plan to return to Mr. Judge, who she said was actually in the room at the time, for more questions.
Several former F.B.I. officials said that they could think of no previous instance when the White House restricted the bureau’s ability to interview potential witnesses during a background check. Chuck Rosenberg, a former F.B.I. chief of staff, said background investigations were frequently reopened, but the bureau decided how to pursue new allegations.
The F.B.I.’s security division is handling the background investigation, and the interviews will be given to the White House. Former officials said a short synopsis of the interviews might also be provided pointing out contradictions or commonalities.
In his comments on Monday, Mr. Trump expressed indignation that Democrats were questioning Judge Kavanaugh’s youthful drinking and suggested that some of them were being hypocritical because they themselves abuse alcohol.
