Without a strong stance from Washington to give them cover, top executives have been on their own dealing with Saudi Arabia, a country that has shown itself capable of holding a grudge.
How can we get out of this?
That was the question repeatedly asked during a series of phone calls over the weekend by the biggest names in finance — Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase, Larry Fink of BlackRock and Stephen Schwarzman of Blackstone — about how they could extricate themselves from a conference in Saudi Arabia they were scheduled attend next week.
With the disappearance of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi and reports that he was murdered by Saudi agents sent to Turkey to kill and dismember him, the thought of appearing shoulder to shoulder with Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman at an opulent event meant to symbolize the country’s reforms was considered untenable.
The three executives considered their options, according to four people briefed on the conversations. Could they pressure Saudi Arabia to postpone the conference? That would be the best outcome, they figured. Would the collective threat of all three of them canceling their plans be enough? Or could they persuade the Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, to publicly declare he would not attend? Or could he make his appearance conditional on new information emerging that would support the kingdom’s denial of any involvement in Mr. Khashoggi’s disappearance? That would give them cover to pull out.
These were not conversations the men wanted to be having. JPMorgan has been working with Saudi Arabia since the 1930s and has an office in Riyadh with about 70 employees. BlackRock has long managed billions of dollars for the kingdom’s central bank. And Blackstone recently started an infrastructure fund backed by as much as $20 billion from Saudi Arabia.
But those conversations represent a new reality for business leaders under the presidency of Donald J. Trump. How a conference known as the Davos in the Desert turned into a crucible for these executives and others demonstrates the curious change the world has seen under a businessman president: America’s moral compass being set by the C-suite, rather than the Oval Office.
Over the past two years, executives have found themselves in the uncomfortable position of having to speak out on matters of right and wrong. After Charlottesville, they rebuked the president’s weak response to white supremacy. After the United States pulled out of the Paris climate accord, they expressed their disappointment. And on immigration, many businesses have denounced the administration’s hard-line approach.
And on Saudi Arabia, they have heard the president give credence to the kingdom’s denial of responsibility and float the idea that “rogue killers” could have been to blame for Mr. Khashoggi’s disappearance.
In the last week, businesses have faced perhaps their thorniest conundrum, caught between a global outcry, a vacuum of leadership from Washington and a country with a long memory. Saudi Arabia and its oil riches could represent one of the greatest untapped financial resources of the next generation — potentially trillions of dollars in capital to invest and billions more in related fees.
They also fear retribution from Saudi Arabia, which has shown a penchant for holding grudges.
One talking point among some executives has been Citigroup’s experience in Saudi Arabia. For decades, the bank had a joint venture with the Saudi government, Saudi American Bank. But after the Sept. 11 terror attacks, and a lawsuit by 9/11 victims against Saudi American Bank, Citi decided to sell its stake. The government was furious and made its feeling clear: Several years later, when Citi sought a license to do business in the kingdom, it found the gates closed. It took years of lobbying and trips to Riyadh before Citi gained the license last year.
Despite pleas from corporate leaders for help, Mr. Trump continued to instruct Mr. Mnuchin to attend the conference — while also saying that he would consider “punishing” the country if it was found to have killed Mr. Khashoggi. Saudi Arabia’s combative posture — it said it would “respond to any measure against it with an even stronger measure” — left business leaders worried that their companies could become targets.
And many chief executives took notice of the vindictive nature of the Saudi response to the criticism from Canada this summer over Saudi Arabia’s arrest of human rights activists: The kingdom instructed its investment mangers to start dumping its stakes in shares of Canadian companies, even if the sales would result in losses.
Last week, as Mr. Khashoggi’s disappearance drew headlines, companies began pulling out of the Saudi conference, known as the Future Investment Initiative. The New York Times and CNN pulled out as media partners. Late Thursday, Dara Khosrowshahi, the chief executive of Uber, said he would not attend. His decision was perhaps the most courageous: His company had received a $3.5 billion investment from the Saudi sovereign wealth fund in 2016 and one of his own board members is the head of the fund, which was putting on the conference.
I also had to make my own hard decision. I was scheduled to moderate several panels, like I have done at other conferences. But I chose to end my participation because, quite simply, it was the right thing to do. There was no guarantee that I would have the opportunity to ask tough questions of people in power about Mr. Khashoggi’s disappearance, and my participation, I feared, would be perceived as an endorsement of the kingdom rather than a journalistic enterprise.
So the exodus had already begun before the three financial titans began strategizing over the weekend. In a series of phone calls, Mr. Dimon, Mr. Schwarzman and Mr. Fink scrambled to find a way to gracefully exit the conference — or at least put it off, according to the people briefed on the conversations. Those people spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the business and political sensitivity of the discussions.
Mr. Fink called Yasir Al-Rumayyan, the chief executive of the Saudi Public Investment Fund and Uber board member, and encouraged him to delay the conference, according to people familiar with the conversation. The event would bring unwanted attention on the kingdom and the many companies that have tried to work with the country, Mr. Fink told him, overshadowing any chance of it serving as a positive catalyst for further investment. Mr. Schwarzman called Mr. Mnuchin, pressing him to cancel his trip or to work with the Saudis to postpone the conference, according to people familiar with the phone call. Neither conversation ended with a solution.
By Sunday night, Mr. Dimon decided he could not wait for more conference-call diplomacy: He declared he was out, the people said. Mr. Fink and Mr. Schwarzman decided to give the Saudis one more chance: If the conference was not postponed by 6 a.m. Monday, they would withdraw from the event.
At 6 a.m., the event was still on, and the three biggest names in finance were out.
The decisions that business leaders have made in the past week are laudable — Mr. Khosrowshahi’s in particular, because of Uber’s direct ties to the kingdom. And the departures of Mr. Fink, Mr. Dimon and Mr. Schwarzman — despite the role of public pressure — opened the door for more companies to walk out.
Of course, the world is full of countries with dubious human-rights records. China, our largest trading partner, is engaging in the mass detention of Muslim minorities. And many United States companies still do business in Russia.
Where companies draw the line when it comes to the conduct of the countries where they do business is not a simple matter. After all, Saudi Arabia’s intervention in Yemen is a human-rights crisis all on its own.
To be sure, it’s hard to imagine companies pulling up stakes entirely in Saudi Arabia or some other country because of moral considerations. But even gestures like pulling out of a conference go some small way toward demonstrating American values.
Over the coming weeks, there almost certainly will be more pressure for companies to distance themselves from the kingdom. Executives better get used to their new role as de facto diplomats.