Television|Can Hasan Minhaj Make Topical Comedy Work on Netflix?
Can Hasan Minhaj Make Topical Comedy Work on Netflix?
With “Patriot Act,” the former “Daily Show” correspondent plans to cover news most late-night hosts ignore, and looks to defy Netflix’s spotty talk show track record.
Standing on the set of his new Netflix series, “Patriot Act,” one evening earlier this month, Hasan Minhaj asked his studio audience if they had any questions about what they were about to see. He knew that his stage, an immense digital screen encircling the diamond-shape platform he was standing on, was a bit of a technological monstrosity — “it’s like if Michael Bay directed a PowerPoint presentation,” he joked to the crowd — and so some clarification might be required.
Minhaj, 33, a lean, energetic stand-up and a recent alumnus of “The Daily Show,” explained that “Patriot Act” (whose first two episodes will be released on Oct. 28) was a project he had been developing for more than two years.
Before the success of his stand-up special “Homecoming King” and his incisive turn as host of the 2017 White House Correspondents Dinner, he said he’d already been thinking about applying his comedic style to news stories that weren’t necessarily at the center of everyone’s attention, in a format that didn’t look like another cookie-cutter late-night comedy.
The test show that Minhaj was about to perform — a 24-minute monologue about the role of Asian-Americans in reshaping affirmative action, and a 10-minute piece about digital security in Estonia — could very well end up looking like a “woke TED Talk,” he said.
Good or bad, it was the show he always wanted to make and “I’m going to give you everything I have,” Minhaj said.
“We” here could mean the racially diverse group that had come to see Minhaj, who often talks in his act about his identity as a Muslim and a child of Indian immigrant parents. It could refer to the demographic of viewers in their 20s and 30s that Netflix would love to see him bring to the streaming service. Or it might be anyone who has tired of “Daily Show” clones and is eager for anything even slightly different.
But even if Minhaj and his colleagues have cracked the code and created a genuinely new kind of topical comedy, is there an audience for it? And is Netflix the place where it belongs?
If the post-Jon Stewart era of television once looked like a potential paradise for any host with a political perspective and a few zingers about the Trump administration, it is now a battlefield littered with casualties.
Netflix, despite its rapid expansion in other traditional TV categories, has struggled to create this kind of appointment viewing. Last year it canceled its first high-profile attempt at a topical talk show, “Chelsea,” hosted by Chelsea Handler, and this past August, it lowered the boom on two weekly programs, “The Joel McHale Show With Joel McHale,” which debuted in February, and “The Break With Michelle Wolf,” which started in May.
Maybe there’s no way for topical comedy to succeed on streaming TV and maybe Minhaj is doomed before he starts. But Minhaj doesn’t see it this way.
On an earlier morning in September, Minhaj and about 20 of his “Patriot Act” colleagues were in the bowels of their midtown Manhattan office, gathered around an enormous TV (and a basket of croissants) for what they called a “pre-viz” meeting.
The monitor showed a computer rendering of the “Patriot Act” stage, on which stood a small digital silhouette of Minhaj. The flesh-and-blood comedian was sitting on a couch, dressed in athleisure clothes and a pair of Air Jordans as he read from the script for his affirmative action monologue.
At a breakneck clip, he narrated the story of Edward Blum, the conservative activist and president of Students for Fair Admissions, which is suing Harvard University for allegedly discriminating against Asian-American applicants.
Amid the deluge of data and punch lines, Minhaj was also weaving a personal story: one of growing up a proud first-generation American in Davis, Calif., while navigating a murky ecosystem of race and class.
In his college-prep classes, Minhaj said, he was told not to declare himself an Asian on his application forms or he’d risk the penalty of a possible racial quota.
On paper, Minhaj is very much a grown-up: a husband of three years to his wife, Beena, a management consultant, and father to their daughter, who was born in March. But in person, he has a childlike buoyancy, kept aloft by his lifelong loves of hip-hop and professional basketball and his occasional tendency to talk like an internet meme come to life. He’ll say aloud a phrase like “tools→clear history” when he means he’s trying to put something out of his mind.
Only a few months later, Stewart announced his departure from the program. Minhaj said he couldn’t forget his admired boss’s explanation for why he was leaving: “Jon was like, ‘I’ve manipulated this chess piece in every single way I could. There’s no further place that I can take it.’” The message to Minhaj was clear, even then, that he had to start thinking about his own next moves.
Minhaj appeared in recurring features like “Brown in Town,” where he reported on stories outside New York, and “Hasan the Record,” in which he answered burning questions — say, “What is impeachment?” — in pretaped segments edited at a pace apparently intended to induce seizures.
His breakout opportunities arrived elsewhere. First was his one-man show, “Homecoming King,” which he started performing live in 2014 and released as a Netflix special last year. It is his exuberant recitation of his origin story, of learning the ropes from his father (while his mother studied at medical school in India) and confronting bias and bigotry in America.
“How far down the totem pole do you have to go to be like, ‘Let’s get the second- or third-most popular correspondent on ‘The Daily Show’?’” he said.
Minhaj knew that he’d been underestimated and he used this to his advantage. He delivered a stirring routine that was less a taunting of Trump officials than a reminder to the journalists watching of the weighty responsibility facing them.
Looking back on the experience over lunch at a Greek restaurant near his office, Minhaj told me this was a pivotal career moment, not because he got good reviews or because he resisted the advice of fellow comedians who told him he had to (metaphorically) burn the room down.
When Netflix pursued him, in the afterglow of the White House Correspondents Dinner, to create a series for them, Minhaj had a very clear sense of what he didn’t want to do.
He took out his phone and showed me a series of photos from other late-night shows — all the hosts you’d expect — seated at their desks in identical poses with graphics placed in identical locations above their shoulders.
His voice was uncharacteristically ferocious as he swiped through the photos. “It. Doesn’t. Matter. The. Network. It all. Stays. The same. I swear. To. God,” Minhaj said.
In their international travels, Minhaj and his collaborators were seeing “Homecoming King” and his correspondents dinner performance connect with a global viewership.
Prashanth Venkataramanujam, a fellow comedian and longtime friend who worked with Minhaj on these routines, said they began to devise a plan for tapping into this underrepresented audience.
Over a period of months, Minhaj workshopped some routines (like the one about affirmative action) at the Fat Black Pussycat in Manhattan. He spent his own money to produce a proof-of-concept video for “Patriot Act” — essentially, a rough pilot episode that he could show to Netflix and other broadcasters.
It closely approximates how Minhaj intends to present “Patriot Act” now: with him always standing and in perpetual motion — no desk to sit behind, no chair to sit on — surrounded at all times by graphics, data and video.
Netflix ordered 32 episodes of the series, which will be released in cycles of six to eight weekly episodes. Even now, in the days before its first episodes are released, Minhaj was still deciding whether one long monologue was enough content for an entire show or if viewers would also want another shorter, less substantive segment (a “wine pairing” to go with their “steak,” as he put it).
Minhaj’s comedy peers believe that he has as good a shot as anyone at finding a new approach to this well-worn genre. But no one is in denial about the challenges he faces, either.
Larry Wilmore, the longtime “Daily Show” correspondent and former “Nightly Show” host, said he wondered if the audiences for these comedy shows had already made their choices and their viewing habits were fixed in place.
In an oversaturated market, Wilmore said, audiences would be won not by pioneering formats but memorable personalities, and he certainly considered Minhaj to be such a performer.
But broadcasters also have to recognize the long-term commitments required to make these programs viable.
To many viewers, the very idea of a comedy show drawn from news and events happening right this moment seems to contradict the fundamental proposition that streaming platforms are offering.
She pointed to shows like Jerry Seinfeld’s “Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee” and David Letterman’s “My Next Guest Needs No Introduction” — both hosted by monolithic entertainers — as examples where Netflix had innovated in the category.
The abrupt, 10-episode run that Netflix gave Michelle Wolf — another “Daily Show” veteran with a recent, much-discussed turn at the dais of the White House Correspondents Dinner — would seem like a bad omen for Minhaj.
Netflix is hoping that Minhaj’s ethnicity and his personal compass for news stories will help him reach viewers in the other 190 or so countries outside the United States where it is offered, and it plans to promote the show heavily on YouTube and social media.
The success of “Patriot Act,” Bajaria said, would be measured by its viewership figures (which Netflix doesn’t make public) as well as its ability to insinuate itself into the zeitgeist (which no one has yet figured out how to quantify).
He had to make his choices shrewdly: every segment he commits to means months of work for his news research, writing and graphics departments, a staff of about 74 people total.
Minhaj said he was determined that “Patriot Act” not come out of the gate looking like “this open mic that Netflix is paying for as we figure it out.” He could still remember the day he learned that Wolf’s and McHale’s shows were both canceled and how it ratcheted up the pressure on his project.
At his test show a few weeks later, in a rare moment when he wasn’t feverishly delivering his affirmative action monologue or guzzling down gulps of water when the camera wasn’t on him, Minhaj paused to reflect on a joke he had told earlier.
He’d played a series of clips from interviews with Edward Blum, the conservative activist, in which he variously claimed that Harvard had a precise quota of 17, 19 or 15 percent for Asians in its incoming freshman class.
After the videos, Minhaj mocked Blum, telling him he should have studied harder at Kumon, the boot-camp education franchise that is especially popular with Asian immigrant families.
And he was right. It was just one choice, but it was his choice and he was happy with it.