Meadowlands Racetrack is usually home to thoroughbreds or harness racers. But on a recent Saturday, a different kind of horsepower was on display.
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Almost any other Saturday night of the year, the loudest noise heard in this expanse of former wetlands would come from horse-loving crowds cheering thoroughbreds or harness racers. On a recent Saturday, though, a far more raucous form of horsepower was in the air: scores of motorcycles tearing around the one-mile oval of the Meadowlands Racetrack in the final meet of the American Flat Track season.
Volume levels, it turns out, are the least of the differences between the sports.
Unlike the refined gaits of trotters and pacers, the gas-burning competitors in the flat-track series teeter at the edge of control, averaging nearly 100 miles per hour for each lap. Racers chew through the corners in lurid power slides that shoot roostertails of gravel at any competitor behind.
Speeds average nearly 100 miles per hour.
Each circuit of the course sends thundering blasts down the straightaways, as riders shrink low to minimize wind resistance. A pair of 180-degree left turns demand that adrenaline-fueled bravado be offset by balletic finesse.
The rules do not allow the bikes to have front brakes on the oval tracks. Most riders do, however, wear a steel-reinforced left shoe, which they can drag through the turns and, if need be, stab into the ground to avoid a potential spill.
This Saturday night event was the debut for motorcycle racing on the Meadowlands track, drawing about 8,700 spectators. According to the organizers, it was also the first time that professional flat trackers have competed in the New York metro area.
But dirt ovals built for horses have served as bike battlefields dating back to the 1920s. Flat track is the only born-in-America form of motorcycle racing, according to Michael Lock, the chief executive of the sport’s sanctioning body. It started on wood-plank board tracks but made the shift early on to what was more at hand in the rural landscape: dirt.
Fans watching the flat-track races at the Meadowlands Racetrack.
Preparing to start a race.
Racers take off.
Today, the national series, which features two classes of motorcycles, twins and single cylinders, and 18 races, still delivers the feel of its grass-roots beginnings at county fairgrounds. The racers compete on ovals of various distances and on the makeshift hilly terrain of what are known as TT courses. This season has seen steady improvement in attendance at tracks and increased viewership on NBC Sports Network and streaming services, according to the series organizers.
Even if the shriek of internal combustion engines was new to this track at the Meadowlands, motor vehicles have raced before in the northern New Jersey sports complex. Giants Stadium has been the site of extreme motocross competition, and open-wheel Indianapolis 500 cars raced on a nearby parking-lot course three decades ago. Neither of those sports, however, claim a legacy that traces back to flat-track duels between Harley-Davidson and Indian that were contested in the decades before World War II.
In the grandstands and paddock, fans wear hats, shirts and jackets proclaiming their devotion to particular motorcycle manufacturers. After decades of domination by the Harleys in the top class of twin-cylinder machines, Indian has won the season championship for the last two years with Jared Mees, who won 10 of this year’s 18 races. Kawasaki has also succeeded in recent years, and Ducati was the title sponsor of the Meadowlands race.
The twins are the headliners and proclaim their dominion during their 25-lap final with a bellowing exhaust.
Technicians worked on the Indian Scout driven by Jeffrey Carver Jr. of Godfrey, Ill.
A competitor’s jacket hangs in the window of a trailer.
Francisco Proano, 5, of Brooklyn, tried sitting on a Ducati bike.
Sammy Halbert, a Harley team rider, embodies a common challenge in the twin series. At 5-foot-4 and 140 pounds, he has an advantage on the long straightaways of the mile tracks, where he can tuck in tight to the bike for better aerodynamics. But his light weight makes it tough for him to improve traction by shifting back over the rear wheel.
The single-cylinder motorcycles are barely slower than the twins. Lapping the mile track about three seconds slower, the single-cylinder clashes are elbow-to-elbow tight, and the field is full of fan favorites.
The 15-lap singles final featured an intense shootout between Estenson Racing’s Kolby Carlile, the 2017 champion who is known as the Flying Tomato for his brilliant red mane, and Shayna Texter, a fearless rider with the most wins in the singles class, on a Husqvarna.
All of five feet tall and 95 pounds, Texter let no one bully her off the racing line during the repeated passes of each lap. She finally nipped Carlile by six-thousandths of a second to secure her first victory on a mile track in 2018.
An official waved the checkered flag to signal the end of a race.
Jeffrey Carver Jr., left, placed third, Bryan Smith, center, won, and Jared Mees placed second in the main twin-cylinder event.