If the Saudi journalist in exile was abducted and murdered, as many fear, a full accounting is needed.
Last Tuesday, Jamal Khashoggi, the self-exiled Saudi journalist and Washington Post columnist, walked into the Saudi consulate in Istanbul to get some divorce papers. He has not been seen since. Turkish officials have raised the horrendous possibility that he was tortured and killed and his body dismembered by a team of Saudi agents.
That’s a terrible charge. If true, it could hold grave consequences for Saudi Arabia and its relations with the United States, Turkey and other Western states. Turkey should not leave its accusation dangling without official confirmation or evidence, and Saudi Arabia cannot dismiss it with blithe denials. At the very least, it can immediately accede to Turkey’s demand to search the consulate.
And the Trump administration — which has embraced Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, a close ally and the power behind the Saudi throne — has a duty to insist on a prompt and credible explanation. President Trump said Monday that he was “concerned” about the case. “Right now nobody knows anything about it, but there’s some pretty bad stories going around,” he said. There has been no official administration protest, however.
Mr. Khashoggi, 59, had been both a consummate Saudi insider and a bold critic during his career. He was at one time the editor of a major Saudi newspaper, at another an adviser to Saudi ambassadors in Britain and the United States. He was known to journalists as someone who could explain the politics of the House of Saud and its several thousand princes. But with the ascent last year of Prince Mohammed, widely known as M.B.S., who has combined promising social and economic reforms with ruthless suppression of any opposition or criticism, Mr. Khashoggi assumed another role — critic in self-imposed exile.
While the crown prince was being extolled in many Western quarters for reforms like letting women drive and reining in the religious police, Mr. Khashoggi was writing about widespread jailings of dissidents at home and dangerous Saudi adventures abroad.
The Saudi-led military intervention in Yemen, widely perceived as part of a proxy war between Saudi Arabia and its archenemy Iran and actively supported by the United States, has also come under heavy criticism for the humanitarian crisis it has helped create. None of that has dimmed the ardor of Mr. Trump and his son-in-law and Middle East envoy, Jared Kushner, for M.B.S., whom they see as a counterweight against Iran and as a huge customer for American weapons.
Yet the dark side of M.B.S. has been ever more evident. When Canada urged Saudi authorities to release a just-arrested women’s rights activist and sister of an imprisoned blogger this summer, the crown prince’s reaction was wildly disproportionate: He recalled his ambassador, froze trade relations, pulled Saudi students out of Canada and canceled flights between Saudi Arabia and Toronto.
All this was grist for Mr. Khashoggi’s pen, and it obviously grated on M.B.S. Mr. Khashoggi understood that challenging the brash 33-year-old prince posed a qualitatively new danger for internal critics, that M.B.S. demanded a monopoly on the narrative of his reforms and would let no one challenge it. Mr. Khashoggi knew how many of his friends and colleagues were being jailed. He was aware of a risk in going into the Saudi consulate — before entering, Mr. Khashoggi gave his cellphone to his Turkish fiancée and told her to seek help if he did not reappear.
At this stage, the suggestion of a deliberate and cruel execution must remain only that, a frightening possibility. Yet the monstrosity of such an action requires prompt and credible explanations.
Why has the Trump administration, which has coddled, armed and hosted Prince Mohammed, not yet unequivocally supported Turkey’s demand to investigate the consulate for a full reckoning? Though Mr. Trump has described journalists as “enemies of the people,” he cannot be unaware that his ally stands accused of a heinous murder.
If those allegations do prove founded — a big “if” — the United States has options, including sharply cutting arms sales to Saudi Arabia and downgrading relations with it.
Again, for now these are allegations. Yet whatever happened, it’s scandalous that an outspoken journalist should disappear without a trace. A free press remains the surest defense against tyranny, and it’s a tragic sign of our times that so many courageous journalists are repressed, imprisoned or killed, and that their oppressors act with impunity.
On Saturday, a Bulgarian journalist — Viktoria Marinova, a television broadcaster who had just interviewed two reporters looking into fraud in Bulgaria and Romania — was found dead in the town of Ruse, northeast of Sofia, Bulgaria’s capital. She had been raped, beaten and strangled. Whether her murder was linked to her journalism is not yet known, but it calls for an exhaustive investigation.
That is the same reason that all who can should raise their voices and demand a full accounting of the fates of Mr. Khashoggi, Ms. Marinova and all the other voices that have been silenced. And whether the responsibility falls on prince or pauper, let justice be done.
