Opinion|I Was in the Elevator With Jeff Flake. Senators, Don’t Look Away From Me.
I Was in the Elevator With Jeff Flake. 
When I ran from Senator Jeff Flake’s office door to the elevator last Friday and put my arm in to stop it from closing, I wasn’t thinking about what would come next. I had no idea what I was about to say. But when he would not look at me, or the woman standing next to me baring her soul, I felt only fury.
Recounting trauma is powerful but emotionally taxing. It is perhaps more so when the person you are recounting it to won’t look you in the eye, refuses to shake your hand or walks into a bathroom to ignore you. What those actions — how Mr. Flake first responded to us and how other senators have responded to other survivors — demonstrate is that the person is ashamed.
If Mr. Flake had been confident in his decision to vote yes on Brett Kavanaugh’s nomination, he would have looked me in the face, point blank and explained why he was going to do what he believed in. What his refusal to look at me told me was that even though his actions were going to affect women, he didn’t want to confront them. I wanted him to look in my eyes and acknowledge my pain; it was clear that he wished he could have stayed in his office and not faced those whose lives would be affected by his actions.
And yet, frustrating as it can be, a sense of shame can also provide an important opening. Those four minutes in the elevator with Mr. Flake were a whirlwind, but I will never forget his eyes after I pleaded with him to look at me, to not look away. When he looked up, I didn’t see a senator. I saw a man, torn between his conscience and his party. And he saw me, a young woman trying to make a difference in the way that we can in a democracy: by using her voice.
The question of whether to support a Supreme Court nominee who has been accused of sexual assault should not be partisan. This is about the treatment of survivors. It is about telling us that what happens to us matters. That our traumas are not something to be ignored but are to be believed and investigated. Fully investigated.
I didn’t say the term “sexual assault” to describe what happened to me until Friday, when I looked at Mr. Flake. That’s partly because the first time I recounted what happened to me, I was dismissed. I sat in a therapist’s office, my hands shaking. “Something not good happened to me,” I choked out. I described the episode in vague language, not wanting to relive it out loud. When the therapist looked at me and asked, “Had you been drinking?” every ounce of courage left my body, and I retreated into my shame, feeling even more that this was something I needed to keep to myself because I had been drinking, so clearly I deserved it.
These consistent examples of invalidating survivors’ experiences of sexual assault is why so many don’t report. The same therapist asked me whether I wanted to press charges and when I said, “I’m not sure,” he got annoyed, as if my inability to wrap my head around the violation of my body was an inconvenience to his plans for the day.
Hours after our encounter, when Mr. Flake compromised with Senator Chris Coons to ensure an F.B.I. investigation, it was a first step toward letting survivors know: What happens to you matters. It made me feel like we might be taking baby steps toward a time when a woman’s instinct isn’t to feel ashamed and the instinct of someone in power isn’t to ignore her. Where survivors can speak up and speak out.
But what happens over the next few days will help determine whether we move closer to that time or are set back. When a person who holds the highest office in the United States ridicules a brave survivor, as Donald Trump did on Tuesday, it is a despicable display of disregard for the courage it took for Dr. Blasey to confront her worst trauma. The F.B.I., which was supposed to be investigating Dr. Blasey’s accusations, did not speak to her over the course of the investigation, which does not inspire confidence that the stories of survivors are being taken seriously.
To the senators about to vote yes: I can’t get into an elevator with all of you and beg you to look at me. You say you listened to Dr. Blasey, but you have given few indications that you heard her. Listen to and really hear the women who are confronting their innermost trauma to convince you that sexual assault isn’t something to be swept aside, no matter how long ago it happened — that it is something for which people, no matter who they are, should be held accountable.
You’ve deemed Dr. Blasey credible; don’t look away now. Look survivors, all of us, in the eye. Show us we matter.
Maria Gallagher is a recent college graduate working in Washington.