On average, there were 53 outages per subway elevator in 2015.
Good morning on this temperamental Tuesday.
Getting stuck for hours on a stalled subway car or pushed on the tracks or caught in the train door — those are just a few scary scenarios that many commuters have thought about at some point or another.
We’d like to add getting trapped inside a subway station elevator to the list.
That’s what happened on Monday morning to more than a dozen riders who were taking the elevator up at the Clark Street station in Brooklyn Heights, one of three subway stations in the city accessible only by elevator.
Talia Kovacs, 29, was one of them.
“It was very hot, very sweaty, very freaky,” she said. The button for assistance was pushed, but the voice on the other end could not say how much longer the group would have to wait (only that the M.T.A. had been notified), said Ms. Kovacs, who tweeted about being trapped.
The Fire Department got them out nearly an hour later.
Luckily, no one was hurt in Monday’s elevator incident. But Ms. Kovacs isn’t taking any more chances. She plans to get off one stop early — at Borough Hall — to walk.
It’s a tug of war between clouds, sun, showers and thunderstorms.
Expect an overcast morning with the sun doing its best to peek through, followed by an equally iffy afternoon when we could get some rain.
High in the upper 70s, low in the upper 60s; the rest of the week is looking brighter.
• Alternate-side parking is suspended.
Scene: A weekday morning at rush hour aboard a Manhattan-bound Long Island Rail Road train car. A boy who looks about 13 asks the conductor when he should transfer at Jamaica to the Atlantic Terminal connection to Brooklyn.
With an empathetic look on his face, the conductor says the train is running express and will not stop in Jamaica.
I am sitting three rows away. I can feel the panic wash over the boy.
Not understanding, he asks again how to transfer at Jamaica.
Speaking with care and patience, the conductor gives the directions to Atlantic Terminal from Penn Station until, finally, the boy seems to understand.
About 15 minutes later, the train approaches the Jamaica station. The conductor returns to our car and gestures for the boy.
The train slows to a stop. The doors open for a moment, and the boy gets off to make his transfer. As he steps onto the platform, the doors close and the train continues on its way into Manhattan. The conductor smiles with satisfaction.
Imagine a typo as egregious as the George Washingtin Bridge.
It would irritate many of us like a misused apostrophe does.
Such was the case with New Yorkers and the Verrazzano, a bridge linking Brooklyn and Staten Island that has been misspelled so frequently over so many years that it’s been challenging to set the record straight on the R (one or two?), the Z (single or double?) and the N (once or twice?).
The correction will be made in state statutes and on replacement signs over the next several years — at no cost to taxpayers.
