Mr. Weiner’s last series, the Emmy-winning AMC drama “Mad Men,” also concluded with the soft trill of a bell: There, it rang on a Northern California cliff top as the ad executive Don Draper (Jon Hamm) sat cross-legged among a group of meditating hippies. Don had come west in an attempt to divest himself of his job, but as the bell rang on that hill, a smile spread on the man’s face. Without even meaning to, he had come up with a new idea.
Inspiration did not arrive quite so easily for Mr. Weiner after “Mad Men” went off the air in May 2015. Recently, in a Hollywood editing bay, Mr. Weiner described a long rough patch where he felt unable to think of a new idea. After finishing a novel called “Heather, the Totality,” he found himself turned on by the notion of closed-end stories, and resolved that his next television project would not be serialized. Instead, he would make an episodic anthology where the characters, and sometimes even the genre, were different week to week.
The result is “The Romanoffs,” which debuts Oct. 12 with two nearly 90-minute episodes. (In a break from the trend toward binge-watching, the next six installments will arrive every week thereafter.) The episodes, which Mr. Weiner also directed, take place all over the world yet have one unlikely thing in common: In each story, there are characters who believe themselves to be descendants of the Russian royal family whose reign came to a bloody end a century ago.
But “The Romanoffs” is not the only notable thing that happened to Mr. Weiner this past year: A sexual harassment allegation was made against him last November by Kater Gordon, his former assistant and a writer on “Mad Men.” In an interview with The Information, Ms. Gordon said that while writing the second-season finale of “Mad Men,” for which they would both win an Emmy, Mr. Weiner intimated that she owed him the chance to see her naked.
“That was not an isolated incident, but it was the most affecting,” Ms. Gordon elaborated in a recent Vanity Fair article.
When did you know you wanted to make another television show?
I didn’t for a while. I really didn’t. I got a lot of advice from people who said I should stop working for a while after “Mad Men” and soak it in, and I was kind of into the time off. You have to reacquaint yourself with your family. I started watching TV in a noncompetitive atmosphere, and really stopped writing anything down, even notes, because “Mad Men” stories were still coming to me for a while after that.
Even after the show was off the air?
And it’s like, what am I going to do with that? I wanted to try the discipline of not thinking that way. What if I were to experience things without the purpose of trying to turn it into a story? Then I tried to turn it back on again after six or eight months, and it was really bad. Nothing was happening. Then I went to Yaddo [an artists’ retreat] and started my novel. Everything was activated by the novel. There was something about telling a story that was not continuing.
You had a story people wanted to continue. People were clamoring for a “Mad Men” spinoff about Sally Draper.
That was very flattering, actually. I loved that. I’m curious what would happen to her, too, but I didn’t want to do that. I liked leaving the show where it was.
“The Romanoffs” is very different than “Mad Men,” and even different from other anthology shows on television now. No matter which “Black Mirror” episode you’re watching, you know it will be about the perils of modern technology. I’m not sure “The Romanoffs” is as easy to sum up in a sentence.
Not to quote Don Draper, but you want to be a needle in a haystack, you don’t want to be a haystack. If I went in pitching, “It’s Don Draper, but it’s a woman in a pharmaceutical company …” I said that as a joke to someone I was pitching to, and he said, “Sold!” But I don’t want to do that. You know, they didn’t want “Mad Men” at first, either, so asking for another “Mad Men” is funny. But what is the one-sentence thing? I don’t know.
When it came to “Mad Men,” you challenged AMC on the episode length, the budget and the expense of the licensed songs. And now I watch “The Romanoffs,” and the episodes are feature-length, incredibly lavish and filled with famous, expensive songs. Did Amazon let you have carte blanche?
It was a wildest-dreams scenario. I will say that I don’t know what people think an episode of TV costs, but we’re not in the realm of “Westworld” or “Game of Thrones.” But I did say, “These are the things I would like to do that I couldn’t do on ‘Mad Men.’” And music was definitely part of it.
Why an episodic anthology?
I’m not a trailblazer or a disrupter. I’m just thinking in terms of the audience: Wouldn’t it be nice to have something that was on once a week that you didn’t have to catch up with and you could watch in any order?
You made a list of rules before you convened your writers’ room for “The Romanoffs,” and one of those rules says, “Ideas (especially intellectual) have no place in entertainment.” The three episodes I’ve seen are concerned with wealth, race and sex, among other ideas.
But I’m not trying to write about race, I’m trying to write about some people that I know who are racist. “Someone who becomes political” is a story, but “politics” is not. It’s just about character.
Do you have any regrets over the way “Mad Men” treated race?
I felt it would be a fantasy, unless I did an entire parallel show, to show the lives of black people through that world. I regret that on some level. There were black ad agencies, you know? But those characters were not in each others’ worlds. It was an extremely segregated society even in New York. I’m interested in fairness, if that makes sense, and representation.
There are 16 people on the poster for “The Romanoffs,” and every one of them is white.
The famous people are white, that’s true. Most of these characters are really rich. This Romanov thing, it’s not like there couldn’t be Romanovs of different races. I don’t know what to tell you. There is a lot of diversity in the cast; they’re just not people that you know. You will know them, hopefully.
The main characters in the first three episodes are all fairly wealthy. Does that persist through the whole show?
No, there are some regular people in there. It depends on the episode — they’re all different from each other. I don’t think that on Episode 3, which is set backstage on a mini-series, it really matters at all.
The first two episodes both feature a middle-aged man in an unhappy relationship who’s tempted by an affair with a younger woman.
I don’t know if I would characterize the first one that way. Certainly, in the second episode, that is about a marriage. The scene where the wife gets into bed and turns off the light and he says, “I guess we’re going to bed now,” so many people have told me, “Were you in my house?” Because that’s a long-term relationship. For me, the temptation for both of those people is the wish that there was something more exciting in their lives.
Whenever the husband in that episode fantasizes about another woman, the camera takes his perspective and ogles the woman from head to toe.
Right, because he is projecting this onto her. She is exotic and objectified by him, but that’s in his mind. They’re at an impasse in their marriage, and it is 50/50 to me. His wife has half the story.
But the camera never adopts the wife’s perspective in the same way that the camera adopts his.
I don’t think she’s as warped as he is, in terms of his fantasy. I don’t think I’m using the camera to do anything other than make you laugh at how improbable it is. When you make an actor, male or female, look attractive and do their makeup and put them in a costume that’s flattering, are you objectifying them? I don’t know.
What did you make of the Kater Gordon article once you read it?
I have reasons I don’t believe that I said it, if that makes sense, but I really don’t remember saying it. I mean, Kater and I were in a room together nine hours a day for six months, six days a week, and I just don’t remember having that attitude. I didn’t feel that way about her. I was surprised that so many years later, I was being told about that. We worked together for a year, and it did not work out.
Why didn’t it work out? She had won an Emmy the season before she was let go.
There’s lots of reasons. That was a really hard year for the staff on the show, and it was a very difficult year for getting story. I had a lot of people with no experience, and they needed to get experience elsewhere because it was too much work. In the end, she was not asked back, which is how we do it in TV. I really remember she was supposed to come down [to the office] to have that conversation with me, and she knew what it was about. Who would want to come down for that? So it was done over the phone. We did have a conversation that I really regret, the way it went. It was a lot of questions and a lot of answers, and it was not polite, and I never did it that way again.
What do you mean when you say it was not polite?
To do it over the phone and end up in an argument. It was really mean: “I don’t want you to work here anymore, and these are the reasons.” It’s something you should do in person. It was heated, and it was not what I wanted. I had not been the boss very long. I had watched a lot of people do it, and I think that I was very casual about my responsibility to have higher standards of language, of humor, of everything.
I was surprised to hear that she had this experience of working with me. She was very interested in how I worked, and she was very instructive to me on how to use the room, because I didn’t want to go in the writers’ room. I couldn’t deal with the pressure all the time of going in there and not hearing what I needed to hear and having to come up with stuff on my own. I was a very demanding boss. Some of it is continuing a tradition of hazing, in a weird way.
Had you been hazed in other writers’ rooms?
Oh yeah. Absolutely. I wanted to give people an easier ride than I had.
Has there been any course correction in the way you behave?
Honestly, the course correction happened during the show. I can say this because I’ve been on both sides of it, but there are very few other jobs — maybe being a model — where when you critique someone’s work as a writer, you are crossing a boundary into the personal immediately. But I was a very demanding boss. The show’s not going to happen if you don’t do it, and someone has to make these decisions. Because of that, when scripts come in and they’re not the way you want them, you get mad at people for not doing things the way you would have done it, and that is just wrong. But no one cried in my room.
Did you ever cry when you were a writer in someone else’s room?
Yes, I did. I felt that I had been treated way worse than I had ever treated anybody on my show. I’ve never shared people’s first drafts. I never did anything that I felt was crossing the line. You get rewritten, and it’s embarrassing, but in a comedy room, they put your script up on the screen and 12 people see what you wrote and rewrite it. I think the fact that I’ve retained 85 percent of my crew from the first season of “Mad Men” over eight years is because it wasn’t a crappy place to work. It’s hard for me to believe that it was that bad.
I remember once that at a Q. and A. for your film “Are You Here,” you told an audience member that you cared more what strangers thought of you than the people who know you well.
Wow. You can write down that I’m smiling, because out there in the world right now are lots of writers, painters, performers who are smiling at the baldness of that statement. I don’t feel that way anymore, I can tell you that.
It feels germane to “The Romanoffs,” because many of these characters are preoccupied with how they come across to people who barely know them.
