MILITELLO, Sicily — For one of the few times in his life, Franco Trincale was speechless.
The man who had spent some 60 years belting out song after song about the exploitation of workers, sundry social injustices and Italy’s political and criminal travails during decades of social upheaval could barely speak above a whisper.
“I’ve lost my voice,” he croaked to the room full of well-wishers who had gathered in the town hall of Militello, his hometown in southeastern Sicily, to honor their compatriot who — like thousands of other Sicilians — had emigrated to northern Italy during the postwar boom and made good.
Frankly, it was not a good day to be wordless.
Mr. Trincale, 83, was in Militello for the opening this month of an exhibit dedicated to his long career as one of Sicily’s last old-school “cantastorie,” literally “story singers,” who recount an event in song, usually in rhyme. Many in the crowd were expecting one of his lively performances.
But instead, Mr. Trincale attached his smartphone to an amplifier and chose a song, his strong tenor filling the hall.
Missing from Mr. Trincale’s performance, which was nonetheless loudly applauded, were the tricks of his trade: a guitar and the large painted panel typically used by Sicilian cantastorie, which in comic book form would illustrate the tragic tale.
The exhibit, sprawled throughout a wing of the town hall, contained a life’s worth of these panels, colorful codas to the cantastorie tradition. Painted by Mr. Trincale, but also by professional artists and his close friend Boris Dimitrov, some depicted more traditional tales, like the ballad of “Barunissa di Carini,” about a 16th-century Sicilian noblewoman assassinated for having committed adultery.
An enigmatic 12-frame panel involving a blind soldier, two women, a baby, a murder and a prison told a sensational story that was well known to Sicilian audiences in the 1950s.
But mostly, the panels captured Mr. Trincale’s often ironic take on recent Italian history, filtered through his left-leaning politics and big heart.
There were accounts of mass migration from Italy’s poor south to the industrial north, and the labor unrest and occupied factories that followed; tales of the Mafia’s hold on his region; and a panoply of the political figures who had loomed large in recent history, from the seven-time prime minister Giulio Andreotti, who died in 2013, to the media mogul turned politician, Silvio Berlusconi, who was often the subject of Mr. Trincale’s barbs.
Lawyers for Mr. Berlusconi, who has been indicted (and rarely convicted) on a number of charges, once claimed that their client could not get a fair trial in Milan because of Mr. Trincale’s caustic songs, which he belted from his regular post of many years, in front of Milan’s cathedral.
Humans have been narrating through song from ancient times, and the cantastorie have a long history themselves. Over the centuries, they have moved from the aristocratic courts, where they glorified the rulers, to the piazzas, spinning tales over a handful of melodies, said Gian Paolo Borghi, an ethnographer and vice president of Italy’s national association of cantastorie.
Depending who you talk to, Homer, Bertolt Brecht, Woody Guthrie and the Nobel Prize winner Dario Fo could qualify as cantastorie.
Experts cite Mr. Trincale as an innovator in the traditional form.
Traditional cantastorie focused on folkloric themes and could spin their tales for hours, he said. By contrast, Mr. Trincale abridged his chronicles, tackling issues as varied as terrorism and the soccer star Maradona in three or four-minute songs.
Mr. Trincale, born on Sept. 12, 1935, started singing as a boy, when he was an apprentice at a local barbershop, where he took up the guitar.
“I learned to play four chords on the guitar, and they have remained those four chords,” he laughed, during an interview. But what he really wanted was to join the cantastorie.
“I guess I am a bit of an exhibitionist,” he added with a smile.
Mr. Trincale moved to Milan in 1957, looking to better his fortunes. Those turned considerably when he began singing outside the factories in the Milanese hinterlands that were absorbing thousands of migrants from Italy’s southern regions.
Mr. Trincale sang of their nostalgia for their hometowns, their aspirations and broken dreams, and their frustrations when they occupied factories and demanded better working conditions. At the inauguration of the exhibit, Mr. Trincale lovingly cradled a guitar given to him in 1968 by the workers of the Alfa Romeo factory in Arese. “I was the voice of the workers,” he said.
Compared with other Sicilian cantastorie who sang in the local dialect, “Trincale was different because he sang in Italian, was biting in terms of his political commentary, but also ironic so that people were entertained,” said Remo Vigorelli, who coordinates an annual gathering of Italian cantastorie, mostly from central Italy, at a popular fair.
For many years, he recorded with the record label Fonola, humorous 45-r.p.m. records — often pitting southern Italians against northerners — as well as sentimental ones that capture the heartbreak of Italy’s economic migrants (“Letter to a Faraway Father”).
Mr. Trincale also self-published, moving from the traditional lyric sheets of the ballads that cantastorie sold in town squares, to music cassettes and CDs. In the early years, he listed his home phone number on his painted panels. Now he lists his website. People bought his songs, paying what they could, but Mr. Trincale said his career was never about money.
With growing fame came travel: to the Soviet Union, where he participated in festivals celebrating the proletariat (he once belonged to the Italian Communist Party but later severed ties); and to the United States, where he participated in festivals that drew Italian emigrants.
For around a decade, he was a fixture in the Piazza del Duomo in Milan, in front of the cathedral, where I first found him more than a decade ago. In 2010, the city awarded him the “Ambrogino d’Oro,” the city’s highest accolade.
Mr. Trincale has slowed in recent years, though not necessarily of his own will. Milan recently changed its regulations regarding street artists, and Mr. Trincale found himself sidelined from the Piazza del Duomo by a series of bureaucratic obstacles.
Also, his wife, Lina, whom he fell for when he was 17 and she was 13, has been ill for the past three years. They have been married for 61 years, and he cannot bear to be separated from her.
He wrote a love poem to his wife on the flight to Sicily from Milan, and sent it to his daughter to read to her. “My daughter is happy because she knows she was born of a deep love,” he said.
In 2006, the Sicilian province of Catania bought Mr. Trincale’s archive of song lyrics, panels, posters, trophies, awards and sundry documents. But a promised museum never materialized (“My stuff hibernated in Catania,” Mr. Trincale grumbled). This year, Militello’s mayor, Giovanni Burtone, obtained a five-year loan of the collection, and he hopes to make it into another tourist attraction for Militello, already one of several towns in the Val di Noto, an area of Sicily on Unesco’s World Heritage List.
