Readers share stories of themselves or friends and relatives deemed suspicious for simply walking around in their own skin.
Ms. Harris and Ms. Tarchak are senior editorial assistants.
In “To the Next ‘BBQ Becky’: Don’t Call 911. Call 1-844-WYT-FEAR,” Niecy Nash, the actress and comedian, uses a satirical infomercial to call attention to society’s “fear of the other,” specifically when white people call the police on black people who are just going about their business.
The infomercial may be fake, but our hotline is real and open to calls. Tell us your story by leaving a message at 1-844-WYT-FEAR or by emailing a video message to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| I went to a famous medical school that I prefer not to name. I was studying in a conference room at midnight during a blizzard, wearing a baseball cap backward, a T-shirt and socks. Police officers approached me with reports that I was robbing the medical school and were in the process of handcuffing me when I said, "How can I rob this place in a blizzard, wearing socks?"
They asked for proof that I was a medical student (a bunch of medical books wasn't enough). The problem was, we didn’t have student IDs. This was the fifth time I was harassed by police within six months. Soon after, the school issued IDs so that kids of color could prove that we belonged.
I’m white, but I’ll never forget the time my son and his black friend — they were both about 8 or 9 at the time — went to an art store in Noe Valley, San Francisco, to get some markers. They came home empty-handed and told the same story: A salesperson in the store followed my son’s friend around and then told him to get out.
I brought them back to the store and sent them in first. Then I casually walked in, not acknowledging them, and pretended to shop. Immediately, the salesperson started following my son’s friend. You should have seen her face when I said they were with me.
 One evening, her oldest son, who is 18, wanted to walk up to the convenience store at the front of our neighborhood. She would not let him. She insisted that she drive him there. I gave her a bit of a hard time about babying her 18-year-old, telling her that my son used to make that walk all the time when he was younger and that it was perfectly safe.
For the last 18 years I’ve mentored three different young men of color through a large national organization. I’ve done it in two of America’s largest cities. I can’t count the number of times there’s been grief from my fellow white people when they’d see us together, at restaurants, stores, movie theaters, sporting events. There were always looks and snide comments. Don’t get me started on the rare occasion when one of the young men would wander away from me in a store. They’d be followed by security, management, you name it. Sadly, it was usually in predominantly white neighborhoods.
