A new 42-story rental near the United Nations will be the first Manhattan tower built from scratch by Lloyd M. Goldman, a national landlord.
Lloyd M. Goldman comes from a real estate family that was once New York’s largest private property owner, and while he continues to be a major national landlord, until recently there was one thing that he had never done: build an apartment tower from scratch in New York.
But Mr. Goldman, the president of BLDG Management, is now putting the finishing touches on his first ground-up rental building in Midtown.
The 42-story, 429-unit building, at 222 East 44th Street, is just a couple blocks west of the United Nations’ headquarters and is named Summit New York, in part to honor the type of high-stakes tête-à-tête that diplomats engage in.
Mr. Goldman, 60, who owns a major stake at the World Trade Center, is also known for having studiously avoided the press for decades. But as BLDG increasingly develops buildings, instead of just buying existing ones, Mr. Goldman, who has previously renovated thousands of units, seems to relish the minutiae of designing.
At Summit, which has mostly studios to two-bedrooms, he led a tour and pointed out niches he had installed in walls near doorways, so renters can quickly stash their phones, to free up hands, when arriving home. Similarly, conduits in the wall allow unsightly TV wires to be hidden from sight.
Mr. Goldman also pointed out that the “saddle” threshold stones typically placed at seams between bathroom and living room floors, to hide imperfections, were not needed at Summit, because the floors are so flat.
The apartments, with floor-to-ceiling windows, offer compelling views, largely because Summit, near Third Avenue, is set at an angle to the street. The unusual positioning of the building, from Handel Architects, allows many windows to face the Chrysler Building. Others take in the East River.
Michael Arad, a designer of the Sept. 11 memorial at the World Trade Center, and a Handel partner, was the lead designer. Kitchens at the building have quartz counters and Bosch appliances, while baths feature porcelain tile.
For building amenities, Summit offers 36,000 square feet spread between three levels. The top floor has a wine-locker-lined lounge. The lower “arena” area has a section for boxing, a 60-foot pool and 75-foot basketball court. There are also 9,000 square feet of shared outdoor space, including sloping lawns. Access to all amenity floors is $2,200 a person a year, with discounts for families.
“It’s in an elite class,” said Matthew Villetto, a senior vice president with Douglas Elliman Development Marketing, which is leasing the $350-million project, a mix of market-rate and affordable apartments.
Of the 320 market-rate units, one-bedrooms start at $4,500 a month, while two-bedrooms at $7,700, according to Mr. Villetto, who is offering a month of free rent as a concession. The three-bedroom penthouse will be $30,000.
The 109 affordable units are being assigned through a lottery run by Breaking Ground, a social-services organization that has received 89,000 applications, BLDG said.
To lure residents from the diplomatic corps, Summit will target the residences of United Nations officials that line the area. Marketing materials include a hardcover 68-page book the size of a place mat.
Even though there are not many contemporary luxury rentals in the vicinity, Summit may have to compete with condo sublets that are similarly fancy, said Ray Urci, a salesman with Bond New York who works and lives in the area.
He’s currently listing a three-bedroom at 50 United Nations Plaza, a 43-story condo from Zeckendorf Development, at $19,000 a month. An ambassador recently toured it, Mr. Urci said, but didn’t like that the dining room could fit only eight, and not 15, people.
BLDG’s roots stretch back to the early 1950s, Mr. Goldman said, when his father, Irving Goldman, and his uncle, Sol Goldman started their real-estate careers by snapping up a pair of small buildings in Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn, near where their parents ran an Italian grocery store.
Just a decade later, the Goldman brothers, with other investors, owned the Chrysler Building. Their strategy was to target existing buildings and hang onto them for decades. If they did sell, the Goldmans often retained ownership of the land beneath the buildings, then leased it to builders. New developments, Mr. Goldman said, were nonexistent.
Today, in New York, BLDG owns the Montana, at 247 West 87th Street, the Blake, at 220 East 63rd Street, and the Mayfair, at 145 Fourth Avenue, which are among 250 residential and commercial properties the firm controls nationwide, in places like Florida, Massachusetts and Arizona.
With other investors, Mr. Goldman also holds about a 50 percent stake in three sites at the World Trade Center office complex. Three and Four World Trade are up and running; Two World Trade has yet to be developed.
About a decade ago, Mr. Goldman, who works alongside his son Robert, 30, finally decided to have at his first ground-up project in the region, in Jersey City. But the recession delayed the project for years. The One Jersey City opened in 2015.
In addition to Summit, which is built on the site of a former Goldman-owned garage, BLDG is also helping to redevelop the site of a former gas station in the East Village, at East Houston Street and Avenue C.