U.S.|There’s Much Talk About Latino Voters, but Are Campaigns Talking to Them?
There’s Much Talk About Latino Voters, but Are Campaigns Talking to Them?
Latino voters in California could help decide party control in Washington in the midterms, with several of the country’s most competitive congressional races being fought here. But just how many Hispanics will show up at the ballot box remains a big question, and it appears that most in the state have not been contacted directly by campaigns.
Latino turnout in California has steadily declined in recent years, to 47 percent in 2016 from 57 percent in 2008, according to data analyzed by William Frey, a demographer at the Brookings Institution. Midterm elections saw even lower rates: Just 25 percent of eligible California Latinos cast ballots in 2014.
Perhaps nowhere is the Hispanic vote so critical this year as in the 10th District, surrounding Modesto in the Central Valley, where Josh Harder, a Democrat, is running a competitive bid to unseat the incumbent Republican, Representative Jeff Denham. Mr. Denham clung to his seat in 2016 by just a few percentage points even as Hillary Clinton won the district.
Mr. Denham has been a pro-immigrant voice on the right and has often butted heads with fellow Republicans over reform efforts. But Mr. Harder is hoping Latinos in the district will make it to the polls to cast protest ballots against President Trump’s agenda this year, honing a message that focuses on jobs, economic security and health care. He is looking for young voters like Estela Arreola, 18, a pro-Democrat student at California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, who said she was extremely excited to vote in her first general election.
But Ms. Arreola worries that others are not tuning in, and that local campaigns are not doing everything they can to reach out. There is data to support her concern: A tracking poll released this month by Latino Decisions, a polling firm, showed that more than 60 percent of registered Hispanic voters in California had not been contacted by any political campaigns.
And campaigns may be overestimating the extent to which Mr. Trump alone will spur voters to the polls. Many Hispanics, especially in the more conservative Central Valley, like some of the president’s policies.
Jose Alvarez, 20, said he supports Mr. Trump because he feels the economy is doing well under his direction. He said he would vote to bolster the president’s agenda, but he seemed unaware there was a midterm election coming up.
This is the fifth in a series of 10 California-themed crossword puzzles, written by the veteran Times crossword constructor and San Diego resident Bruce Haight.
In today’s puzzle, we’ll be delving into California sports. A team playing in the World Series makes an appearance, as does one that recently added LeBron James to its roster. The rest are for you to uncover!
It started as a small renovation.
Carrie Byles, a partner at Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, one of the largest architecture firms in the U.S., was looking to update her 1956 home in Sausalito. But when it came time to draw up the plans, she wanted help.
So she called on a former intern, Jennifer Weiss, who had worked for her 25 years ago.
Ms. Weiss’s advice: Dream bigger.
“Jennifer did that thing that architects do,” Ms. Byles said. The result was larger and airier, with dramatic views and an open layout that promotes indoor-outdoor living.
Read the full story and see the photos here.
