He helped make the West Coast a period-instrument power. He expanded the repertory, conducting little-known Baroque works as well a new ones written for antique instruments. And he made the music of Handel and Rameau seem new again through acclaimed collaborations with the Mark Morris Dance Group.
The conductor Nicholas McGegan, who helped make the San Francisco Bay Area-based Philharmonia Baroque Orchestra one of the country’s best period instrument ensembles, announced on Tuesday that he would step down as its music director at the end of the 2019-20 season, after 35 years at its helm, to take a laureate position with the orchestra.
It is the latest classical musical shake up in the Bay Area: Michael Tilson Thomas announced last year that he would step down as music director of the San Francisco Symphony in 2020, and the San Francisco Opera is searching for a new music director.
Since becoming Philharmonia Baroque Orchestra’s first music director in 1985 — the group had been founded in 1981 by the harpsichordist Laurette Goldberg — Mr. McGegan, 68, has conducted 981 performances, taken the ensemble on many tours, and led it on 40 recordings. He spoke by telephone about his tenure at the helm of the ensemble, which is known for its historically-informed performances. Here are edited excerpts from the interview.
How has the orchestra changed in 35 years?
Well, obviously we’ve all gotten older. The reason I say that is it might be my 35 years there, which is half my life, incidentally — I’ll be 70 in January of 2020 — but we still have a number of musicians who were there before I was. Some of them played in the very first concert.
It was really an outsized chamber group rather than an orchestra then, a cross between a chamber group and a Quaker meeting: “The spirit moves me to play a B flat here rather than a B natural.” All the things they joke about, Birkenstocks and homespun clothes, are not so far from the truth in certain ways. My job was to change it from a chamber group to a Baroque orchestra. As its first music director, I’d say, “We’ll, we can discuss it afterward, but if I say it’s a B flat, it’s a B flat.” That’s what happens in orchestras.
How has the music you play changed?
It was very definitely only playing the Baroque greats — heavy on the Bach, because the founder of Philharmonia was a pupil of Gustav Leonhardt. I remember a couple of years in, I insisted we do a classical concert, and do some Mozart. And we got grumblings from our audience!
Pushing the envelope a little bit, stretching the repertoire is to me an important thing — it keeps the musicians on their toes; it keeps me on my toes. We have a thing called New Music for Old Instruments where we commission new works. We’ve commissioned one from Matthew Aucoin coming up in a couple of seasons; next year, we’ll be doing one by Caroline Shaw.
That was one of the things I could do as music director was to be more adventurous, to get away from doing eternal Bach cantatas, which are of course magnificent — but do things that the audience maybe doesn’t know, hasn’t heard or has not heard played on period instruments.
What projects are you particularly proud of?
We collaborate a lot with Mark Morris. And if that isn’t pushing the envelope, I don’t know what is.
We did this big Rameau a year ago, which took nearly a quarter of a century to put on. The manuscript is actually at the University of California, Berkeley, here. We had to get it from a manuscript locked up in the library onto the stage, and find people to sing it, dance it, and to fund it. That was definitely a high point.
I’ll be officially a laureate, so I suppose I shall polish my bay leaves every so often. I’ll be coming back often; I’m not going to move to Scottsdale, Ariz., or something, and got hot and wrinkly. I’m looking forward very much to making lots and lots of music — which makes a nice change from being in lots and lots of meetings.