MILWAUKEE — Craig Counsell was 12 the last time the Milwaukee Brewers won a league championship series. His father, John, worked for the team and took Craig to St. Louis for the last two games of the World Series. The Brewers needed one win for the championship. They didn’t get it.
Counsell sat in the upper deck. He waited out a long rain delay in a blowout Game 6 loss. He witnessed the Brewers taking a lead in Game 7, and then giving it away in the middle innings. The details are hazy to Counsell now, but he knows how he felt.
That month is here again, and the Brewers looked ready for it in Game 1 of the National League Championship Series on Friday with a 6-5 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers at Miller Park. It was a stirring start to the Brewers’ first N.L.C.S. since 2011, when they lost — again! — to the Cardinals. That series marked the end of Counsell’s playing career, which peaked with two Game 7s more satisfying than the one he saw at age 12.
Counsell was a starting infielder for the Florida Marlins in 1997 and for the Arizona Diamondbacks in 2001, winning the World Series both times. The Diamondbacks did it on the strength of two starters, Randy Johnson and Curt Schilling, who combined for 116 of the 195 outs recorded by Arizona pitchers.
In Game 1 on Friday, the Brewers faced Clayton Kershaw, a three-time Cy Young Award winner who has the longest start of this postseason: eight shutout innings in the division series against Atlanta. The Brewers countered with Gio Gonzalez, who had made six previous playoff starts, never lasting past five innings.
In that way, Gonzalez is a perfect fit for Milwaukee, which swept the Colorado Rockies in the first round with starts lasting three innings (by Brandon Woodruff), five innings (Jhoulys Chacin) and four and two-thirds innings (Wade Miley). Gonzalez had an even shorter outing in Game 1, lasting just two innings before Woodruff started a six-reliever relay.
To Counsell, though, the Brewers are simply applying their own version of the principle that guided the Diamondbacks of Johnson and Schilling: Use your best guys as much as possible. For a manager with deep baseball roots, it is merely a modern twist on an old idea.
“That’s what it is,” Counsell said. “You’re using your team’s talents the best way you can to win games. For that team, that was the best way to do it. For this team, we have to think about things differently because of the talents of some of our players.
Unfortunately for the Brewers, Johnson is 55, retired and enshrined in Cooperstown. The next best thing is a different All-Star left-hander with long hair, a three-quarters delivery and a devastating array of fastballs and sliders: Josh Hader. He blanked the Dodgers in the fifth, sixth and seventh innings on Friday, and Counsell said he would not pitch on Saturday.
Hader, 24, set a major league record this season for strikeouts by a left-handed reliever, with 143, becoming the first pitcher ever to work at least 80 innings while averaging more than 15 strikeouts per nine. He has come a long way since his days as a Class AA starter in 2015, when the Astros traded him to the Brewers in a deal for Mike Fiers and Carlos Gomez.
The Cleveland Indians used Miller 10 times in the 2016 postseason, always for more than one inning. The strategy earned Miller the A.L.C.S. Most Valuable Player Award and nearly led Cleveland to a championship.
Like those Indians, the Brewers support their multi-inning left-hander with dominant right-handers — Jeremy Jeffress and Corey Knebel, who combined with Hader for 43 saves this season. Counsell uses the three interchangeably, and they do not mind.
Jeffress gave up two hits in the eighth inning as the bullpen wobbled near the end of Game 1, and Knebel allowed a two-out, run-scoring triple before fanning Justin Turner to end it. Jeffress, Hader and Knebel have all closed out victories this postseason.
The Brewers planned for this all along. While much of the industry expected them to target starters in their deals last winter, they poured most of their resources into outfielders, signing Lorenzo Cain and trading for Christian Yelich. The Brewers — believing they had depth in adequate, if unspectacular, starters — targeted bargains like Chacin, who had pitched for five teams in the previous four seasons, and Miley, who led the majors in walks last season.
Miley, who signed a minor league deal, has made 17 starts, including the postseason, with a 2.43 E.R.A. Chacin, who signed a two-year, $15.5 million contract, was 15-8 with a 3.50 earned run average; he was the only Brewer to work more than 160 innings or earn more than nine victories.
Miley will start Game 2, and Chacin will start Game 3. They understand what Counsell wants from them, just as Gonzalez did in his own abbreviated start. The logic is old-fashioned, but the method of applying it is new.
