Two decades ago, Elvis Costello and Carole King kept running into each other at a Japanese restaurant in Manhattan. “It was the lure of the sea urchin,” Costello said. And the meals paid off: Over the course of several omakase dinners, the musicians developed a friendship that led to a writing collaboration — but not before they went through a harrowing experience.
In 1995, the two were performing with Bob Dylan and Van Morrison in Dublin. “At the end, it was too dark and when everyone went offstage left, I went stage right,” said King. “Boom! I fell 15 feet onto a concrete floor.” Costello said it was “truly horrifying.” King broke her right wrist and left thumb in the accident. “I think I was saved by landing on a pile of cables,” she said.
Not long after, the two musicians decided to write a song together. For more than 20 years, the piece, “Burnt Sugar Is So Bitter,” only existed as a demo, though Costello performed it live on several occasions. But the track finally has a home on “Look Now,” his new album with the Imposters, out Friday.
Several weeks ago, the two met at Electric Lady Studios in Greenwich Village (where he recorded the album’s strings) to talk about their work together, as well as their separate histories as collaborators, writers and performers. Settling down on a plush red sofa, King, 76, kept referring to her collaborator by his birth name.
“Do you mind if I call you Declan?” she asked Costello, 64, who was looking healthy several months after revealing that he had undergone successful surgery for cancer.
“Anything but Gladys,” he answered. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
“Burnt Sugar” fits right into “Look Now,” which recalls the grandeur of those highly arranged, early ’60s pop hits written by artists like you, Carole. When you heard the album, did you recognize yourself in it?
CAROLE KING I didn’t, but I did recognize a value I hold dear, which is authenticity in presentation. You take a song that’s good, and you go into the studio and you present it to the band, and they find themselves feeling the groove. Then you give them direction, and they take it to levels you didn’t quite imagine. You [Elvis] probably have more of the big picture going in than I do.
ELVIS COSTELLO That’s really true of this record. It’s one of the only ones where I recorded the vocals last. Normally, I arrange outward from a core vocal, which tortures the band. Sometimes the drummer says I drag or speed up a verse. Here, I had it all arranged in my head.
In your memoir, Elvis, you wrote about seeing Carole in concert in Manchester in 1971 when you were 17. Do you remember that show?
COSTELLO The two most memorable concerts I saw that year were you, with James Taylor, and Joni [Mitchell] doing “Blue” before that album came out. Can you imagine today someone touring before their album came out? You were playing all these songs that had been standards from the ’60s and then your songs from “Tapestry.” But you made sure not to tour until your album was in shops!
KING That wasn’t me. It was Lou Adler [the head of her record company, Ode].
COSTELLO I have a Lou Adler story. I was sitting at the Whiskey A Go Go in 1978 watching [the band] Rockpile, and this gentleman passes a piece of paper over the table, so I signed it. I thought he wanted my autograph. Looking floored, he handed the paper back to me and, after I turned it over, I saw it said, “Lou Adler” with his phone number on it. He was trying to sign me!
KING He knew your talent. We all knew! You did so many different things and did them all well. If you had begun in our generation of writers you’d be right there with us.
COSTELLO I can’t believe you said that!
KING A lot of it is just time and place. In some ways, I feel that it’s all undeserved for me. I know that I’ve done the work and I have the gift, but I feel grateful that circumstances put me in a time and place where people have gotten to hear it.
KING I have to say this as if I’m speaking of someone else: I got everybody’s attention. I think they weren’t expecting a small Jewish girl to have that much power or confidence. They were hungry for new talent. They were small start-up companies. Atlantic Records was in a tiny office on 54th Street.
Carole, you made history twice: first as one of the young, New York writers of the ’60s hits; then as part of the singer-songwriter movement of the early ’70s, which asserted that the quirky writer’s voice was more authentic than the “professional” singer. Given your unusual voice, Elvis, was that aesthetic shift an inspiration?
COSTELLO You hit the nail on the head. I never planned to be a singer. I was a songwriter. My role model was Robbie Robertson, but I couldn’t find a Levon Helm or a Rick Danko, so I was forced to sing. Had I come up in Carole’s time, I tell myself I wouldn’t have been a performer, which, for a lot of people, would have been a relief because they wouldn’t have to hear me sing.
KING I beg to differ. Probably you would have started off as a songwriter, but your vocal ability would have emerged. Your interpretations of your songs are magnificent.
COSTELLO When you went from songwriting to singing, you were reclaiming songs that made their name played by other people.
KING Look, if you’re following Aretha Franklin [on “Natural Woman”] it’s like … I wasn’t going to try to compete with her vocally because that would be silly. What I did was just present the song I had written.
In a way, Carole, that makes you an unlikely collaborator with Elvis. 
COSTELLO That’s probably because I thought of myself as a writer before I thought of myself as a musician. I knew I was some kind of writer from when I was 8 or 9. I didn’t know I was a musician until I was 17.
KING Your lyrics aren’t linear, but you get all the emotional components of what’s going on. There’s a freedom to it, even though you might not be able to draw a line from Point A to Point B.
COSTELLO That’s why you listen to the song more than once.
KING Well, I go directly from Point A to Point B, and they listen too!
Elvis, you’re known for full-album collaborations with everyone from Paul McCartney to the Roots. Carole, you’ve teamed with artists from Paul Westerberg to Mariah Carey. Why do you enjoy the collaborative process?
COSTELLO It’s the speed with which it’s done. When I did the songs with Paul McCartney, it was like a tennis match. Reaching across the table, I’ve got this line. I’ve got that line. And then the song was done.
Carole, what do you look for in a collaborator?
KING You trust that the person is coming from the same place — i.e. let’s write something creative that comes to a conclusion we both want. Most of the people who I collaborate with rise to that occasion.
What’s the core of your contribution to the writing?
KING I’m very chord oriented. I have been informed in that by Richard Rodgers — the way he wrote melodies that are deceptively simple.
COSTELLO That could be one of your tunes!
KING I hear that, yeah.
KING That’s an influence too. It’s all down to writing the chords. Sometimes I wander off melodically.  To me, bringing it all back home is the magic of writing. When you have a collaborator, you share that joy. It’s so much richer than what you can write on your own.