TAMPA, Fla. — Carlos Bacca, Radamel Falcao and Miguel Borja scored second-half goals to lead Colombia over the United States, 4-2, on Thursday night in an exhibition that marked the return of the captain Michael Bradley to the U.S. team following a one-year absence.
James Rodríguez put Colombia ahead with a curling shot from just inside the penalty area in the 36th, but the U.S. regrouped and took a 2-1 lead on goals by Kellyn Acosta in the 50th minute and Bobby Wood in the 53rd.
Bacca tied it three minutes later, and Falcao put Colombia ahead in the 74th on a counterattack started by Rodríguez’s clearance that went nearly half the length of the field. Borja scored on an off-balance scissor kick in the 79th.
“We let ourselves down a little bit in terms of that middle part of the second half,” Bradley said.
The U.S. now has three wins, three losses and three ties under the interim coach Dave Sarachan, who also will lead the team in Tuesday’s exhibition against Peru in East Hartford, Conn. A new coach is expected to be hired later this year.
The Americans had not allowed four goals since 4-0 loss at Costa Rica in a November 2016 World Cup qualifier that led U.S. Soccer to fire Jurgen Klinsmann and reinstall Bruce Arena as coach.
Bradley was dropped from the national team along with most veterans after the loss at Trinidad and Tobago on Oct. 10, 2017, that ended the Americans’ streak of seven straight World Cup appearances. The 31-year-old Bradley, who hopes to play a role in qualifying for the 2022 World Cup, made his 141st international appearance, tying Clint Dempsey for third-most by an American man behind Cobi Jones (164) and Landon Donovan (157).
Goalkeeper Brad Guzan also was back for the first time in a year, but the 34-year-old was on the bench as 23-year-old Zack Steffen started his fourth straight U.S. match in goal.
Three top young American midfielders missed the game because of injuries: 20-year-olds Christian Pulisic (torn calf muscle) and Weston McKennie (right adductor muscle), and 19-year-old Tyler Adams (back spasms).
Ben Sweat, a 27-year-old left back from nearby Palm Harbor, Fla., entered in the 75th minute and became the 19th player to make his debut under Sarachan, who took over when Arena quit after the loss in Trinidad.
Colombia, which was eliminated by England on penalty kicks in the round of 16 at this summer’s World Cup, went ahead on Rodríguez’s 22nd goal in 67 appearances, his first since a World Cup qualifier at Peru on Oct. 10 last year.
Bradley helped in the buildup to the equalizer, playing the ball to left back Antonee Robinson, who played a long cross into the penalty area. Dávinson Sánchez misplayed a clearance attempt, and Acosta beat defender Deiver Machado to the ball with his right foot from seven yards out for his second international goal.
Just three minutes later, Julian Green stole the ball and fed Tim Weah on the left flank. Weah passed to the streaking Wood, who one-timed the ball past goalkeeper David Ospina.