There have been plenty of stories about young black men and boys at white prep schools, whether in feature films (Gus Van Sant’s 2000 drama, “Finding Forrester”; the 2009 inspirational tale “The Blind Side,” starring Sandra Bullock), documentaries (“The Prep School Negro” from 2012; “Divided by Diversity” from 2016), television series (ABC’s “black-ish”) or music videos (Michael Jackson’s “was that what that was about?” 18-minute opus “Bad”). “American Promise,” the documentary about two boys navigating their way through Manhattan’s prestigious Dalton School, won a special jury prize at Sundance in 2013; “Hoop Dreams,” the 1994 film that tracked two teenage boys at Chicago’s St. Joseph High, is widely considered one of the greatest documentaries of all time.
That feeling of difference runs throughout the book — in it, Africa and Fiji became the Bahamas and “Harry Potter World” — and the new film. In the adaptation, Starr Carter (Amandla Stenberg) lives in a poor black neighborhood but attends high school in a rich white one. Striving to fit in both worlds, she constantly code switches between her true self and “Starr, Version 2,” her “approachable,” nonslang-speaking, never-angry alter ego. After meeting up with a childhood friend, Khalil, at a party near her home, Starr watches as Khalil is gunned down by a white police officer during a random traffic stop.
George Tillman Jr. narrates a sequence from his film where Maverick, played by Russell Hornsby, teaches his children how to behave around the police.
Stenberg, 19, recalled similar experiences as a student at Wildwood, a private school in West Los Angeles. “I picked up from my peers that my blackness was not a good thing, or made me too different,” she said by phone. “But at the same time, they were bumping ‘Yeezus’ everyday, and wearing Jordan.” For a school project in 2015, she and a classmate, Quinn Masterson, created “Don’t Cash Crop my Cornrows,” a short video that called out the appropriation of cornrows by celebrities like Christina Aguilera and James Franco, among others (the video quickly went viral). “I think there was some discomfort about it at school,” she said.
The actress shared her experiences with Tillman and Thomas, and together the three of them created a chart of “behaviors and perspectives” that ranged from Starr at home (the girl who got “The Talk” from her dad about how to avoid getting shot when you’re stopped by a police officer) to Starr at school (the girl who would never tell her white friends about “The Talk”). “It was a scale going from one to five,” Stenberg said.
All three of them could recognize Hailey, the blond student who goes from being one of Starr’s closest friends to the poster child for white privilege, blaming Khalil for getting shot and icing out Starr when she posts a grisly image of Emmett Till on her Tumblr.
So why haven’t there been more movies about young women like Starr? “Umm, patriarchy?” Thomas said.
