CHICAGO — Sam Darnold and the Jets did a good job of protecting the ball.
Playing without two of its top receivers, the Jets managed just 207 yards in a 24-10 loss to the Chicago Bears on Sunday. Darnold passed for a career-low 153 yards in his eighth N.F.L. start, and Isaiah Crowell was the Jets’ top rusher with only 25 yards on 13 carries.
It was the Jets’ first game since running back Bilal Powell sustained a season-ending neck injury during last weekend’s 37-17 loss to Minnesota. The leading receivers Robby Anderson and Quincy Enunwa were inactive with injuries, and tight end Neal Sterling left in the first half with a concussion.
Receiver Rishard Matthews made his Jets debut after signing on Tuesday, but he was shut out. Asked if the Jets (3-5) might need to add another offensive option, Coach Todd Bowles said they would discuss the possibility this week.
Mitchell Trubisky threw for two touchdowns, and the Bears (4-3) came out on top after dropping two in a row to fall out of the N.F.C. North lead. But they might have to get by without guard Kyle Long, a three-time Pro Bowl lineman, who injured his foot in the closing minutes. That was another hit for a team that was already missing the star pass rusher Khalil Mack (right ankle) and their No. 1 receiver, Allen Robinson (groin).
A week after Darnold threw three interceptions and lost a fumble against the Vikings, the Jets played turnover-free ball against the opportunistic Bears. But they hurt themselves with five false-start penalties. The flags contributed to a 3-for-14 performance on third down and just 12 first downs over all, compared with 22 for the Bears.
Trubisky was again shaky at times, going 16 of 29 for 220 yards and adding 51 rushing yards, but he did just enough. He connected with Tarik Cohen for a 70-yard touchdown on a screen in the first quarter and threw a 4-yard scoring pass to Anthony Miller in the third, making it 14-3.
Jets inside linebacker Avery Williamson said he blew the coverage on the play.
The Jets’ longest play of the day was nearly intercepted by Kyle Fuller, but it went off his hands and Deontay Burnett took the ball to the Chicago 18 for a 29-yard reception with about 12 minutes left. Darnold finished the drive with a 16-yard touchdown pass to the rookie Chris Herndon, making it 17-10 with 11 minutes 10 seconds remaining.
But the Bears responded with an eight-play, 79-yard drive, culminating in Jordan Howard’s 2-yard touchdown run, and the Jets did not threaten again.
The lack of execution was particularly glaring in the first three quarters, during which the had just four first downs and 98 yards.
Before Herndon caught a touchdown pass for the third straight week, the Jets’ only scoring drive ended with a 42-yard field goal by Jason Myers in the second quarter.
