The voice has stayed with Rosamund Pike. For the new movie “A Private War,” the British actress transformed her posh, rounded speech into a distinctive American rasp, to play Marie Colvin, the Long Island-raised, London-based journalist who was killed in Syria in 2012. On tough occasions, Pike still imagines using her tone: It suggests a woman who gets things done.
That voice, along with the patch Colvin wore after she lost an eye to a grenade in Sri Lanka, became her calling cards as she catapulted into war zones around the world, and wrote deeply felt, courageously reported articles for The Sunday Times in London. “A Private War,” due Nov. 2, aims to realistically portray her struggles and explain why she persisted. And it could have scarcely arrived at a more apt, and fraught, time.
Colvin’s story — her rise as an international correspondent reporting on conflicts in the Middle East, the Balkans and elsewhere; her bravery going into hostile territory to document the civilian cost of war; and ultimately, her death while covering a relentless battle in Homs — is in some ways tailor-made for the big screen. She was undeniably gutsy but suffered post-traumatic stress disorder and other psychological and physical ills from witnessing so much trauma. She was also witty, gregarious and stylish: a natural cinematic heroine.
Women like Colvin — and those before her, like the British correspondent Clare Hollingworth, who broke the news of World War II in Europe, and pioneering photojournalists like Gerda Taro and Dickey Chapelle — have been at the front of conflicts for a century or more, delivering rich material, with fascinating personal tales.
And yet “A Private War” is one of only a handful of Hollywood features that put the focus squarely on female war correspondents in the field — perhaps only the third or fourth such film in decades. By contrast, dozens have followed male journalists abroad, said Matthew Ehrlich, author of “Journalism in the Movies” and a professor emeritus at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
In Hollywood, Pike said, “If Marie had been a man,” her biopic “would have been made, maybe more easily. And there probably would have been many actors raising their hand” for the part.
Playing Colvin left an emotional mark; even discussing the production and what Colvin witnessed left her queasy, she said. “I had to be her at all times, which meant carrying her in my body and my bones,” she said. She dressed in Colvin’s clothes and worked with a movement coach to recreate the way the reporter carried tension in her neck. In between takes, she studiously watched Colvin on tape.
Authenticity was paramount for the director, Matthew Heineman. “The film, for me, is both a homage to Marie and a homage to journalism,” he said.
Heineman made his name with documentaries like “City of Ghosts” (2017), about citizen journalists fighting ISIS in Syria, and the Oscar-nominated “Cartel Land” (2015), which confronted the Mexican drug trade. He served as cinematographer on those films, shooting in sometimes dangerous conditions (he kept the camera rolling while dodging bullets in “Cartel Land”). So he had a sense of kinship with the way Colvin pursued her subject.
And he had a guide in Paul Conroy, Colvin’s longtime photographer, who was with her when she died and was gravely wounded himself. His experiences are also the subject of a new documentary, “Under the Wire,” adapted from his book of the same name. For “A Private War,” Conroy, who’s played by Jamie Dornan (“50 Shades of Grey”), was on set daily as an adviser, Heineman said.
In 2016, Colvin’s family sued the Syrian government for wrongful death, offering a trove of evidence alleging that President Bashar al-Assad’s regime knowingly attacked her and other journalists. The government has not responded to the suit.
“A Private War” ends with chilling statistics: in the six years since Colvin’s death, at least 500,000 people have been killed in Syria. Given the carnage, it’s hard to imagine that one story might have an impact. Colvin held on to hope that it would: for her final broadcast, on CNN, hours before she was killed, she detailed the death of a Syrian baby boy.
