HOUSTON — After months of campaigning in the shadows of his Democratic rival, Senator Ted Cruz goes into his second debate with Representative Beto O’Rourke on Tuesday on decidedly better footing.
Mr. Cruz’s bid for re-election should have been an easy one in Republican-dominated Texas, but Mr. O’Rourke, an El Paso congressman, has turned the race into one of the tightest and most closely watched in the country. Republican leaders had publicly and privately worried that Mr. Cruz might lose the seat he has held since 2013, especially with Mr. O’Rourke managing to raise a staggering $38 million in the past three months, the most of any Senate candidate in history.
But those fears have largely evaporated recently as Mr. Cruz has surged in the polls, riding on conservative enthusiasm for the confirmation of Supreme Court Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh and an aggressive performance in a debate last month that reassured his Republican base. Mr. Cruz has become far more assertive on the campaign trail, rallying earlier this month with Donald Trump Jr., the president’s son, and even in Mr. O’Rourke’s hometown. And on Monday, Mr. Cruz got yet another boost from his onetime Republican rival — President Trump will hold a long-planned rally for Mr. Cruz and other Texas Republicans in Houston next week.
In ruby red Texas, a Democrat hasn’t been elected to a statewide position since 1994. But ahead of this year’s midterm election, a Senate race between an unflinching liberal and a religious conservative is unexpectedly close.
Texas: Border walls, oil wells, Lone Star beer, margaritas, the deep red Panhandle, sky-blue Austin. A Senate race between an unflinching liberal with a punk-rock past and a God-fearing evangelical Tea Partier with a thing for country music. “These are my people.” Over all, Texas is red. Like big, bright, Republican red. A Democrat hasn’t been elected to a statewide position since this song was at the top of the charts. “I saw the sign—” But things are changing. Trump won Texas by smaller margins than the last two Republican presidential candidates. The state is becoming more diverse, less white, and the Democratic candidate’s fund-raising numbers so far — astronomical. So who are these guys? This is Beto O’Rourke, the Democrat. You and 44 million other people may have seen him in this viral video, talking about N.F.L. players kneeling for the national anthem. “They take a knee to bring our attention and our focus to this problem to ensure that we fix it.” He used to be in a band, lived in a loft in Brooklyn, has been out on the road with Willie Nelson. He’s Mr. Congeniality and has that kind of Kennedyesque swoon factor that nostalgic Democrats crave. You can catch him driving all over Texas often live-streaming. “Let me see if I can put this —” Also, he’s become a bit of a media darling. “People are pretty excited.” And then there’s Ted Cruz, incumbent Republican candidate with a successful track record in Texas. He loves playing up the whole Texas thing. Cowboy boots? Cowboy boots? Check. Gun? Gun? Check. Prayer? Prayer? Check. “We can return to our nation’s founding rituals.” He rode the Tea Party wave right into the Senate in 2012 and then ran for president in 2016. Cruz supports Trump’s border wall and is against a path to citizenship for so-called Dreamers. O’Rourke: Pro-immigrants’ rights and anti-border wall. He also wants more gun restrictions, like universal background checks. He wants to raise the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour. And legalize weed. And in the end, it’s Cruz’s race to lose as long as he can keep the new Democratic poster boy at bay.
“I actually think the way the Democrats conducted themselves during the Kavanaugh hearings has had a powerful effect in waking up and energizing a lot of Texans and common-sense conservatives of just how extreme and radical the national Democrats have gotten,” Mr. Cruz said last week after a private fund-raiser in the border city of Edinburg.
Doctors wearing sport coats over scrubs and couples dressed in cowboy boots emerged smiling from the event, which drew about 50 supporters. There in the Democratic-leaning Rio Grande Valley, conservatives are the political minority, but spirits were high.
There have been no outward signs that any uptick of Republican momentum has caused the ever-confident Mr. O’Rourke to falter. He makes a point of not being a professional politician — he has no pollster, for example — and appears unlikely to change such an image now. After stepping off the stage at his first debate with Mr. Cruz in Dallas last month, he made his next appearance behind the wheel of his car in the drive-through lane at Whataburger, air-drumming to The Who, all of it livestreamed for his followers.
A celebratory moment last week for Mr. O’Rourke’s underdog campaign — raising the record-breaking $38.1 million in the last three months — got mixed up in Democratic Party squabbling, as a growing chorus of party officials began suggesting Mr. O’Rourke share his war chest with other candidates and the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.
On Monday, Mr. O’Rourke said he had no plans to share any of that $38.1 million with other Senate Democratic candidates.
The debate on Tuesday evening at the KENS 5 television studio in San Antonio could be the final one between the two candidates. The two campaigns had originally agreed to three debates, but the second one in Houston was postponed in the tumult over Mr. Kavanaugh’s Supreme Court nomination. It has not been rescheduled.
Mr. O’Rourke will also appear on CNN on Thursday in a live town-hall event in McAllen. The network said Mr. Cruz’s campaign initially accepted their invitation to participate but then backed out.
If Mr. O’Rourke defeated Mr. Cruz, he would do more than unseat Texas’ junior senator. He would burst a political dam, becoming the first Democrat since 1994 to win any statewide elected office. The idea of a history-making victory for Democrats in 2018 seems far-fetched to many Texas Republicans who view Mr. O’Rourke’s popularity as more a media creation than a sign of a profound shift in the electorate.
Texas Democrats, meanwhile, are alternately hopeful or uncertain about Mr. O’Rourke’s chances, and often a bit of both.
On Saturday, Mr. O’Rourke stood behind McAllen’s convention center after the rally, fussing with the luggage in the back of a vehicle while his wife, Amy O’Rourke, looked on. A skateboard he received at a rally in Corpus Christi earlier that day was about to roll out of the trunk. He spoke of being humbled and surprised by his sudden celebrity, which has reached Halloween-costume level, down to the sweat stains Mr. O’Rourke typically exhibits on the campaign trail.
“We just got a picture from somebody who’s going as Beto and Amy for Halloween, and he’s got a sweat stain,” he said.
“Thankfully there were no sweat stains on the woman’s shirt,” Ms. O’Rourke added with a laugh.
In a hint of what might be in store on Tuesday, Mr. Cruz has been eager to go on the attack lately. Last week, after the fund-raiser in Edinburg, Mr. Cruz brought up his opponent’s ads and media coverage.
