Seven Russian spies charged Thursday with carrying out cyberattacks targeted a number of international antidoping agencies as well as soccer’s governing body and even individual athletes, the Justice Department said.
Some of the defendants — all members of Russia’s military intelligence agency — had been separately indicted in July for conspiring to interfere in the American presidential election. According to the new indictment, the spies traveled beyond their Moscow headquarters, including to Rio de Janeiro at the time of the 2016 Olympics, to conduct attacks on investigators pursuing Russian misconduct. Their tactics included stealing the private communications and records of top sports officials, antidoping investigators and prominent athletes.
Here are key takeaways from the indictment as it relates to global sports.
• 250 athletes from about 30 countries who had their medical records stolen and published, including the tennis stars Serena and Venus Williams and the gymnast Simone Biles.
• The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), the regulator of drugs in sports, headquartered in Montreal, which has commissioned multiple investigations into Russian doping.
• The United States Anti-Doping Agency (Usada) and its Canadian counterpart, the Canadian Center for Ethics in Sport, which have pressed for strong punishment of Russia.
• The International Association of Athletics Federations (I.A.A.F.), the Monaco-based governing body of track and field, which has taken the strongest, most persistent stance against Russian doping.
• FIFA, the global governing body of soccer, which managed fallout from the doping scandal as it prepared to hold its marquee event, the World Cup, in Russia last summer.
How did the spies carry out the attacks?
The hackers used spearphishing — email fraud, in which they baited recipients into clicking malicious links — while leveraging fictitious personas, cryptocurrency and social media accounts.
When their remote hacking efforts failed, they traveled to various sporting competitions and conferences around the world, logging on to hotel Wi-Fi networks used by the targets of their attacks. After studying hotel internet systems, the Russians compromised networks in coordination with conspirators in Moscow.
When did the attacks occur?
Across multiple years, but many were in summer 2016. A key date was July 25, 2016 — the day after Russia’s participation in the Rio Games was threatened by global Olympic officials.
On July 24, 2016, the International Olympic Committee announced that Russian athletes would be excluded from the 2016 Olympics unless evidence cleared them of doping. The restriction came after reports of a state-supported doping scheme Russia carried out at the 2014 Games the country hosted in Sochi.
The next day, according to American prosecutors, Russian spies began a “distributed denial-of-service attack” on the World Anti-Doping Agency, which had recommended Russia be banned; such an attack overloads a target’s website with traffic until it weakens or collapses.
Right before the Aug. 5 opening ceremony of the Rio Games — the hackers registered a false WADA domain name. On Aug. 4, one spy, Artem Andreyevich Malyshev, sent messages to WADA employees posing as the organization’s chief technology officer, phishing for employees to input their user names and passwords. Similar messages went out on Aug. 9, and at least one employee entered his or her credentials, the prosecutors said.
What did the intelligence officers do at the 2016 Olympics?
At the Rio Games, Olympic officials stayed at the Windsor hotel chain and were principally headquartered at the Windsor Marapendi, where a pop-up sports arbitration court and other official proceedings were conducted.
On Aug. 19, 2016 — about 15 hours before two of the Russian spies were scheduled to depart Rio de Janeiro — an Olympic official logged on to the private global antidoping database, affording the hackers access. “Large-scale exports of data” followed on Aug. 29, 2016 and Sept. 6, 2016, the Justice Department prosecutors said.
What other events did the spies attend?
The frenzy of activity extended into September 2016, when two spies traveled to Lausanne, Switzerland, where the I.O.C. is headquartered, for an antidoping conference. The intelligence officers stayed at different hotels, each known to host antidoping officials for the occasion. By compromising a hotel Wi-Fi system, they gained access to a Canadian official’s laptop and email account.
Was any of this activity discovered at the time?
Some organizations — like WADA, the global antidoping regulator; Usada, the American regulator; and the I.A.A.F., the track and field governing body that first banned Russia in November 2015 — had announced they had been the subject of cyberattacks.
But Thursday’s indictment provided a new level of detail about the mechanics and extent of the attacks while also revealing, for example, that FIFA’s medical and antidoping director also had his computer breached. Until at least Jan. 2, 2017, the spies had access to a computer belonging to the head of FIFA’s medical and antidoping division and downloaded “more than 100 documents,” including evidence produced in investigations of Russian doping.
What motivated the attacks?
“All of this was done to undermine organizations’ efforts to ensure the integrity of the Olympics and other Games,” a Justice Department official said at Thursday’s news conference.
Did investigators and sports officials back off from disciplining Russia?
The nation was technically banned from the last Olympics for its doping system, though more than 160 Russian athletes were permitted to compete under special dispensations. WADA recently reinstated Russia’s antidoping agency, which had been suspended for nearly three years. That decision was met with controversy as Russia has not fulfilled certain previously set criteria, including admitting to the widespread cheating.
How did sports officials react to Thursday’s charges?
