The story of her mother’s death was never easy for Elissa Slotkin to tell.
Ms. Slotkin and her brother had pushed their mother into reinstating her health insurance, which she had dropped after losing her job. But she let the new policy lapse, opting to pay another bill before her $1,000-per-month premium. A few weeks later, she walked into an emergency room and learned she had stage-four ovarian cancer.
The same month she received her terminal diagnosis, she had to consider filing for bankruptcy.
Nearly a decade later, Ms. Slotkin watched her congressman, Mike Bishop, a Republican, smiling and standing alongside the president at an event to celebrate the House passing its version of a bill to repeal the Affordable Care Act. “Something in me just broke,” she said.
Ms. Slotkin decided to challenge Mr. Bishop for his seat in Michigan’s Eighth District. And she knew she wanted her mother’s story to be part of her campaign.
What she didn’t expect was just how many people would be eager to hear it. The story has became a central theme of her campaign — she even released an ad featuring her sick mother delivering a speech at her wedding.
Stories like Ms. Slotkin’s abound among Democratic candidates on the campaign trail. In New Jersey, Andy Kim talks about a prenatal health scare that affected his younger son. In Illinois, Betsy Dirksen Londrigan describes how her son almost died of a septic infection at age nine. In Illinois, Lauren Underwood shares how her own heart condition, SVT, makes her someone with a pre-existing condition. And in Arkansas, Clarke Tucker shares his 2017 diagnosis of bladder cancer.
After years as a drag on Democratic candidates, health care has transformed into a powerful — and personal — weapon for the party.
In polls, Democratic voters list health care as the most important issue in the midterm elections. Strategists are listening: Of all the political ads aired by Democrats in House and Senate races last month, the highest percentage focused on health care, according to the Wesleyan Media Project.
Part of the issue’s power comes from the fact that the health care law remains under threat, even after Republicans failed to repeal it in the Senate last year. A pending lawsuit brought by 20 Republican-led states, and backed by the Trump administration, could allow insurance companies to stop covering people with pre-existing medical conditions.
Three-quarters of voters say it is “very important” to them that the health care law protect people with pre-existing conditions.
Those kinds of numbers have left Republicans in competitive races trying to square their nearly decade of opposition to the law with voters’ support for one of its most popular elements.
To do so, they’re stealing a play from their Democratic opponents.
In February, the Missouri attorney general Josh Hawley joined the Republican lawsuit to overturn the health care law. Seven months later, as a candidate for Senate, he released an ad proclaiming his support for covering pre-existing conditions.
His reason: the affliction of his young son, who was diagnosed with a rare chronic disease.
“A pre-existing condition, we know what that’s like,” he said.
Last Sunday, Mr. Bishop, Ms. Slotkin’s opponent, brought up his own health care story during a televised debate, in an effort to defend his vote on the health care repeal.
Yes, we saw Kanye West in the Oval Office. It was crazy. That’s all we have on that one.
• This morning, President Trump called into “Fox and Friends” and spent 47 minutes weighing in on seemingly every issue of the day, from Hurricane Michael (a “speedster”) to the midterms (“there are Senate races that we weren’t even going to contest that we’re leading in”) to that anonymous Op-Ed (“there is a very good chance that that was written by The Times … because The Times is totally corrupt”).
The basic idea behind the podcast is that most Americans don’t want to live in a political bubble and would like to hear from people who disagree with them. This may seem like wishful thinking right now, but we’re going to give it a try anyway. In the first episode, three op-ed columnists with wildly divergent views — Ross Douthat, Michelle Goldberg and David Leonhardt — take on the question of the legitimacy of the Supreme Court, as well as the political consequences of Brett Kavanaugh’s confirmation and the #MeToo movement generally. Also, Ross Douthat sings a bit of “A Star Is Born.” Let’s just say you have to listen to it to understand how it happened.
The aftermath of Justice Kavanaugh’s confirmation dominated our coverage this week, but there was lots of other good stuff to read. Before we leave the court, do check out Linda Greenhouse’s piece on the lessons Justice Kavanaugh should learn from the career of Justice Hugo Black, who ended life as an exemplary civil libertarian but began it as a member of the Ku Klux Klan. And the midterms featured in several sharp arguments — about the size and scope of the Trump coalition in the Midwest, and how much economic anxiety matters to his supporters.
But even the most politically minded editors in Opinion get tired of seeing the word “midterms.” With Hurricane Michael still trashing the south, we have been worrying a lot about climate change, which you can read about in this fascinating graphics-and-data-driven story on heat and humidity. We have also been thinking about the ongoing fight over a suit concerning affirmative action at Harvard (the trial begins Monday), which was brilliantly dissected today by Elise Boddie. And finally, in the did-I-just-read-that-in-The-New-York-Times department, Neil Pollack shared the heartbreaking story of his attempt to stop living his life in a marijuana fog.
Listen to the new podcast, The Argument, here.
A new story in The Times Magazine dives into Democratic efforts, or the lack thereof, to connect with veterans. We wanted to know more, so we asked Lauren Katzenberg, the editor of the magazine’s At War channel, to tell us about the story.
1. Veterans make up 13 percent of the voting population.
They also enjoy high voter turnout (in 2016, veterans voted at a rate 6 percent higher than nonveterans) and are especially concentrated in some decisive swing states.
2. Democrats seem more focused on running veterans as candidates.
They tried that approach in the 2006 midterms, when they ran dozens of veterans as candidates under the banner of the “Fighting Dems,” but only six of them won their elections.
3. Republicans, meanwhile, are approaching the midterms with a seasoned ground game to mobilize veteran voters.
Republican staff members have built a permanent presence in veteran communities across the country. The conservative group Concerned Veterans for America, for example, has 12,000 active volunteers and a potent operation at work in 13 key states.
For the latest from At War, subscribe to their newsletter here.
• It’s a move straight from Russia’s playbook. But American groups are behind it. Here’s how disinformation is spreading ahead of the midterms.
• Hurricane Michael pummeled the Florida Panhandle with winds of up to 155 m.p.h. See photos of the destruction.
• An acclaimed charity said it was saving some of the world’s most vulnerable girls from sexual exploitation. But from the very beginning, the girls were in danger. Read the investigation at ProPublica.
This obituary is a marvel. Make sure to read all the way to the end!
