Illustrated. 739 pp. Crown. $35.
How presidents deal with war is the subject of the historian Michael Beschloss’s latest work, a sweeping overview of presidents leading the United States through almost two centuries of conflict. “Presidents of War” is a marvelous narrative that opens with James Madison, the father of the Constitution and a reluctant warrior during the War of 1812, desperately fleeing for his life, his table still set for dinner, while British troops torched Washington. From there, Beschloss takes us through the Mexican War, the Civil War, the Spanish-American War, World Wars I and II and Korea. He ends with America’s humiliating loss in Vietnam.
Along the way, we see presidents plotting strategy, maneuvering with Congress (which plays a large role in this book) and conferring with confidants, while their families weigh in on critical decisions. We see presidents leading great public debates — or failing to. And we see presidents exhibiting a myriad of emotions, depressed or elated, pugnacious or regretful, wise or foolish. Beschloss has a thesis about all this, and it’s an important one. Echoing the sentiments of the founders, he posits that the nation should go to war only when there is an “absolute necessity” and only with overwhelming support from Congress and the public.
However, even if the framers of the Constitution saw war as a last resort, and the decision was to be made by Congress rather than presidents, seldom has this been the case. True, Madison abided by the Constitution “he had helped to write” when he insisted that Congress start the War of 1812. But by the time of the Civil War, the picture was very different. Little by little, Congress had ceased to exercise its constitutional mandate to declare war, which became the exclusive purview of presidents. As Daniel Webster memorably put it, “presidential war” took over.
It effectively began with James Polk and the Mexican-American War. Unlike the more measured Madison, the ambitious Polk shamelessly “lied and connived,” fabricating a pretext for war that, despite his public declarations, was designed to allow the United States to seize large portions of territory from Mexico. Eventually, by Truman’s day, America was bogged down in a bitter conflict with North Korea without the president even bothering to ask Congress for a war declaration. Truman established a dangerous precedent for future presidents, one that we live with today.
As Beschloss notes, marginalizing Congress, even when legislators were eager to pass the buck, has serious pitfalls. Truman, for instance, worried about spreading “war psychosis,” but in the process, unlike Franklin Roosevelt, he failed to adequately prepare the American people for the struggle the nation confronted, and the country paid a price.
One of the book’s more intriguing contributions is in noting that the founders could not have envisioned war in the nuclear age, when the president would have the ability to eviscerate hundreds of millions in less than an hour — all resting on “the whim” of a single person. However, beyond pointing this out, Beschloss says little more. The issue cries out for a treatment of its own.
As Beschloss explains, the greatest wartime presidents successfully leaven military actions with moral concerns — a lesson for future presidents.  And invariably, all wartime presidents suffer personally. There was Lincoln with his headaches and depression; William McKinley with his severe physical and mental strain; Truman with his sleeplessness and nausea; Johnson aging; Wilson having a massive stroke; and Roosevelt visibly dying.
It is little wonder that presidents look to other presidents for sustenance and support. Truman, for example, admired Lincoln’s humble origins, adulated Wilson and approved of Polk’s “undaunted use of presidential power” throughout the Mexican War (as Truman put it, Polk regularly “told Congress to go to hell in foreign policy”). Lincoln looked to the founders and Andrew Jackson. And more recently, President George W. Bush, thrust by 9/11 into the role of being a wartime president, sought lessons from Lincoln. And so it goes.
Beschloss’s writing is clean and concise, and he admirably draws upon new documents. Some of the more titillating tidbits of the book are in the footnotes. Polk had urinary stones requiring removal, which left him “perhaps without sexual function.” Theodore Roosevelt regretted that he didn’t have a crisis dramatic enough “to fully demonstrate his leadership potential.” And Lincoln, of all people, may have contracted syphilis in the mid-1830s, which he then passed on to Mary.
The book also has some delicious asides, as when President Wilson met King George at Buckingham Palace; after Wilson departed, the king told an aide: “I could not bear him. An entirely cold academical professor — an odious man.” Wilson, Beschloss notes, for all his rhetoric about liberal democracy, seized authority as a war president with the “passion of an autocrat,” running roughshod over civil liberties. Moreover, he refused to deal with Congress as a constitutional equal. No wonder his League of Nations foundered.
It is noticeable that Beschloss only modestly touches on 9/11, Afghanistan or Iraq, asserting, I think rightly, that they are too recent to be written about as history. Surely, however, there are lessons historians could draw from some of these modern wars. As Truman once said, “the only thing new in the world is the history you don’t know.” Moreover, Beschloss does not say much about the Cold War, itself a momentous conflict that long held the world hostage to potential nuclear war.
But all this is mere quibbling. There are fascinating nuggets on virtually every page of “Presidents of War.” It is a superb and important book, superbly rendered.