U.S.|Who Is Robert Bowers, the Suspect in the Pittsburgh Synagogue Shooting?
Who Is Robert Bowers, the Suspect in the Pittsburgh Synagogue Shooting?
The authorities said Mr. Bowers, 46, then killed at least 11 people in and around the synagogue, Tree of Life, a spacious building with stained glass windows, a golden memorial tree and a Torah rescued from the Holocaust.
It was the Sabbath, the synagogue’s busiest day. The attack was one of the deadliest on the Jewish community in United States history.
The police arrested Mr. Bowers, who had 21 guns registered to his name, according to Representative Mike Doyle of Pennsylvania. Officials said he was not known to law enforcement before the shooting, and a search of the Pennsylvania judiciary database shows only a 2015 traffic violation in his name.
Mr. Bowers took to Gab, a social network that bills itself as a being dedicated to free speech and which is increasingly popular among alt-right activists and white nationalists. After opening an account on it in January, he had shared a stream of anti-Jewish slurs and conspiracy theories. It was on Gab where he found a like-minded community, reposting messages from Nazi supporters.
“Jews are the children of Satan,” read Mr. Bowers’s biography.
Mr. Bowers lived about a 25-minute drive south of the synagogue in a brick apartment complex on a dead-end street, where he was frequently spotted smoking cigarettes outside. A neighbor said she could not remember seeing him speak to anyone, not in the two years she’d lived there.
The shooting came a day after federal authorities arrested a man in Florida on charges of sending mail bombs to prominent Democrats. The man, Cesar Sayoc Jr., had also posted vitriolic and sometimes violent messages — both online and on stickers attached to the windows of his van. Political rage fueled Mr. Sayoc, who railed against liberals and immigrants and echoed the saber-rattling rhetoric of Mr. Trump’s rallies, according to people who knew him.
But Mr. Bowers’s social media activity appeared to be much more extreme.
Another doctored image showed the president in conversation with a man wearing a skullcap. Yet another post featured a suitcase of guns.
Gab has grown increasingly popular among those whose views are unwelcome on other services. It grew out of claims of anti-conservative bias by Facebook and Twitter and is best known for its limited user guidelines.
The company confirmed that the name on the account matched the name of the alleged gunman. It took down the account, and released a statement saying it was cooperating with law enforcement. “Gab unequivocally disavows and condemns all acts of terrorism and violence,” the statement read.
On Saturday, in Mr. Bowers’s modest neighborhood, a large truck from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives blocked the street. Some three dozen law enforcement officials milled around and neighbors came out to look, despite a cold steady rain.
One man, who said he had lived nearby for more than 15 years, stood outside shaking his head. He noted that many immigrant families had moved into the neighborhood lately. Another woman said she had struggled to understand how the national epidemic of violent hate — so vivid and relentless on the media but in many ways still distant — had arrived at her doorstep.
“I can’t believe it has spread out this far,” she said.