MUNICH — At a recent exhibition opening, a painting of a black baby was attracting an unusual amount of attention.
The work, by the German artist Jörg Immendorff, was part of a series of several cartoonish infants painted half a century ago. Visitors at the Haus der Kunst, one of Germany’s most important contemporary art museums, were peering closely at the painting’s title, taking photos on their smartphones and furrowing their brows in consternation.
As it turned out, the title of the 1966 piece contained a word now considered racially charged: “Negerchen mit Kerze” (“Little Negro With a Candle”).
Mr. Soumade said Mr. Enwezor’s time at the museum was “a fresh breath of air.” Similar words have been used to describe Mr. Enwezor throughout his career. Considered one of the most influential curators active today, Mr. Enwezor was born and raised in Nigeria. Since the mid-90s, when he started a magazine about African art in Brooklyn, Mr. Enwezor has fought to bring attention to African, Asian and Latin American artists, and many have praised his curatorial work at the 2002 edition of Documenta, an important exhibition held every five years in Kassel, Germany, as challenging Western hegemony in the art world.
The mid-September opening at the Haus der Kunst was packed — a large crowd had come to see Gerhard Schröder, the former German chancellor, deliver a speech about the artist. But Mr. Enwezor was nowhere to be seen. Just weeks before, he had given an interview to the German newsmagazine Der Spiegel in which he called the short statement announcing his resignation “an insult” because it did not highlight the accomplishments of his tenure, and said that statements about the museum’s financial situation created the impression that his leadership had been a failure.
The State of Bavaria is the biggest shareholder of the Haus der Kunst, and provides the museum with millions of euros every year.
An in-house scandal in 2017 that revealed that the museum was under surveillance by the intelligence services for harboring Scientologists in its ranks might have seemed bizarre to outsiders. It caused a small uproar in Bavaria, where Scientology is considered a threat to democracy and where employees can be dismissed from government or state-funded organizations if they are members of a Scientologist group. Three Scientologists were fired, and the flap exposed fissures between Mr. Enwezor and some members of his staff.
According to the Munich newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung, workers also complained that Mr. Enwezor was distant and did not speak German. Some observers wondered how he could be an effective artistic director while curating the Venice Biennale in 2015 — no small task. For his part, Mr. Enwezor still wonders whether the furor surrounding the Scientologists was part of a strategy on behalf of some on his team to “bring change about within the organization,” as he put it.
Against the backdrop of the Scientology scandal, the Haus der Kunst was struggling with its budget, as it had been for years. In April, the museum hired Bernhard Spies to sort out its finances. In an interview with The Art Newspaper, Mr. Spies blamed the museum’s current 500,000-euro deficit on management mistakes made during Mr. Enwezor’s tenure.
Oliver Joerg, a member of the Bavarian Parliament, wrote in an email that Mr. Enwezor’s exhibitions drew international attention but carried financial risks. “This is particularly true if, for example, visitor numbers fall short of expectations or exhibition partners drop out at short notice,” he wrote.
“Postwar,” a huge exhibition at the Haus der Kunst from October 2016 to March 2017 of art from the two decades after World War II, was cited by Mr. Enwezor’s critics as an example of a show that did not pull its weight financially. It brought together more than 350 artworks from 50 countries; planning it took three and a half years. It drew acclaim from critics, but costs were much higher than projected — €4.4 million, or about $5.1 million, instead of €1.2 million — and ticket sales were much lower than expected. The Brooklyn Museum, which originally signed up to host the exhibition in the United States, pulled out unexpectedly.
“ ‘Postwar’ was a debacle,” Ms. Zacharias, the center-left member of Parliament, said. She added that after that exhibition, the supervisory board should have taken a closer look at the museum’s budget and questioned the financial wisdom of Mr. Enwezor’s future plans.
Mr. Enwezor said he knew from the beginning that the exhibition would not be a blockbuster, but he did expect a higher turnout. He expressed disappointment that an exhibition that explored Germany’s history and the global shifts that followed World War II did not entice more people. The letdown was especially cutting because the Haus der Kunst was built by Hitler in the 1930s to house Nazi propaganda art. “I wanted to engage the public in this conversation,” Mr. Enwezor said.
According to public figures, 6 percent to 7 percent of the funding for the arts in Germany comes from private sources. Corporations, which can typically provide continuous and significant support, do not have as active of a presence in the German art world as they do in the United States.
The Haus der Kunst is funded and directed through a complicated structure in which three separate groups are shareholders, one of which is the State of Bavaria. Mr. Enwezor and his team did not manage to secure any large corporate donors, and even lost one that donated $500,000 annually. But they did secure 78 million euros in government funding for a planned renovation of the museum in 2020, and raised more than 4.3 million euros in donations between 2015 and 2017. But it wasn’t enough. The costs of Mr. Enwezor’s projects outpaced the profits, and a deficit formed.
A lingering question on the minds of some observers has been whether racism or xenophobia were factors in Mr. Enwezor’s departure. Mr. Enwezor was hired at the Haus der Kunst with fanfare in 2011, but since then, the political mood in Germany has shifted and xenophobia is no longer the purview of fringe political parties. In Bavaria, in elections for the state Parliament last Sunday, the populist Alternative for Germany, which has made anti-migration policies a focus of its platform, entered Parliament for the first time with a 10 percent share of the vote.
Mr. Enwezor’s exit has not been the only change at Haus der Kunst. In the last months, the museum has announced the departure of Ulrich Wilmes, the head curator, and the addition of a deputy for Mr. Spies to help with a new department dedicated to fund-raising.
A few weeks after the Der Spiegel interview published, Mr. Enwezor took a more diplomatic tone, reflecting on the goals he set out to accomplish and the role a museum can play in a society defined by political battles.
