The chairman of the board of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center bluntly disparaged the hospital’s former chief medical officer on Monday, telling the hospital’s staff that the medical chief had “crossed lines” and had gone “off the reservation” in his outside dealings with health and drug companies.
The remarks by Douglas A. Warner III, the chairman of the center’s board of managers and overseers, as well as Dr. Craig B. Thompson, the chief executive, went beyond previous hospital statements about the former chief medical officer, Dr. José Baselga. Until Monday, the hospital had said Dr. Baselga followed internal policies and had mainly just failed to disclose his industry affiliations in some medical journal articles.
Dr. Baselga did not respond to phone calls or an email message requesting comment.
Monday’s meeting between hospital executives and employees was the latest in a series held by the cancer center as it conducts a broad review of policies regarding the nonprofit institution’s ties to outside industries. Memorial Sloan Kettering has been forced to re-examine its rules governing board memberships and compensation in the wake of articles by The Times and ProPublica that revealed insider deals with start-ups that were poised to reap millions of dollars for breakthroughs in cancer treatments and biotechnology advances.
The hospital’s senior executives have come under scrutiny in recent weeks, leading Mr. Warner to question on Monday whether Dr. Thompson would be permitted to continue sitting on the board of Merck, which makes the blockbuster cancer drug Keytruda. In addition to his position with Merck, Dr. Thompson is also a director of Charles River Laboratories, a publicly traded company that assists research in early drug development.
Dr. Thompson received $300,000 in compensation from Merck in 2017, according to company financial filings. He was paid $70,000 in cash from Charles River in 2017, plus $215,050 in stock. The compensation for the two corporate boards was in addition to what he was paid as chief executive at Memorial Sloan Kettering. In 2016, he earned $6.7 million in total compensation from the cancer center and related organizations, according to the most recent Internal Revenue Service filings.
In a memo late last week and again at Monday’s meeting, the New York-based cancer center emphasized the need to overhaul its policies, which had failed to address some of the potential conflicts made public recently at a time when investors are tossing vast amounts of money at start-ups developing promising treatments.
Dr. Thompson said Monday that working with for-profit companies remained a priority. “We cannot be shy about the importance of investments in bringing forward these advances,” he said.
Dr. Baselga, one of the world’s leading breast cancer researchers, has also resigned from the boards of the drugmaker Bristol Myers-Squibb and Varian Medical Systems, a maker of radiation equipment.
Memorial Sloan Kettering also announced late last week that it would limit the involvement of its board members in start-ups affiliated with the hospital, a development that followed news of an exclusive deal the hospital made with an artificial intelligence company founded by Memorial Sloan Kettering insiders.
On Monday, Representative Debbie Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, sent a letter to Dr. Thompson seeking answers to a series of questions about the deal with the company, Paige.AI, giving it the right to access images of 25 million tissue slides analyzed over decades. Her letter questioned how the hospital planned to ensure patient privacy, among other issues, many of which had been raised by hospital doctors at the internal meetings once the deal became public.
In his own comments to the staff, Dr. Thompson apologized for what he described as his poor handling of the recent crisis and said Dr. Baselga had not acted appropriately.
Mr. Warner, a former chairman of JPMorgan Chase & Company, acknowledged that there was “widespread anger” among staff members and that the hospital’s reputation had been harmed.
