HOUSTON — Justin Verlander and Gerrit Cole have been even more brilliant in the playoffs, keeping Cleveland’s powerful offense in check to give the Houston Astros a 2-0 lead in the American League division series.
Cole struck out 12 and walked none, combining with two relievers on Houston’s second straight three-hitter in a 3-1 victory on Saturday.
Marwin Gonzalez hit a go-ahead, two-run double and Alex Bregman homered for the second straight day.
Next up: Dallas Keuchel will oppose Mike Clevinger in Game 3 of this best-of-five series on Monday in Cleveland.
Francisco Lindor hit a third-inning homer for the Indians, who have three runs in the two games. Cleveland is batting .100 (6 for 60) after a regular season in which it ranked second in the majors with a .259 average. Jose Ramirez, Edwin Encarnacion and Josh Donaldson have combined to go 1 for 22.
Gonzalez put the Astros ahead in the sixth with the third of his four hits, an opposite-field double to right off the usually reliable reliever Andrew Miller.
Bregman homered against Trevor Bauer in the seventh, and the Astros, the defending World Series champions, are a win from advancing to the A.L. Championship Series.
Cole allowed one run and three hits in seven innings, joining Tom Seaver (1973) as the only pitchers to strike out at least 12 batters without a walk in a postseason game.
Ryan Pressly got two outs, and Roberto Osuna walked one in a four-out save. Cleveland’s starter, Carlos Carrasco, allowed two runs and six hits in five and one-third innings.
Jose Altuve singled leading off the sixth but slipped as he left the batter’s box and was limping after reaching first base. Hinch and a trainer came out to check on Altuve, who remained in the game.
Bregman walked and one out later, Cleveland brought in Miller, the left-hander who was the dominating Most Valuable Player of the 2016 A.L.C.S. but has been slowed by injuries this year.
The switch-hitting Gonzalez turned around and hit right-handed. He fouled off a slider, and then doubled on a fastball. Gonzalez, who hit a career-best .303 last season, has struggled this year, hitting just .247.
Miller had allowed just one previous inherited runner to score in the postseason, on a sacrifice fly by Boston’s David Ortiz in Game 3 of the 2016 A.L.D.S.
Miller walked Carlos Correa on four pitches and loaded the bases with an intentional walk.
Bauer, a starter pitching in relief for the second straight day, got Evan Gattis to pop out and struck out Martin Maldonado.
Cole retired 13 of 14 after Lindor’s homer, striking out the side in the fourth. After fanning Ramirez on three pitches to end the sixth, Cole screamed and pumped his arms as he walked off the mound.
Houston’s leadoff hitter, George Springer, went 1 for 4 with a single, ending a streak of five postseason games with a home run — one shy of Daniel Murphy’s record.
Now he and the Astros head to Cleveland hoping to set a different kind of record by becoming the second team in franchise history to reach the championship series in consecutive seasons.
