DealBook|What Are the Consequences of Elon Musk’s S.E.C. Criticism?
What Are the Consequences of Elon Musk’s S.E.C. Criticism?
First, it was a tweet proclaiming “funding secured” for taking Tesla private. That caused the Securities and Exchange Commission to sue Elon Musk, the company’s chief executive, for misleading investors.
Then, having entered into a settlement with the S.E.C. that has yet to receive court approval, Mr. Musk took to Twitter and appeared to call the agency the “Shortseller Enrichment Commission.” He also criticized BlackRock for lending shares to those betting against the company.
The settlement included a permanent injunction — sometimes referred to as a “sin no more” order — that raises the stakes for Mr. Musk if he violates the primary antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws again. But his tweets raise a question: Will Mr. Musk be able to avoid violating securities laws in the future?
Mr. Musk’s criticism of the agency appears petulant and poorly timed, given his need to have the settlement approved, but it is not the type of statement that misleads shareholders. It does indicate that he may not be as contrite as other defendants who settle with the S.E.C., however, and could violate the injunction. That could have serious consequences by allowing the S.E.C. to ask the federal court to impose additional penalties.
One basis for justifying a permanent injunction is whether the defendant is likely to violate securities laws in the future. The securities laws prohibit both false statements and those that are so sketchy that they could mislead investors — something the 280 characters allowed on Twitter might foster.
The S.E.C.’s settlement with Tesla, which was sued separately from Mr. Musk, requires the company to “employ or designate an experienced securities lawyer whose qualifications are not unacceptable” to the S.E.C.’s staff to review future communications through social media by its senior executives. That person must stay in place as long as Tesla remains a public company, with the S.E.C. apparently hoping that the lawyer will be able to tone down Mr. Musk’s social media commentary. In addition, the company must create a committee of independent directors who will oversee the controls that Tesla has been told to put in place regarding public statements by its executives.
But can Tesla’s board of directors or corporate counsel control Mr. Musk? The S.E.C. will certainly be watching and has the ability to punish him if he makes statements that are considered to be a potential violation.
If that happens, the S.E.C. could pursue a civil contempt case, and Mr. Musk’s tweets criticizing the agency could bolster it.
To prove a violation, the agency would have to show clear and convincing evidence that the order was valid and lawful, clear and unambiguous, and that the violator had the ability to comply with the order. That is a higher standard than the one usually applied in civil cases because a contempt finding can have serious consequences.
A federal judge who finds civil contempt can order that the defendant be incarcerated until the person complies with an order, but that is unlikely to happen if the matter concerns only misleading statements. The more likely remedy would be a corrective statement along with an additional monetary penalty for a violation. Given Mr. Musk’s wealth, the likelihood is that any fine would make little difference to him.
If a violation is significant, a court may require the defendant to stand trial for criminal contempt. Under the federal statute governing contempt, a judge can find a defendant guilty if the person willfully engaged in “disobedience or resistance to its lawful writ, process, order, rule, decree or command.” Such proceedings are rare, but they do show that any future violation could result in a criminal penalty, which would have a disastrous impact on a corporate executive.
The S.E.C.’s ultimate power if Mr. Musk made new misleading statements would be to seek an order barring him from serving as a director or an officer of a public company. This penalty was the greatest threat in the original lawsuit filed on Sept. 27, and perhaps a motivation for the settlement. One basis for issuing a bar is a repeat offense, so the settlement counts as a first strike against Mr. Musk.
So now it becomes something of a parlor game: Will he say something that violates the antifraud rules? If the “experienced securities lawyer” that the company must retain has real power, the likelihood of a violation is low. But if Mr. Musk posts comments on Twitter without having them vetted first, there will be a risk that the injunction could be violated — with potentially significant consequences.