Welcome to The New York Times’s international election newsletter, where Sarah Lyall tries to explain the U.S. midterm elections to readers outside the United States (and perhaps to herself). Only a week to go.
It’s been an awful few days, with the slaughter of 11 worshipers by an anti-Semitic, anti-immigrant gunman at a Pennsylvania synagogue, and the efforts, apparently by a deranged Floridian supporter of President Trump, to send pipe bombs to prominent Democrats and Trump critics.
The year was 1954. The longtime anti-Communist obsessions of the Republican senator Joe McCarthy had succeeded in infusing the country with a toxic brew of fear, mistrust and paranoia. But then, in the midst of a televised hearing about whether Communists secretly lurked in Army, as Mr. McCarthy claimed, an Army lawyer named Joseph Welch could not take it any longer.
It was such an important moment.
But he has been back-and-forth with his regular programming, in part because he was so mad that his critics called pipe bomber “the MAGABomber,” in an allusion to his “Make America Great Again” slogan.
“We have seen an effort by the media in recent hours to use the sinister actions of one sinister individual to score political points against me and the Republican Party,” President Trump said at a rally on Friday.
Well, maybe. Or maybe not. But what else might be to blame? The nature of our political system? The nature of our president? The rise of social media?
Critics of the president, of course, say the fault lies with him.
Tom Steyer, a Democratic billionaire who leads the “Impeach Trump” movement (and was the intended recipient of one of the mailed pipe bombs), said that after the synagogue shooting the president’s behavior was, well, presidential, with his brief foray into sober words.
“But there’s something much bigger than that going on here, which is the atmosphere that he’s created — and that the Republican Party has created — in terms of political violence,” Mr. Steyer said on Sunday morning.
Later that day, Vice President Mike Pence was asked about the president’s rhetoric and name-calling.
Asking for a Friend?
Let’s say, for the sake of argument, that the current predictions about the congressional elections prove true: The Senate remains under Republican control, but the House of Representatives flips over to the Democrats.
Under this scenario, the House Democrats will, at the very least, try to make the next years of President Trump’s life a living hell. They will seek to force him to release his income taxes; they will subpoena his aides; they will open as many investigations into as many aspects of his businesses and his presidency as they can.
Impeachment, which refers to the process by which Congress can remove a president for “treason, bribery, or high crimes and misdemeanors,” is another matter entirely.
Impeachment proceedings originate in the House, which votes on whether to bring Articles of Impeachment — essentially, the details of an indictment — against the president. The matter is then sent to the Senate, whose chambers act as a courtroom for the trial. The chief justice of the Supreme Court serves as the judge, members of the House of Representatives are the prosecution, and the Senate acts as the jury.
At least two-thirds of the senators have to find the president guilty in order to remove him from office. Then the vice president takes over.
Under our hypothetical scenario — that is, that the Republicans hold on to the Senate while the Democrats take the House — it is highly unlikely that the House Democrats would try to impeach Mr. Trump. They’d never win the case in the Senate.
“We’re the only country in the world where a person comes in and has a baby, and the baby is essentially a citizen of the United States … with all of those benefits,” Mr. Trump said in an interview that’s part of an “Axios on HBO” documentary.
Drawing the electorate’s attention to immigration and threats from abroad, rather than domestic terrorism and threats from within, seems to be one of Mr. Trump’s goals in these last heated days before the election.
Opinions on the matter are strong and pointed, as you might imagine, particularly since such a move would have grave constitutional implications — because the president is proposing to use an executive order to do it, he would effectively be circumventing Congress in making policy.
Mr. Trump’s supporters argue that the amendment applies only to freed slaves, not to children of immigrants born on American soil.
Mr. Trump discussed birthright citizenship while campaigning for president, and since then, his administration has been quietly batting the issue around.
“The notion that simply being born within the geographical limits of the United States automatically confers U.S. citizenship is an absurdity — historically, constitutionally, philosophically and practically,” Michael Anton, a lecturer at Hillsdale College and a former national security official in the Trump administration, wrote in The Washington Post in July.
Writing in The Hill earlier this year, Linda Chavez, a former official in the Reagan administration and now the director of the Becoming America Initiative, an advocacy group, said that the president’s constitutional interpretation is just plain wrong, resting on the “tortured” insertion of an extraneous “or” into the original congressional argument.
