The College Football Playoff committee has certainly faced tougher tasks than determining which team to slot first in its initial rankings this season.
Alabama, the defending national champion and ranked No. 1 in The Associated Press poll, is the only undefeated team left in the Southeastern Conference. This season, its typically stellar defense has been merely excellent, allowing the 16th-fewest yards and 10th-fewest points a game. Its offense, led by the sophomore quarterback Tua Tagovailoa, has been a weekly fireworks show, putting up a nation-leading 54.1 points a game.
And so when the selection committee’s rankings were revealed Tuesday night on ESPN, it was — surprise! — the Crimson Tide (8-0) taking the top spot.
The top 10 was rounded out by six teams that are 7-1: No. 5 Michigan, No. 6 Georgia, No. 7 Oklahoma, No. 8 Washington State, No. 9 Kentucky and No. 10 Ohio State.
This is the fifth year of the playoff — whose 12-year contract with ESPN runs to $7.3 billion — so fans probably know the drill by now.
A refresher: on Dec. 2, the day after the conference championship games are complete, the committee will issue its final rankings and set the bracket.
No. 1 will play No. 4 and No. 2 will play No. 3 in the semifinals, which will take place on Dec. 29, at the Orange Bowl in Miami Gardens, Fla., and the Cotton Bowl in Arlington, Tex. The national championship game will be Jan. 7 at Levi’s Stadium, the San Francisco 49ers’ home in Santa Clara, Calif.
The structure of college football, which has one more so-called power conference than it does playoff spots, guarantees disputation, as at least one power-conference champion will be left out every year. Last year, for the first time, two were left out, as Alabama joined the SEC champion, Georgia, in the playoff instead of the Big Ten champion, Ohio State, which had two losses.
If Notre Dame sews up its final four games, there will probably be a similar situation: With wins over Michigan in the season’s first game, and, presumably, No. 19 Syracuse (6-2), which it plays next month, the Fighting Irish, who are independent in football, would probably be shoo-ins.
It is also difficult to envision the SEC, with five teams in the top 11, not producing at least one entrant.
And with a surprising number of Atlantic Coast Conference teams ranked, Clemson could perhaps afford a loss (perhaps at No. 22 Boston College, or in the conference title game) and still salvage a tournament spot.
That could leave as many as three conferences scrapping for as few as one remaining spot.
The Pacific-12, which has one team with fewer than two losses (Washington State), will probably be locked out for the third time in five seasons. Oklahoma, which has a loss to No. 17 Texas (6-2), probably needs to run a gantlet including next month at No. 13 West Virginia (7-1) and in the conference title game, probably a rematch versus the Longhorns or the Mountaineers. And in the Big Ten, the title could well come down to the game next month in Columbus featuring the Wolverines — whose loss, at Notre Dame, is more impressive than Ohio State’s, at unranked Purdue.
Central Florida, the final undefeated team remaining in the Football Bowl Subdivision, was ranked 12th — exactly as it was at the end of last season, when it was a 12-0 champion of the American Athletic Conference. In the four previous seasons of the playoff, the committee has yet to place a member of a so-called Group of Five league in the top four, including the Knights, who went on to defeat Auburn in the Peach Bowl last season.
Many of the most momentous remaining regular-season games will come this weekend. Alabama plays at L.S.U., Georgia goes to Kentucky, West Virginia will be at Texas, and Michigan is being challenged at home by No. 14 Penn State (6-2).