An article on Sunday about Saudi Arabia’s account of the circumstances of Jamal Khashoggi’s death misstated the name of the German foreign minister. He is Heiko Maas, not Meiko Mass.
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about discontent and infighting at the Justice Department misstated who Justice Department leaders consulted in stripping protections for transgender people. They spoke to departmental experts, though not to the head of the civil rights appellate division and her team.
An article on Monday about the policies of Senator Joe Donnelly of Indiana misspelled the surname of a lawyer who spoke about the Indiana candidates for Senate. She is Gaya Boyers, not Bowers.
A Spotlight article on Page A3 on Saturday about William Nordhaus’s concept of a carbon tax misstated the category in which he won a Nobel Prize. Mr. Nordhaus shared the 2018 prize for economic science; he did not win the Nobel Peace Prize.
An article on Saturday about American and European companies’ ties to Saudi Arabia misidentified the leader of the Saudi-French Business Council. He is Dr. Mohammed bin Laden; he is not the leader of the Saudi Binladin Group or the father of Osama bin Laden.
An article on Saturday about the relationship between the Knicks and the Nets misstated the number of times the two teams have played each other, and the record between them. They have met 192 times, not 184. The article also misstated the teams’ historical record. The record between the two franchises is 98-94, Knicks, not a 92-92 tie.
Because of an editing error, a picture caption with an article on Sunday about the Seattle Seahawks’ recent trip to London for an N.F.L. game misidentified the players at a Top Golf center. Doug Baldwin was on the left, not the near right; Jaron Brown was on the right.
An article on Sunday about college hockey coaches moving into jobs in the N.H.L. misstated the number of years between Wayne Gretzky’s departure from the Edmonton Oilers and the Calgary Flames’ victory in the Stanley Cup Finals. It was one year, not two.
An article on Monday about American Ballet Theater’s fall season misstated the surname of the set designer for “Garden Blue.” She is Sarah Crowner, not Sarah Crowden. The article also misspelled the given name of a pianist. He is Jacek Mysinski, not Yacek Misinski.