He takes credit for everything, except his own screw-ups.
From where I sit, Jared Kushner hasn’t been much of a blessing to America.
But he has been a boon to clichés.
Like the one about having your cake and eating it, too. Only in his case, there’s extra frosting: He doesn’t pay any tax on the cake, either.
Or the one about having everything served to you on a silver platter. Except Jared bobbles the platter, sends the delicacies atop it to the floor and squashes them under his tasseled loafers. Then his enablers whisper to the media that the delicacies were pulverized all along and would have looked worse without his princely footwork. We’re not to fault Jared. We’re to fete him.
I’ll pass, and I’ll note that while he and Ivanka Trump seemed at one point to be taking a wise break from center stage, he’s back in the spotlight, identified as one of the most gullible fan boys of Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia and exposed as an epic tax evader. He really is the perfect son-in-law.
Where Jared goes, embarrassment follows. He’s Midas minus the touch and the humility. Oblivious to the truth of the kingdom that he was romancing, he bought into and promoted the idea of the Saudis as forward-thinking fixers who would make his self-aggrandizing delusion of peace in the Middle East happen. Now he watches and winces as they clumsily try to settle on the right lie about what happened to the journalist Jamal Khashoggi, who is believed to have been tortured, murdered and dismembered in the Saudi consulate in Istanbul.
Last year Jared persuaded President Trump to choose Saudi Arabia as his first big stop on his first big foreign trip. He was on the phone with the kingdom so often that it frightened some American security experts. America’s spies, meanwhile, caught wind of communiqués between foreign officials talking about how easily manipulated Jared might be.
What does he have to say about the Saudis and Khashoggi? Nothing. He has his usual moral laryngitis. He’s integral when there’s the hope of credit, invisible when there’s the certainty of blame.
Jared, 37, fancied himself a visionary. So did the 33-year-old Saudi prince, known as M.B.S. When they met at the White House two months after President Trump’s inauguration, they reportedly forged an immediate friendship, each affirming the other’s precocity and royal glow. Two princes are even smarter and shinier than one.
But this was another Jared misjudgment: M.B.S. imprisoned business executives, kidnapped the prime minister of Lebanon and surely had knowledge of, if not a hand in, the silencing of Khashoggi.
And so the list of Jared’s screw-ups grows.
He was among the Trump intimates who wanted all those fat-cat bankers in the administration; the resulting optics have dazzled. He pushed for the firing of the former F.B.I. director James Comey; that worked out brilliantly. He advocated the hiring of Anthony Scaramucci for the White House’s communications operation; that was the stuff of farce.
Meantime he and Ivanka told the world — and themselves — that they were the better angels of the administration. Never mind that to campaign for her father, they shelved many of the principles that they had prattled about at Hamptons cocktail parties across the years. They weren’t really shelving them, you see. No, they were sneakier than that! They were positioning themselves to be traitors within the new regime. They would bring it to power, then undermine it. They would create the problem in order to solve it.
This made no sense unless you factored in their desire for the heady adventure and personal advantage that a Trump presidency would afford them, no matter how wretched it turned out to be. They wanted the ride. So they rationalized it.
Then they crashed. To measure their softening effect on Trump, just watch his recent “60 Minutes” interview. He dismissed climate change. He blithely shrugged off the brutality of Vladimir Putin and Kim Jong-un. He all but begged Jim Mattis to resign.
Stephen Miller lives large. Steve Bannon lives on. Jared, are you alive?
“He hasn’t really done anything,” a prominent Republican who knows and is sympathetic to him recently said to me, referring to how little on Jared’s résumé can be divorced from his inheritance. I’ll give Jared this: He has at least kept Uncle Sam at bay. As The Times’s Jesse Drucker and Emily Flitter reported last weekend, he “appears to have paid almost no federal taxes” for years while quintupling his net worth over the past decade to almost $324 million.
He’s the embodiment of the Trump administration’s ethos that you’re entitled to take a whack at something by dint of affluence and arrogance, not because of any manifest expertise. He’ll reinvent government! He’ll end the violence between the Israelis and Palestinians! He’ll do justice to yet another cliché. It’s the one about fools rushing in.
