The Dodgers’ pursuit of their first championship since 1988 continues Wednesday at Fenway Park in Game 2 of the World Series. In the opener, the Red Sox defeated the Dodgers, 8-4. The Dodgers fell one game short last season, falling in seven games to the Houston Astros.
This Dodgers team found itself 16-26 in the middle of May but has since gotten healthier and deeper, with two stars — shortstop Manny Machado and third baseman Justin Turner — and a versatile group of interchangeable parts to help Manager Dave Roberts exploit matchup advantages.
The presence of Roberts evokes the start of the Red Sox renaissance. The team had gone 86 years without a championship before 2004, when a stolen base by Roberts in Game 4 of the American League Championship Series propelled Boston to a comeback victory over the Yankees. They went on to win the World Series in 2004, 2007 and 2013.
Roberts needs to make some more positive Fenway memories by winning at least one of the first two games before the World Series shifts to Dodger Stadium for Game 3 on Friday. The Red Sox will not be intimidated by playing far from home: They have won all five of their road games so far in this postseason.
This is the third in a series of 10 California-themed crossword puzzles, written by the veteran Times crossword constructor and San Diego resident Bruce Haight.
In today’s puzzle, you’ll be tested on a few California politicians. If you’ve been following the midterms, you’ll be familiar with 11-Across, who is up for re-election in less than two weeks. Those living near Fairfield and Sacramento should have a good chance at getting 22-Across.
If you like what you’re solving, check out our daily Mini crossword puzzle, or take your puzzles on the go with the New York Times Crossword app.
The Neptune Pool at Hearst Castle, in San Simeon, finally reopened Sunday after its $5.4 million renovation with a “Great Gatsby”-inspired event.
Guests paid more than $1,000 to plunge into 345,000 gallons of frigid nirvana designed for the publishing tycoon William Randolph Hearst.
Sponsored by the nonprofit Friends of Hearst Castle, the benefit celebrated the completion of the largest restoration project in the property’s history: a five-year project to repair cracks that caused the pool to leak up to 5,000 gallons a day.
The lush Central Coast estate was donated by the Hearst Corporation to the state in 1958 and is now the most popular state park in California.