HOUSTON — For a snapshot of the way baseball has changed recently, consider the pitching matchup for Game 3 of the American League Championship Series here on Tuesday: the Houston Astros’ Dallas Keuchel versus the Boston Red Sox’ Nathan Eovaldi.
Baseball used to be filled with pitchers like Keuchel, a durable sinker specialist who studies the movement of his pitches, not their speed. Now it is loaded with pitchers like Eovaldi, who throws about 100 miles per hour and has twice had Tommy John surgery. Strikeouts reached a record high in the majors this season, and speed has an undeniable appeal.
Eovaldi’s fastball has always stood out, even in this age of velocity. It averaged 97.2 m.p.h. this season, according to Fangraphs, ranking third among the 140 pitchers who worked at least 100 innings. Keuchel, at 89.3 m.p.h., was 132nd.
Accordingly, Keuchel averaged only 6.7 strikeouts per nine innings, and Statcast measured the spin rate of his four-seam fastball at 2,166 rotations per minute. The Astros’ ace, Justin Verlander, had a four-seam spin rate of 2,618 r.p.m., best among starters. Keuchel is not Verlander, and does not try to pitch that way.
“You’re only going to throw as hard as your body can,” Astros Manager A. J. Hinch said. “So for someone to be as mature enough to know himself and use his weapons to the best of his ability, I applaud, in a sport where we’re shifting towards maybe a little bit more bravado, a little bit more high-end velocity and spin rates.
True, but Keuchel’s way is disappearing. Just a few years ago, it was not so unusual to throw a lot of innings — successfully — without many strikeouts. In 2014, there were 24 qualified pitchers who had an earned run average under 4.00 and fewer than seven strikeouts per nine innings. This season, there were only four — and no others in the A.L. besides Keuchel.
Keuchel guessed that he had never thrown harder than 93 m.p.h., and his style seems to help him last deeper into games. He worked 204⅔ innings and led the majors in batters faced.
O’Brien, who played from 1985 to 2000, said Keuchel — who will be a free agent after the season — could last for many years with his approach. While harder throwers often struggle to adapt as their fastballs fade, Keuchel, 30, has always grasped the importance of movement and location, a sensibility he shared with a veteran O’Brien caught as a rookie with the Oakland Athletics.
So does Keuchel, at his best. He struggled early this season when he tried to throw too many high fastballs, as so many others do today. When he decided to stay true to himself — back to sinkers and changeups — he did much better, with a 3.30 E.R.A. in his last 20 starts.
Eovaldi has also evolved, throwing more cutters this season and thriving, especially after a July trade from Tampa Bay to Boston, where his E.R.A. was 3.33. He stymied the Yankees in the division series and has not allowed a home run in his last five starts, though the Astros hit three in a row off him here on June 20.
Alex Bregman, the Astros’ supremely talented and confident third baseman, posted video of those homers on Instagram on Monday. The Red Sox tend to take trolling personally — they reveled in Aaron Judge’s playing “New York, New York,” as he strode past their clubhouse after a division series victory — but Eovaldi, who does not use social media, brushed it off.
One potential distraction could be sitting directly behind home plate at Minute Maid Park: the Hall of Famer Nolan Ryan, baseball’s career strikeout leader, who watches many games from that spot. Eovaldi said he did not notice faces in the crowd, but he shares a hometown with Ryan — Alvin, Tex., about 25 miles from Houston, where a statue of Ryan stands in front of the city’s history museum.
Horn, who lived next door to Ryan decades ago — “Our wives used to push the baby strollers down the street,” he said — insisted the city would not be conflicted with Eovaldi on the mound for the visitors.
