Music|Does Brahms’s Obsession With Rhythmic Instability Explain His Music’s Magic?
Does Brahms’s Obsession With Rhythmic Instability Explain His Music’s Magic?
Polyrhythms run through his music like a compulsive streak. They’re what give his works tension and majesty.
A century separates the clarinet quintets of Mozart and Brahms, but at the emotional heart of each sits a slow movement of rapt, bucolic calm. In both, the strings play with mutes, creating a sound like a summer-morning haze, over which the clarinet drifts in unhurried legato lines. Brahms wrote his in 1891, after he had heard the Mozart quintet performed and grown infatuated with the clarinet’s sound.
Listen closely to Brahms’s Adagio, and you may notice a destabilizing irregularity that is built into the rhythmic texture and lends it buoyancy and unease. Though the sound of the strings in the opening is misty, it is swirling with syncopations, overlapping cross-rhythms and hemiolas, rhythmic devices that dissolve a listener’s grounding sense of a first beat to the bar.
You don’t have to be musically literate to know the bumpy feel of a cross-rhythm. Two-against-three can be a parent strolling hand in hand with a skipping child. Triplets on top of eighth notes are like a slow canter next to a trot: The two horses might move at the same speed, but you wouldn’t want them pulling a carriage together.
Polyrhythms run through Brahms’s music like an obsessive-compulsive streak. In a bucolic moment such as the one in the Clarinet Quintet, which the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center performs on Nov. 15, they seem to subtly mirror the organic irregularity of nature.
Pull up a video on YouTube that scrolls through the score as the music play and find the opening of this Adagio (at 12:22).
There are three beats in a bar and the clarinet places a quarter-note in each. Simple enough. The first violin plays the same theme but with a one-and-a-half beat delay, so that there is no discernible strong first beat. The other three strings underpin this with alternating triplets and eighth notes — or, rather, triplets tied over to eighth notes so that here in the texture, too, the pulse becomes imperceptible. The effect is amorphous and a bit wobbly, like entering a space with no vertical lines.
Or take a symphony like the Fourth, in which Brahms wields cross-rhythms for dramatic effect. Listen to the moment in the Passacaglia when the winds (save for the bassoons) first fall away leaving the violins to lay down a noble but urgent melody (at 35:53).
When the violins elaborate on this melody in eighth notes, the upper winds add agitated ornamentations, some in triplets, some in eighth notes. The orchestra seems to strain in different directions; things sound on the verge of falling apart.
And in a showpiece like the “Paganini Variations,” which the pianist Garrick Ohlsson performs on Oct. 27 at the 92nd Street Y as part of his two-season traversal of the complete Brahms works for solo piano, rhythmic intricacies create virtuosic dazzle.
Brahms is a staple of the concert hall, his music dependably grand. Even in his lifetime, he was pegged a traditionalist because his forms — the sonata, the symphony — are those familiar from Mozart and Haydn. But zoom in on his use of rhythm, and a different picture emerges. If his harmonies had been as conflict-seeking as his rhythms, he might be considered the most dissonant composer of the Romantic era.
Brahms didn’t invent the practice of superimposing duplets and triplets in music: Beethoven explored it, especially in his late works. Chopin designed an étude to teach pianists how to become metrically ambidextrous. The rhythms in Schumann are sometimes wildly unstable.
But for Brahms, subdividing a measure of time into different units and layering different patterns on top of one another seemed to be almost a compulsion — as well as a compositional device and an engine of expression. The number six held a special fascination for him because it could be rendered as two groups of three or three groups of two, or sliced asymmetrically into four plus two.
It’s tempting to look for clues to this obsession in Brahms’s biography. One telling detail is his lifelong attachment to his collection of tin soldiers, which numbered more than a thousand by the time of his death. As an adult, he often showed it to visitors and at least once asked to have it sent to him while he was away from home. Some biographers have seen this as a regressive streak or a sign of Brahms’s military bent. (He did have a bust of Bismarck next to one of Beethoven in his room.) But to play with toy soldiers is also to organize and arrange, to divide and regroup.
On a visceral level, cross-rhythms may have filtered into Brahms’s music while he was walking. We know that he did much of his composing while in motion and liked to recite poetry out loud while strolling. The duple meter laid down by his feet would have knocked against the rhythm of whatever melody or text was running through his mind.
Mr. Morris pointed out that a song like “Vögelein durchrauscht die Luft,” from one waltz collection, manages to be both in two and in three, even though it is billed as a waltz. But he also said that a certain rhythmic kink is built into a waltz when it is played idiomatically.
Perhaps the most ingenious aspect of Brahms’s rhythmic puzzles is that it they are so well hidden. The musicologist and conductor Leon Botstein said that Brahms was acutely aware that he lived in a time in which modernizing forces threatened a rupture with the past. “He wanted to show that the classical procedure he found in Mozart or Haydn could fit a modern world, a more ambiguous world,” Mr. Botstein said in a phone interview.
Science, too, was then shifting to an understanding of the brain as not a single entity but as an organ comprising many subcenters. Pathologists examined the role of the brain’s two hemispheres in patients with mental illness; phrenologists tried to map mental faculties onto different areas.
“The idea that we contain multitudes — like Walt Whitman — was becoming a physiological realization,” Mr. Pesic said.
As a pianist who has performed a complete Brahms cycle, Mr. Pesic said he had noted the relish with which the composer broke out polyrhythms whenever he could. The device popped up as technical challenges, as in the “Paganini Variations,” and as an agent of drama.
