With Hurricane Michael’s assault on Florida, officials have again begun tracking storm deaths. As of Thursday evening, at least six people had died from the storm. But a look at how death tolls were tallied after Hurricane Florence last month showed that what qualified as a storm-related death varied not only state to state and county to county, but even based on who was filling out a death certificate.
Robert Edge, the coroner of Horry County, S.C., received a call from a florist who sounded upset. Vivian Skipper, owner of Buds and Blooms, had provided flowers for three funerals in short succession for patients of a hospital that was evacuated before Hurricane Florence. All the family members said the deaths were unexpected.
A funeral director then called Mr. Edge to report several more deaths of people evacuated from hospitals and nursing homes. But none of the eight deaths, which occurred outside Mr. Edge’s jurisdiction and in some cases in Georgia, have been attributed to the storm. Florence’s official toll does not include them, even though the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention last year asked those who fill out death certificates to note when they think a disaster played a role in the timing of a death — including through the stress of displacement — even if it was not a direct cause.
Inconsistencies in classifying deaths have made it difficult to compare the magnitude of different disasters, to understand why people die, and to help prevent deaths in future storms. Undercounting deaths disqualifies survivors from receiving federal funeral assistance.
The problem with discrepancies in how storm-related death tolls are calculated gained attention after Hurricane Maria last year. Puerto Rico’s long-held official toll of 64 was dramatically disproved by public health statistics indicating that about 3,000 more people than expected had died in the months after the storm. The vast majority did not die as a direct result of drowning in floodwaters or being struck by falling trees, but instead likely lost their lives because of chronic illnesses exacerbated by poor conditions such as prolonged power losses. A version of the study was published in the journal Lancet Planetary Health on Thursday.
Early indications are that the tallies from this year’s hurricanes may not prove more accurate.
The C.D.C.’s 14-page guide, developed with a range of experts, calls for certifiers to record both directly related disaster deaths, such as when a building collapses and crushes someone, as well indirectly related deaths in which unsafe or unhealthy conditions stemming from a disaster likely contributed. The president of South Carolina’s coroners association, Sabrina Gast, said that she hoped the C.D.C.’s guide would improve accuracy in identifying disaster-related deaths. “I think we may have missed some in the past,” she said.
However interviews with 15 coroners, medical examiners, pathologists and law enforcement officials investigating deaths in areas of the Carolinas affected by Hurricane Florence last month revealed little knowledge of the guidance or, when it was known, showed little consistency in applying it.
But only on Tuesday, after being contacted by a reporter, did Dr. Nelson send the C.D.C. guide to the state’s medical examiners, part of a note urging them to report deaths that might result from Hurricane Michael. “These notifications are critical in tracking storm-related deaths, and no statewide system exists to track them otherwise,” he wrote.
A spreadsheet of Hurricane Florence-related deaths provided by North Carolina’s health department listed only one of 41 deaths from that storm as “indirect.” In an interview on Tuesday, Dr. Nelson was unaware that a crucial aspect of the C.D.C. guidance is to make note of the storm on the death certificate, even if it is only a contributor to a natural death.
“That has not been something we have done for the death certificates,” Dr. Nelson said. He added that it was unnecessary, because even if death certificates did not mention the disaster, the deaths could still be included in the official state count. “It has been better to try and maintain a central database of deaths related to the storm rather than rely on individual reporting on death certificates,” he said.
Dr. John Almeida, a pathologist with a regional medical examiner’s facility in hard-hit Onslow County, N.C., said the process of reporting and classifying storm deaths had changed. “My impression is we are a little more lenient now classifying things as storm related than they have been in the past, and certainly more fastidious in collecting the information,” he said. Still, he and others pointed out that the deaths of people whose health conditions might have been exacerbated by the storm would not necessarily be brought to the attention of medical examiners, who investigate unusual deaths or those caused by injury or violence. Certifying a natural death, by contrast, most often falls to the patient’s physician.
Last week Congress directed the Federal Emergency Management Agency to contract a national medical organization to study and provide policy recommendations within two years on how deaths should be counted in major disasters. President Trump signed the Count Act into law as part of the reauthorization of the Federal Aviation Administration.
But it remains unclear whether the recommendations of experts convened by the National Academy of Medicine might be more effectively translated into policy and practice than the C.D.C.’s expert guidance. Without robust educational campaigns or a measure of enforcement, the recommendations may simply be ignored.
The C.D.C.’s guidance, which is voluntary, was rejected in at least one county. The medical examiner’s office in Harris County, Texas, which includes Houston, punched by Hurricane Harvey last year, was not expanding criteria for storm-related deaths, officials said recently. Only deaths that are a direct consequence of environmental factors will be considered, continuing a long-held practice.
“The array of indirect factors that might or might not be included in an expanded definition is limitless,” said Jason Wiersema, the office’s director of forensic investigations and emergency management. He said local health officials can still make their own determinations of indirect causes from investigation and autopsy data.
Even when officials wish to follow the guidance, tallying death tolls involves a tangle of agencies that vary from state to state and ultimately rests on the expertise of thousands of individual death certifiers.
In Florida, county medical examiners report storm-attributed deaths to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement and then to the State Emergency Response Team. North Carolina has a medical examiner system in which contracted health professionals investigate unexpected deaths. The state’s official tally is a combined effort between the emergency operations center and the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner.
South Carolina uses coroners — 46 elected county officials who may not have a medical background, but who investigate deaths with the help of experts and serve as a link to grieving families. Coroners are asked to report disaster-related deaths to the coroner’s association, whose president, currently Ms. Gast, shares the information with the state emergency management team.
The information must then make its way, through a liaison from the state highway patrol, to the state’s public safety department, which has official responsibility for collating disaster deaths (seven out of the nine deaths on South Carolina’s official list from Florence involved road fatalities).
The majority of natural deaths across the United States are certified by regular doctors who may not have special expertise and are even less likely to have heard of the C.D.C.’s guidance. Because the contribution of a natural disaster to an individual’s death can be uncertain, it is possible that the true toll of a disaster may only be appreciated in retrospect, by studying rates and patterns of deaths in affected populations.
