Readers place some blame on the president and easy access to guns. “Mr. President, I don’t want to live in a country where we need guards at synagogues and churches,” one reader writes.
Last Monday a new Holocaust memorial was dedicated in Philadelphia. I thought that another memorial to one of the 20th century’s greatest tragedies was not needed. On Saturday one of the deadliest anti-Semitic attacks on American soil occurred. I guess I was wrong.
Merion Station, Pa.
In demonizing “the other,” President Trump incites the acts of hate that he professes to deplore, such as the Pittsburgh synagogue shootings and the pipe bombs directed at political opponents.
He can express condemnation of such acts all he wants, but his calls for harsher punishments fail to address remedies that might actually work to prevent hate crimes: stricter screening for buyers of firearms and explosives and a toning down of his divisive rhetoric.
The first duty of government to its citizens is to safeguard them from acts of violence. Instead, President Trump suggests that worshiping Jews bear the responsibility and costs of hiring private armies to protect our people and our institutions.
Why? Because this administration refuses to recalibrate its laissez-faire approach to gun purchasing, ownership, concealment and use.
Sorry, Mr. Trump, George Soros and the media cannot be blamed for your dereliction of duty. In the meantime, you are obsessed with sending a militia to turn back thousands fleeing from murderous violence in their homelands.
Two of my friends were present at the Tree of Life Congregation when this all went down. As I feared, one of them was among the victims.
It is agonizing to think about what has happened. So what can we do? Pray, of course, for everyone involved.
But we can do more. All of us should strive to make a sincere effort to treat those whom perhaps we don’t care for a little better. Let’s try to forgive some transgressions that have hurt us. Let’s work to be kinder than we may otherwise have been. Let’s do a better job of practicing what our religious faith teaches.
Only by adding some love and forgiveness to our world can we hope to offset the hatefulness that still resides among us.
O’Hara Township, Pa.
Mr. President, I don’t want to live in a country where we need guards at synagogues and churches. I don’t want live in a country where I send my grandchildren to schools with guards and guns.
Your offhand solution to the violence in our nation, this time in Pittsburgh, is repugnant. If more guns in schools and churches is the answer, then God help us.
