OTTAWA — When it becomes legal on Wednesday in Canada to buy marijuana for recreational use, rather than under doctor’s orders, the occasion may be anticlimactic for many Canadians. In Ontario, the most populous province, the first legal cannabis buyers will be online shoppers only.
Like many things in Canada, exactly what legal marijuana means varies by province. But there’s no doubt that the country’s fractured and not fully prepared system will nevertheless bring significant social, economic and legal changes and challenges. Canada is the first major industrialized economy to take this on. Its success or failure with legal recreational marijuana will likely become a model — or a warning — for the rest of the world.
It’s not often that Canada is a global example, and so for much of the past few weeks, Catherine Porter, our Toronto bureau chief; Dan Bilefsky, the correspondent in Montreal, and I have worked on articles linked to Wednesday’s legalization.
My work in this file actually goes back much further. Under court orders, an earlier Conservative government reluctantly set up a limited legal medical marijuana system in 2001 and expanded it greatly five years ago.
This week’s change, however, will eclipse all of that, and it is very much part of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s political agenda. During the 2015 election campaign, he vowed to legalize marijuana by last July 1, a deadline that politicking in Canada’s unelected Senate made impossible to meet.
That pledge was, at best, a minor factor in Mr. Trudeau’s election success. And Canadians have always been mixed in their views about legalization. To deal with those concerns, the government emphasizes that its legalization is not about encouraging marijuana use among Canadians. Mr. Trudeau and his ministers instead pitched their law as a way to end ruining people’s lives because of marijuana-related criminal records and as a better method for keeping marijuana away from children and profits from its sale away from organized crime.
As I reported this week, if all goes according to the government’s plan, biker gangs and other organized crime groups will be replaced by an all-new, heavily regulated, multibillion-dollar industry. No one really knows exactly how big its market will be, and, of course, the newly hatched industry has expansive forecasts. But there’s one baseline: The government’s statisticians calculate that Canadians spend about 5.7 billion Canadian dollars on marijuana each year, about 90 percent of that through the black market.
In many ways, it often feels like I’ve gone back to the late 1990s, when I was reporting on tech startups. The stock market value of each of the three largest players in Big Weed is now well over $10 billion. But all of those companies report losses in the tens of millions of dollars from their current medical marijuana businesses. The question now is whether some of those companies will meet the fate of many tech firms after the dot-com bubble burst, and how many will meet their investors’ dreams.
Driving while impaired by drugs has long been a crime in Canada. While the penalties for it have now been increased, the government has admitted that police are lagging when it comes to things like the blood-testing systems necessary to lay charges. Nor does it appear that the police will be making much of an effort to shut down the illegal marijuana shops that have popped up in many cities.
Stoned students and employees aren’t anything new, particularly among young Canadians, who are among the world’s biggest pot users. But many Canadians fear that legalization will make usage more widespread. And it adds another wrinkle to conversations about marijuana between parents and their children.
Somewhat lost in the discussion here in Canada has been its health effects. While a lot remains unknown, no medical group in Canada endorses regular marijuana use. Aside from the ill effects of smoking anything, there are concerns about how marijuana alters the brains of users who are under the age of 25.
This week, an editorial in the Canadian Medical Association Journal called on Mr. Trudeau to rework legalization if it leads to more marijuana use. But those marijuana companies I’ve visited can only justify their staggering stock prices by encouraging the use of their products. I’ll be following closely to see who wins that conflict.