LOS ANGELES — What baseball fan has not seen video of Kirk Gibson pumping his arm while limping around the bases after smashing one of the most memorable home runs in the sport?
It was the stuff of legend. Gibson was the National League’s most valuable player that season, but he was unable to start that night because of leg injuries. He came off the bench with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning to pinch-hit, then blasted a game-ending, two-run home run off Oakland Athletics relief pitcher Dennis Eckersley, a future Hall of Famer.
It was Game 1 of the 1988 World Series, and the A’s never recovered. It was also the last World Series title the Los Angeles Dodgers won.
Thirty years later, the ball Gibson sent into the right-field pavilion at Dodger Stadium still has not been located.
“It may never be,” Gibson, 61, said in a phone interview this week.
As the Dodgers try to salvage this year’s World Series against the Boston Red Sox, one reminder of their past remains a mystery. Earlier this year, the Dodgers commemorated the home run by painting blue the seat where the ball is believed to have landed: Row D, Seat 88, in Section 302. Gibson even signed the seat.
Granted, this is not a mystery on the level of Jimmy Hoffa’s final resting place. But in sports, where keepsakes are cherished and sometimes valuable, a home run ball this famous going AWOL and staying gone is intriguing.
One can imagine an empty display case somewhere honoring other memorabilia unaccounted for, like the home run ball from Bobby Thomson’s “Shot Heard Round the World,” in 1951; the basketball Wilt Chamberlain used to score his 100th point in a single game, in 1962; and the puck from Patrick Kane’s Stanley Cup-winning goal, in 2010. Gibson’s ball would fit right in.
Gibson remembers the pain from that day, thinking about his parents in attendance, the satisfaction of proving critics wrong with a key hit, and the elation of winning a World Series game. He was too busy to notice where the ball ended up. Nowadays, Gibson, a Michigan native who serves as an analyst for the Detroit Tigers’ television broadcast, said he does not think much about the ball or hear from people claiming to have it.
“Right now, I’m just thinking about the Dodgers and who is going to step up for them to come back against a very good Boston team,” he said, referring to the Dodgers’ 2-0 World Series deficit entering Game 3 here on Friday night.
Today, it is common for fans, if they do not plan to sell it, to at least offer a notable home run ball back to the team or player who hit it in exchange for gear, an autograph, a hello with the player or some tickets, and sometimes even all four. Langill said nobody ever came forward. That was Oct. 15, 1988.
As the legend grew, so did the stories. One man claimed the ball had been sitting on his shelf since he was 15, after he received it as a gift from his father, who attended the game. Another man created a website trying to prove that his uncle caught the ball but that it was later lost in an ex-girlfriend’s garage. Gibson said a woman once sent him a photograph of a bruise on her leg where the home run ball supposedly hit her.
“A lot of people have actually come forward over the years claiming to have this ball, but their stories have been scrutinized, and none of them have been able to be validated,” said Dan Imler, vice president of SCP Auctions, who worked with Gibson on sales of other memorabilia from that game.
The biggest challenge to proving any case involving the ball is the NBC video from the game; fans in the stands look grainy, and cameras quickly cut to Gibson celebrating as he ambled around the bases.
Imler’s auction house was able to sell the ball from Barry Bonds’s record 756th career home run in 2007 for $750,000 because it was specially marked by Major League Baseball, and there was clear video of the person catching it.
Imler said Gibson’s home run ball could be worth at least $300,000 to $400,000. Any value, however, would be commensurate with the strength of the authenticity.
When Gibson sold the bat, jersey and helmet used in that World Series game for a combined $1 million in 2010, many hoped the ball would also surface, given the publicity surrounding the other gear. It, of course, did not.
If a Red Sox or a Dodgers player hits a memorable home run in this World Series, the issues plaguing Gibson’s missing ball will not exist.  Most important, video and photo technology is more precise and omnipresent.
“If Kirk Gibson hit that home run today, there would be no question on who caught the ball and when,” Imler said.
Just make sure to have a cellphone camera out.