Europe|Migration and the Far Right Changed Europe. A German Vote Will Show How Much.
Migration and the Far Right Changed Europe. A German Vote Will Show How Much.
MUNICH — They do not know each other, but Josef Mayerhofer, a construction manager, and Harold Fischer, a retired doctor, have at least two things in common.
Both have always voted for Bavaria’s dominant party, the conservative Christian Social Union, a key component of Chancellor Angela Merkel’s fragile coalition government.
And come Sunday, when Bavaria votes again, neither will do so this time.
They diverge on which parties will get their votes: one will vote left, and the other far right. The issue driving both? Migration.
At any other moment in Germany, a regional election in Bavaria would be merely a regional election in Bavaria. But in the current political climate, the vote is being closely watched as a referendum on Ms. Merkel’s migration policy — and a measure of how much German and European politics are being reshuffled by feelings over migration, the rise of the far right and the collapse of the political center.
In Bavaria, that center has been more conservative and dominant than elsewhere in Germany, and has held out longer. But Bavaria’s conservatives, who have governed here with an absolute majority for all but one term since the 1960s, could see their vote share shrivel to below 35 percent on Sunday.
As once loyal voters scatter, seven parties could soon sit in the Bavarian Parliament, which would make it one of the most fragmented in the country. Two in particular are poised to benefit: the anti-immigration, euro-skeptic Alternative for Germany and the pro-refugee, pro-European Greens.
Three years after more than a million migrants started arriving in Germany, a noisy and at times ugly election campaign in Bavaria has crystallized into perhaps the clearest battle of values yet.
Alternative for Germany, which is on course to enter the Bavarian Parliament for the first time, with an expected 10 percent of the vote, has received the most attention. But the biggest winner could be the Greens.
On course to double their vote share to 18 percent, this onetime single-issue environmental protest party could become the second-strongest political force in Bavaria — and the only viable coalition partner for the diminished conservatives.
Strikingly, the Greens have become the most consistent voice in favor of migration — and as such the clearest challenger of the far right, both in Munich and Berlin. Their Bavarian co-leader, the 33-year-old Katharina Schulze, says she wants to tell a positive story about migration and about Europe.
“People are tired of the hate and fear-mongering,” she said in a recent interview.
Terrified of Alternative for Germany, which has steadily gained support since the 2015 migrant crisis, Bavaria’s conservatives responded by veering sharply to the right themselves before rowing back somewhat when their poll numbers continued to slide.
Early in the campaign, Markus Söder, the Bavarian premier, talked of ending “asylum tourism,” a term frequently used by the far-right party, and ordered that Christian crosses be displayed in every state government building.
Since then, Horst Seehofer, the Christian Social Union’s leader and interior minister in Ms. Merkel’s government, has said that Islam “does not belong to Germany” and called migration “the mother of all problems.” Mr. Seehofer, a vocal critic of the chancellor, nearly brought down the country’s governing coalition over the question of reinstating border controls with Austria.
It is that sort of thing that persuaded Mr. Mayerhofer, after 32 years of supporting the conservatives, to vote Green on Sunday.
Mr. Mayerhofer, who lives in a Catholic village in rural Bavaria, speaks in Bavarian dialect and streams Bavarian radio when he travels, joined the conservatives’ youth organization more than three decades ago, when he was 14.
“The party was always a broad church, but it worked in the interest of the many and it did a good job,” he said.
Four Syrian families live in his village and “are perfectly well integrated,” he says. Two of them are his immediate neighbors. “There is nothing Christian in vilifying them,” he said.
Or take the police controls the Bavarian conservatives have reinstated at the nearby border with Austria, just over a mile from Mr. Mayerhofer’s house. “We live at the border, there is no problem,” he said.
“It’s pure populism,” he added.
About 60 miles northeast, in another hilltop village near the border, Mr. Fischer is equally dismissive of conservative election maneuvering, but for different reasons.
A lifelong conservative like Mr. Mayerhofer, he, too, says he will abandon the Christian Social Union because of the recent influx of migrants — but in his case, Alternative for Germany will get his vote.
When migrants started arriving in 2015, and kept coming in 2016, Mr. Fischer thought the conservatives might shut the border, do something, “fix this,” as he put it.
Mr. Fischer said the Bavarian conservatives, for all their hawkish noises, were in government with Ms. Merkel. “This is their responsibility, too,” he said.
On several afternoons this week, Mr. Fischer helped at an Alternative for Germany stall on the market square in Deggendorf, where the party got nearly 20 percent of the vote in last year’s national election, the highest share in western Germany.
Alternative for Germany’s 100-page program states that, “Islam does not belong to Bavaria,” and warns that the religion’s spread endangers “the internal peace, our legal and value systems, as well as our cultural identity.” The party calls for swift deportations of people whose asylum applications are rejected, and a ban on dual citizenship.
The Greens take the opposite view, arguing that “people who come to us are part of society,” seeing “diversity as an enrichment” and calling for an end to labor restrictions for asylum seekers.
Mr. Mayerhofer said he hopes his old party and his new one will form a coalition, like the one in the neighboring state of Baden-Württemberg. Mr. Fischer said he would like the conservatives to team up with Alternative for Germany, mirroring a coalition in Austria.
Both men are somewhat nostalgic for the days when the conservatives still had their confidence, when Bavaria and its future seemed in good hands, and when politics was not quite so raw.
Mr. Fischer said he can no longer talk politics with some of his family members without falling out.
