Trump represents all the white men who feel they’re losing ground.
But to me, this was not just a president and party worried about an approaching “blue wave” and trying to take political advantage of a moment of victory. It was also an outright and increasing amplification of a reactionary white male victimization syndrome that has consumed modern American conservatism.
The women accusing the white man of assault weren’t the victims; instead, the white man was the victim. In some people’s eyes, he was the victim of political correctness, #MeToo’s overreach, a check-your-white-male-privilege culture drunk on its own self-righteousness.
The evocation of his white maleness in his argument was an overt shot at the check-your-privilege crowd.
Kavanaugh’s belligerent defense and Trump’s dismissal of the accusers — he mocked one at a political rally and called the accusations a hoax — represent for many men a back-against-the-wall, no-more-space-to-retreat moment of fighting back, of pushing back, of standing proud in their patriarchy and proclaiming that it will not bend.
They’re saying, “Enough.” They will cede no more ground, they will share no more power, they will accommodate no more ascendancy and validation of the oppressed. That is what they are telling us, and they are speaking through Trump.
And this victim sensibility that Trump is articulating is not generationally restricted. In January a PRRI/MTV poll of 15- to 24-year-olds found that 43 percent of young white men say discrimination against whites is as serious a problem as discrimination against other groups (29 percent of young white women agreed with them), and nearly half (48 percent) believe efforts to increase diversity will harm white people.
Trump is the paragon, the epitome, of this white male victimization. Everything and everyone is being unfair to him, and by extension, to white men.
Black athletes must stand up. Statues of white slavers must not be taken down. White Nazis rioting in Charlottesville have “fine people” among them. The people who rioted in Baltimore after the killing of Freddie Gray were “thugs.” There was no mention of “fine people” among that group.
Trump’s entire obsession with Barack Obama springs from this. He wants to be better than Obama and be acclaimed for that superiority. Obama, the candidate that a coalition of America’s diversity elevated, must be brought low by the candidate that the right homogeneity has ordained. White scion outperforms black striver. This is America, after all. Basic legends must be buttressed.
Trump’s planned spectacle of Kanye West visiting the White House on Thursday is also caught up in this, even though West is a black man. Both Trump and West had their egos bruised by Obama — Trump at the White House Correspondents’ Association dinner in 2011 where Obama mercilessly mocked him, and West in 2009 when Obama called him a jackass for interrupting Taylor Swift’s acceptance speech for a video award.
The word is that they are coming together to have lunch; I think they’re also coming together to lick wounds.
Through it all, Trump’s mantra and mission remain clear: to bind together toxic masculinity and racial performance anxiety into a weapon that can repel change and any perceived diminution of white male primacy.
Trump is on a campaign to Make America’s white men feel Great Again.