A Campbell Soup Company executive who had planned to retire next month left last week instead after sharing a conspiracy theory on Twitter about a migrant caravan in Mexico, the company said on Monday.
Campbell said the company and the executive, Kelly Johnston, the vice president of government affairs for 16 years, had agreed to “accelerate” his retirement after he said on Twitter last week that a foundation led by George Soros, the billionaire philanthropist and liberal activist, was the driving force behind a caravan of thousands of migrants headed toward Mexico’s border with the United States.
Mr. Soros’s activism has made him a lightning rod for criticism among some conservatives and right-wing activists. Last week, a pipe bomb was delivered to his house in Westchester County, N.Y. It was one of 14 explosives sent to people who are regularly disparaged by the right. The authorities have charged an outspoken supporter of President Trump with sending the bombs.
Campbell Soup said in a statement on Monday that Mr. Johnston had been scheduled to leave the company in early November. “In the last few days, the company and Mr. Johnston agreed that under the current circumstances it would be best to accelerate the timing of his departure,” the company added.
Mr. Johnston’s last day was Thursday, the company said.
“We regret that this episode happened and has colored his service to us,” Mr. McLoughlin said in the letter, which was dated last Tuesday.
Mr. Soros founded Open Society more than 30 years ago to promote democracy and human rights. He made his fortune running a hedge fund and has donated to Democratic candidates in the United States and to liberal causes.
Mr. Soros has been a target of anger from right-wing groups and of anti-Semitic smears. 
The conspiracy theories about Mr. Soros have been spread against a backdrop of increasing hostility toward Jews in the United States. The Anti-Defamation League said there was a 57 percent increase in anti-Semitic incidents in the United States last year compared with 2016.
On Saturday, a man who told police that he “wanted all Jews to die” killed 11 people in a rampage at a Pittsburgh synagogue.
Other executives and officials have run afoul of their employers over comments on social media. In one prominent instance, CBS fired a company lawyer, Hayley Geftman-Gold, last year after she said on Facebook that the victims of a mass shooting in Las Vegas were “Republican gun toters” who did not deserve sympathy.