Mr. Norman, 38, had good reason to be nervous. The ink had barely dried on his new symphony-length work “Sustain” — which will receive its high-profile premiere on Thursday in a concert opening the Los Angeles Philharmonic’s centennial season — and he was on the eve of hearing it for the first time.
Premieres on the scale of symphonies are rare, immense opportunities. The last time Mr. Norman, one of the most gifted and respected composers of his generation, wrote a piece like this, it was his 2013 masterpiece “Play,” which earned the praise of an instant classic and won him the prestigious Grawemeyer Award for Music Composition.
Not that the pressure wasn’t already there: Mr. Norman is profoundly self-critical, to the point where he will delay the premiere of a new work if he feels it isn’t ready. This year, the Seattle Symphony postponed his Cello Concerto, which Johannes Moser had been scheduled to perform in June.
The roughly 40-minute “Sustain” is an instance of something coming together. After years of gestation and experiments, Mr. Norman wrote it in the span of several months, right up until the week before rehearsals. It’s a departure from “Play,” a rambunctious and theatrical piece about the interpersonal dynamics of musicians. If that work’s focus was on the orchestra, then “Sustain” turns its attention first to the audience, then to the cosmos.
With the form of a contracting spiral and repetitive phrases, the score deals in cerebral questions about the nature of time, from the fleeting presence of a tweet to the birth and death of stars. Mr. Norman explained why in the interview; here are edited excerpts from the conversation.
How did you arrive at the concept for “Sustain”?
I knew this had to be a significant statement, for myself. It’s on such a prominent program, and it’s a lengthy piece. It was an opportunity to think about big issues of the symphony orchestra and its place in society and its future. So, really, it was also thinking about questions of what this art form means in our world and what might it mean in the future.
I started by asking lots of big questions: How are our minds now different from the minds of the people a hundred years ago, and how might the minds of the people of a hundred years from now be different — their experience of reality, their experience of time and what it means to sit in a concert hall quietly for 45 minutes and listen to a symphony orchestra play a piece? Suddenly that became a thousand years from now and then a million years from now. The piece became about so much more than just a small view; it’s relating me and my sense of time to things that are much bigger.
It’s been a very chaotic and contentious time in our country. I think I was feeling the need to find a sense of a long view, because it’s so easy for me to get completely lost and bogged down in the kind of chaos and craziness of our world. So in that sense, it felt like a very personal response to the world around me.
That’s a lot to reckon with, and I imagine difficult to keep control of during the writing process.
I really am entirely alone with my own thoughts, and every piece is this journey. It’s never a clear or straightforward path. With every piece, I have this notion that I have to go into the studio and really reinvent myself. This one was a huge challenge for me: I needed to relearn my language and how to compose again. I spent a lot of time thinking about what was worth saying for this huge venue; where could I go that felt honest, but also significant, a testament to what it means to be alive in 2018 but also to my feelings about how the orchestra relates to society?
Somehow as I’m working, a kind of nucleus of the piece emerges and I follow that. It became clear that this wanted to be something different from what I wanted it to be. I wanted to write a big tribute to the L.A. Phil, almost like a concerto for orchestra. But in the end I felt like that wasn’t the piece I had to write at this moment, and I actually had to go and explore these more abstract ideas of time and space, how I relate to time and how we communally relate to time.
The themes here feel very Californian, in a way. Did a sense of place factor in your writing?
I think my identity as a West Coast composer started to matter once I figured out what this piece was. I was able to connect it then to a tradition of West Coast expansiveness, thinking about nature. There’s a certain minimal quality to this music — not in a sense of lacking material, but in the expansive thinking about how sounds evolve over time, which I would definitely connect to a kind of California minimalist tradition. I was able to pick up that thread in the process and think about composers like John Adams, Terry Riley and even Lou Harrison, people for whom the natural world seems to be a part of the fabric of their music.
There were a few ideas and words I often try out in my mind as I’m writing — how the words might interact with the sounds. “Sustain” is a word that means something technical to musicians, but I was really interested in some of the phrases that came to mind. I thought of sustained attention, and of how difficult it is in our world to have that. What does that mean for me to ask for that kind of attention from the audience and musicians? There’s also sustained discourse: How do you create an argument that unfolds over time? I wanted to sustain an argument, a kind of through line of thought from the beginning. And, of course, all of this feels like a response to our particular moment and what I want in a concert experience, which is to have a long, unfolding, sustained communal experience. That’s what I feel like I need, and that’s what I try to write.