It was Feb. 14, and she was running down the hallway of Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, her flight captured on security cameras, as shots echoed around her. She had almost reached the door to a stairwell.
But here in eastern Pennsylvania, there is a twist: Both candidates are trying to claim the gun-control mantle.
Mr. Wallace has called for measures like universal background checks and bans on high-capacity magazines, bump stocks and certain semiautomatic weapons. But two major advocacy groups — Everytown for Gun Safety and former Representative Gabby Giffords’s namesake organization — have endorsed the Republican incumbent, Brian Fitzpatrick. Among other things, they cited Mr. Fitzpatrick’s vote last year against a bill that would have forced states to honor concealed carry permits granted by other states, a policy known as reciprocity.
In an interview on Wednesday, Mr. Fitzpatrick — who led by four percentage points in a recent poll — said the endorsements spoke for themselves.
“These people don’t endorse without thoroughly not only assessing the record — this is based on a working relationship over a two-year period,” he said.
Mr. Wallace, for his part, said that even if Mr. Fitzpatrick backed gun control legislation, voters needed to elect a Democratic majority if they wanted that legislation to make it to the House floor.
What was not in question on Tuesday was the degree to which gun policy is dominating the race.
Elizabeth Jordan, 63, a copywriter from New Hope, said that she had a friend who worked at New Hope-Solebury High School, where the event was held, and that her daughter was a senior in college and planned to become a teacher. She said, with audible anger, that the friend had described being given rocks to throw if a gunman came.
Erin Baeder, 25, a student at Bucks County Community College, said she felt that no one was paying attention to her fear. Yet Mr. Wallace argued that it was because of the students who studied in constant fear that gun control had finally become less taboo for politicians to discuss.
