PITTSBURGH — One of Pittsburgh’s most solemn days began with hundreds coming together in anguish and grief in synagogues and at gravesides, to start the services for those killed as they prayed on the Sabbath. In the afternoon, they came together again, in shivas to honor the dead and comfort the living, and, later by the thousands, in solemn marches of protest around the Squirrel Hill neighborhood where the attack took place on Saturday.
This is the Pittsburgh that met President Trump, who arrived with members of his family on Tuesday.
The presidential visit, welcomed by some in Pittsburgh, unwanted or vigorously opposed by many others, began with a motorcade into the city and a visit to the Tree of Life synagogue. Mr. Trump lit memorial candles in a vestibule near where the shooting unfolded, and placed stones and white roses from the White House outside, in commemoration of those killed in an attack by a gunman full of anti-Semitic rage shouting that Jews must die.
But if Mr. Trump’s visit was intended to bring healing, it instead laid bare the nation’s deep divisions. Many protesters in Pittsburgh had no doubt of what one called “the dotted line” between presidential rhetoric and violence, though some people in the city have pushed back on the idea that Mr. Trump had fomented the atmosphere of anger. As the president moved around Pittsburgh, a largely Democratic city, the signs of discord were apparent.
The protesters, some praying in Hebrew, others singing and chanting, moved around Squirrel Hill. Hoodie-wearing college students and Orthodox Jews with black hats and long beards walked alongside demonstrators carrying militant signs and middle-aged parents pushing strollers. Signs read “Words matter” and “President Hate is not welcome in our state.” As if to hold up a beloved local figure in contrast to the president, the largest march began on Beechwood Boulevard, where Mr. Rogers, the children’s television figure, used to live, and it ended at the Presbyterian church where he used to pray.
The mayor of Pittsburgh, Bill Peduto, who just a day before had urged the president not to visit while the mourners buried the dead, neither met with Mr. Trump nor joined the protests. The top four Republican and Democratic congressional leaders who were invited to join him all declined.
At the synagogue, Mr. Trump was accompanied by the first lady, Melania Trump, his daughter Ivanka Trump and son-in-law Jared Kushner. They were greeted by Rabbi Jeffrey Myers, the spiritual leader of the Tree of Life congregation, who spoke to the president on the history of the synagogue and the carnage there on Saturday as they lit 11 candles to honor the dead.
Later, Mr. Trump spent about 90 minutes visiting the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. He met privately with four officers who were injured responding to the shooting, and then sat for about an hour with Peg Gottfried, the widow of Richard Gottfried, one of those killed on Saturday.
Throughout the president’s visit, protesters amassed by the thousands.
“While our community is still processing this violence from a few days ago, we recognize that it did not happen in a vacuum,” said Ardon Shorr, who helped organize one protest not far from the Jewish Community Center, where the funeral for one of the victims of the attack was held just a few hours earlier. “These Jews were targeted specifically because they were helping refugees,” he said, calling the visit, as funerals were taking place, “insulting” to the victims and their families.
Not everyone in Pittsburgh was opposed to the visit. Even some of those who do not like Mr. Trump at all said he had no good choice, facing criticism if he came and criticism if he did not.
Dominick Candelore, the co-owner of a Cold Stone Creamery ice cream shop at the heart of Squirrel Hill, disagreed with some Jewish leaders who opposed a presidential visit.
Dissent over the president’s visit extended even to the grieving. The family of Daniel Stein, a victim of the attack who was buried on Tuesday, explicitly told inquiring federal officials that they did not want to meet with the president. They cited Mr. Trump’s comments immediately after the shooting that the Tree of Life should have had an armed guard.
An hour and a half before visitation began, the lines started forming at Rodef Shalom Temple, a stately, domed 111-year-old building that is home to one of the oldest Jewish congregations in western Pennsylvania. The crowd, which filled the large sanctuary to standing room, was racially diverse, made up of those stooped with age and crying infants, Jewish people — Orthodox, Conservative, Reform and nonobservant — and non-Jews, Pittsburgh natives and those who had flown in from elsewhere.
It seemed as if all of Pittsburgh was there. The mayor came, as did Scott Brady, the United States attorney for the Western District of Pennsylvania, who will be prosecuting the man charged with killing the Rosenthal brothers.
A hundred-strong delegation of the Pittsburgh Steelers came to pay their respects, including the owner, the general manager, dozens of players and Mike Tomlin, the head coach, who lives in Squirrel Hill. Michele Rosenthal, one of the sisters of the David and Cecil, worked for the Steelers until several years ago.
The service began with a quiet procession of firefighters in dress uniform from Engine 18, a station not far from Tree of Life, where David Rosenthal would spend his afternoons. One by one, they came to the front of the sanctuary and quietly saluted the two simple wooden coffins.
A letter from David Zubik, the Catholic bishop of Pittsburgh, was read. Prayers were sung, psalms read about the valley of the shadow of death. But little was spoken of the grim circumstances that led to the service. Much of the eulogizing centered on its opposite, the kindness and purity of the brothers, who were both developmentally disabled.
Michael Hirt, a brother-in-law, talked of how David and Cecil were distinctive, though they were often referred to simply as “the boys.” There was David, the younger brother, the stickler for cleanliness, who carried a police scanner wherever he went and was the right hand of his mother. And Cecil, the socialite and inveterate gossip, the one who knew everyone, the informal mayor of Squirrel Hill, the mirror image of his father.
David and Cecil would meet everyone coming through the doors at Tree of Life, arriving earlier than everyone else and handing out prayer books as people walked in the door.
The service ended and the mourners prepared to proceed to the cemetery. But other events were not far from people’s minds.
“Hey, are you going to be there at 4, at the protest?” one man asked another amid the crowds on the way out of the synagogue.
“I’ll be there,” the other man said.