Readers weigh in on the company’s minimum-pay increase.
Amazon has announced a minimum-wage increase, and reports have already come in that warehouse workers’ bonuses and stock benefits are being cut as the increase takes effect (“Amazon Lauded for Raises, but Workers Are at a Loss,” Business Day, Oct. 10). Some workers fear that the loss of these benefits will result in lower pay.
The public has probably already decided that Amazon is a benevolent corporation. But those of us who care about sustainable wages and working conditions in the United States should tread carefully and pay close attention to the confusion and dismay being voiced by Amazon employees.
When a company’s minimum wage is increased without legislation — and especially without a union contract — we must keep in mind that what has been given can always be taken away.
The writer is a member of the communications team at the National Employment Law Project.
Hey, guys! Ever hear of the Wagner Act, known formally as the National Labor Relations Act of 1935? The right to organize and join a union? The right to collective bargaining?
It might be a costly struggle if your philanthropist employer is also a dedicated union-buster, but it’s your right and it’s worth it.
Assuming, as Amazon says, that the recently announced increase in the minimum hourly wage for its workers will result in an increase in their overall pay, Amazon’s decision is obviously a positive development, but it is also a function of supply and demand. The labor market is tight, Amazon is increasingly profitable, and the company needs to attract and retain more employees.
This is the way the market is supposed to work. Amazon’s announcement makes a mockery of the position taken by progressives who continually agitate for government-mandated minimum-wage levels that are above what the market will bear. That unavoidably leads to reduced levels of employment, hurting workers.
Amazon’s move to raise the minimum wage for its employees in the United States and Britain is good news for many, but the company is still lagging behind competitors when it comes to preventing forced labor across its global supply chains.
In a report released this summer by KnowTheChain, where I am the project director, Amazon ranked 20 out of 40 tech companies in its efforts to prevent forced labor in its supply chains — well behind the American tech giants Intel, HP and Apple.
Although Amazon wasn’t the worst performer, it has a long way to go to protect workers across the globe who contribute to the company’s monumental profits but are vulnerable to exploitation with little recourse for addressing forced labor. Amazon’s next move should be to ensure that all workers in its supply chains are treated with dignity.