Business|Marks & Spencer Is Struggling. Can Knickers, Candy and Colin the Caterpillar Cakes Save It?
Marks & Spencer Is Struggling. Can Knickers, Candy and Colin the Caterpillar Cakes Save It?
The British icon has played a crucial role in the daily lives of millions for more than 100 years, but financial problems and store closings have made its future uncertain.
STOCKTON-ON-TEES, England — This once-booming County Durham market town in the northeast corner of England has something of a grand past. Known for a time as the Queen of the North, Stockton was the departure point in 1825 for the world’s first public passenger railway.
It was also the place, in the 1880s, where Michael Marks, a penniless Polish immigrant, got his start as a market peddler, the early stirrings of a business that would eventually become one of the country’s best-known brand names, Marks & Spencer. Stockton had one of the first stores in the country.
M & S — or Marks and Sparks, as it’s affectionately called — is now a cultural fixture in the daily lives of millions of Britons. Most girls are fitted for their first bras at M & S. A third of the country goes to the store to buy knickers, the British word for women’s underwear. Its Colin the Caterpillar cakes are omnipresent at birthday parties for kids and adults alike, while the chain’s staple candy, the gummy Percy Pig, sells at a rate of 10 pigs per second, or 300 million per year.
But on Aug. 11, the Marks & Spencer store here closed. As profit falls and e-commerce reshapes retail, the company will shut 100 stores by 2022 — a corporate restructuring that will play out in communities.
Marks & Spencer is far from the only British retailer experiencing difficulty. House of Fraser collapsed last month, requiring a last-minute bailout. Debenhams looks likely to follow suit. And profit at John Lewis plummeted 99 percent in the first half of the year.
But M & S is under attack from all sides. Competitors sell cheaper, trendier clothes; supermarkets have raised the quality of their food; and online shopping has become the norm.
The spread of Marks &Spencer’s shop-floor offerings — once the beating heart of its appeal — could be its Achilles’ heel. In May, the chain announced a 62 percent drop in pretax profit to less than 67 million pounds, or roughly $87 million, dragged down by restructuring costs alongside slumping sales in food and clothing.
The retailer’s decline has been so precipitous that Marks & Spencer was almost dropped from Britain’s Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 index, a stark turnabout for a company that was an original member of the list in 1984. With a stock price around 282 pence, Marks & Spencer is holding on to the last spot, at No. 100.
Founded in 1884, with a slogan that read, “Don’t ask the price, it’s a penny,” the business began to flourish after Mr. Marks formed a partnership with a onetime cashier, Thomas Spencer. Later, under Mr. Marks’s son, Simon, and Simon’s partner, Israel Sieff, the family business boomed, securing a unique foothold in British society.
Sally Morrison, head of marketing for Lightbox Jewelry, has lived in the United States for more than 30 years. But she returns to London about seven or eight times a year — and every time she does, she makes a pilgrimage to Marks & Spencer for its underwear and spicy ketchup.
She remembers going to the store with her mother in her hometown, Aldershot, about 30 miles southwest of London, at the age of 8. That store closed last year.
Allowing aspirational shoppers in class-obsessed Britain to keep up appearances of upward social mobility gave the chain serious commercial and cultural clout. It made previously exotic items like fresh fruit and cashmere sweaters available to the masses. The aisles gave shoppers their first taste of delicacies beyond British borders, from tinned mandarins in the 1930s to avocados in the 1960s and chicken Kiev in the 1970s.
“Marks & Spencer democratized shopping on a national scale for consumers,” he added.
For decades a family-run company, Marks & Spencer was also a pioneer in corporate responsibility and benefits. Long before the national health care system, the company, in the 1920s and ’30s, offered generous medical benefits and free breakfasts for those who started a shift at 7 a.m.
Manfred Dessau, 92, who owned a family business in Nottingham that supplied blouses to Marks & Spencer for over 50 years, said the company had long-lasting relationships with many manufacturers.
A German-born Jewish escapee from the Holocaust, Mr. Dessau came to Britain with his family after his father found a guarantor who could give him factory work. When his father set up his factory, Marks & Spencer gave him his first order.
Despite Britain’s sentimental attachment, the chain’s all-in-one model, heavily weighted to a motley array of brick-and-mortar stores on High Streets, has not held up well in the era of e-commerce. The company has been slow in adapting to changing shopping habits, although executives have said they expect a third of the M & S clothing and housewares business to move online over the next five years.
There is the confusing mix of goods — a premium food business, midprice fashion and a smattering of housewares. With margins being squeezed for all grocers and ever more competition from discounters like Aldi and Lidl, the food business appears stale.
Marks & Spencer has had a handful of successful collaborations with British celebrities like Rosie Huntington-Whiteley and Alexa Chung. When Gareth Southgate, who coached the English national soccer team to an unexpected berth in the semifinals of the World Cup this summer, showed up on the sideline wearing a buttoned-up waistcoat, social media lit up with the news that it was a Marks & Spencer original. It prompted a run on stores.
But few of the retailer’s more fashion forward collaborations have created much of a stir with millennials, who opt for the likes of Zara. And middle-age and older shoppers continue to grumble about a sliding quality of fabric and fit in many of the classic items on which M & S made its name.
Mr. Rose said he felt that chasing young consumers had hastened the recent downward spiral at M & S. The key to the golden gate, he said, are women, who buy all the ladies’ wear, most of the children’s wear and half the men’s wear, as well as home goods.
“Keep the middle-class housewives happy and give them what they want and M & S will get itself back on track,” Mr. Rose said.
In Stockton, the departure of M & S has dealt a heavy blow to those who depended on its presence in the town center for more than 100 years.
