WASHINGTON — President Trump welcomed home on Saturday an American pastor freed by Turkey and said the release would improve relations with Ankara, but he denied any connection to the dispute between Turkey and Saudi Arabia over the missing Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi.
Mr. Brunson’s sudden release after two years in detention came as the Turkish government was seeking help from Mr. Trump in its confrontation with Saudi Arabia over the disappearance and apparent murder of Mr. Khashoggi, a columnist for The Washington Post and critic of the royal family. Mr. Khashoggi entered the Saudi consulate in Istanbul but never emerged, and Turkish officials said he was killed and dismembered with a bone saw.
That may be exactly what Turkey wanted, given the clash over Mr. Khashoggi, but Mr. Trump made clear once again that he had no immediate or specific plans to take action against Saudi Arabia. He again rejected the idea of canceling or postponing arms sales on the grounds that it would cost American businesses money and jobs, and he made no move to cancel Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin’s coming trip to Saudi Arabia for an investment conference, even though several American businesses are pulling out.
In an interview with “60 Minutes” to be aired on CBS on Sunday, Mr. Trump said “there will be severe punishment” if Saudi Arabia is found to have ordered the killing of Mr. Khashoggi, but neither in the interview nor in his comments to reporters on Saturday did he suggest what such punishment would look like. Instead, he extolled the virtues of an arms sales deal he cut with Saudi Arabia during a visit last year.
Mr. Trump said that he had received a letter from Mr. Khashoggi’s fiancée, Hatice Cengiz, and that he had invited her to meet with him. He said that he planned to call King Salman of Saudi Arabia later on Saturday or Sunday to ask him about Mr. Khashoggi’s disappearance.
An evangelical pastor who ran the small Resurrection Church in Izmir, Mr. Brunson, 50, and his wife, Norine, lived in Turkey for two dozen years. He was arrested in October 2016, accused of spying and aiding terrorists and sentenced to three years, one month and 15 days in prison. He was released into house arrest in July, and a Turkish judge on Friday reduced his sentence to time served, after which Mr. Brunson was quickly flown out of the country.
The reaction in Turkey to the release was otherwise muted. The government played down the event, a sign of its discomfort, since Mr. Brunson had long been vilified by the Turkish news media as a terrorist and a spy.
Yet the anti-American, nationalist posture that has been adopted by the Turkish government, and by Mr. Erdogan himself, since a failed coup in 2016 will not be easily reversed. “Never come back again!” the pro-government newspaper Yeni Safak screamed in a headline on Saturday.
“Pastor Brunson has been released after a dark, unacceptable process to which everyone with a conscience objects,” he said in a statement to the Turkish news media. He called on the United States to hand over Fethullah Gulen, an Islamic cleric blamed by Turkey for orchestrating the coup attempt two years ago from his self-imposed exile in Pennsylvania, or to extradite Mehmet Hakan Atilla, a Turkish banker imprisoned in May for conspiring to violate American sanctions on Iran.
“The moment Pastor Brunson departs for U.S.A., those whose extradition is morally and legally obligatory must be sent to our country,” Mr. Bahceli said.
Appearing in the Oval Office in a dark suit, white shirt and Carolina blue tie, Mr. Brunson appeared healthy and in good spirits. He expressed no bitterness and thanked Mr. Trump and other American officials.
Mr. Brunson asked the president if he could pray for him, and Mr. Trump agreed. Mr. Brunson knelt next to the president and put his hand on Mr. Trump’s shoulder, closed his eyes and looked down. “I ask that you give him wisdom to lead this country into righteousness,” Mr. Brunson said.
She indicated that she had voted for him.
“I knew the answer,” he said with a smile.
