Six months ago, Mayor Bill de Blasio had weighed whether to fire the city’s investigation commissioner, Mark G. Peters, but decided against it.
But now Mr. Peters’s job may be in further jeopardy. The mayor and his aides are reviewing a damaging report prepared as part of an independent whistle-blower inquiry that portrays Mr. Peters as a bully who abused his authority, raged at underlings and may have given intentionally misleading testimony to the City Council.
In short, the report concluded that Mr. Peters, the chief watchdog of New York City government, considered himself to be above the law.
The mayor and his aides were also troubled about why Mr. Peters, who has had the report since Oct. 10, had refused to provide a copy to City Hall. His agency, the Department of Investigation, finally did provide a copy on Wednesday.
The report, which was also released to the public on Wednesday, criticizes Mr. Peters for improperly and carelessly seizing control of the quasi-independent city agency that polices misconduct in city schools. It also found that he had retaliated against its top two officials when they complained that his conduct was illegal, firing one and demoting the other.
The damning 144-page document, prepared by a former federal prosecutor, James G. McGovern, is a powerful indictment of Mr. Peters’s conduct.
The report is critical of Mark Peters, the city’s investigation commissioner, for seizing control of the agency that polices misconduct in city schools.
Mr. Peters acknowledged that the report “strongly criticizes me.” But he pointed to the fact that it did not dispute that his motive in seeking to take over the agency was to improve its investigative capacity and the oversight of the school system. He did not mention that the report found that his actions were contrary to the law, though he disputed its conclusion that he and his senior staff do not take the law seriously.
“Readers of this report may be concerned by many of the findings in it,” he said in the statement. “Statements suggesting that I and my senior staff have a lack of respect for and an indifference to the law are particularly disturbing to me.” He said he “regrets” the way he “handled this,” presumably referring to the takeover.
Eric F. Phillips, a spokesman for the mayor, said officials were reviewing the report. He declined to comment further.
One of the report’s most critical findings stems from a Feb. 27 meeting that Mr. Peters and his staff had with one of the two officials, Anastasia C. Coleman, who Mr. Peters later fired.
Ms. Coleman recorded the session without their knowledge, the report said. It found that the account of the meeting that Mr. Peters and his staff provided under oath during the investigation differed in some ways from what was on the recording.
In the recorded conversation, Ms. Coleman expressed concern that Mr. Peters’s takeover of her agency was contrary to law because it violated an executive order, the report said.
Mr. Peters dismissed her concerns and told her that he could get the mayor to change the order.
“The substance of this exchange and the dismissive, contemptuous tone in which the statements were delivered would have reasonably suggested to an objective observer that Commissioner Peters was attempting to convey that he was not required to comply with the letter of the law,” Mr. McGovern wrote.
These conclusions could damage Mr. Peters’s relationship with key Council members, including the Council speaker, Corey Johnson, and the chairman of the investigations committee, Ritchie Torres, who have been among his strongest backers.
On Oct. 11, the whistle-blowers received letters indicating that their complaints against Mr. Peters had been substantiated. The letters included only a brief summary of the report’s conclusions and recommendations, which called for Mr. Peters to reinstate the two officials at full pay, and relinquish control of the independent agency, the Special Commissioner of Investigation of the New York City School District.
Mr. McGovern, in accordance with the city’s whistle-blower law, gave the full report to only Mr. Peters, whose unwillingness to share the document with the mayor’s office led to a tense and bitter behind-the-scenes battle between City Hall and Mr. Peters.
On Friday, Mr. Peters sent a dismissal letter to Mr. McGovern, firing him and ordering him not to disclose the report, or any of the other materials generated during the inquiry, to anyone.
Mr. Peters, through a spokesman, disputed that he fired Mr. McGovern, saying the former prosecutor had completed his work. Mr. McGovern declined to comment.
Late Wednesday, faced with the knowledge that City Hall had obtained a copy of the document from Mr. McGovern on Tuesday, and that news organizations were pressing the D.O.I. and City Hall to release it, Mr. Peters provided reporters with a redacted version and released a statement.
The spokesman for Mr. Peters said the agency needed time to redact the report, and had sought permission from City Hall to hire outside lawyers to do so. Ultimately, a team of agency lawyers unrelated to the inquiry did the work.
Mr. de Blasio appointed Mr. Peters to the investigations post in 2014, after he had served as the treasurer of Mr. de Blasio’s successful mayoral campaign. Their relationship prompted questions about whether Mr. Peters could be an impartial corruption watchdog. Those questions were put to rest after Mr. Peters conducted a series of aggressive inquiries that embarrassed the mayor.