These writers are embracing a more elastic literary form — the novel — and a number of recent works, often genre-bending as well as gender-bending, have won critical acclaim.
NORTHAMPTON, Mass. — The Pioneer Valley in western Massachusetts is a cradle of social progress — a place where L.G.B.T.Q. is often followed by I.A. (for intersex and asexual), there’s a Stonewall Center (now 33 years old), and gender-nonconforming parents have a nickname of choice (it’s “Baba”).
This also represents progress.
The book is narrated by one R. Voth, a contemporary transgender scholar who is given to lengthy and unusually personal footnotes — and who, the author stressed, is not an alter ego. It tracks the academic’s efforts to authenticate a “mashed and mildewed” manuscript chronicling the adventures of Sheppard and his lover, Edgeworth Bess, here a Spinoza-spouting prostitute, as they move through the queer subcultures of 18th-century London and clash with its corrupt police force. If the novel is a cunning metafiction, it’s also a lusty picaresque and, ultimately, as the author braids Sheppard’s and Voth’s stories, an impassioned political proof.
Regarding its mash-up of genres and influences, Rosenberg said he was primarily interested in writing a “faux 18th-century thriller.” But he cited literary touchstones as diverse as Daniel Defoe’s “A Journal of the Plague Year,” Marquis de Sade’s “Philosophy in the Bedroom,” and the novels of Thomas Pynchon. The book, whittled in half from an original draft of 800 pages, also happens to be steeped in queer theory — as popular on campuses today as deconstruction (from which it evolved) was a generation ago.
Rosenberg said “Confessions of the Fox” did not owe any particular debt to earlier works with transgender themes — but pointed out that his housemate’s book was shaped by their reading of “Orlando,” Virginia Woolf’s novel about a poet who changes gender from male to female and lives through several centuries of English history.
“Paul Takes the Form of a Mortal Girl” literally embodies the notion that gender is fluid rather than binary (an idea with enough currency that two acclaimed television series — “Pose” and “Billions” — feature gender nonspecific characters). In the novel, Paul Polydoris changes his body and sex organs at will to attract “only the sorts of attention he desired” as he cruises a “womyn’s festival” in Michigan, Iowa City’s punk scene, or off-season Provincetown in the age of mixtapes and Doc Martens.
Like “Confessions of the Fox,” “Paul Takes the Form of a Mortal Girl,” which took Lawlor 15 years to write, bends genre as well as gender. Short fables are sprinkled among the chapters, and the author makes use of pastiche, footnotes and other moves from the postmodern playbook. “For queer artists of a certain age we just assumed that to write was to experiment,” Lawlor said.
The two novelists are not unique among transgender writers in their magpie approach to literary tropes and genres. Kai Cheng Thom, a 27-year-old Chinese-Canadian transgender writer and performance artist, is the author of a recent “fictional memoir” titled “Fierce Femmes and Notorious Liars: A Dangerous Trans Girl’s Confabulous Memoir” — a novel that turns the memoir form on its head.
Her novel, which follows the exploits of an Asian transgender girl who runs away from home and finds her true family in a vigilante gang of “fierce, fabulous femmes” known as the Lipstick Laceraters, blends fiction and nonfiction with dashes of magical realism, poetry and fairy tale. There’s violence, too, but it’s of the Tarantino variety — stylized and, in the context of real-life conditions for transgender women on the street, cathartic.
Another transgender writer of color whose work defies easy labels is Akwaeke Emezi. Emezi was raised in Nigeria and lives in New York, is the author of “Freshwater,” a haunting, incantatory account of a Nigerian girl born “with one foot on the other side,” her body inhabited by a malevolent Igbo spirit known as an ogbanje. From her childhood in Africa, through her graduate-school years in the United States, Ada lives in multiple realities, performing brutal sacrifices to her demons to survive. “Freshwater” was published by Grove in February, wreathed in well-deserved hype: rhapsodic reviews, an Annie Leibovitz portrait in Vogue, a two-book deal with Riverhead. Like “Confessions of the Fox,” it was shortlisted for the Center for Fiction’s First Novel Prize.
If transgender fiction leans to heightened narratives, it doesn’t exclude kitchen-sink realism. “It’s important to acknowledge the writers engaging in the specificities of actual trans experience,” said Talusan, if only to counter a long cultural tradition of transgender people “cast as the other or the villain” (think “Silence of the Lambs”). Imogen Binnie, Casey Plett, and Torrey Peters are three novelists whose slice-of-trans-life fiction is published by small presses.
This year Plett, a Canadian writer who is the author of the story collection “A Safe Girl to Love,” came out with her first novel, “Little Fish.” The book opens with the discovery by a young Winnipeg transgender woman, Wendy Reimer, that her Mennonite grandfather may also have been transgender. But the novel’s primary focus is the day-to-day struggles of Wendy and her circle of friends — with unemployment, with alcoholism, with sexual violence. Plett knows alienated transgender millennials the way Ann Beattie knows alienated cis-gender boomers.
Toward the other end of the commercial spectrum, earlier this year Ecco/Harper Collins released “The House of Impossible Beauties,” by Joseph Cassara, with a bullish first printing of 50,000. The book is as immediate as cinéma vérité — not surprisingly, given that it was inspired by the documentary “Paris is Burning.” Like the film, the novel tells the story of the House of Xtravaganza, the Latinx drag ball “family” of the 1980s, through the voices of Angel, Hector and its other larger-than-life gay and transgender members. There is much fabulousness until there isn’t — racism, queer bashing and AIDS taking their inevitable toll.
