A man in Florida was arrested Friday in the wave of mail bombs that have targeted critics of President Trump. The arrest came hours after federal authorities said they had found two more explosive devices: one addressed to Senator Cory Booker, a Democrat from New Jersey, and the other to James R. Clapper Jr., the former director of national intelligence and a commentator on CNN.
Cesar Sayoc Jr., 56, of Aventura, Fla., was taken into custody Friday morning by F.B.I. agents, according to law enforcement officials.
After several packages containing the devices were discovered on Wednesday, law enforcement officials across the country mounted a massive search for the person or persons who had sent them.
On Thursday, three more envelopes were found addressed to former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and the actor Robert De Niro.
Here’s what we know and don’t know about the arrest and the devices.
Mr. Sayoc, a registered Republican, has a criminal history in Florida dating to 1991 that includes felony theft, drug and fraud charges, public records show.
The authorities believe that at least some of the packages traveled through a mail center near Miami, which is south of Aventura.
News organizations in Florida reported on Friday that the authorities had surrounded a white van with Trump stickers on it. Television news outlets later showed images of the van underneath a tarp. But it remained unclear if the van belonged to Mr. Sayoc.
The authorities believe that the first package arrived Monday afternoon at the suburban New York home of George Soros, the billionaire philanthropist, Democratic donor and the subject of far-right conspiracy theories.
Since then, the F.B.I. has discovered at least 12 other similar devices sent to other prominent Democrats as well as Mr. De Niro, who has publicly criticized the president.
A device meant for former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and addressed to her home in Westchester County, N.Y., was found Tuesday night during a Secret Service screening of her mail. A device meant for former President Barack Obama was intercepted Wednesday in Washington.
Others who have received packages include Representative Maxine Waters of California, Senator Kamala Harris of California, and former Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.
The packages have shared the same traits: a manila envelope containing a 1-inch-by-6-inch length of PVC pipe filled with powder believed to be a pyrotechnic substance and packed with shrapnel. The pipes were also equipped with a small battery, a digital clock as a timer and an initiator, which causes the bomb to explode, a law enforcement official said.
None of the devices have detonated, leading some officials to question whether they were designed not to explode or if they were even capable of doing so. Some bomb technicians who reviewed photos of the device that circulated on social media on Wednesday suggested that it resembled the kind of fake device often portrayed on television and in movies.
A suspicious device resembling a pipe bomb was sent to CNN and addressed to Barack Obama’s ex-C.I.A. director John Brennan. Here’s what we know about it.
But Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said on Thursday that the devices were functional explosives.
The packages meant for Mr. Biden, Ms. Waters, Mr. Booker and Mr. Clapper were intercepted before they were delivered. Investigators initially believed that some packages, including the one for Mr. Soros, might have been hand-delivered and did not go through the mail system.
It was also believed that a package for John O. Brennan, a former C.I.A. director and vocal critic of Mr. Trump, was delivered Wednesday by a courier to CNN’s offices in Midtown Manhattan.
Another package that traveled through the postal system arrived on Wednesday at the office in Sunrise, Fla., of Debbie Wasserman Schultz, a Democratic congresswoman and a former chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee. That was because her name was printed as the return address for all the packages. Her office received one intended for Mr. Holder that was apparently incorrectly addressed and rerouted back to her office.
The bubble-padded manila envelopes had six first-class stamps, and the mailing labels were printed by computer.
