“Beware of the deep dark,” says Teresa Wren, who has worked the night shift for 30 years as a labor-and-delivery nurse at the University of Washington Medical Center in Seattle. With sufficient sleep during the day, you can stay alert, but you’ll have to get through a wave of fatigue between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m. Take a short nap if you can. Wren warns against eating unhealthful snacks or candy to stay awake; her go-to weapons against the darkness are one caffeinated diet soda per night and a walk up and down the external stairwell in the cool air.
Schedule your nights as though they were days. The world won’t be broadcasting the passage of time at you with school bells, lunch specials, happy hours and traffic. “Time is either dragging or it’s flying by,” says Wren, who eats a family dinner (her breakfast) before work. If you drink caffeine, do so at the start of your shift and cut yourself off at least five hours before you intend to sleep. Take a lunch break in the middle of the night. Keep your work space well lit. It helps to have stimulating, nonrepetitive work (childbirth, in Wren’s case).
 Treat morning as your bedtime and quash that rush of steroidal energy. When Wren gets home, she drinks a cup of herbal tea, reads the paper, talks with her husband and then goes to sleep for a minimum of six hours. Working the night shift puts you at higher risk for cardiovascular disorders, gastrointestinal problems, psychological issues like anxiety and depression and possibly cancer. Some people seem to be biologically incapable of adjusting to it. If that’s you, find a different job before it kills you.
If you can adapt, you’ll join the subset of nocturnal humans (as much as 30 percent of the work force in industrialized countries is estimated to work outside regular daytime hours). Years ago, Wren briefly switched to working days. She missed the after-dark collegiality, when fewer people were awake and everyone tended to look out for one another. “I couldn’t wait to get back to my night-shift people,” she says.