The heroes of “DC’s Legends of Tomorrow” return to stave off another threat. And the final season of “Rake” comes to Acorn TV.
DC’S LEGENDS OF TOMORROW 9 p.m. on The CW. Last season, the legends rejoiced after killing the time demon Mallus with a giant stuffed animal. In this Season 4 premiere, the team joins Ava (Jes Macallan) and the Time Bureau to take care of the remaining anachronisms, but reach a major hump when they learn that their defeat of Mallus unleashed a wave of deadly magical beings across the timeline. Their hunt for wicked unicorns, fairy godmothers and other deceptive creatures brings them to Woodstock.
STOLEN DAUGHTERS: KIDNAPPED BY BOKO HARAM (2018) 8 p.m. on HBO. In 2014, 276 Nigerian schoolgirls were kidnapped by Boko Haram, an extremist terrorist group, and taken to the Sambisa Forest. Three years later, 103 returned to their town. This new documentary captures their readjustment to ordinary life and revisits the night of the kidnapping with heart-wrenching testimonies.
T.I. & TINY: FRIENDS & FAMILY HUSTLE 9 p.m. on VH1. A year after the reality series “T.I. & Tiny: The Family Hustle” wrapped up its six-season run, the Grammy-winning rapper and his family are back for this new show. This time, they’re joined by some Houston friends: the singers Monica and LeToya Luckett and the author Toya Wright. Each cast member has their fair share of baggage, so expect a roller-coaster ride of drama.
RAKE on Acorn TV. The barrister at the center of this cheeky Australian legal drama has made a name for himself as a rake (read: bad boy) in Sydney’s legal world. Whether he’s in the courtroom or the bedroom, Cleaver (Richard Roxburgh) resorts to his charm to win people over. And it works — despite the fact that he prefers to represent guilty clients. In the fifth and final season, Cleaver navigates his new career as an independent senator just as a terrorist gas attack hits New Parliament House.
RED TABLE TALK 12 p.m. on Facebook Watch. Will Smith sits down with his wife, daughter and mother — who happen to be the hosts of this show — for a heart-to-heart conversation. Future guests include the actresses Leah Remini and Ellen Pompeo and the rapper J. Cole.