A midcentury-modern house in Palm Springs, a Craftsman-style home in Atlanta and a cottage in Bridgehampton.
Designed by Hugh M. Kaptur, an architect known for his use of floating rooflines and lots of angles, this 1960 house is in Deepwell Estates, a neighborhood once occupied by Tippi Hedren, William Holden and Jerry Lewis. The house is currently being considered for historic designation. It is about three miles from the town center.
Indoors: Past the bright orange doors and to the left, one finds a snow-white, brick-walled living room with a cement floor, exposed beams and a gas fireplace with a huge angled hood. This room flows into a dining area with an open kitchen that contains dark gray cabinets, stainless steel appliances and a breakfast bar.
Both rooms are backed by a wall of glass with views of the saltwater swimming pool and its surrounding terrace. All of the building’s original glass has been replaced for thermal efficiency, and the house has a full sound system.
Two bedrooms are at one end of the single-story structure and the third is at the other end; all three have en suite bathrooms. Two of the bedrooms, including the master, have direct access to the pool area. The third has a private outdoor patio.
Outdoor space: The surrounding hardscape was recently renovated to create a sense of flow between interior and exterior. The landscape incorporates drought-tolerant plants. An attached two-car garage can be reached from within the house, and parking is also possible in the circular driveway.
This property is in Inman Park, an elite 1890 planned community that is about a mile and a half from the center of Atlanta. The area includes several parks and walking trails — the result of a failed 1970s highway project. (The highway was quashed after homes had been torn down to make way for its construction.) The house dates to 1912 and was known in the 1960s and ’70s as a stopping-place for rock bands, including the Grateful Dead. The acid-jazz musician Tom Hobson was a frequent guest.
Indoors: The deep front porch is original to the house, as are the long, high-ceilinged living room and dining room, and three main-floor bedrooms and two bathrooms. Period features include decorative brick and tile fireplaces, paneled doors, slatted window shutters, and wooden ceiling and wall trim.
An addition built two years ago brought a new kitchen, as well as the entire second level. A screened sun porch and deck date to 2007.
The new upstairs rooms include two bedrooms, a sitting room and two bathrooms. The master suite has a bathroom with a water closet, a double trough sink and a tile-and-glass walk-in shower.
Outdoor space: A stairway descends from the screened porch to the fenced backyard, which has a terrace and stone paths that cut through greenery. Parking is in a two-vehicle carport at the rear of the house and in an off-street space in front.
Indoors: The house is decorated with a nautical theme and appeared in a 2016 book called “Dream Decor” by Will Taylor, a designer and blogger. It is available furnished at an additional cost.
The open-plan main floor has a living and dining area with two working fireplaces and an open kitchen. Steel-and-glass doors lead to a back deck. The bathroom on this floor has a shower, a vessel sink and a mirror framed by a life preserver.
Upstairs, the master bedroom includes an en suite bathroom with marble tile floors, a claw-foot soaking tub and a walk-in glass shower. Two additional bedrooms share a full bathroom. There is also an upstairs laundry room.
Outdoor space: The 0.18-acre property has a heated swimming pool and a firepit. Two bicycles come with the house, to facilitate rides to the beach.
