Madame Morbid leads a year-round trolley ride through the haunted parts of Brooklyn. Unsurprisingly, October is good for business.
As a child, Ms. Chase, now 31, was unfazed by the annual arrival of UPS packages containing fake severed heads, and the Jell-O brains in the refrigerator. “I didn’t even think it was strange,” she said. She dreamed of growing up to be the Wicked Witch of the West, but has found perhaps, an even more fitting vocation.
She’s the C.E.O. and lead tour guide of Madame Morbid’s Trolley Tours, which escorts brave souls on a 90-minute expedition around Brooklyn to the sites of battlefields, ghostly visitations, mafia executions and extraterrestrial encounters. The tour, which costs $49, runs year round. October is, unsurprisingly, good for business.
On a recent Wednesday, Ms. Chase picked up her guests from an M.T.A. bus stop on Driggs Avenue in a replica turn-of-the-century trolley, outfitted with a fog machine and haunting piano music. Imagine a Victorian funeral parlor on wheels, complete with green velvet curtains and a row of glamorous chandeliers overhead — a B62 rerouted from hell.
As the guide, Ms. Chase looked like an Edward Gorey illustration come to life. Her uniform was a floor length 19th century-style mourning dress (resourcefully hemmed with a safety pin) that lent her a gothic, consumptive elegance. Her eyes were rimmed with heavy shadow; her black bob was adorned with a fascinator and veil. “Mad” Matt Zaller, Madame Morbid’s chief operating officer and Ms. Chase’s ex-boyfriend, served as the evening’s coachman.
The first stop was the Brooklyn Navy Yard. In the small inlet there, once known as Wallabout Bay, more than 11,500 American colonists died in appalling conditions while trapped aboard British prison ships. (They are also honored by the Prison Ship Martyrs Monument in Fort Greene Park.) Their bones washed ashore for decades, not far from the scene shop where “Saturday Night Live” sets are now built, Ms. Chase said.
Then it was on to Park Slope, where 11-year-old Stephen L. Baltz made national headlines in 1960 as, initially, the sole survivor of a catastrophic midair collision between two planes; one crashed in Staten Island, and the other at Seventh Avenue and Sterling Place. The boy died the following day, and locals have since reported seeing the specter of a child searching for his lost luggage.
In Prospect Heights, Ms. Chase led an animated discussion of the severed goats’ heads that have been discovered throughout Prospect Park in recent years, and the mummies biding their time in storage at the “notoriously haunted” Brooklyn Museum. A real-life fender bender near Grand Army Plaza seen through the trolley windows added an unexpected element of excitement to the tour, but thankfully, zero gore.
The trolley tour ends where it begins — in Williamsburg, near the Two Boots Pizza whose menu includes a vampire-repelling Madame Morbid pie, heavy on the garlic and crowned with a pesto pentagram.
Some evenings, Ms. Chase and her cohort go back out for several more spins around the borough. On each return, she bids her passengers farewell.
“Now you know where all the bodies are buried,” she said.