Erik Agard gives us something to sing about.
THURSDAY PUZZLE — If you don’t know Erik Agard except for his crossword bylines, let’s start by saying that he’s kind of a big deal in the puzzle community right now.
If you’d like to see him exercise his brain in a different sort of way, he will be a contestant on “Jeopardy!” on Friday, and perhaps for longer than that.
Today, he’s made us a sparkling puzzle that will lift you up once you figure it out. My best advice, if you are seeing a theme like this for the first time, is to stay open minded, like we did with yesterday’s stack of pancakes. And lift with your knees, not your back.
1A: I knew from reading that this was about DABbing, but was having trouble seeing it in my brain as THE DAB. That killed the northwest for me for quite a while until I got the Downs in that corner.
32A: Once again, an entry that I knew, but had trouble getting to the answer. The singer Rihanna had the hit “Umbrella,” and TIL that her nickname is RIRI.
36A: Tricky one! Usually, a “Middle of …?” clue wants you to look at the middle of a word in the clue and pick out the letter or letters there, but not today. If you read time as “hour:minutes,” like 11:30, the middle of time would be the COLON used to separate the hour from the minutes.
41A: When is AUG an abbreviation for “8”? When the puzzle wants you to think of the month associated with that number. AUG is the abbreviation for AUGust.
24D: What do you think of when you think about balance? Scales, right? The “Sign” of balance we’re supposed to be thinking about is the zodiac sign with the scales, which is LIBRA.
It was originally a poem by James Weldon Johnson and, according to PBS.org, “it was performed for the first time by 500 school children in celebration of President Lincoln's birthday on Feb. 12, 1900 in Jacksonville, Fla. The poem was set to music by Johnson's brother, John Rosamond Johnson, and soon adopted by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (N.A.A.C.P.) as its official song.” You can read the original poem here.
So what does this have to do with our theme? Mr. Agard has hidden a range of singing voices in the theme entries, and if you don’t see them, it might be because you are not lifting properly.
Take a closer look at 4-, 6-, 22- and 34D and read from the bottom of each entry to the top. Can you hear them now? How about 4D’s DIDN’T MISS A BEAT, a great entry in and of itself? If you read it from bottom to top, you’ll find a BASS. And if you need help finding the other voices, click on any of the clues below for help.
I’m guessing that there were no good entries that spelled SOPRANO backward.