Ladies and Gentlemen, Give It Up for, er ... Ben Stiller’s Sister!
With a shyness he often lends to his characters, Ben Stiller slipped nearly unnoticed past the concession stand selling $5 Dixie cups of wine and into the fifth row of a 99-seat theater on the second story of a Manhattan building one recent weeknight for a one-woman show still in development.
The other two people in that family are their parents: Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara, the married comedy team known as Stiller and Meara.
Ms. Stiller, 57, a lifelong actress and comedian, has done regional theater and Off Broadway, and has landed many smaller roles in films and television, including “The King of Queens,” “Bored to Death” and “Inside Amy Schumer” — not to mention parts in her brother’s films.
But more than anything else she has plugged away for decades at auditions and workshops aspiring to a bit of the stardom enjoyed by the rest of her family. This has caused no small amount of angst and soul searching that she has now channeled it into a show that seeks to chronicle all of it.
With uncanny impersonations, Ms. Stiller slips seamlessly from character to character, from a spot-on version of Jane Fonda, her teenage obsession, to her childhood nanny from Jamaica, Hazel, who would tell her and Ben in her strong Caribbean accent to tend to their religious duties, including the kosher dictate: “Man ya don’t be mixing ya meat wit ya milk.” Naturally, Ms. Stiller’s impressions of her parents are uncanny.
Yet the inescapable motif of the show is her brother’s soaring career overshadowing hers, leaving her with the compulsion to catch up to him professionally.
Onstage, she recalled an acting teacher suggesting that therapy might help her live up to the family fame.
Ms. Stiller was part of her brother’s film career from the very beginning. She starred in the Super 8 movies he made while they were kids living on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where their childhood was full of late-night showbiz parties and watching their parents work out routines based on their real-life partnership.
“There was always this connection in our family,” said Ms. Stiller, who said it was often hard to discern whether her parents were really fighting or just rehearsing stage arguments.
In her show, Ms. Stiller recounts how she and Ben tagged along with their parents as they did theater, films and television work, whether performing regularly on “The Ed Sullivan Show,” “The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson,’’ or making countless other film and television appearances.
When their parents played the lead couple in a theatrical tour of the play “Prisoner of Second Avenue,” Amy and Ben would dress up as their characters and perform the show for the cast at their hotel.
“We knew the entire first act,” recalled Ms. Stiller, who acted in productions at Calhoun High School in Manhattan and at Emerson College, before leaving college to study at Circle in the Square Theater School in Midtown Manhattan.
Her parents’ stardom hardly shielded her from the vicissitudes of a struggling actor: the years of small roles and modest productions, the many side jobs waiting tables, working retail and giving reflexology foot massages.
In contrast, her little brother’s success came early and hardly ever slowed down. Ben began securing Broadway, movie and television roles as a teenager, and he would go on to star in, direct, or produce more than 50 feature films and become a globally recognized movie star .
Ms Stiller and her brother at a ceremony in 2016 where their mother was posthumously named to the Hall of Fame at Sardi’s, the famous Theater District restaurant.
“That was the hard part for me,” she said, sitting recently in Sarabeth’s restaurant on the Upper West Side where she worked as a hostess in the 1990s.
She has performed her show, which is directed by Kathryn Markey, about 15 times in various locations since 2016, to help develop it, and is now seeking investors for a steady run.
Indeed, her father is a source of inspiration and encouragement. Mr. Stiller, 91, who is known to younger generations for roles in “Seinfeld” and “Zoolander,” goes to many of his daughter’s performances and offers feedback.
And her father believes Ms. Stiller’s show allows her to display her share of the family talent.
For Ms. Stiller, a breakthrough in writing the show came when she and her brother presented an award to their parents at a ceremony in 2012 that included Robert DeNiro and Meryl Streep.
With no prepared remarks, she cracked up the crowd with her Jamaican nanny imitation, a spontaneous riff encouraged by her mother’s advice to just trust her actor’s instinct to take risks.
It turned out to be Anne Meara’s last public appearance before her death. Ms. Stiller was able to complete her project, and her mother’s advice — “Just trust” — became the title.
He Raised Legal Hell for 35 Years. Now He’s Back.
Cuomo Campaigns for Fellow Democrats and Some Ask: What’s Up His Sleeve?
Opinion: What if the Republicans Win Everything Again?
Democrats Need Latinos at the Polls. But Will They Turn Out?
