Beginning in September, the Times bureau in Kabul mobilized all of its stringers and Afghan reporters to record every attack on the Afghan security forces that they could find, as a daily chronicle of the war. In this week’s edition, we are adding reports of civilian casualties.
The heavy violence of the preceding several weeks has slowed down, with reported death tolls lower this past week, even as fighting remained widespread, occurring in 13 of the country’s 34 provinces. Relatively mild weather has contributed to a prolongation of the fighting season in many places. The Times confirmed reports of 62 security force members and 37 civilians killed in the past week; one American soldier was also killed.
The Taliban attacked a police outpost in Eshaqzo village of Maruf District. A police officer was killed and three others were wounded. During the attack, rockets fired by the Taliban hit a civilian house, killing four civilians and eight wounding others.
The Taliban attacked a police outpost in Farah Roud district of Farah province, killing two police officers and wounding three others.
An IED attached to a private vehicle went off in Kabul city. The driver was killed and another person was wounded in the incident.
A civilian van hit a roadside bomb in Dasht area of Zahri District, killing two teenage girls and wounding 16 other passengers. Two women and a child were among those wounded.
A bomb placed inside a government office in Khogyani District exploded in the afternoon, killing two government employees and wounding seven others, including four women.
A pro-government militia commander in Helmand province was killed in Lashkar Gah city when a magnetic bomb attached to his car exploded. Two others in the vehicle were also killed and two of the commander’s bodyguards were wounded.
An American Army specialist was killed during operations by an improvised explosive device, becoming the eighth American soldier to die in Afghanistan in 2018.
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in Dara-i-Suf Payin District, where the fighting continued for five hours. Four local police officers and four pro-government militias were killed and six others were wounded in the clashes.
An army convoy was ambush in Faizabad District. During the fighting, soldiers fired a mortar that hit a house in the area, killing three children and wounding two others.
Unknown gunmen on a motorcycle opened fire on police in Kandahar city, killing two of the officers.
The Taliban attacked a police outpost in Nad Ali District, killing one police officer and wounding four others.
Three civilians, including a woman and two children, were killed and another one wounded in a hand-grenade attack on a house of a former jihadi commander in Hazrat-e-Sultan District.
The Taliban attacked a police checkpoint in Maruf District, using a Humvee mounted with explosives. The police clashed with attackers for two hours, and were able to hold control the checkpoint. Three police officers were killed and six others were wounded in the fighting.
The Taliban attacked a police checkpoint in Chikhansor District, killing four police officers and wounding two others. Six Taliban fighters were also killed in the fighting.
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in Khwaja Sabz Posh District at predawn hours, killing five army commandos, two police officers and three pro-government militia members. Two pro-government militias were wounded. The Taliban also suffered casualties in the fighting, which continued for hours.
At least 14 civilians were killed and 43 wounded in a suicide attack on a election rally in Kama District.
The National Directorate of Security director for Nad Ali District was killed when his vehicle was blown up by an I.E.D. His bodyguard was injured in the attack.
 Three civilians were also wounded in the incident. The village is under the Taliban control.
A roadside bomb killed an 8-year-old child killed and wounded three civilians in Khwaja Sabz Posh District.
The commander of the provincial governor’s security team was killed and four police officers were wounded when an I.E.D. attached to their car exploded in Maimana, the provincial capital.
Two civilians were killed by unknown armed men on motorcycle in Taloqan, the provincial capital. Police and pro-government militia forces followed the attackers to Qara Hindu village, where Taliban fighters were waiting for them. Fighting erupted between the Taliban and government forces, which continued for almost 40 minutes. Two pro-government militants were killed and three others were wounded. Three Taliban fighters were also wounded.
Three members of Afghan security forces were killed and a number of others were injured in the Loymanda area of Nad Ali District, during a joint military operation.
Three members of local militia groups were killed and another was wounded in a Taliban attack on a security outpost in Asia Khan village of Chemtal District. The Taliban attacked three security outposts in the district on Sunday evening.
Three bodyguards of a parliament candidate were killed by military forces during a night operation in Narang District. The goal of operation was to arrest a former Afghan soldier who was involved in an insider attack in Uruzgan province.
A roadside bomb hit a Humvee tank of Afghan commandos who were transferring four dead bodies of commandos and an Afghan army soldier, killed in an earlier attack days before, from Sheren Tagab District to Dawlat Abad District. Three commandos were killed and another was wounded in the incident.
A roadside bomb hit a police vehicle in Jaldak, wounding one police officer who died of his injuries one day later.
A traffic police officer was killed by unknown gunmen in Jalalabad, the provincial capital.
A military chopper made a crash landing in Koh-e-Safi District. Eight military personnel were killed or wounded in the incident. The exact casualty counts are unclear. There were no Taliban activities in the area during the incident.
A roadside bomb hit a police vehicle in Khamab District, killing one police officer and wounding another.
A man who defected from the Taliban a month and a half ago was killed, along with another person, by armed men on a motorcycle in Farah city. Three other civilians were injured, including a child. The attackers escaped after the incident.
A police officer was killed and another was wounded by armed men in Farah Ruod District. Police are searching for the attackers.
A member of a pro-government militia was killed and another was wounded in Taliban attacks on security outposts in Khowaja Bahauddin District. Two Taliban fighters were killed and three others were wounded.
A roadside bomb hit an armored Humvee of Afghan police in Shah Mirzayi village of Khanaga District, killing two police officers and wounding two others.
A police officer who was newly employed at police headquarters in Arghistan District opened fire on other officers while he was on night duty. Five police officers were killed and seven others were wounded in the incident. The attacker managed to escape. His identity remains unknown.