In response to the Pittsburgh shooting, readers discuss anti-Semitism, guns, armed guards and President Trump.
We learned of the murders at Tree of Life synagogue as we quietly prayed in our own shul across the state. The impact on our communities is hard to describe. Do we now go into these quiet places of worship as we do at an airport, getting in a line to be screened? When does a gathering for prayer lose its power to be a time of peace and rest as Shabbat was meant to be?
After 9/11 we became defiant and said that “we can’t let the terrorists win.” I fear they may be winning. They aren’t coming from abroad. They are right here at home. They are, unfortunately, using the hate speech of their president to help carry out their mission.
Given the horrific tragedy of the Pittsburgh synagogue shooting, I wonder when those Jews who have supported President Trump because he’s purportedly “good for Israel” (a debatable assertion) will finally turn away. The president’s unrepentant demonization of nonwhites and non-Christians, and his affinity for white nationalists, should have made it abundantly clear that his positions are incompatible with Jewish values. And ultimately, as the Pittsburgh massacre revealed, dangerous for American Jews.
The rise of anti-Semitism in America is rooted in the extremes of each side, both the right and the left. Although in the terrible tragedy in Pittsburgh we saw an individual with an extremist right-wing ideology commit this atrocity, on many college campuses throughout the country virulent anti-Jewish and anti-Israel bias runs rampant.
This is emblematic of a pervasive issue facing our country — the tendency for the extremes to be the loudest voices, even if they make up a small minority, as a recent study suggests. Until we stand up and quiet them, this issue will remain.
As a practical matter, most modest-sized churches and synagogues cannot bear the cost of 24-hour armed guards. But even if they could, an armed guard is no guarantee of safety, and it wouldn’t have helped at the Tree of Life synagogue. It took a Pittsburgh police SWAT team to take down Robert Bowers, one lone man on a mission with a high-powered rifle, and four officers were wounded in the process.
Having an armed guard at the front door would not have helped. He would have been the first person killed. We need better solutions than that from our leaders.
Yet another “law abiding” gun owner, who is now a non-law-abiding murderer, used a weapon designed solely for mass killing. It is believed that he acted alone. But he had accomplices, though perhaps unwitting. There must have been others in his circle of contacts who knew about his hatred of Jews, his anger, his rants on social media and his guns. These persons had a moral obligation to intervene in a way that separated him from his guns (he had registered 21 guns).

