The transformation of Camp Dwyer in Helmand Province reflects the shifting strategy for troops fighting in Afghanistan, where on Oct 4. the 2,414th American was killed.
Specialist James A. Slape died in southern Afghanistan on Oct. 4, three days before the 17th anniversary of the start of the war there. He was 23 years old when he stepped on a roadside bomb in a stretch of desert that turned to green shrub and stray trees as it approached the Helmand River.
Slape was a bomb-disposal technician with the North Carolina National Guard, assigned to an infantry company that had drawn the task of protecting an installation called Camp Dwyer in Helmand. The base had been there for more than a decade. It was cut into the sand with barbed wire and guard towers in 2007 as a British firebase. The war was six years old then, and Slape was 12. The base was named after a British soldier: Lance Bombardier James Dwyer, who was 22 years old, a year shy of Slape’s age, when his vehicle ran over a mine two days after Christmas in 2006.
In 2008, the base had rudimentary showers and a small cross made of artillery shells in its center. At the bottom was a wreath of plastic poppies and a plaque that said, “Memory of the Fallen.” The British burned feces at Dwyer at the time and ate their food in a small tent next to a fryer, a grill and a stove called Hell Man’s Kitchen. Half-dressed British soldiers sat idly next to their howitzers, smoking until they had to fire the 105-millimeter gun.
The base was built when British forces were fighting a resurgent Taliban that had slowly reformed in the years after the initial American invasion in 2001. The American military had not yet committed to the volatile province.  It wasn’t until the spring of 2008 that United States Marines started to show up in force. Before this, American Army units visited only sporadically for brief missions. With a few tents, most American Marines and soldiers would sleep outside. Some armored vehicles couldn’t fit inside the perimeter. They were the first of what would turn into the next iteration of the Afghan strategy, in which tens of thousands of American troops spread across the country, building small outposts and expanding the ones that already existed.
In 2009, Dwyer grew, and the Marines started a spat of offensives. The base changed from Forward Operating Base Dwyer to Camp Dwyer. Engineers plowed the dirt and paved a new airfield. Troops bled and died in the surrounding farmland. By 2010, the number of American service members in Afghanistan climbed toward 100,000; a few laps around Camp Dwyer’s perimeter could easily equal 10 miles. There were two mess halls staffed by foreign contractors, a phone center with computers and a trailer where soldiers, sailors, Marines and airmen could use phone cards to call home. A line of medical evacuation helicopters sat on Dwyer’s tarmac. 
In 2012, when the British started its slow withdrawal from the country, the memorial cross was sent back to England as a token of remembrance for James Dwyer’s unit. By then, the text at the bottom had faded. American troops began their departure too. Dwyer stopped growing. In 2014, as the Pentagon euphemistically declared that it had ended combat operations in Afghanistan, larger bases like Camp Leatherneck shut down. Camp Dwyer remained, turning into a detached hub of contractors, Special Operations soldiers and American advisers.
Dwyer’s perimeter was most mostly unchanged by 2016, but the buildings within it had slowly been torn down. Tents where troops lived were replaced with air-conditioned trailers. The medical helicopters remained mostly idle, reserved almost entirely for the Western troops relegated to advising from behind the frontlines. But the Afghan soldiers, fighting the war with limited support and air power, died in extraordinary numbers in the countryside. With the addition of roughly 4,000 troops under the Trump administration in 2017, the Marines returned to Camp Dwyer. Army soldiers patrolled the perimeter. At night, mortars fired illumination rounds into the air.
On Oct. 4, 2018, around 9:30 a.m., an Army patrol hit a roadside bomb seven miles southeast of Camp Dwyer, immobilizing one of its vehicles. Specialist Slape hopped into an armored truck and drove out of the base’s gate. He was an explosive-ordnance disposal expert, and the ground around the blast needed to be cleared. Around 1:30 that afternoon, he stepped on the bomb that killed him.
A helicopter picked him up and carried him to Camp Dwyer, where he was pronounced dead. Slape was the eighth American to die in Afghanistan this year and the 2,414th since 2001.
Thomas Gibbons-Neff is a reporter in the New York Times Washington bureau and a former Marine infantryman.
NATO Soldier Killed as Concern Rises Over Afghan Insider Attacks: An Afghan commando targeted NATO soldiers, days after an infiltrator killed a top Afghan commander and wounded an American general.
This is the front line of Saudi Arabia’s invisible war: The Khashoggi crisis has called attention to a largely overlooked Saudi-led war in Yemen. On a rare trip to the front line, we found Yemenis fighting and dying in a war that has gone nowhere.
Hondros and Hetherington: Photographing the Liberian Civil War: A show at the Bronx Documentary Center reveals how Liberia’s civil war shaped the lives and careers of Chris Hondros and Tim Hetherington.
Will There Be a Ban on Killer Robots?: A push for a global agreement on autonomous weapons is stalled, much to the chagrin of advocates who believe a treaty is urgently needed.
Overlooked No More: Rose Zar, a Holocaust Survivor Who Hid in Plain Sight: Zar worked in the home of a Nazi commander and saved dozens of Jewish orphans, then moved to the United States and shared her life story.
U.S. Begins First Cyberoperation Against Russia Aimed at Protecting Elections: American operatives are messaging Russians working on disinformation campaigns to let them know they’ve been identified. It’s a measured step to keep Moscow from escalating.
Trump Considers Closing Southern Border to Migrants: The proposed executive action would be a sweeping use of presidential power to fortify the border as President Trump tries to play to his anti-immigrant base days before the midterm elections.
Hollywood’s Forgotten Heroes: Female War Correspondents: The brave journalist in the field is a big-screen staple, but “A Private War,” about Marie Colvin, is one of the few to focus on women doing the job.
We’d love your feedback on this newsletter. Please email thoughts and suggestions to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Or invite someone to subscribe through this link. Read more from At War here or follow us on Twitter.