Jennifer Nutt’s puzzle brings us in touch with the cosmos.
WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — Solving this puzzle by Jennifer Nutt was particularly rhapsodic to me because it reminded me of a writer whom I adored, years ago, when I read her big work in high school. We had learned a lot of history and religion by then, but this book was luscious — in the 1980s, before social media and instant access to infinite content, I think I used my imagination better, and internalized many of the amazing, vivid stories.
It’s one of the exceptionally good perks of crosswords, the ability of a clue or a theme to remind you of something, often something cerebral. It’s not exactly learning something new, but a rediscovery can be wonderful, can’t it?
9A: Is this common knowledge? I suppose it should come as no surprise that there was once a presidential YACHT (the last version being the U.S.S. Sequoia), and I confess that it was a bit gratifying to learn that President Jimmy Carter was the one who jettisoned the floating status symbol as part of his efforts to dispense with governmental extravagance. Mr. Carter sold it to someone who then rented it out, and as of a couple of years ago, it had become a raccoon party boat.
20A: I think I was hunting for something like “hacker” here, but EXILED is true enough for Edward Snowden, who now lives in Russia.
53A: As a beleaguered custodian of multiple dogs, all of whom careen in various directions at random speeds, I wonder if this entry pegs someone as an urbanite, or if most dogs on walks are LEASHED. This summer when it got sweltering I would take my dogs out late at night and wish I could let them just saunter along with me, but they aren’t to the point where I can trust them not to chase night critters into the next county. One night when all the raccoons are on the presidential yacht, I will try it.
19D: If you are a mycophile, you might know more of the great variety of names of culinary and medicinal mushrooms; ENOKI didn’t come to mind. They are the very long, etiolated-looking spindly white strands that show up in some stir fries and soups.
38D: The heart of the theme today, at 63A, is a spelling bee word (at least it is to me, and I’m writing this post). This entry, crossing it on the way down, is also a little tricky, especially for those not horticulturally inclined: FUCHSIAS. They are lovely and flower heavily without much sun, but they don’t overwinter outdoors in my climate and inside they get covered in gnats. You’d probably recognize the plants in bloom.
That’s what Edith Hamilton wrote in “Mythology” as an introduction to the story that forms the word part of the theme to Ms. Nutt’s puzzle. The myth in question is a juicy one, and many of its major players are in the grid.
To begin with, Ms. Nutt has four informative entries, at 3D, 41D, 18A and 63A. They are interconnected and, depending on your knowledge of Greek myth, you may be able to fill them all in with the speed of Hermes.
My first entry was 18A, “Sea nymphs,” which I knew as THE NEREIDS because it’s important to know your nymphs, especially when puzzling.
I drew a blank, though, when I reached 63A; “Andromeda” rang a bell but didn’t fit, and I needed a bunch of crosses to jog my memory and find her mother, CASSIOPEIA, the vainglorious queen of ETHIOPIA. Cassiopeia enraged POSEIDON, the Greek god of the sea, by comparing her own beauty favorably to his nymphs.
As punishment, Poseidon ordered up a sea monster to avenge his lovely girls, and Cassiopeia decided to sacrifice her own lovely girl (Andromeda) to the monster — until Perseus heroically rescued Andromeda from the rock to which she’d been chained. This saved the daughter, but made it even more apparent that the mother was irredeemable, and so she was flung into the sky and became a constellation, depicted as sitting in a chair that tumbles uncomfortably through space.
About that constellation! At 41D, we’re tipped off to a terrific visual flourish to the grid: There are five X’s present, and when you connect them, you get the shape of Cassiopeia in the night sky.
I considered other constellations for a puzzle theme, but Cassiopeia won out because it has only five main stars. Soon after this puzzle got accepted, Jeff Stillman’s May 22 Ursa Major crossword was published, and I thought it would be a good long time before this one appeared.
Subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.