Good morning on this flawless Friday.
What that means: two new international terminals, modern amenities, expanded capacity on the runways and at the gates, and more centralized ground transportation options, to name just a few improvements.
Sounds splendid, but don’t hold your breath. We won’t start reaping the benefits of the $13 billion project for five to seven years — or more.
In the meantime, we asked New York Times readers traveling to and from our city to share their feelings about the airport and what the first thing to fix should be.
They had a lot of thoughts.
If you’d like to share any other feedback about J.F.K. for possible use in our coverage of the airport and its renovations, click here and fill out this form with your information.
Highs 60s and sunny Friday and Saturday; high 70s and sunny Sunday.
And don’t forget: Monday is Columbus Day.
• “Harry Potter: The History of Magic,” a British Library exhibition exploring the folklore of the Harry Potter stories, opens at the New-York Historical Society on the Upper West Side. Times and prices vary.
• Yankees at Red Sox, 7:32 p.m. (TBS).
• Watch “The New York Times Close Up,” featuring The Times’s investigative reporter Russ Buettner, one of the authors of the paper’s investigation into the inherited fortune and tax dodges employed by President Trump and his family. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 1:30 p.m. and Sunday at 12:30 p.m. on CUNY-TV.
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Oct. 8.
• Weekend travel hassles: Check subway disruptions and a list of street closings.
• Devils host Oilers, 1 p.m. (MSG+). Rangers at Sabres, 7 p.m. (MSG). Islanders host Predators, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Yankees at Red Sox, 8:15 p.m. (TBS). New York Red Bulls at San Jose Earthquakes, 10:30 p.m. (MSG).
• Jets host Broncos, 1 p.m. (CBS). Giants at Panthers, 1 p.m. (FOX). Rangers at Hurricanes, 5 p.m. (MSG).
• For more events, see The Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.
It was another Saturday night. After a busy day of shopping and walking in the city, I got on the Third Avenue bus at 8 p.m. I must have looked exactly as I felt, lonely and sad.
“Happy Saturday,” the driver said as I put my MetroCard in the slot.
I had no choice but to reply.
“Happy Saturday to you,” I said.
I found a seat. As the bus slowly made its way uptown, I started to feel more relaxed. As we approached my stop, I walked to the front of the bus.
“That’s what it was meant to do,” he said.
Some readers expressed nostalgia for the local airports of yesteryear.
This weekend you can do the same for New York’s old buses; today our buses are sluggishly slow — worse than any other major city in the country — and ridership is declining.
The New York City Transit Museum will hold its 25th annual Bus Festival on Sunday in Brooklyn Bridge Park. It’s a chance to board the city’s vintage fleet and explore more than 80 years of local transportation history.
You can read more about the yearly tradition here and roll through the festival from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. on Sunday. Admission is free.
Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra S. Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.
