Sports|The N.L.C.S. Isn’t All That Connects Milwaukee and L.A.
The N.L.C.S. Isn’t All That Connects Milwaukee and L.A.
The Dodgers and the Brewers, and their cities, have more in common than you might imagine.
No franchise has reached the National League Championship Series more times than the Los Angeles Dodgers. Their 13th visit begins Friday at Miller Park against a new opponent: the Milwaukee Brewers, a team that often plays in obscurity.
The Brewers’ franchise, now in its 50th season, has never won the World Series. The team has been to the Series only once, as the American League pennant winner in 1982. The Dodgers have not won a title since 1988, but as the franchise that promoted Jackie Robinson and helped establish major league baseball in California, they still have one of the most famous brands in sports.
The N.L.C.S. franchises and cities would seem to have little in common, but there are some peculiar connections, one of them forged by a sitcom. Milwaukee has a downtown statue of Henry Winkler’s Fonzie, from “Happy Days,” but there are no statues from its sister show, “Laverne & Shirley.” Those characters, you may recall, eventually left their Milwaukee brewery jobs for a new life in sunny L.A.
In modern baseball, though, migration goes the other way. The Brewers’ owner, Mark Attanasio, runs an asset-management firm in Los Angeles and regularly commutes to Milwaukee to watch his baseball team. Two of the Brewers’ biggest stars, outfielders Ryan Braun and Christian Yelich, also live in Southern California.
Attanasio gave them a lift in his private jet last winter, stopping off in Arizona to pick up two franchise icons — the broadcaster Bob Uecker and the Hall of Famer Robin Yount — on the way to a fan event. Yelich, who had just been traded from Miami, ended up having the kind of season that probably will be rewarded with the N.L. Most Valuable Player Award.
The Brewers rolled to an N.L.-best 96 victories, matching their franchise high and ensuring that Games 1, 2, 6 and 7 would be held at Miller Park, an 18-year-old bandbox with a retractable roof and a carnival atmosphere. Before the fun begins, here’s a look at some shared history between the teams and the towns.
Both franchises started elsewhere, and the owners who moved them are now in the Hall of Fame. Walter O’Malley brought the Brooklyn Dodgers to Los Angeles for the 1958 season, leaving heartbroken loyalists behind but opening Major League Baseball to the West. Twelve years later, in March 1970, Bud Selig — then only 35 years old — led a group that bought the Seattle Pilots out of bankruptcy court and moved them to Milwaukee, his hometown. The Pilots, who had played just one season in Seattle, were rechristened the Brewers, filling the baseball void for a city that had recently lost the Braves to Atlanta.
While this is the first postseason meeting between the Brewers and the Dodgers, the cities have met before in a baseball playoff, of sorts. In 1959, the Dodgers’ second season in Los Angeles, they finished the regular season tied with the Milwaukee Braves for the N.L. pennant. The teams staged a best-of-three playoff, which was technically part of the regular season, and the Dodgers won two in a row, with Carl Furillo’s 12th-inning single scoring the decisive run in the clincher. The Dodgers went on to beat the Chicago White Sox for the first of their five titles in L.A.
The Green Bay Packers have a special connection to Los Angeles, having won the first Super Bowl at the Coliseum on Jan. 15, 1967. The Packers beat the Kansas City Chiefs, 35-10, in what was then known as the A.F.L.-N.F.L. Championship Game. In college football, the Wisconsin Badgers have been a frequent visitor to Pasadena for the Rose Bowl, appearing nine times, with victories in 1994, 1999 and 2000.
The N.B.A.’s Milwaukee Bucks won their only championship in 1971, led by Lew Alcindor, who would soon be known as Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. Four years later, the Bucks traded Abdul-Jabbar, a former U.C.L.A. star, to the Lakers with Walt Wesley for Junior Bridgeman, Dave Meyers, Elmore Smith and Brian Winters. The Lakers have won 10 N.B.A. titles since then, while the Bucks have never returned to the finals.
Only two players have had 1,000 at-bats for both the Brewers and the Dodgers (Greg Brock and Gary Sheffield), and only Don Sutton has thrown at least 500 innings (postseason included) for both. Sutton started the Brewers’ first home L.C.S. game, in the A.L. in 1982, beating the California Angels to ignite the Brewers’ comeback from 0-2 in the best-of-five format. While Zack Greinke and Randy Wolf have started in the N.L.C.S. for both franchises, Sutton is the only player to have appeared in the World Series for both, making six starts for the Dodgers in the 1970s and two for Milwaukee in 1982.
The only no-hitter at Miller Park took place in a game not involving the Brewers. In 2008, the Chicago Cubs’ Carlos Zambrano no-hit the Houston Astros, who had been displaced by Hurricane Ike. The Brewers themselves have thrown only one no-hitter, by Juan Nieves in 1987, while the Dodgers have 26, by far the most of any franchise. Their most recent gem came against San Diego on May 4 in Monterrey, Mexico, where Walker Buehler worked six no-hit innings before three relievers finished up.
Brewers Manager Craig Counsell might not have known it at the time, but the Dodgers did him a favor by releasing him during spring training in 2000. Counsell had struggled with the Marlins and the Dodgers in 1999, hitting just .218. After the Dodgers dropped Counsell the next March, the Arizona Diamondbacks signed him. Counsell worked his way up from the minors and was the starting second baseman when the Diamondbacks beat the Yankees in the 2001 World Series. The victory gave Counsell his second World Series ring; he scored the winning run for the Marlins in Game 7 in 1997.
The two most prolific individual days of offense in National League history took place in games between Milwaukee and the Dodgers. On May 23, 2002, the Los Angeles Dodgers’ Shawn Green set a record with 19 total bases at Miller Park, connecting for a single, a double and four home runs against the Brewers. Christian Yelich, the Brewers’ star outfielder, grew up rooting for Green in Southern California.
“I remember watching him all the time, throwing the batting gloves into the stands after every homer,” Yelich said recently.
Green broke a record held by Joe Adcock, who had 18 total bases for the Milwaukee Braves in a game against the Dodgers in 1954.
Kenley Jansen vs. Ryan Braun. Sort of.
In the 2009 World Baseball Classic, in a game between the Netherlands and the United States, a Dodgers minor league catcher threw out the Brewers’ Ryan Braun at second base on a stolen-base attempt — from his knees. The catcher was a light hitter from Curacao named Kenley Jansen, whose arm strength was by far his best tool. That July, his Class A manager, Carlos Subero, told a tearful Jansen that the organization had decided to move him to the mound. With help from the former knuckleballer Charlie Hough — and a fastball with a wicked natural cut — Jansen took to pitching quickly and is now an All-Star closer. Braun still bats in the middle of the Brewers’ order, and Subero is Milwaukee’s first base coach.
While the Dodgers are the only N.L. team without a mascot, the Brewers have mascots to spare. Their standby is Bernie Brewer. At old County Stadium, he cheered from his perch in a chalet and slid into a giant beer stein when the Brewers hit a home run. Now he has a swirly yellow slide high above left field. Bernie’s friends include Barrelman, who represents the Brewers’ original primitive logo, and a team of five smiling sausages who race one another before the seventh inning of every game: Bratwurst, Polish, Italian, Hot Dog and Chorizo.
The Italian sausage — “the suave one of the bunch,” according to the Brewers’ website — won 21 races to capture the regular-season title. The mustachioed, lederhosen-clad Brat had just 10 victories, making him the wurst.