MILWAUKEE — The Milwaukee Brewers were finishing their pregame practice last week at Miller Park, going through the rote exercises teams have used forever. Pat Murphy, the Brewers’ bench coach, gestured to an infielder scooping a lazy ground ball.
The Brewers have successfully challenged other conventions in baseball, notably by their early and aggressive use of relievers in the postseason, and Murphy embodies a different kind of change. In a sport that rarely looks outside the pro ranks for coaches, the Brewers have two prominent ones with a background mostly in college baseball.
Murphy coached in college from 1983 through 2009, mostly with Notre Dame and Arizona State. The Brewers’ pitching coach, Derek Johnson, worked in college jobs from 1994 through 2012, the last 11 seasons as an assistant at Vanderbilt.
Counsell was undrafted out of high school but started all four years for Murphy at Notre Dame, hitting .307 and becoming an 11th-round pick by Colorado in 1992. (Murphy persuaded the Rockies to bump Counsell’s bonus by $1,000 — all the way to $5,000.) Counsell went on to play 16 years in the majors, with a toughness Murphy first recognized when Counsell broke his nose with one of those practice grounders.
Counsell wanted to hire Murphy when he got the Brewers job early in the 2015 season. Murphy was managing the Class AAA El Paso Chihuahuas, in the San Diego farm system, but the Padres kept him and later in 2015 made him the interim manager after firing Bud Black.
Murphy went 42-54 with the Padres that season, and when they told him afterward that he was not a candidate for a full-time job, Counsell asked Murphy again to be his bench coach. Counsell considered Murphy an ideal dugout adviser because he would not be afraid to challenge him, and his extroverted personality would help connect with players. General Manager David Stearns understood the benefits.
Johnson had left Vanderbilt before the 2013 season to join the Chicago Cubs as minor league pitching coordinator. He had helped turn Vanderbilt into a factory of future major league pitchers, including David Price, Sonny Gray and Mike Minor. Tim Corbin, the Vanderbilt head coach, said Johnson had specialized in arm care and coached players with sincerity that has translated well to the pros.
In college, Johnson said, a coach can more easily tell a player what to do. In the pros, a coach tends to wait for cues from the players, who have already demonstrated elite skills. But it always comes down to trust, he said, and Murphy agreed.
Murphy described himself as a gruff taskmaster in college, and he is still blunt with players. But he is also boisterous in a life-of-the-party way. In a 15-minute interview before Game 1 of the National League Championship Series, he stopped four times to hug, banter with or trade barbs with an umpire, a reporter, a player and an opposing coach.
Murphy’s Arizona State program produced several prominent major leaguers: Dustin Pedroia, Jason Kipnis, Mike Leake, Andre Ethier and others. Murphy turned Austin Barnes into a catcher, setting him on his path to the Los Angeles Dodgers, the Brewers’ opponent in the N.L.C.S.
In general, Murphy said, prominent college coaches tend to stay in college because entry-level pro jobs do not pay enough. Baseball is also fundamentally different from pro football and basketball because of its extensive minor leagues. Yet with the success of the Brewers — and the changing dynamics of baseball’s front offices — others could follow Johnson and Murphy.
