DEAD OR ALIVE: SCIENCE OF CREEPY at the New York Hall of Science (Oct. 28, 1-5 p.m.). This celebration in Queens promises plenty of splatter. But parents shouldn’t worry; the guts come from gourds. At 3:30 p.m., Chuck, the museum’s enormous outdoor catapult, will lift and hurl pumpkins, providing not only entertainment, but also a lesson in physics. Other activities with a science spin will include demonstrations of the phases of matter (with a Halloween angle) at 3 p.m. and a game of zombie tag in which children portray biological investigators. Young visitors can also create fake blood, prosthetic wounds, stop-motion-animated monsters, eerie-sounding electronic instruments, spooky sculptures and Halloween costumes (or come already dressed for the occasion and receive a prize).
LC KIDS: ‘ANTIGONE’ at the Gerald W. Lynch Theater (Oct. 27, 2 p.m.) and ‘IS THIS A DAGGER? THE STORY OF MACBETH’ at the Clark Studio Theater (Oct. 27-28, 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.). Dark doings and themes always surface in the arts in late October, but as portrayed by Sophocles and Shakespeare, they’re also timeless — and, in the hands of this Lincoln Center series, age-appropriate. On Saturday LC Kids will present a revival of the Classical Theater of Harlem’s “Antigone,” a version of the tragedy inspired by Paul Roche’s adaptation and lasting barely more than an hour. Recommended for audiences 12 and older, this production frames the story of the titular character, who defies her uncle to seek justice for her dead brother, with references to Black Lives Matter and contemporary feminism. All weekend the series will also offer “Is This a Dagger?” by the Scottish theater company Red Bridge Arts. Although this hourlong “Macbeth,” adapted by Andy Cannon, still has witches, ghosts and murder, it also incorporates contemporary language and leavening humor. Intended for children 8 and older, it features Mr. Cannon, dressed in a kilt and brandishing a few props, incarnating all the roles, including a falsetto-voiced Lady Macbeth. He will also do a Q. and A. after each show.
OBAKE FAMILY DAY at Japan Society (Oct. 28, 11 a.m.-4 p.m.). Japan doesn’t have a headless horseman or a flying Dutchman or even, strictly speaking, a Halloween. But its lore does abound in dozens of shape-shifters, or obake (pronounced oh-BAH-kay), and monsters and spirits, known as yokai (yoke-EYE). They star in this annual celebration, which this year will offer three live performances by Goro Koyama, a professional Foley artist. During screenings of two animated Japanese films with ghostly themes, Koyama will show how he uses ordinary objects to create scary sound effects for movies. The day’s program will also feature opportunities to tour a Japanese haunted house populated with actors portraying signature goblins, and to hear spooky stories. Families seeking less frightening fare can enjoy festival games, paper mask making and demonstrations of amezaiku (candy sculpture).
‘SPIRITED AWAY’ at select theaters nationwide (Oct. 28, 12:55 p.m.; Oct. 29-30, 7 p.m.). Moving to another home can be disorienting and intimidating, but children may be consoled to know that they’ll never have the experience of Chihiro, this 2002 film’s 10-year-old heroine: As she and her parents are traveling to their new residence, they stop at what looks like an abandoned town. Gods, ghosts and demons actually rule the place, and before long, Chihiro, whose mother and father are turned into pigs, finds herself working in a bathhouse for a supernatural clientele. In partnership with the distributor GKids, Fathom Events will screen this Oscar-winning parable on adolescence, written and directed by the great Japanese moviemaker Hayao Miyazaki, in participating theaters as part of Studio Ghibli Fest 2018. Showing in English on Sunday and Tuesday, and in Japanese with English subtitles on Monday, “Spirited Away” was chosen by A. O. Scott and Manohla Dargis, chief film critics of The New York Times, as second only to “There Will Be Blood” for their list of the 25 best pictures of the 21st century so far.
‘WANDA’S MONSTER’ at the 92nd Street Y (Oct. 27-28, 1 p.m.). Wanda is not the first child to think that a monster lives in her closet, but she may well be the first for whom that is literally true. The creature in her wardrobe, however, resembles a monster on “Sesame Street” more than the kind that inhabits bad dreams. First produced Off Off Broadway in a longer version in 2013, this adaptation of Eileen Spinelli’s 2002 picture book has a script by Barbara Zinn Krieger and an upbeat pop score by Laurie Berkner, one of the biggest stars in children’s music. Intended for theatergoers ages 3 to 11, the show portrays Wanda’s grandmother as a kick-out-the-jams rocker who’s the only adult to take the little girl’s claims seriously — and to convince Wanda that she should give the poor monster a chance.
