BEYOND THE CANON: ‘BODY AND SOUL’ AND ‘THE NIGHT OF THE HUNTER’ at BAM Rose Cinemas (Oct. 13, 4:30 p.m.). The goal of this recurring series is to pair an acknowledged masterwork with a complementary, lesser-known title from a filmmaker omitted from a bias-tainted canon. But this week’s double feature, showcasing films about men who pose as preachers, includes two classics: Charles Laughton’s only film as a director, “The Night of the Hunter,” with Robert Mitchum (and his famous “love” and “hate” fist tattoos) as a killer who terrorizes two children, and the groundbreaking African-American director Oscar Micheaux’s 1925 silent “Body and Soul.” Paul Robeson, in his first screen appearance(s), plays both an escaped convict who pretends to be a minister and his twin brother.
ORPHANS OF NEW YORK at Film Forum (Oct. 14, 3:10 p.m.; Oct. 15, 7 p.m.). The common thread of all the so-called orphan films in this showcase is that they weren’t made for commercial purposes and were filmed in or around New York. They include footage shot in 1899 from a train passing over the Brooklyn Bridge; a 1949 Communist Party short made in Harlem that decries ghetto conditions and police brutality in Harlem; and newsreels that were discovered at the famous (among archivists, anyway) dig in Dawson City, in Canada, which was the last stop on a film-shipping circuit during the silent era. Bill Morrison, who made a movie, “Dawson City: Frozen Time,” about the discoveries there, did the selections from that group.
‘A VERY CURIOUS GIRL’ at Light Industry (Oct. 13, 7:30 p.m.). Laura Mulvey, the theorist who coined the term “male gaze,” will introduce a rare screening of this feminist French feature from the Argentine-born filmmaker and writer Nelly Kaplan. First shown in 1969, the movie concerns an outcast (Bernadette Lafont) who takes methodical revenge on the village leaders who have abused and exploited her. When the film opened in New York in 1970, it came with an endorsement from Pablo Picasso, who compared it to the work of Luis Buñuel.
