CHICAGO — The Chicago Cubs started their renaissance with a wild-card game. That was three years ago, in Pittsburgh, and their fans were thrilled. It had been a dozen years since the franchise’s last playoff victory, and a new group was making its mark.
A year later, in 2016, the Cubs stormed to their first World Series title in 108 years. The expectations changed. Anthony Rizzo, the Cubs’ first baseman, sensed that this year’s wild card felt like a consolation prize around town.
In doing so, at least, they put on a heart-pounding show. The Colorado Rockies eliminated the Cubs on Tuesday, 2-1, in 13 taut innings at Wrigley Field, whose bricks and ivy had never witnessed such a long postseason game.
The Cubs fought hard for nearly five hours. Their pitchers wedged 11 shutout innings between Colorado’s first and last runs. Four outs from defeat in the eighth, Javier Baez doubled home the pinch-runner Terrance Gore, exhorting the crowd and his teammates.
Maybe, but what lessons can the Cubs really take from a season so bizarre? When they won, they looked overpowering. The averaged 6.5 runs in their victories, comparable to the Boston Red Sox, who had the majors’ best record and averaged 6.7.
Yet on too many nights, the Cubs seemed allergic to the plate. They scored one or no runs 39 times in the regular season, tied with the Baltimore Orioles for the most such games in the majors.
The Orioles were 47-115. The Cubs, meanwhile, reached the end of their original schedule tied with the Milwaukee Brewers for the most wins in the National League, with 95. But the Brewers won the Central division tiebreaker on Monday at Wrigley, 3-1, and now the Cubs are finished.
Bryant, the league’s most valuable player in that dreamy 2016 season, played just 102 games this year because of shoulder injuries. He struck out three times on Tuesday, going 1 for 6. The Cubs had six hits over all and fanned 16 times, going 1 for 6 with runners in scoring position.
That was a chronic problem for these Cubs. They ranked third in the majors in plate appearances with runners in scoring position this season, yet hit just .247 in those spots, ranking 20th. The trend continued in their one-night postseason.
The Cubs have 387 wins in four seasons under Maddon, who is entering the last year of his contract. Theo Epstein, the Cubs’ president of baseball operations, said on Wednesday that he was “very happy” that Maddon was the manager, though he has not focused on the possibility of a contract extension.
Maddon got little help this season from the Cubs’ splashy off-season moves. The team signed pitchers Yu Darvish, Tyler Chatwood and Brandon Morrow for a combined $185 million, enticed by their hard, sharply moving repertories. Yet all were inactive on Tuesday, felled by injuries, underperformance or both.
Other moves worked, like the signing of reliever Steve Cishek last winter and the summer trades for Cole Hamels, Daniel Murphy, Jesse Chavez and Jorge De La Rosa. But besides a brief uptick after Murphy’s arrival in August, the Cubs simply could not generate consistent offense from a lineup of stars.
The Brewers swiped the Cubs’ division title, and the Rockies snagged their spot in the division series, which starts in Milwaukee on Thursday. The Cubs should be back soon — they retain control of almost all their core players, and now have an unexpected four weeks in October to rest.
They also have more time to reflect. Outfielder Albert Almora Jr., who struck out against Scott Oberg to end Tuesday’s game, said the season was “not a success unless we win,” echoing the cold calculus of the early-2000s Yankees.
Those Yankees, though, were trying to maintain a tradition unrivaled in their sport and demanded by their irrational owner, George Steinbrenner. These Cubs know what they will miss by losing on Tuesday, but they understand where they came from.
The Cubs, in that way, have earned a strange viewpoint in defeat: They can hang their heads high.