NORTHAMPTON, Mass. — The Pioneer Valley in western Massachusetts is a cradle of social progress — a place where L.G.B.T.Q. is often followed by I.A. (for intersex and asexual), there’s a Stonewall Center (now 33 years old), and gender-nonconforming parents have a nickname of choice (it’s “Baba”).
Rosenberg said “Confessions of the Fox” did not owe any particular debt to earlier works with transgender themes — but pointed out that his housemate’s book was shaped by their reading of “Orlando,” Virginia Woolf’s novel about a poet who changes gender from male to female and lives through several centuries of English history.
“Paul Takes the Form of a Mortal Girl” literally embodies the notion that gender is fluid rather than binary (an idea with enough currency that two acclaimed television series — “Pose” and “Billions” — feature gender nonspecific characters). In the novel, Paul Polydoris changes his body and sex organs at will to attract “only the sorts of attention he desired” as he cruises a “womyn’s festival” in Michigan, Iowa City’s punk scene, or off-season Provincetown in the age of mixtapes and Doc Martens.
This year Plett, a Canadian writer who is the author of the story collection “A Safe Girl to Love,” came out with her first novel, “Little Fish.” The book opens with the discovery by a young Winnipeg transgender woman, Wendy Reimer, that her Mennonite grandfather may also have been transgender. But the novel’s primary focus is the day-to-day struggles of Wendy and her circle of friends — with unemployment, with alcoholism, with sexual violence. Plett knows alienated transgender millennials the way Ann Beattie knows alienated cis-gender boomers.
Toward the other end of the commercial spectrum, earlier this year Ecco/Harper Collins released “The House of Impossible Beauties,” by Joseph Cassara, with a bullish first printing of 50,000. The book is as immediate as cinéma vérité — not surprisingly, given that it was inspired by the documentary “Paris is Burning.” Like the film, the novel tells the story of the House of Xtravaganza, the Latinx drag ball “family” of the 1980s, through the voices of Angel, Hector and its other larger-than-life gay and transgender members. There is much fabulousness until there isn’t — racism, queer bashing and AIDS taking their inevitable toll.
