Book Review|Were the Founders Against Slavery All Along?
Were the Founders Against Slavery All Along?
350 pp. Harvard University Press. $26.95.
Across from the New York Stock Exchange sits Federal Hall National Memorial, the beautiful Greek Revival columned structure that in 1842 replaced Federal Hall, the birthplace of American government. That building is where George Washington took the oath of office as the first president. It housed the Supreme Court and the first Congress. The address is 26 Wall Street. Two blocks east at 75 Wall Street stands a 42-story modern structure of marble, glass and steel. This condominium sits at the old water’s edge of the East River, atop the slave market where for half a century (1711-62) enslaved Africans were bought and sold like cattle and corn. They were traded as commodities in the enormous trans-Atlantic slave markets that linked four continents together for nearly four centuries. These parcels of flesh and bone were “not like merchandise,” James Madison argued at the Federal Convention in 1787. But they were counted as assets, or property, that helped build and finance the infrastructure and the wealth of the richest nation in the world.
It is impossible to comprehend American history without understanding slavery’s role in every aspect of its early development. Eleven slaves built a wall to protect a fledgling Dutch colony in 1626. Within a century, those 11 grew to represent one in five residents of what is now Manhattan, the nation’s first capital city and today’s global financial capital. Ten of America’s first 12 presidents were slaveholders, as were two of the nation’s earliest chief justices.
Slavery is at the heart of the nation’s origin story. The core of our democratic institutions — from the presidency to the Congress to the courts — was shaped immeasurably by it. And yet it is one of the least understood and distorted subjects in American history. The hip-hop superstar Kanye West’s bizarre remark this spring that slavery was “a choice” is just one of many examples. A recent report by the Southern Poverty Law Center found that a “bare majority” of social studies teachers said they are qualified to teach it. Educators also complained about unclear state content standards and inadequate curricular resources. The net result: High school students are virtually illiterate on the subject, and this has had severe consequences for our national life.
Sometimes in plain view and often just beneath the surface, slavery rests uncomfortably in the middle of national debates about monuments, white nationalism, kneeling athletes, Donald Trump’s election, policing, immigrant family separation, racial wealth disparities and so on. Its meaning and legacy are, in many ways, as fiercely contested today as was the case when the framers first debated how to make America great.
To put it simply, the Constitution, as ratified in 1788, was less racist and pro-slavery than many have thought. The nation’s founding document contained a fundamental antislavery ideal built into it. Enslaved people were defined legally as “persons” and not property.
The usual evidence for what the celebrated historian John Hope Franklin called the “sweeping constitutional recognition of slavery” consists of the three-fifths compromise (with the enslaved counted for political representation as three-fifths of free persons), the continuation of the Atlantic slave trade until 1808 and the so-called fugitive slave clause. None of these provisions contained the actual words “slave” or “slavery.” Nowhere do these words exist in the Constitution, that is, until after the Civil War, with ratification of the 13th and 14th Amendments.
Wilentz goes to great lengths and, at times, takes great pains to show how Northern antislavery delegates combined forces with some moderate Upper South delegates to ensure the United States “would not validate slavery in national law.” All references to persons “bound to service” or “held to service” were the deliberate and intentional consequence of these hard-fought efforts.
At root, the nagging question remains: What manner of nation is this?
By the 1840s, Madison’s secret was out, and yet slavery would continue to be a proxy for everyone’s own American values, including Wilentz’s. The United States, he writes, had by then become the “wealthiest and most powerful slave society in the world.” 
In the end, restoring the antislavery intent of the Constitution leaves a more perplexing question at the heart of American democracy. If it is now correct to say that America’s leaders got something right about racism in the beginning, why have they repeatedly gotten so much wrong ever since? That’s a history lesson still desperately needing to be taught.