If Senator Elizabeth Warren thought that releasing her DNA test results showing Native American ancestry would neutralize a Republican line of attack, she was wrong.
But that distinction actually cuts to the heart of why Native Americans are so upset with her. Fundamentally, their anger is about what it means to be Native American — and who gets to decide.
This perspective is grounded in a long history of persecution, displacement and massacre. Over many decades of United States history, the government took the land of Native American tribes, including the Cherokee, and pushed them steadily west. President Andrew Jackson’s policies, continued under Martin Van Buren, forced the Cherokee into their current territory in Oklahoma in the Trail of Tears during 1838 and 1839. Administration after administration signed treaties with tribes and then violated them. It was not until the 1930s that tribes gained the sovereignty they now have on their reservations.
“Those of us who are Cherokee citizens, we know our ancestors in some cases perished along the Trail of Tears,” Mr. Hoskin said.
“Most reasonable people can understand,” in that context, why claims to Native American heritage based on a DNA test are fraught, he added.
Neither Ms. Warren nor anyone on her staff contacted the Cherokee Nation before publicizing the DNA results, Mr. Hoskin said. A spokeswoman for Ms. Warren’s re-election campaign, Kristen Orthman, declined to comment on this point.
Ms. Warren’s announcement was clearly intended to put to rest one of Mr. Trump’s favorite lines of attack. (Mr. Hoskin criticized Mr. Trump, too, for his repeated use of “Pocahontas” as a slur.) Instead, the DNA test brought a barrage of negative headlines and opinion pieces, in liberal-leaning publications like HuffPost as well as conservative-leaning ones like The New York Post.
Asked about the criticism, the senator’s campaign spokeswoman, Ms. Orthman, sent links to a tweet by Ms. Warren and to a statement posted on Facebook by the Eastern Band Cherokee, a separate tribe from the Cherokee Nation.
The Eastern Band Cherokee’s statement was supportive of Ms. Warren, saying that she “has not used her family story or evidence of Native ancestry to gain employment or other advantage” and that she “demonstrates respect for tribal sovereignty by acknowledging that tribes determine citizenship and respecting the difference between citizenship and ancestry.” It also listed Native-friendly bills she had supported in the Senate.
By Wednesday, the post had been deleted from the Facebook page of the tribe’s newspaper, but Ashleigh Stephens, a spokeswoman for Principal Chief Sneed, said he stood by it.