What do umpires and judges have in common? Not as much as some people think.
Three umpires walk into a bar. The World Series is on TV — Red Sox vs. Dodgers. The three umps have a few beers as they watch the game and discuss their philosophies of umpiring.
The first one says, “I know that some are balls and some are strikes, so when I’m behind the plate I call them as I see them.” You might describe him as an empiricist.
The second one then says, “You’re right that some are balls and some are strikes, but I call them as they are.” He’s a realist.
I got this joke from my friend Daniel Cohen, a philosophy professor at Colby, who credits it to the college’s former president, Julius Seelye Bixler. As the World Series gets underway, I’ve been thinking about what this story tells us about American justice and the way we make decisions — in baseball and in life.

If you “call them the way you see them,” you’re accepting that your role is to incorporate your own wisdom and research into the making of decisions — because “the way you see them” is influenced by your own experience of being human.
If you believe “they ain’t nothing until I call ’em!” you’re not just a pragmatist — you’re an activist, or so conservative legal scholars would have you believe.
And if you “call them the way they are,” you’re suggesting that the law exists independent of human experience — that the business of judging should be like the job of a robot. The realist’s world is a black-and-white one, with no shades of gray.
It’s no coincidence that it’s the world of grays that often presents the greatest challenge for conservatives; they don’t like it when things fall outside the bright lines originally imagined by our 18th-century founders — men whom, we should note, agreed that African-Americans should count as only three-fifths of a human and that the right to vote should be reserved for white men who owned land.
But the passage of time ensures that a changing world surely contains shades of gray. Most of the cases coming before the Supreme Court call not for the application of black-and-white rules but for an understanding of the complexity of human experience.
If you were an “originalist” umpire, for instance, how would you have called the 1951 game when Bill Veeck, the manager of the St. Louis Browns, sent in Eddie Gaedel to bat against the Detroit Tigers? Gaedel, who stood 3 feet 7 inches tall, had a tiny strike zone; if he’d gone into the extreme crouch that Veeck wanted, it would have been just 1.5 inches high — smaller than the diameter of a baseball itself. How would you have ruled in a case like this, one surely unforeseen by the founding father, Abner Doubleday?
Gaedel walked. (The Tigers catcher, Bob Swift, counseled the pitcher, Bob Cain, “Keep it low.”) You could look it up.
Exactly — and it’s the way you consider the intangible that defines what kind of judge, or umpire, you will be. It also has a lot to say about how you live your life and whether in the face of the new and unsettling you will react like a robot or whether you will react like a human being — a creature ruled by the law, to be sure, but also ruled in no small measure by wisdom, and kindness, and by love.
