Donald Trump has harmed me more than any specter ever could.
I have been afraid of a lot of things, over the course of a long life. But what I feel now is new.
I grew up in a house that everyone said was haunted. Several nights before my mother died there, my neighbors saw a black shadow — human shaped — slither along the walls of the stairwell, drift down the hallway and into her room. It went in, and it came back out.
The next day, a home health care nurse looked in a mirror in the bathroom. Standing behind her in the reflection, she said, was a translucent crone with a cruel, knowing expression.
She quit on the spot. My sister and I were annoyed. There are no such things as ghosts, we explained.
When I was 24, I lived with a friend, Jon, in an uptown apartment in New York City, a friend who (although I did not know it at the time) was in the midst of a psychotic break. One night Jon woke me up at 2 a.m. and said that he had to stay in my room all night, to ward off an evil spirit. He sat himself down with a long kitchen knife in the corner, as I lay there, fairly certain that the evil spirit that was imperiling me was Jon himself.
When my son Sean vanished, at Lego Land in Windsor, England, in the summer of 1999, I was terrified that I would never see him again. When he reappeared 45 minutes later, wondering what all the fuss was about, I wrapped that child up in my arms and wept. “I was just exploring,” he explained.
When he was born, Sean was found to have a heart condition — super-ventricular tachycardia — that caused his heart to pound at 240 beats a minute. For the first several days of his life our child lay in the intensive care unit at Maine General, as we sat there weeping at his side. We did not know if he was going to live or die.
I was frightened by all these losses, or near-losses. But these were nothing compared with what I feel right now.
We never used to keep our doors locked; now we bolt them every night.
These days, when I hear a gun go off in my Maine community, my heart pounds with dread that this time, someone is coming for me.
In response to an essay I wrote last week, suggesting that transgender Americans have the right to live their lives in peace, I got some of the scariest email I’ve ever received. My wife and I had a conversation about checking our mailbox and perhaps having a consultation with our local post office about the no-longer-unthinkable possibility that someone might send a bomb to our little house.
Sometimes we talk about leaving the country, going back to Ireland.
It is possible that the specter that appeared in the mirror in my mother’s house was a trick of the light or a work of the imagination. It’s possible — likely, in fact — that my friend Jon was suffering from schizophrenia, a medical condition. As for our son Sean, whom I’ve feared I have lost again and again, he is now 22 and in graduate school, learning how to make robots.
All of these monsters turned out, in the end, to be chimeras.
But now I live in a world in which the president of the United States urges violence against reporters, in which survivors of sexual assault are ridiculed, in which migrant children are placed in “baby jails,” in which transgender people are faced with erasure, in which Donald Trump lies and lies and lies. And in response to all of this, and so much more, a large portion of the country — is it 40 percent? — cheers and laughs and smiles.
As a journalist, as someone who has been threatened with male violence, as the daughter of an immigrant, as a transgender American, as a person who believes that a president should tell the truth, I can tell you I am not cheering or laughing or smiling.
Donald Trump has harmed me more than any specter. He has transformed the country I love into a place of fear and roiling hatred. I honestly do not know if my family and I can survive him.
Once, I told my children that monsters were not real and that I could keep them safe. I was wrong.