An 18-year-old who had been charged in the fatal shooting of a police officer in Georgia was shot and killed on Monday as he was pursued by the police, officials said.
Butch Ayers, the police chief for Gwinnett County, told reporters that the suspect, Tafahree Maynard, failed to comply with verbal commands when he was found in a shed in Snellville, Ga., about 25 miles northeast of Atlanta. In a statement on Monday, the police added that the officers had used a Taser on Mr. Maynard, but it failed to stop him.
Mr. Maynard then brandished a lawnmower blade and “made an aggressive move” toward the officers, the statement said. One officer opened fire, striking and killing him.
The police had been searching for Mr. Maynard since Saturday, when the officer, Antwan Toney, 30, was shot and killed while responding to reports of a suspicious vehicle parked near a middle school in Snellville. As Officer Toney and other officers approached, shots were fired from the vehicle, the police said.
A 19-year-old, Isaiah Pretlow of Snellville, had been driving the vehicle when the shooting happened around 2:30 p.m. on Saturday, the police said, but they believe that Mr. Maynard, also of Snellville, fatally shot Officer Toney. Police officers fired back, but it was unclear whether any of the people inside were hit.
Mr. Pretlow then drove the car a short distance before crashing, and as many as four occupants fled on foot, the police said.
During a search of the area about a half-hour later, a police officer encountered Mr. Pretlow — who pointed a gun at the officer — and fired shots at him, the police said. Mr. Pretlow fled into a wooded area and was later taken into custody by the United States Marshals around 11:30 p.m.
The police said Mr. Pretlow had been charged with aggravated assault based on the encounter after the fatal shooting. Before his death, Mr. Maynard was charged with aggravated assault and felony murder in connection with Officer Toney’s death.
On Monday, the police said they had identified all occupants of the vehicle, but would not confirm whether they were still searching for other suspects.
Officer Toney, who had been with the department for almost three years, was taken to Gwinnett Medical Center in Lawrenceville, Ga., where he died. He had previously worked as a security guard, the police said, and his immediate family lives in Southern California.
