WOODSTOCK, Conn. — The friendly, bearded face of Caroll Spinney may not be one you recognize immediately. But if you have watched TV at any point in the past 50 years or so, you are almost certainly familiar with his work. Since 1969, he has played the parts of the gentle, inquisitive Big Bird and the lovably disgruntled Oscar the Grouch on “Sesame Street,” the long-running children’s program.
This Thursday, as he so often has, Spinney, 84, plans to travel to the studios in Astoria, Queens, where “Sesame Street” is produced, and record some voices for his colorful alter egos.
Then he will retire from the program: His roles will be passed on to new performers and his remarkable half-century run, in which he has embodied two of the most beloved characters on television, will come to an end.
Sesame Workshop, the nonprofit education organization that produces “Sesame Street,” did not have a precise figure for the number of episodes Spinney has appeared in, but a spokeswoman said the number was likely thousands of the more than 4,400 episodes that have been created.
But in recent years, Spinney said, the physical requirements of performing the characters had become difficult for him, and he had developed problems with his balance. He stopped doing the puppeteering for Big Bird in 2015 and has since been providing only the voices for him and Oscar.
The impending 50th anniversary of “Sesame Street,” for which his final voice recordings will be used when it is celebrated on the show — the episodes will run next year on HBO and in 2020 on PBS — seemed like a good moment to take a bow.

There’s the rocking chair with Big Bird’s gargantuan, disembodied orange and pink legs attached at either side; the congratulatory letter Spinney received on his 75th birthday from then-President-elect Barack Obama; the wall of photographs in which Spinney has posed with other TV luminaries like Sid Caesar, Bob Hope and Jerry Seinfeld.
Several pictures show him working alongside Jim Henson, the iconoclastic creator of the Muppets, who recruited Spinney to “Sesame Street” all those years ago.
Although they had previously crossed paths in the 1960s, Spinney pinpointed a fateful encounter at a Salt Lake City puppeteers’ festival in 1969, when Henson watched him try to perform a multimedia show that went gradually awry.
That had a lasting effect on Big Bird and on “Sesame Street,” where the character came to embody the tender, nurturing soul of the show.
Spinney has said that over the years his work on “Sesame Street” acquainted him with countless fans who could not help but tell him — often with eyes full of tears — how the show had changed their lives.
He spoke of a woman he met in Cambridge, Mass., who related how a chance encounter with Oscar the Grouch in her adolescence taught her it was permissible to stand up for herself.
“Sesame Street” was also responsible for introducing Spinney to Debra, who was working in the community education department of what was then called Children’s Television Workshop when they first met, in 1972. “I couldn’t believe Big Bird was coming up and talking to me,” she said of their earliest interactions.
Though Oscar and Big Bird seem to have little in common, Spinney observed that they were both solitary characters who performed with other humans but few other Muppets. That suited him, he said.
Matt Vogel, who has been Spinney’s apprentice on Big Bird since 1996, will succeed him in the role.
At his departure, Spinney will be one of the last surviving “Sesame Street” staff members who has been with the show since its very beginning.
In some form or another, he plans to remain an ambassador of “Sesame Street,” at conventions and other public appearances. “I’ll be 100 years old, doing Muppet stuff,” he said.
He recalled how he and Henson used to imagine themselves “being old” — by which they meant, in their 70s — “doing Muppets the rest of our lives.” Henson, who died in 1990 at age 53, “didn’t get that chance, but I will be,” Spinney said.
Big Bird shows up frequently in the artwork that Spinney creates and surrounds himself with at home. That collection includes paintings like the one he calls “Going Home,” in which Big Bird is seen approaching an enormous tree, its many branches colonized by countless birdhouses.
Another Spinney painting, titled “In My Dreams I Can Fly,” shows Big Bird — who is traditionally depicted as flightless — with his wings spread as he soars high above the countryside.
Though the role would no longer be his, he was hanging onto a portion of the playful spirit that came with it.
