LAS VEGAS — As he lay in a bed inside the crowded hospital one year ago, Detective Casey Clarkson remembers calmly wondering whether doctors would ever be able to remove the bullet shard lodged deep in his neck. Weeks later, the shard would be gone. But the wounds from that night would haunt him for months to come.
When the gunfire began to rain down just hours before at a country music festival, he was working an overtime shift for the Las Vegas Police Department. Even after he was hit, he continued to help the wounded.
But Casey was not the only member of his family on duty that night. His twin brother, Branden Clarkson, was directing officers from the police command post. Their stepfather, Dave Lewis, would soon be sifting through the sprawling crime scene, overseeing the cleanup of the massive concert field soaked with blood. And Brandi Lewis, their mother and a retired civilian police department employee, later rushed through the hospital while her son lay on a gurney, offering her cellphone to anyone who needed it.
It’s been 12 months since the deadliest mass shooting in modern American history, which left 58 people dead and hundreds more wounded, and the experience of the Clarksons during that time shows how many who were there that night are still struggling.
Casey, who over two decades as an officer had already heard more rounds of gunfire than he could possibly count, now jumps at loud noises. Ms. Lewis worries about whether her grown children will make it home at night. Now, every one of the Clarkson family will remind anyone who will listen that a mass shooting can, does, and will happen anywhere.
Nearly a month had gone by after the shooting before the bullet shard would be surgically removed from Casey’s neck. When his doctors showed him the shrapnel, he was struck at the sight of its sharp, jagged edges, amazed it had not done more damage. When he began feeling throbbing and shooting pain in his face months later, he thought it might be faulty fillings in his teeth.
He wore his sunglasses askew and avoided hats, since both exacerbated the pain. He went to the dentist asking for a root canal, but his family urged him to see a doctor, reminding him that this had never happened before the shooting. After rounds of tests, he learned it was trigeminal neuralgia, a chronic nerve pain he will very likely have to deal with for years.
There is still no known motive for the attack, in which police say Stephen Paddock unleashed hundreds of bullets from his hotel suite overlooking the concert grounds, and the persistent lack of any explanation continues to frustrate the Clarkson family.
Some of the scars are more than physical. After getting a divorce earlier this year, a decision that he at least partly attributes to the shooting, Casey Clarkson moved in with his parents.
His mother often helps with his two children, ages five and seven — a way, she said, of doing what she can to help him heal.
The changes have impacted the brothers’ professional lives as well: both Branden and Casey have traveled all over the country to give presentations about the night of the shooting. Wearing their tan police uniforms, the identical twins are hard to tell apart at first glance. They finish each other’s sentences and tease one another relentlessly, but affectionately. Though Branden is the higher-ranking officer, he’s often been in the background as Casey received awards this year.
For months after the shooting, as the coordinator for the team that deals with active shooters, Branden routinely worked long hours to talk to churches and school groups, casinos and small businesses about preparing for future shootings. He was surprised with the intensity of the task.
He has taught his own children to “run, hide or fight,” and facilitated dozens of “stop the bleeding” trainings. He gets frustrated when someone suggests such training is unnecessary. If it wasn’t, he argues, people would not hesitate when they hear a series of loud pops.
In nearly every one of the five or so talks he’s delivered, Casey said, some memory has inevitably choked him up. In one presentation with the footage from his own body camera, he had to wipe away tears when he saw his interaction with a nurse who kindly but firmly forced him to take off his bloody bandage so that she could pinch his wound together to staunch the bleeding.
The shots began at 10:05. Twelve bursts of gunfire later, the police broke down Stephen Paddock’s door at the Mandalay Bay. The Times mapped 30 videos to draw perhaps the most complete picture to date of what happened.
Even now, there are moments from that night Casey is still processing. He remembers looking down and seeing his pistol in his hand “like magic,” before he even realized he had taken it out of his holster. Just the other day, he told his mother for the first time that his main emotion in the midst of gunfire was anger.
“He told me he was just so mad somebody would shoot all these people and he was hellbent on getting him,” she said.
Over the last year, Casey has spent hours talking with a psychologist he met through the police department’s employee assistance program. Other counselors have repeatedly checked in with Branden. They both say that years ago, they would have been reluctant to accept such help. Now, they embrace it and urge others to do so, too.
Casey is still startled every time he hears a loud, sudden sound. It happens even when he knows to expect them, like during his occasional trips to the shooting range.
Ms. Lewis likens it to her friends who returned from Vietnam dealing with what doctors now call post-traumatic stress disorder.
Now as the anniversary has been approaching, the emotions are beginning to feel raw once again — a bit “like picking a scab off,” Ms. Lewis said. The family usually refers to the shooting as “the 1 October incident,” the somewhat sterilized term embraced by local law enforcement.
In the days leading up to Monday’s anniversary, the family had not made any firm plans on how they would mark it, though Branden was determined to drink from a commemorative bottle of Jack Daniels whiskey engraved with #VegasStrong in a fund-raising campaign by the Fraternal Order of Police. They bought the bottle at a local liquor store just after the shooting.
“We definitely need to toast together,” Branden said, his hand on his brother’s back.