In 2015, the Tamil writer Perumal Murugan committed literary suicide. “Perumal Murugan the writer is dead,” he posted on his Facebook page. “Leave him alone.” He instructed his publishers to stop selling his work and readers to burn his books.
In a benchmark ruling, however, the Madras High Court in Chennai, India, upheld Murugan’s right to free expression. He came back from the dead — and into the glare of sudden publicity. Five of his books are being translated into English, among other languages. The combustible “One Part Woman,” translated by Aniruddhan Vasudevan, has just been published in the United States.
But they cannot have a child. They scan their family history for curses — was it that ancestor who so barbarously raped a young girl in a forest? Or another one who cheated in a village competition? The couple perform every act of expiation they can imagine, obey every superstition, worship at every shrine. No god seems to hear them. Years pass, and their isolation grows. Neighbors begin to taunt them and won’t accept Ponna’s help in the fields. “That barren woman ran up and down carrying seeds,” one of them says. “How do you expect them to grow once she has touched them?” Desperate measures are suggested by the couple’s extended families: Will Kali consider taking another wife? Should Ponna participate in the temple ritual in which childless women sleep with strange men, understood to be deities?
Jealousy arrives in their marriage.  “Seeking a life, we have pawned our lives,” Ponna says.
Murugan’s extensive body of work (10 novels, 10 works of nonfiction, several collections of poetry and short stories) has always been inspired by social issues in his community. “Resolve” addresses sex-selective abortions, “Pyre” is the story of an intercaste marriage (like Murugan’s own), “The Misanthropic Bird” is about land and caste.
But Murugan works his themes with a light hand; they always emanate from his characters, who are endowed with enough contradiction and mystery to keep from devolving into mouthpieces. Kali, in “One Part Woman,” is a perfect example. He is a man who makes things grow — plants and small animals flourish around him. That is, of course, what he tells us. Murugan allows us to see what Kali cannot, how steeped he is in a world where other forms of brutality are common, even banal — his beloved uncle, for example, secures his right to land by threatening to rape his brothers’ wives, a fact Kali reports to us rather serenely.
If terror is bound up in customs, there are glories in the land.  “I knew their birthing and growing rhythms as my own,” he has said. Trees in the book are described with patience and gravity, treated as characters in their own right. Kali roamed every inch of the forest as a boy — he feels one with it; only as an adult does he even realize it is a separate entity.
“Folks” is a bit jarring here, and just one of the tin-eared choices of the translator. At times, Vasudevan capably conveys the distinctiveness not only of Tamil but the language of a farming people — the insults (Ponna: “Let her come. I will scoop the life out of her!”) and the particular metaphors (Kali is a light sleeper — “his was a chicken’s sleep”). But too often Vasudevan resorts to bland, anachronistic English clichés — “testing the waters,” “leaving no stone unturned.” To borrow a (stronger) expression from Murugan himself, it’s like coming across a small stone in rice.
