BERLIN — What Google wants, Google usually gets, but in Berlin’s Kreuzberg neighborhood, residents have won a battle against the internet giant, which backed away from a project in the face of local opposition.
Google had planned to convert an old electric company building in Kreuzberg into an incubator for tech start-ups, the kind of development that could have altered the fabric of the funky, multicultural area.
Instead, the company announced on Wednesday that after sinking millions of dollars into the project, it will make the space available, free of charge, to nonprofit social service and local advocacy groups — a move its adversaries welcomed.
The decision handed a surprise victory to anti-gentrification groups who had protested Google’s plan, but some city officials saw it as a lost economic opportunity and a stain on Berlin’s vaunted tech-friendly reputation.
Kreuzberg has long been one of the most affordable areas of Berlin, making it a haven for students, immigrants, artists and activists, a hub of culture, night life and left-wing politics. But in a pattern repeated in similar neighborhoods in many of the world’s wealthiest cities, affluent people have moved in, too, in recent years, bringing with them the social tensions of gentrification.
Residents opposed to the Kreuzberg project worried about tech salaries driving up rents in a neighborhood already dotted with new restaurants that local residents cannot afford. But reasons for the opposition went beyond gentrification: Some people were opposed to Google because of its data collection and tax avoidance practices.
Activist groups cropped up with names (those that are printable) like No Google Campus, Counter Campus, Google Campus & Co Prevent, with ideologies ranging from neighborhood activism to anarchy.
The activists organized protest rallies, community discussions and, last month, even a short-lived occupation of the site. Kalabal!k, an organization and library devoted to anarchism, hosted bimonthly information sessions. At one event held at SO36, a venerated local nightclub, an activist from San Francisco talked about how the spread — and wealth — of Google and other tech companies had transformed her city.
Local resistance to such projects is fairly common. Google’s parent company, Alphabet, has faced opposition in Toronto, where it plans to redevelop a section of waterfront, and a Google plan to overhaul an area of San Jose, Calif., has faced criticism.
But cities often see the gentrification that comes with an influx of tech workers as a good problem to have, and they compete with one another to attract big companies. Amazon’s plans to open a second headquarters drew more than 200 bids.
In Berlin’s city government, opinion is split.
Sebastian Czaja, the head of the pro-business Federal Democrats faction in Berlin’s House of Representatives, said that Google’s retreat will discourage other companies from settling in the city, which bills itself as the start-up capital of Europe.
“Even if the new use of the venue is welcome, the message to all future companies and investors is fatal: Do not come to Berlin, certainly not to Kreuzberg,” he said in a statement.
Progressive politicians lauded Google for its decision to focus on social services, charities and neighborhood groups.
“There is a lot of potential for solving societal challenges,” said Ramona Pop of the Greens, the city senator responsible for the economy, in a statement praising Google’s announcement.
Mr. Koppitsch’s record store, across the street from the Google site, is typical of the old Kreuzberg, an informal community center where people come to chat and browse through the 10,000 discs.
“I think it’s a very positive turn of events, and doing something social is much in tune with what Kreuzberg is about,” he said.
Ulrike Ebeling, 46, of GIZ, a corporation that works with the government in international aid and development, says she sees herself as a recently arrived gentrifier. Doing her wash in a Kreuzberg laundromat, she said she understood the local groups’ arguments, but was not sure Google’s withdrawal was good for the city.
Google, which first announced plans in late 2016 to open a 32,000-square-foot start-up campus, said this week that it had taken note of the protests, but took pains to counter the idea that it had been pressured into changing its plans. An incubator specifically for start-ups was no longer as needed as it was two years ago, the company said.
“From the beginning, our goal with the campus was not only to create a space for start-ups, but also to open the space up to social organizations,” Rowan Barnett, the head of Google for start-ups in Germany, said in a statement.
Google said it will complete renovations of the building by next spring and then turn the space over to Betterplace, a nonprofit that enables online charitable fund-raising, and Karuna, a nonprofit that combats child homelessness and drug abuse. Betterplace will be in charge of deciding what groups will be invited to move into the building, which includes work spaces, conference rooms and a stage.
Jörg Richert, the founder of Karuna — which, among other things, has created an app that gives homeless youths access to help around the clock — said the intersection between new technology and social work has enormous potential.
“But to do it, you need friends like Google on your side,” he said.