The stock markets fell again yesterday, with the S.&P. 500 shedding 3 percent — meaning that it has erased its gains for the year. The tech-heavy Nasdaq fared worse, losing 4.4 percent, as semiconductor stocks endured some of the biggest sell-offs of the day. Overnight, Asian stocks followed America’s lead.
Instead of celebrating quarterly profit and sales numbers that have largely lived up to expectations, investors have zeroed in on potential risks to the economic and corporate profit outlook for the coming year. Rising commodity costs tied to tariffs on imports, expectations that the Federal Reserve will keep raising interest rates, and an economic slowdown in China could all start to bite. And that’s on top of investors’ anxiety about what the midterm elections could mean for their portfolios.
The drops will ruin one of President Trump’s favorite talking points — that his policies have helped buoy the markets — going into the midterms. And they erased $33 billion from the net worth of the 61 richest tech leaders.
This could start a major shift in the way that investors allocate their assets. Or, as Mohamed El-Erian, the chief economic adviser to Allianz, argues in the FT, the volatility may just be part of the markets learning to live without support from central banks.
Either way, optimists may find solace in U.S. futures markets trading up slightly this morning, which hints at a brighter start for the day.
President Trump is known for making unsecured phone calls to associates, despite warnings that foreign powers can eavesdrop on them. Now the NYT reports that China has been tapping those calls to help limit the trade fight between Washington and Beijing.
Combined with the eavesdropping is a lobbying effort by Beijing involving close Trump friends like Steve Schwarzman of the Blackstone Group and Steve Wynn, the former casino magnate. One U.S. official told the NYT that the Chinese were pushing for those friends to persuade Mr. Trump to sit down with President Xi Jinping of China as often as possible.
The good news saw the company’s stocks surge to levels last seen in mid-August when Mr. Musk tried (briefly) to take the company private.
If sales falter, the company could quickly find itself in a financial squeeze. It has to make bond payments of $230 million in November and $920 million in March. It can use stock for the second payment but only if its share price is above $360. At the same time, Tesla hopes to build a factory in China, which will require hundreds of millions of dollars in capital expenses.
More auto news: In contrast to Tesla, Ford reported lower profits yesterday, as sales fell in Europe and China, and costs rose because of tariffs.
Tech giants release earnings. Analysts expect Amazon to report a rise in sales driven by cloud computing, while they anticipate Google to announce rising revenue and profit driven by strong ad sales. Investors will watch Twitter to see if its monthly user numbers continued to decline.
The European Central Bank discusses monetary policy. The bank’s governing council is expected to continue slowly winding down its post-crisis measures. But the meeting takes place against Italy’s budget standoff and continuing trade wars, and the central bank’s president may give a cautious assessment of the future of the eurozone economy.
The state’s attorney general filed a lawsuit against Exxon Mobil yesterday, arguing that the oil giant defrauded investors by playing down the risks of climate change.
The suit, built on three years of investigations, does not charge the company with creating climate change. But it claims that the company essentially kept two sets of books when accounting for the effects of global warming: publicly, it claimed to be ready for stringent regulations, while internally it discounted potential costs of climate policies, prosecutors said. Executives as senior as Rex Tillerson, the former Exxon C.E.O. who later became President Trump’s secretary of state, “knew for years” about the practice, the complaint said.
An Exxon spokesman dismissed the lawsuit as “baseless.” But as the NYT points out, New York attorneys general have had success bringing shareholder fraud lawsuits before, aided by the state’s sweeping Martin Act.
At stake isn’t just hundreds of millions of dollars in punishment, but also a reputation that Exxon has tried to shape as a global leader on climate change issues.
More climate news: Amalgamated Bank started tracking the carbon emissions of projects it lends money to, and is creating a system that would let other North American banks follow suit.
The company is already the biggest player in the ride-hailing market. But, as it prepares for an I.P.O. next year, Uber is pointing out that its ambitions are much bigger. Its C.E.O., Dara Khosrowshahi, said at an FT conference Monday that it wants to have a role in how anything — people or goods — moves from A to B.
That starts with cars, said Mr. Khosrowshahi: “If there’s one big goal for Uber, it’s to replace car ownership.” But Uber is also betting on bike and scooter rentals, food delivery, aircraft, and drones. The goal, he said, is to develop four or five multibillion-dollar businesses.
That will come at a cost. Uber is at least a few years away from making money on ride-hailing, and investing in new technologies will require more cash. The company says revenue from mature markets is helping cover costs elsewhere, but prospective investors in its forthcoming I.P.O. will decide if that’s enough to make a bet on its vision.
The big question remains whether the Trump administration will continue to stand by Prince Mohammed. All eyes are on Gina Haspel, the C.I.A.’s chief, who is returning to the U.S. from Istanbul, where she met with Turkish officials to review their purported evidence about the Saudis’ role in Mr. Khashoggi’s death. What she relays to Mr. Trump could shape his response.
Wells Fargo suspended its auditing chief, David Julian, and its chief administrative officer, Hope Hardison, amid a regulatory review of sales practices.
Snap hired Jeremi Gorman from Amazon as its new chief business officer, and Jared Grusd from HuffPost as its new strategy chief.
Kelly Johnston, the Campbell Soup executive who promoted a conspiracy theory about George Soros, is leaving the company next month.
Kelly Coffey, who stepped down as JPMorgan Chase’s U.S. private bank, will become City National’s next C.E.O.
• Mr. Trump played down the scale of his tariffs in an interview with the WSJ, so the newspaper made a list of the ones he’s introduced so far.
• An earnings roundup: Microsoft’s cloud strategy is paying off, but AMD’s weakening graphics and crypto sales caused its stocks to plunge.
• The NBC host Megyn Kelly has been heavily criticized for making racially insensitive remarks on air, and may lose her show over the debacle.
