Donald Trump’s chaotic foray into pro football was a precursor to many of his actions today, Jeff Pearlman writes.
Mr. Pearlman is the author of “Football for a Buck: The Crazy Rise and Crazier Demise of the USFL,” and hosts the “Two Writers Slinging Yang” podcast.
Whenever President Trump says or does something outrageous, you can be certain that near-identical utterances were made, or actions taken, some three decades ago, when he was the owner of the New Jersey Generals of the long-defunct United States Football League.
For those who might not recall, the U.S.F.L. was a 12-team professional spring football league that began in 1983 with a modest goal: to provide quality games with franchises stocked largely with regional players. (For example, the Philadelphia Stars had a high number of former Penn State standouts.) It was fun and flashy, and largely successful.
Then Donald J. Trump bought in.
He purchased the Generals from an Oklahoma oilman named J. Walter Duncan, paying $10 million for a team reportedly valued at $8.5 million by the league. (Mr. Trump says there was a bidding war. There was not.) What ensued was an early-’80s ode to deception and selfishness that eerily mirrors the ongoing 2018 ode to deception and selfishness.
Or, put differently: Past is prologue.
For those convinced that Trump and Company would never have colluded with Russia to steal an election, consider this: Shortly after buying into the U.S.F.L. (and having initially praised the league), Mr. Trump arranged for a secret meeting with Pete Rozelle, the National Football League’s commissioner, inside a suite at Manhattan’s Pierre Hotel.
According to those later briefed on the session, as well as Mr. Rozelle’s 1986 testimony in a trial pitting the two leagues against each other, Mr. Trump all but begged for an N.F.L. franchise, insisting he would gladly throw the U.S.F.L. (and his fellow owners) under the bus were it to result in a place for him in the more established league.
Like Trump 2018, Trump 1984 was undeterred by such setbacks. His goal was to use the U.S.F.L. to land an N.F.L. franchise. If Mr. Rozelle was unwilling to gift him one, well, he’d take matters into his own hands and shift the league to fall, forcing a merger.
Without seeking permission from the U.S.F.L. commissioner, Chet Simmons, Mr. Trump contacted network television executives and asked whether they would broadcast the U.S.F.L. were it to play a fall schedule. Neither ABC nor CBS nor NBC was interested.
Which is why, naturally, in an August 1984 league meeting, Mr. Trump assured his fellow owners that a “huge” network deal awaited if they switched seasons. This was a blatant lie, though one that many of his fellow owners chose to believe.
Before the U.S.F.L.’s third and final season, in 1985, Trump signed Doug Flutie, Boston College’s Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback, to a six-year, $8.3 million deal. It was, the owner believed, the type of bold step an N.F.L. franchise would take.
Doug Flutie was the wall before the wall. The U.S.F.L.’s other owners were Mexico. They paid nary a dime.
Only Mr. Bassett was willing to stand up to Mr. Trump, and their fiery exchanges at league meetings are the stuff of legend. But in February 1985, Mr. Bassett was diagnosed with brain cancer. Mr. Trump expressed sympathy — then proceeded to stomp all over him, ignoring the owner or dismissing his views (“We need to stay in spring! We have to stay in spring!”) as the blatherings of a sick man.
Like John McCain’s family, Mr. Bassett’s family has not forgiven Mr. Trump for the callous way he treated their loved one as he fought a losing battle against brain cancer.
With Mr. Bassett gone, Mr. Trump persuaded his fellow owners (against their better interests) to move the schedule to the fall, then spearheaded the filing of an ill-advised antitrust lawsuit against the N.F.L. Trump hired Roy Cohn, the infamous McCarthy hearings attorney, to represent the league, assuring the other U.S.F.L. owners that the N.F.L. would cower in Mr. Cohn’s presence and immediately seek a settlement.
This did not happen. The trial — which lasted 42 days in the summer of 1986 and which Mr. Trump guaranteed as an “easy win” that would net the U.S.F.L. owners billions of dollars in damages or spots in the NFL — was a blood bath.
Ultimately, the jury decided that, yes, the N.F.L. held a monopoly on fall television, and had colluded against the new league. Yet it also concluded that the main culprit of the U.S.F.L.’s struggles was the U.S.F.L., which should have never tried to abandon its original spring game plan. That’s why the jury, despite finding the N.F.L. liable on multiple counts, awarded the USFL $1 in damages.
The league all but died that day, and never played a fall game.
He had bigger things to do.
Jeff Pearlman is the author of “Football for a Buck: The Crazy Rise and Crazier Demise of the USFL,” and hosts the Two Writers Slinging Yang podcast.
