DUBLIN — Britain’s Supreme Court supported on Wednesday the right of a Belfast bakery to refuse to bake a cake with a message supporting same-sex marriage, finding that its Christian owners could not be compelled to reproduce a message contrary to their beliefs.
Although the person who requested the cake was gay, a five-judge panel found that the bakery owners’ refusal was based not on his sexual orientation, but on their Protestant faith’s opposition to gay marriage.
“There was no discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation,” said the judgment, which overturned the rulings of two lower courts.
It cited the United States Supreme Court’s decision in June in favor of a Colorado baker who had refused to create a wedding cake for a gay couple, a narrow decision that left open the larger question of whether a business can discriminate against gay men and lesbians based on First Amendment rights.
The British case centered on Ashers Baking Company in Northern Ireland, which in 2014 rejected an order by the gay activist Gareth Lee for a cake with the message “Support Gay Marriage.” He also wanted images of the “Sesame Street” characters Bert and Ernie, considered by some to be gay icons.
Mr. Lee intended to share the cake at a meeting in support of same-sex marriage in Northern Ireland, which does not permit the unions.
He said he had not known that the bakery’s owners, the McArthur family, were Christian when he placed his order. One of the owners initially accepted the order, only to later reject it.
A Belfast court initially ruled that the bakery had discriminated against Mr. Lee on the basis of his sexual orientation and fined it 500 pounds, or $660. That decision was upheld by the Northern Ireland Court of Appeal, but Wednesday’s ruling overturned it.
The judges cited as a precedent the United States Supreme Court case in which the Masterpiece Cakeshop in Colorado refused to bake a wedding cake for a gay couple in 2012.
Daniel McArthur, a member of the family that runs Ashers Bakery, said they were “delighted” with the ruling.
Same-sex marriage is not legal in Northern Ireland, although it is permitted in the rest of the United Kingdom and in the Republic of Ireland. In 2015, the region’s Parliament voted by a narrow majority in favor of legalizing same-sex marriage. But the measure was blocked by the Democratic Unionist Party, which draws its support mostly from conservative Protestants.
A 2016 poll found that 65 percent of people in Northern Ireland support same-sex marriage, but that more than half of the region’s pro-British unionists, who are mainly Protestant, oppose it.
John O’Doherty, the director of the Rainbow Project, a Belfast group that supports gay rights, questioned the reasoning of the court ruling.
