Lois S. Gray, who as a professor and mentor for seven decades delivered college-trained women, immigrants and members of racial and ethnic minority groups into the ranks of American organized labor, died on Sept. 20 in Manhattan. She was 94.
Bonnie Beavers, a niece, confirmed her death.
Professor Gray joined the School of Industrial and Labor Relations at Cornell University in 1946, barely a year after it was founded. She started out as a member of the extension faculty, which reached out to employees and would-be union leaders to educate them in collective bargaining, job training and other programs intended to improve workplace conditions.
Over the next 57 years, she directed the school’s first extension office, in Buffalo, and its metropolitan district office in New York City.
As a researcher, author and editor of several books, and as a member of New York State employment and training task forces, Professor Gray remained versed in the latest technological, competitive and political challenges facing both labor and management. Until her death, she met several days a week with students and faculty in the school’s Manhattan office.
Professor Gray personally donated $1 million to the school’s Worker Institute, which conducts research and offers education programs on labor issues. She also funded an internship program in memory of her husband, Edward Gray, who was a regional director and member of the international executive board of the United Automobile Workers union. He died in 1995.
In addition to her niece, Bonnie, she is survived by her nephew, Dr. Bruce Beavers; her stepson, John T. Gray; three step-grandchildren; eight step-great-grandchildren; and five step-great-great-grandchildren.
Professor Gray’s grounding in social justice began when she was a child growing up in Oklahoma in the 1930s on the fringes of the Dust Bowl, where her mother handed out food to migrant workers and her father’s sermons against racism provoked a Ku Klux Klan cross-burning on the lawn of the parsonage in which the family lived.
Lois Faye Spier was born on Oct. 17, 1923, in St. Louis to Charles and Mae (Imboden) Spier. Her father was studying at the time at Union Theological Seminary in New York, where the family moved when Lois was a baby. She was reared in Edmond, Okla., near Oklahoma City, where her father was minister of the First Presbyterian Church.
She earned a scholarship to Northwestern University, where she majored in drama. After her father enlisted in the military during World War II, she transferred to live closer to her mother and sister and graduated from Park College (now Park University) in Parkville, Mo., in 1943 with a bachelor’s degree in economics. She also won first prize in a national debate contest on the topic of government regulation of unions.
During the war she was recruited by a military intelligence unit in Washington, then became a field examiner for the National Labor Relations Board in Buffalo, where she earned her master’s degree from the University of Buffalo (now the University at Buffalo of the State University of New York).
A year later, after she inquired about pursuing another graduate degree at the new Industrial and Labor Relations School at Cornell, she was offered a position on the faculty there.
She moved to New York City in 1956 to direct the extension school’s metropolitan program and earned a doctorate at Columbia University, where she studied under the Nobel-winning economist Gary Becker. She was named associate dean and director of extension in 1976. She lived in Manhattan.
Under Professor Gray’s leadership, the school established the Institute for Women and Work, the Latino Leadership Center, an international worker exchange, and off-campus credit courses for workers and union leaders.
She retired as a professor emerita of labor management relations.