After condemning the deadly shooting at a synagogue in Pittsburgh, Vice President Mike Pence asked Rabbi Loren Jacobs to offer a prayer. But the movement he represents, Messianic Judaism, is viewed by some critics as a threat to Judaism.
God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, God and father of my Lord and Savior, Yeshua; Jesus the Messiah and my God and father, too. You are real. And you know everything, and you are powerful, and you are good. And you are able to hear and answer prayers. Please hear and answer my prayers now, oh Lord, my God.
At a campaign stop in Michigan this week, Vice President Mike Pence condemned anti-Semitism and the deadly massacre at Pittsburgh synagogue, and asked “a leader in the Jewish community” to offer a prayer for the victims and the country.
After the rally, Mr. Pence’s office said that the vice president did not invite the rabbi to the event and asked him to offer a prayer on stage as a message of unity.
One religious leader upset about the prayer on Monday was Rabbi Jason Miller, who lives in Detroit. He said on Twitter that there are more than 60 Jewish rabbis in Michigan that campaign rally organizers could have asked to offer a prayer.
Through an aide, Rabbi Jacobs declined an interview request. In an explanation of his beliefs on his congregation’s website, he wrote that while Jewish people are the “chosen people,” they must accept Jesus Christ in order to go to heaven.
He split in the early 2000s with one of the major groups in the movement, the Union of Messianic Jewish congregations, over whether Jewish people who do not believe in Jesus still go to Heaven.
He has written about his disagreements with the group, on his website and in a separate essay, and about how Messianic Jews must “boldly declare the truth” to Jews and gentiles that they will go to hell without accepting Jesus.
Messianic Judaism has a long, complicated history in the United States and beyond.
The modern movement of Messianic Judaism is relatively new and started to take shape with the help of mass media. Some of the first religious groups that claimed to be both Jewish and believers in Jesus of Nazareth, such as the American Board of Missions to the Jews, were transparent with their mission: Proselytize to Jews.
While the evangelizing of Jews has occurred over hundreds of years, the groups that emerged in the second half of the 20th century were well-funded, organized and influential. Using Jewish symbols and wearing traditional Jewish prayer shawls, leaders spoke across the United States and even in Israel about Jesus Christ and the good news that the Jewish messiah had returned.
Mr. Rosen, who was first ordained as a Baptist minister and later started “Jews for Jesus” in 1970s in San Francisco, grew the movement over the following decades, opening congregations across the country. He argued that being both a Jew and a follower of Jesus, who himself was Jewish, makes sense.
“We couldn’t be anything else but both,” Mr. Rosen, who died in 2010, said in an interview in 1972.
Mr. Rosen said that followers adhered to traditional Jewish traditions, such as High Holy Days, and attend synagogue regularly. Affiliates of “Jews for Jesus,” which is still active, include high-profile people including Jay Sekulow, the personal lawyer for President Trump.
Around the same time, the American Board of Missions to the Jews, which now goes by the name Chosen People Ministries, expanded from its first mission, in Brooklyn, to open up posts across the United States and overseas, including in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv.
“I’ve baptized well over 1,000 Jewish people,” the Rev. Daniel Fuchs, the board’s executive director, told The New York Times in 1975, adding that its ministry had led “many thousands” of Jews to accept Jesus as the messiah.
“Jews for Jesus” estimates that up to 125,000 people worldwide are Messianic Jews. The largest population resides in the United States, the group said, followed by Israel.
During the rise of “Jews for Jesus” in the early ’70s, Israel considered a measure to bar “Jews for Jesus” from missions there. That suggestion, which did not come to pass, came about after Orthodox Jewish volunteers went undercover, even participating in baptisms, to uncover the group’s proselytizing efforts in Israel.
In a 1973 article in The Times, under the headline “Israelis Alarmed by ‘Jews for Jesus,’” a member of the Israeli Parliament compared the conversion efforts to the Crusades.
Jewish resentment of missionaries is deep-rooted. Dr. Yehuda Ben‐Meir, a professor of psychology and a member of Parliament, said that the missionaries’ activities were considered a continuation of Christianity’s 2,000-year struggle to undermine Judaism.
In 1989, Israel’s Supreme Court ruled that Messianic Judaism was considered “another religion” and that its followers were Christians and not Jews. The government then told some Messianic Jews that they were no longer citizens and must leave.
