Chidegar Liberty, a Brooklyn bachelor and businessman who was born in Liberia, was frequently asked by family and friends on two continents when he would settle down and get married.
On March 18, 2017, he ended his holdout.
That was the day he met Georgette Badiel, an international model who was raised in West Africa. She began her American career a decade ago, working for such clients as Louis Vuitton, Diane von Furstenberg, Marc Jacobs and Zang Toi.
“She was the most beautiful woman I had ever seen,” said Mr. Liberty, now 39, who was introduced to Ms. Badiel by Peter Jallah, a mutual friend.
It took a while for fantasy to become reality, as Ms. Badiel, 33, who is known as Georgie, frustrated him for several weeks with a series of cancellations and no-shows.
Mr. Liberty, who is known as Chid, had just about given up hope when Ms. Badiel, who was babysitting in her Upper East Side apartment for a friend’s 7-year-old son, agreed to meet him at a nearby restaurant.
Mr. Jallah was also in tow that night, as was the boy, who had already been throwing a tantrum in Ms. Badiel’s apartment.
“The kid went wild,” Mr. Liberty said. He said the child ran out of the restaurant toward snow-covered streets, where he was soon corralled by members of the dinner party.
Through all of the mayhem, Mr. Liberty and Ms. Badiel saw enough potential in each other to agree to go out the next day. This time just the two of them.
They attended a Mass at a church in Ms. Badiel’s neighborhood, then went to dinner at the Mark Hotel before finishing with a nightcap at the Carlyle hotel.
Ms. Badiel, who speaks with a French accent, said she noticed something about Mr. Liberty that she had not seen in other men she dated. “Chid was a God-fearing man,” she said.
The next day — their third official date — they talked at length at a Shake Shack in Manhattan, and signs of a whirlwind began registering on the romance radar.
She proved that by moving into his Brooklyn home just three days after their third date.
Two weeks later, they traveled to Liberia, where Mr. Liberty was born on May 24, 1979, to Doris Liberty, a retired nurse who now lives in Madison, Wis., and Dr. C. E. Zamba Liberty, a former Liberian ambassador to Germany and a vice president of the University of Liberia.
“Georgie met some of my family, but mostly it was a working vacation regarding projects for my clothing brand,” said Mr. Liberty, a founder and the chief executive of Liberty & Justice, a retail and fashion group based in New York with manufacturing headquarters in Liberia. His apparel line, Uniform, sells T-shirts, cargo pants and other casual clothing.
Mr. Liberty was 18 months old when his parents moved to Bonn, Germany, and 5 when they came to the United States, first to Palo Alto, Calif., where his father took a job as a professor of history, and then to Milwaukee, where the family settled and where the elder Mr. Liberty taught history at Marquette University.
Mr. Liberty graduated with a business administration degree from the University of Wisconsin, and eventually found his way to Brooklyn in 2015, where he built his company.
His success has been no secret in the African-American community and beyond. In 2013, Mr. Liberty was named by New African magazine as one of the top 50 African Trailblazers under 50, and last year, Quartz, a news website, named him one of the top 30 African innovators.
Ms. Badiel took a more hard-scrabbled road to success. A self-described “village girl,” who was born in Ivory Coast on Feb. 7, 1985, she was one of 10 children who grew up in Burkina Faso, a landlocked country in West Africa where French is the official language, though many indigenous languages are also spoken by the nearly 14 million people who live there.
Ms. Badiel’s father, the late Kanzier Eboubie, was an independent carpenter. Her mother, Badiel Bali, sold bananas and cakes at a local market.
Hoping to attend a highly regarded secondary school but unable to afford it, Ms. Badiel, whose stunning appearance did not go unnoticed during her early teenage years, was encouraged by locals at the age of 14 to try modeling at an agency in the town of Abidjan.
Ms. Badiel took that advice. In 2003, she was crowned Miss Burkina Faso, and the next year she was voted Miss Africa.
She finished high school, and started working toward a college degree in accounting when she was pleasantly interrupted by a number of big names from the fashion industry — including Lanvin, Louis Vuitton, Martin Margiela and Emmanuel Ungaro — all of whom summoned her to Paris for modeling work.
In 2008, Ms. Badiel arrived in the United States. She has used her status as a successful model to create the Georgie Badiel Foundation, which builds wells in Burkina Faso and Liberia.
Along the way, she was an author of “The Water Princess” (2016), a children’s book based on her childhood experience walking three hours a day to find clean water. Last year, she was awarded Burkina Faso’s highest civilian honor, the Chevalier de Mérite Burkinabe.
Five months after their trip to Liberia, the couple were engaged. Mr. Liberty, Ms. Badiel and Mr. Jallah traveled together to Burkina Faso to partake in a longstanding tribal tradition in which the groom must prove his love for the bride and hope to be accepted as a suitable partner by answering questions posed by several of the bride’s uncles, all while negotiating a dowry with them for her hand in marriage.
Mr. Liberty was accepted into Ms. Badiel’s family after he paid a settlement that included four goats, tobacco, fabric, cash for Ms. Badiel’s mother and a cola nut from which each took turns eating (a cultural wedding tradition).
They were married Sept. 8 at First Corinthians Baptist Church in Harlem, its stage decorated with white roses, hydrangeas and lemon leaf for their 200 guests, who were treated to a ceremony that felt more like a Broadway production.
It began with the M2 Music Movement choir delivering a stirring rendition of “Come Holy Spirit,” as members of the couple’s wedding party started walking down an aisle littered with white rose petals and candles. Kylie Fox, a classical ballerina, then performed a “praise dance,” to “How Great Is Our God,” by the Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship.
After Ms. Fox exited the stage, the groom’s mother, Doris Liberty, 73, offered a prayer for the couple (her husband is deceased). Guests then learned how the couple first met through a video entitled “To Have and to Hold,” that played on two large screens.
The cocktail hour and reception were held at the Manhattan Penthouse, where guests were served hors d’oeuvres and listened to the soundtrack of a balafon, a percussion instrument that resembles a xylophone.
