Wind and rain roared through the region, flooding homes and sending debris flying at dangerous speeds.
For the latest hurricane coverage, read Thursday’s live updates.
PANAMA CITY, Fla. — Hurricane Michael charged through Florida and into Georgia on Wednesday, lashing the Panhandle with rains and heavy winds. Water raced in from the sea, flooding the streets and leaving at least one person dead.
The storm whipsawed trees, blew away large chunks of fencing and bent stop signs almost parallel to the ground. Videos posted to social media showed a tapestry of damage near a marina in Mexico Beach: waterlogged homes, flying debris, splintered wood. But it was impossible to gauge the full extent of the carnage because the waters, already topping some buildings whose roofs just peeked through, were still rising.

Just about every update seemed to bring greater grimness: closed bridges, more towering waves, suspended emergency services, admonitions that the time to evacuate had passed. The hurricane center reported a 130-mile-per-hour wind gust near the evacuated Tyndall Air Force Base — and said that the measuring instrument had then failed.
• The storm made landfall as a Category 4 hurricane near Mexico Beach, Fla., around midday on Wednesday, with 155 mile-per-hour winds. By 2 a.m. Thursday, the storm was 25 miles east of Macon, Ga., and had lost strength, with maximum winds of 60 m.p.h. At midnight, it was downgraded to a tropical storm.
• Michael is moving north quickly, around 20 m.p.h., and is expected to maintain its speed as it crosses Georgia. Forecasters then expect it to speed up as it continues northeastward across the Carolinas through late Thursday, and then move off the Mid-Atlantic coast by early Friday. Click on the map below to see the storm’s projected path.
Hurricane Michael Made Landfall. We’re Tracking the Storm and Its Impact.
The storm is the worst ever to hit the Florida Panhandle.
• A man died after a tree crashed down on his home in Greensboro, northwest of Tallahassee, the Gadsden County Sheriff’s Office confirmed on Wednesday.
• Power losses were widespread, with hundreds of thousands of customers across three states without electricity.
• Storm surges flooded much of the coastline of the Florida Panhandle. A water-level station at Apalachicola, Fla., was reporting nearly five feet of inundation above ground level.
• Tyndall Air Force Base, near Panama City, Fla., said it had sustained extensive damage. “Evacuated personnel should make plans for an extended time away from the base,” Tyndall said on its Facebook page.
• The authorities said about 375,000 people live in areas covered by evacuation orders, but it was not clear how many had chosen to flee. The American Red Cross said that about 4,000 people slept in shelters on Tuesday. Here’s where to find shelter from Hurricane Michael.
• All commercial air travel has been shut down in the Panhandle. Read more about how the storm is affecting travel.
• Follow New York Times journalists on the scene: Patricia Mazzei in Tallahassee, Richard Fausset in Panama City and Alan Blinder in Atlanta.
The storm took aim at Mexico Beach, an Old Florida beach town spared from overdevelopment and known fondly for a waterfront motel, El Governor, and for a seafood restaurant, Toucan’s on the Beach, with its wooden deck. Whether they survived the storm remained unclear.
Patricia Mulligan, who was riding out the storm with her family in a condo, said that nearby homes had been ripped apart.
“You can’t drive a car anywhere, you can’t do anything because it’s littered with houses, pieces of houses,” Ms. Mulligan said in a phone interview. She could see remnants of people’s lives strewn outside — refrigerators, a beanbag chair, a washing machine, a kayak, a dresser.
Her daughter, Tessa Talarico, captured video of the storm, showing the winds whipping through the city and the water nearly submerging homes.
Ms. Mulligan said her brother’s boat had capsized, and he lost a condo along the beach. Other nearby units were also destroyed. “They’re not there,” she said.
“I went through Hurricane Andrew,” Ms. Mulligan said, recalling the storm that ripped through South Florida in 1992, when she lived in Miami. In an interview with CNN, she said she moved to Mexico Beach about two and a half months ago. “This is just as bad,” she said.
Hurricane Michael hit Panama City, Fla., on Wednesday afternoon, its wind shoving — and shoving again — like an incessant bully.
It was not what people are used to in Panama City, a place that has not seen a storm this ugly in a long time. Nestled under Alabama on the Florida Panhandle, the area is built on the promise of making vacationers happy on a budget. Unlike the rest of the state, Northwest Florida, with its pine trees, military bases and conservative politics, feels like the South.
On Wednesday, it was all danger and worry. The winds approached 150 miles an hour, tripping useless car alarms and felling towering trees. The gusts blew the rain sideways.
A pastor named Carlos Thomas, 48, was out in it in his old Dodge pickup, just before the storm reached its crescendo, driving two older members of his church — the Neals Temple First Born Church of the Living God — to a shelter.
Peggy Spell spent Wednesday in a hotel lobby, pleased enough to be out of her trailer home a few miles inland. Her husband, Eddie, was with her, and her teenage son Jacob. Her husband stretched out on the floor in a pair of waders, stroking the neck of their small dog, Cocoa. Jacob hoped the power would stay on so he could hook up his Xbox. No such luck.
Ms. Spell worried about her other son, 34, who had decided to stay in the trailer near his chain saw and pickup truck, ready to cut people out or drag them to safety.
Pastor Thomas said some of his flock had evacuated, particularly the old and infirm. But it was unclear how many people had decided to stay along the Gulf Coast.
A brother and sister, John and Laurie Hamm, had moved their mother, who has Alzheimer’s disease, to the Hilton Garden Inn, a few miles inland. Her house was near downtown Panama City, right along Watson Bayou. Ms. Hamm herself said that she lives in a townhouse one block from the beach.
Mr. Hamm had come from Tampa to help move their mother and they had thought about moving west along the coast and out of the storm’s path. But they worried about getting stuck on Interstate 10.
And so here was Ms. Hamm, an evacuee, but just a few miles from home.
President Trump received a briefing on the hurricane and said that he expected to visit the storm-damaged area on Sunday or Monday.
Mr. Trump marveled at the size of the storm as Brock Long, the administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, described its impact on the Florida Panhandle. He briefed the president along with Kirstjen Nielsen, the secretary of homeland security.
Still, he said that would probably move ahead with a rally in Erie, Pa., on Wednesday night. “I don’t know what to do because you have so many people already there,” he said.
He also expressed concern for areas in North and South Carolina that are still grappling with flooding from the last storm and remain in danger of receiving more rain.
They lined up inside the cafeteria at Lincoln High School in Tallahassee late Wednesday morning, carrying grocery bags filled with snacks, bedding and the occasional pet, to seek shelter from Hurricane Michael.
Betty Clark and Betty Tyler, friends who live in the same neighborhood of trailer homes, shared a table in front of a television as Ms. Tyler’s grandchildren flitted around the room.
Ms. Clark, 60, waited until Wednesday morning to travel to the shelter, bringing only her medication for the breast cancer she has been battling.
“I wanted to come here so that if I got sick, somebody would be able to help,” she said.
Near the center of the room, Marco Sanchez and Lesley Padilla rested on three inflatable mattresses they bought Tuesday night at Walmart, after concluding that their trailer home might be unsafe for four young children.
“We left all our possessions but brought the most important ones: our papers and our children’s papers,” Mr. Sanchez said.
Their two-month-old daughter, Meghan Sanchez, dozed in a baby carrier as her siblings — Alberto Padilla, 11; Eli Jimenez, 7; and Isabella Jimenez, 3 — played games on tablets.
Some 322 counties in the South — about 10 percent of all counties nationwide — were in states of emergency on Wednesday as Hurricane Michael threatened to ravage parts of the region and strain resources.
Gov. Nathan Deal of Georgia has declared an emergency for 92 of the state’s 159 counties, and Michael is expected to pass over at least some areas as a hurricane, not a diminished tropical storm.
The authorities have not ordered evacuations, the state said, but a handful of shelters are open.
“The time to prepare is ending, and those in the storm’s path should be prepared to shelter-in-place,” the Georgia Emergency Management and Homeland Security Agency said on Twitter on Wednesday.
Michael is also expected to race over the Carolinas — including communities still recovering from Hurricane Florence — as a tropical storm before moving offshore on Friday.
“Make no mistake: Hurricane Michael is a dreadful storm, and it poses serious risks to North Carolina,” said the state’s governor, Roy Cooper.