Opinion|America’s Elections Could Be Hacked. Go Vote Anyway.
America’s Elections Could Be Hacked. Go Vote Anyway.
The system’s vulnerabilities are real, but please do not stay home.
Will November’s election be hacked? A quick sampling of news stories over the past couple of years offers little comfort.
In the months before the 2016 presidential election, Russian hackers tried to infiltrate voting systems in dozens of states. They succeeded in at least one, gaining access to tens of thousands of voter-registration records in Illinois.
At a hacking convention last summer, an 11-year-old boy who had been coached on finding the vulnerabilities in a mock-up of Florida’s state election website broke into the fake site and altered the vote totals recorded there. It took him less than 10 minutes.
All along, the nation’s top intelligence and law enforcement officials have been sounding the alarm, warning that Russia is engaged in a “24/7, 365-days-a-year” effort to disrupt the upcoming midterm elections and imploring Congress and the White House to take more decisive action.
President Trump may not believe that the risk is real, but the American people do. An overwhelming majority say they are concerned about election security, and more than 60 percent say the Trump administration should be doing more to protect the vote from foreign interference.
Numbers like these suggest that whether or not hackers manage to gain access to voting systems, they have already achieved their main goal, which is to sow pervasive doubt over the integrity of American elections. Whoever wins, this lack of confidence is as damaging to the nation’s democracy as it is to its national security. And it drives down turnout at the polls, as voters who are already skeptical of the political process begin to believe not just that their vote won’t count, but that it literally won’t be counted.
First, the bad news. America’s voting systems, like all large and complex computerized systems, are highly vulnerable to cyberattack — whether by altering or deleting voter-registration data, or even by changing vote counts. “The vast majority of technical infrastructure for our voting is absolutely, without doubt, woefully insecure,” said Matt Blaze, a University of Pennsylvania computer-science professor who studies voting machine security. Both of the primary methods by which Americans cast their ballots — optical-scan machines and touch-screen monitors — can be tampered with fairly easily.
The handful of companies that design and make nearly all of America’s voting machines insist that their equipment is cordoned off from bad actors on the internet, but in fact there are multiple ways in for anyone who is motivated, persistent and willing to commit a federal crime.
These manufacturers could choose to share information in order to help researchers and experts identify security weaknesses, but instead they have zealously guarded it as proprietary, even when the outcome of a presidential election has been at stake — as John Kerry found out when his 2004 presidential campaign attempted to look into voting irregularities in Ohio.
Our reliance on these newer voting technologies is largely a result of the failures of older ones. In the weeks after the 2000 presidential election, the entire country sat on edge as Florida poll workers painstakingly examined butterfly ballots and hanging chads. Following that disaster, Congress passed the Help America Vote Act, which established a federal agency, the Election Assistance Commission, to serve as a resource and clearinghouse for state election officials. But the commission, which has been a political football since its creation, is perennially understaffed and underfunded. Most of the nearly $4 billion that it initially got from Congress was spent on new electronic machines that were designed without anticipation of the sort of coordinated cyberattacks America now faces. And these machines are now approaching the end of their useful life.
Now for some good news. Elections officials have become acutely aware of these risks to America’s electoral security, especially after the wake-up call they got in 2016. In a rare example of bipartisanship, Republicans and Democrats are communicating with one another and with their counterparts around the country, sharing information and shoring up defenses where needed.
Most encouraging, the key fixes are relatively simple, and everyone agrees on what they are.
