Alexandra Pelosi’s schedule over a recent 24 hours read like a liberal elite Mad Lib.
On a Sunday night Ms. Pelosi, a documentary filmmaker, was at the 92 Street Y to hear her mother, Representative Nancy Pelosi, in conversation with Paul Krugman, the economist and New York Times columnist. The next afternoon, she attended a fund-raising lunch for Democrats, at a hotel on the East Side with Hillary Clinton. Then she popped over to the HBO headquarters at Bryant Park, where she has an office in a power corridor next to Ronan Farrow’s and across the hall from Sarah Jessica Parker’s. Later, she hurried down to N.Y.U. to hear her mother speak on a panel about women in power.
Maybe it’s just what you’d expect from the daughter of the House Democratic leader. But the younger Ms. Pelosi’s cable-news-viewing habits may surprise you.
This year she brought her two sons, who are 10 and 11, on an odyssey across what Sarah Palin once called “real America.” Together they went to Trump rallies (“Far more interesting than anything you’ll hear at a Manhattan dinner party”), to the fabled and still-under-construction border wall, and into the homes of Trump voters. The result is “Outside the Bubble,” as in Beltway, Ms. Pelosi’s 12th film for HBO, to air on Monday.
It’s not just another episode of the learned cosmopolitan descending from the ivory tower to produce anthropological discourses on that strange creature known as the Trump voter and make it back to the big city in time for a martini. Though she is Democratic royalty, Ms. Pelosi has spent much of her career dissecting, with compassion, the psyche of the political right in America.
Ms. Pelosi’s first film, released in 2002, was “Journeys With George,” shot during her time as NBC’s embed on George W. Bush’s campaign plane. Later, she parsed the beliefs of evangelicals in “Friends of God” (2007) and chronicled the rise of the Tea Party with “Right America: Feeling Wronged” (2009).
But, after the documentarian produces the actual grandchildren of Representative Pelosi for his perusal, he lowers his dukes and the unlikeliest of friendships is able to blossom.
As for Ms. Pelosi’s sang-froid outside the bubble? “I get that Republicans have spent hundreds of millions of dollars to turn my last name into a curse word,” she said. A blanket of ads works. “It’s like, duh, you turn on the TV and you see McDonald’s makes good fries. You can’t blame them.” She was once spit on by a Republican voter, she said, while filming at the Iowa state fair during John McCain’s 2008 run.
Later, in a room backstage at N.Y.U. before the panel, Representative Pelosi, not one hair out of place, chastised her daughter for not having brushed her own long, dark mane. Also in the room, chuckling at this perhaps familiar scene, were Ms. Pelosi’s father, Paul; her sons; and her husband, Michiel Vos, a Dutch journalist she met at a film festival in Amsterdam.
The younger Ms. Pelosi was wearing the green plaid skirt she first wore at Catholic girls school in San Francisco, a plum-colored jacket and lilac glasses. She has long had an affinity for the color purple and said she is known as “the purple sheep” in the family.
First elected to Congress in 1987, Representative Pelosi has seen many iterations of the divide. Is she as hopeful as her daughter about the state of the one we find ourselves in today?
Does she mind that her grandchildren have been catching that president’s roadshow?
