Police checkpoints in the street. Helicopters overhead around the clock. 
To the actress Laura Donnelly, growing up in Belfast, Northern Ireland, during the Troubles, these were simply facts of life. So was the absence of her uncle Eugene Simons, who vanished on New Year’s Day 1981 — murdered by the Irish Republican Army, his body hidden in a bog.
Look very closely and you might glimpse a childhood photo of Mr. Simons on the Broadway set of “The Ferryman,” a play that Ms. Donnelly’s partner, Jez Butterworth, wrote for her.
Five years ago, they watched a documentary called “The Disappeared,” about the victims of a particularly cruel campaign by the I.R.A.: secret murders of supposed traitors, whose families kept hoping that they were still alive somewhere.
When her uncle’s face flashed on the screen, Ms. Donnelly — who knew that his body had been discovered in 1984, and that her mother had worked with families of the disappeared, yet hadn’t quite put two and two together — realized for the first time that he had been one of them.
The personal connection planted a seed in Mr. Butterworth. One weekend in 2014, when Ms. Donnelly was appearing on Broadway in his play “The River,” they drove upstate to a house they’d borrowed from Neil Pepe, the artistic director of Atlantic Theater Company.
Over the course of a snowy, wine-fueled night, Mr. Butterworth — whose first Broadway play, the verbally pyrotechnic “Jerusalem,” won a 2011 Tony Award for its star, Mark Rylance — asked Ms. Donnelly’s permission to include her family’s material in the story he had in mind. Together they sketched out the idea.
Then commenced a long period of a playwright resisting his own creative impulses.
Maybe so, but it’s worked out remarkably well despite some criticism (notably in a Guardian piece by a Northern Irish author) that the play traffics in cultural stereotypes. A London hit that this year won three Olivier Awards, including best play and best director, for Sam Mendes, “The Ferryman” is a blackly comic tragedy set in rural Northern Ireland the very week that Ms. Donnelly was born — a time when republican prisoners were capturing global headlines with a fatal hunger strike.
Perhaps best known for playing Jenny Fraser on the television drama “Outlander,” Ms. Donnelly stars as Caitlin Carney, whose husband, Seamus, has been missing for nearly a decade. Caitlin and her son, Oisin, have spent those years in the home of Seamus’s brother, Quinn, a married father of seven played by Paddy Considine.
The discovery of Seamus’s body is the event that sets the plot in motion, putting an end to the family’s tormented uncertainty while placing them in fresh danger from the I.R.A., which is prepared to enforce their silence. Another shift: Caitlin’s official transition from wife to widow, which places new pressure on the intense, unspoken attraction between her and Quinn, whose wife, Mary, has retreated from the family’s day-to-day life.
As steeped in politics as “The Ferryman” is, those emotional dynamics were what most compelled Mr. Butterworth, a big, bearded man with dark eyes and an almost Beckettian head of hair.
“I’ve been thinking recently about how I get pregnant with plays,” he said, sipping a dry midday martini to ward off the effects of jet lag. “The idea of vanishing and disappearance was really the blastoff point for this.
“The Ferryman” is a play about love and family and the intimacy of war — the way men seduce boys into killing with tales of glamorous brutality, and the immense effort it takes to wrench free of that cycle of violence, as Quinn attempts to do for his children.
When Ms. Donnelly was growing up, her parents and many of their peers were also trying to end that legacy. She remembers her childhood as peaceful and depoliticized despite the everydayness of the conflict. “Friends of mine had much more extreme experiences. Friends of mine were dragged out of their beds in the middle of the night by the army,” she said.
It is a strange disconnect: Ms. Donnelly’s sense that she was always safe in a place where even now not all of the bodies of the disappeared have been found. When they are, her mother attends the funerals. In 2015, she asked Ms. Donnelly to go along to a pair of them for emotional support. Mr. Butterworth went with them and was particularly shaken by the service for Kevin McKee, a teenager when he vanished in 1972.
That thought led to the play’s title: a reference to Charon, who in the underworld of Greek mythology ferries the souls of the dead across the River Styx.
Yet even then Mr. Butterworth couldn’t push himself past his resistance to writing the play — a standard part of his process that grew extreme in this case. And then came the news that finally moved him to write: Ms. Donnelly was pregnant with their first child.
He did it to assure her that she would have a role waiting for her, that her career would be O.K. Which it has been: Playing Caitlin in London last year, pregnant with their second child, she won an Olivier Award, too.
Though the most obvious parallel in “The Ferryman” is with her family’s history, Mr. Butterworth layered in some from his own: a fierce republican whose anti-Thatcher rant is “a verbatim regular aria that my father would go into every time he saw her on the television,” a gaggle of boys who are essentially his brothers, a group of girls who have the names of his mother’s sisters, an old woman with a wandering mind who’s a stand-in for his grandmother.
Mr. Butterworth has always known he’s not only English; he has a good deal of Irish on both sides. But his family comes from where exactly, if you trace it back?
No such luck. The test came back “88 percent Ulster,” he said.
So Ms. Donnelly, it turns out, isn’t the only one from the north.