If your New Year’s resolution was to get in shape by the end of 2018, there’s not a lot of time left. But these hotels and resorts have programs and amenities that might help get you there.
There’s still time this year to meet your New Year’s resolution that wellness should be a priority in your life. Several hotels around the United States are offering an array of new incentives to reach your goal with health-focused amenities that are included in the cost of your stay.
The Dream Downtown, in New York City’s Meatpacking District has a new partnership with Melissa Wood Health, a health and wellness platform founded by Melissa Wood-Tepperberg, a certified yoga and Pilates instructor and wellness coach, to bring on-demand workouts and guided meditation to in-room televisions.
At the Chatwal, in Midtown Manhattan, also part of the Dream Hotel Group, guests can take part in yoga sessions with Eddie Stern, the co-founder of the Brooklyn Yoga Club and Ashtanga New York. Nine 12-minute yoga sessions are available on in-room iPads. The property also provides guests with in-room mats.
In Chicago, The Ritz-Carlton, Chicago, has a new running concierge. The concierge position consists of rotating staff members who take guests out on sunrise or sunset runs twice a week. The excursion is somewhere between 30 minutes to an hour and involves a scenic route along Lake Michigan.
Another Ritz, The Ritz-Carlton Bal Harbour, Miami, has two new wellness offerings this fall: a guided morning meditation session on Thursday mornings and a daily tea ceremony on the pool deck at 3:05 p.m., a nod to the property’s area code. Guests can enjoy an iced tea blend that’s made with relaxing herbs such as lavender and served out of an elaborate siphon.
Also in Florida, Ponte Vedra Inn & Club, just started a new lineup for fall fitness classes including an hourlong boot camp session on the beach, a sunrise beach yoga class and water aerobics in the outdoor pool, which faces the ocean.
Westin Hotels & Resorts has made wellness a priority: the gyms in its 130 properties nationwide now all have TRX Suspension Training resistance straps, a portable strength training system that offers resistance trainers, especially useful for quick workouts or people doing physical therapy. The concierges at each property have been trained on the system and are available to give guests a quick tutorial so they can use it, too.
In addition, Westin guests can now help raise money for one of 40 charities, including Feeding America and the Wounded Warrior Project, by opening the Charity Miles app and heading out for a run, walk or bike ride starting at any of the brand’s properties in the United States. Westin will make a donation to the guests’ selected charity, adding on $1 for every mile logged through the app.
St. Regis Hotels & Resorts, with 10 properties in the country, including Deer Valley, Utah. and San Francisco, stocks rooms with health-related amenities for guests who make a request in advance of their stay. While the offerings vary by property, they include in-room workout equipment such as free weights and resistance bands, a map of nearby running routes, assorted energy and protein bars, a reusable water bottle and fresh fruit.