It was maybe the worst thing a parent could say to a child, and another example of the rottenness of Lucious’s soul.
Three seasons later, “Empire” has invoked H.I.V./AIDS again, but this time, the subject has been finessed into the story, as a way to educate viewers, not to shock them. Episode 4 told, via flashbacks, the evolution of Jamal’s courtship with a journalist, Kai (Toby Onwumere), including Kai’s disclosure about having H.I.V. And on Wednesday’s episode, Cookie (Taraji P. Henson) learns about Kai’s status when she visits him at the hospital, where he’s recuperating after having gone missing while reporting a story abroad. She is aghast: “You just going to let him get you sick?” she scolds Jamal, out of Kai’s earshot.
He is concerned about how H.I.V./AIDS has become a “side story” in conversations within Hollywood and the broader cultural landscape. “I’m still losing people to AIDS,” he said. Through Jamal’s relationship with Kai, the hope is to “normalize” the realities of living with the illness and to take away the stigma.
Outside perspectives were brought in, including from those who are H.I.V. positive and Smollett’s mentor Phill Wilson, the founder of the Black AIDS Institute, an organization Smollett has worked with since he was a teenager. “The writers that we have, everything — our whole team, we can handle this,” he added.
Smollett said he initially asked the writers to give Jamal the illness. “I was searching for, ‘What is the way that we can deal with it, that we can tell the story?’” he explained.
Last season, Ellie Kirshenbaum, a programming executive at 20th Century Fox Television, which produces “Empire,” relayed a story about being in a Trader Joe’s the day after an episode in which Cookie had a heart attack, Mahoney said. A woman was telling the cashier that the episode had inspired her to buy healthier food. “The numbers of black and brown people, and particularly black and brown men, who are still contracting H.I.V.” highlighted the show’s opportunity to make a difference, he said.
Unlike with Lucious’s horrific one-liner to Jamal in Season 2, which eventually was forgotten amid the show’s narrative whiplash, the writers plan to continue addressing H.I.V. as Kai and Jamal’s relationship progresses. In the next episode, Mahoney said, Cookie will be seen educating herself on H.I.V. and what it’s like to live with it today.
