ESTERO, Fla. — With a somber trip to Pittsburgh to visit victims of a synagogue shooting behind him, President Trump flew to one of his favorite places in the world — Florida — on Wednesday to host another one of his high-decibel political rallies.
On Thursday, Mr. Trump will be in Missouri. Before the week is out, he will hit West Virginia, Montana and Indiana, all part of an 11-rally blitz leading to the midterm elections on Tuesday.
That is fast, even for him.
For Mr. Trump, the next five days feature battleground states where the Republican Party’s hold on the House is in peril and come on the heels of a high-profile Twitter slap at Speaker Paul Ryan, who shot down Mr. Trump’s latest promise to issue an executive order denying birthright citizenship to people born to undocumented immigrants.
But any intricacies of the Constitution would have to be for another day. On Wednesday, a red-meat menu included attacks on Democrats, immigrants and the news media — the “enemy of the people,” Mr. Trump said before pumping up a line of Republicans who are betting on his support to bolster them in razor-thin races.
Mr. Trump was here to stump for Gov. Rick Scott, who is mounting a challenge against the incumbent Senator Bill Nelson, and for Ron DeSantis, a former Republican congressman facing a tight governor’s race against Andrew Gillum, the Democratic mayor of Tallahassee. On Twitter, Mr. Trump has accused of Mr. Gillum of running one of the most “corrupt” cities in the United States, a point Mr. DeSantis himself tried to hammer home onstage.
Along with denouncing Democrats and journalists, Mr. Trump — and the candidates who model themselves in his image — has made immigration, and fears about it, the cornerstone of efforts to animate Floridians to vote for Republicans.
“Andrew Gillum wants to throw open your borders to gang members, human traffickers and criminal aliens,” Mr. Trump said. Mr. Gillum has said that Florida should never become a “show me your papers” state.
The president also moved to reiterate earlier promises that include securing the southwest border; issuing an oft-repeated $1.6 billion update on the border wall; pledging an end to birthright citizenship; and unleashing a diatribe against the groups of migrants making their way north to the United States’ southwestern border.
“A vote for Democrat is a vote to liquidate America’s borders,” Mr. Trump said.
Mr. Trump has often relied on inflated or misleading claims to bolster his immigration arguments: The Marshall Project, in a 2018 analysis of data from 200 metropolitan areas over the past few decades, found that crime has fallen despite the immigrant population increasing. Other studies have found that immigration has little effect on crime.
At the rally, the president, as he usually does, took issue with how journalists covered his latest activities, but as midterm elections loom, Mr. Trump seemed to intensify his attacks, taking his “enemy of the people” complaint from his Twitter account to the rally stage. He said he was disheartened to come home and see how his visit to Pittsburgh was covered — the trip drew protests and was skipped by several congressional leaders.
The crowdgoers, who had spent hours listening to muscle-car songs — including “Eye of the Tiger” and “Y.M.C.A.” played at a throat-rattling volume — went crazy, generating a hearty round of “CNN sucks” chants.
He delivered his latest pitch on Halloween, but aside from the occasional wandering colonial patriot or bearded Superman pecking away at his phone, there was only one consistent get-up: the “Make America Great Again” uniform.

 Mr. Trump asked. A standing ovation followed.
Outside the Hertz Arena, a venue of about 8,200 near a strip mall, the mood was festive. Several attendees chattered about the 14th Amendment and delivered a round of immigration-specific chants — “Build the wall! Deport them all!” one man shouted.
Inside, hundreds of attendees milled about in front of the stage amid signs that read, in capital letters, “Finish the wall.” Deja Walker, 20, who works in sales and hosts her own political podcast, said that she disagreed with the way migrants were making their way north in groups, and with the Constitution’s provisions for people born in the United States.
At least one person dressed up as an undecided voter.
Hunter Kufta, 24, a cashier at Publix, said that he had attended Mr. Gillum’s political rally the previous evening and that he was generally pleased with the candidate’s performance. Mr. Kufta voted for Mr. Trump in the 2016 presidential election, but said he was wavering over his vote this time. He said that he supports two disabled parents on Medicare, and that he wanted to hear more from both candidates about how he could help keep his family afloat.
Democrats are hopeful that voters like Mr. Kufta, who supports Mr. Trump’s immigration policies, will be won over by their focus on health care. The president has promised that people with pre-existing conditions will always be protected by Republican health care policies, which so far include efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act.
At the rally, Mr. Trump kept his comments about health care largely to claims that he would protect Medicare.
Mr. Kufta, for his part, said he left the event with mixed feelings — support for Mr. Trump except for his “hatred toward the media,” and turned off by Mr. DeSantis’s behavior. When it comes to health care, Mr. Kufta said neither Republicans nor Democrats had presented viable options.
“Gillum still for governor,” he said of his intended vote. But Mr. Kufta said he planned to back Mr. Scott for Senate.