MARATHON, Fla. — If Representative Carlos Curbelo clings to his seat in Congress come November, defying the political odds for a moderate Republican in one of the nation’s most competitive districts, it will be in part because of people like Gary Graves, the owner of a Florida Keys seafood business. His spiny lobster catch has been hit with costly tariffs as part of the White House’s trade war with China, yet he supports President Trump, and Mr. Curbelo, anyway.
If Mr. Curbelo loses, it will be in part because of people like Josh Mothner, a real estate agent who has watched with alarm as health care choices for himself and his wife, a cancer survivor, have dwindled in the rural Keys. He considers the congressman a centrist too willing to go along with the president on issues like repealing the Affordable Care Act and too powerless to move his colleagues to the middle on issues like immigration and climate change.
Dueling assessments of his tenure are the norm for Mr. Curbelo in the sprawling 26th Congressional District, which stretches from the western Miami suburbs to Key West — a distance of more than 150 miles. Relatively few people, about 53,000 of the district’s 417,000 registered voters, live in the Keys. But in a contest as close as this one, they might be enough to decide this election, a leading national indicator for the 2018 midterms.
A loss by Mr. Curbelo could be a strong sign of a long-anticipated blue wave rolling across the biggest presidential swing state, and one more hurdle for Republicans hoping to keep control of the House. If he wins, it will most likely be seen not as a credit to the Republicans, but as a sign of the unique appeal of Mr. Curbelo himself. He is a Latino perhaps best known as an evangelist for climate science who, if he succeeds, might have identified a way for Republicans in Democratic-leaning districts to survive in the Trump era.
Mr. Curbelo won re-election by nearly 12 percentage points two years ago even as Hillary Clinton carried his district by 16 points. His Democratic opponent that year, former Representative Joe Garcia, told Mr. Curbelo once the results were in that he had proved himself so decisively that he would be able to hold the seat for life.
Yet here Mr. Curbelo is again, fending off a serious challenge from another Democrat, Debbie Mucarsel-Powell, 47, a former associate dean at Florida International University’s medical school. She portrays Mr. Curbelo, 38, as a double talker who gives moderate policies lip service, but ultimately votes mostly with Republican leadership.
“You can talk and talk and talk and talk, and look good, but then it doesn’t matter if you’re not doing anything and there are no results,” she said in a recent interview at a Cuban-Venezuelan coffee shop near her western Miami-Dade County campaign office, where she ordered an arepa, a savory cornmeal patty stuffed with shredded beef and cheese.
Ms. Mucarsel-Powell’s argument against Mr. Curbelo has failed in the past. She says it is different this time, because she has more to use against him: That he helped write the Republican tax bill. That he failed to pass legislation protecting immigrants brought into the country illegally as children. That he filed a carbon-tax bill three months before the election, knowing it was doomed. That he voted to repeal Obamacare in a district with one of the highest number of enrollees in the country.
Ms. Mucarsel-Powell said she has been underestimated because, unlike Mr. Curbelo, the Miami-born son of Cuban exiles, she immigrated to the United States as a teenager and did not move to Florida until she was an adult. About 61 percent of the district’s registered voters are Hispanic; both candidates speak fluent Spanish. Mr. Curbelo says his presence is uncomfortable to Latino Democrats on Capitol Hill: The Congressional Hispanic Caucus denied him membership over his votes.
Democrats have struggled with turnout in majority-Latino districts, and Ms. Mucarsel-Powell made a misstep herself last week when her campaign scheduled an event with Representative Barbara Lee, a California Democrat who said in 2016 that Fidel Castro’s death should be mourned, an unwelcome statement in exile Miami. Ms. Lee’s visit was scrapped at the last minute. But the event, featuring Representative Nancy Pelosi, the House minority leader, still drew furious protesters — including the local Republican Party chairman, a onetime Curbelo aide and two members of the Proud Boys, a far-right organization the Southern Poverty Law Center considers a hate group — who banged on the door and yelled that the candidates were “comunistas” and “brujas” — witches.
In the interview, Ms. Mucarsel-Powell said some people have tried to dismiss her as a generic Latina Democrat, a ballot placeholder waiting for a national tide that lifts all Democrats — a characterization she angrily rejects.
Young women have come up to her on the campaign trail and whispered that they too are immigrants, she said, as if they were embarrassed to say it aloud. “There’s nothing to be ashamed about,” Ms. Mucarsel-Powell said, her eyes watering.
Mr. Curbelo, a frequent Trump critic, is similarly offended by the suggestion that he is the sort of generic Republican whose political future can be determined by prevailing national trends.
First, he said, he will try to secure re-election in a complicated district that behaves differently depending on geography: Its voters are more conservative in the Keys (with the exception of liberal Key West, where Mr. Curbelo was recently heckled at a candidate forum) and more liberal in the Miami suburbs (with the exception of conservative Cuban-Americans, most of whom consider Mr. Curbelo a favorite son and have consolidated behind Mr. Trump, after initial skepticism toward him in 2016).
In the Keys, Mr. Curbelo trumpets the growing support for Mr. Trump’s decision to punish China over trade and for his own push to secure federal dollars for Hurricane Irma recovery. In Miami-Dade, he notes he wants to reduce health care costs and plans to vote for a state constitutional amendment to restore felons’ voting rights.
