Family separations, multibillion-dollar border-wall schemes, unleashed ICE officers —the Trump presidency has taught the Democrats what they stand against. Now they have to figure out what they stand for.
In early June, the Washington office of Representative Pramila Jayapal began to hear rumors about the women. They had crossed into Texas, where Border Patrol officers promptly arrested them. But now the women were somewhere around Seattle, the city Jayapal represents.
Her staff made calls. Usually, undocumented immigrants in the area were held at the Northwest Detention Center, a private facility operated under a contract with Immigration and Customs Enforcement. But the detention center had not received the women. There were too many of them for ICE to house. Instead, as Jayapal learned on June 7, the mothers were now inmates at a Bureau of Prisons facility near the Seattle-Tacoma airport.
Jayapal flew home to Seattle the following night. She showed up at the federal prison the next morning and was escorted to the three pods where the new inmates were held. There were 174 women. Many of them had come to the United States with their children, some as young as 5. A majority were from the violence-racked Central American countries El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras; others had traveled from as far as China and the Democratic Republic of Congo. All of them sought asylum. Some of them, after crossing the Rio Grande, spent their first night in the United States shivering in their damp clothes on Mylar sheets in the sprawling processing center in McAllen, Tex., nicknamed the hielera, or icebox.
But at least their children had been with them. Now they were gone. The immigration authorities would not say where the children had been taken or when they would be returned. As part of the Trump administration’s zero-tolerance policy, several thousand children were being separated from their parents at the border — a tactic that previous administrations had avoided and that the mothers could not have anticipated. Meanwhile, the 174 women, having been denied initial interviews to determine whether their asylum claims merited their protection under international law, were instead piled onto airplanes and flown to the Pacific Northwest, where they were given slips of paper with their children’s names on them.
Of the 535 current members of Congress, only 12 are immigrants, and Jayapal is one of them. The first Indian-American woman to be elected to the House, Jayapal, who is now 53, came to the United States at age 16, unaccompanied and on a student visa — not to flee chaos but to attend great universities (Georgetown and Northwestern) and then make a comfortable living (first by executing leveraged buyouts at PaineWebber on Wall Street and then by selling heart defibrillators out of Cincinnati). She left the private sector in 1991 to work for nonprofits, and in 2001, a year after becoming an American citizen, she became an immigration rights organizer. She developed a reputation for her fierce intelligence, energy and media savvy — and appetite for the national stage. She was elected to Congress as a Democrat on the same night that Donald Trump won the presidency.
Trump’s incendiary immigration policies have afforded Jayapal a spotlight seldom made available to freshman legislators. But in pledging to “stop funding a rogue agency,” Jayapal directed the spotlight onto the Democratic Party’s ambivalent feelings about immigration. Jayapal represents a new breed of liberal politician who is — along with some of this year’s other congressional candidates, like Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, Ilhan Omar of Minnesota and Rashida Tlaib of Michigan — more wedded to social-justice movements than to the slow grind of governance. For years, a number of immigration advocates had been agitating to abolish ICE. Now Jayapal was on record as the first member of Congress to openly endorse doing so.
The economic conditions in Indiana remained a source of overriding concern for his constituents, Visclosky said. In meetings with them, “they said that they will vote for me — implying that they won’t vote for other Democrats. I’m trying to help them with their jobs.” He went on: “I support everything that this caucus is doing on immigration, and on the Syrian population. But I just hope that someday this caucus shows the same energy and passion” when “we talk about jobs.” Several in the caucus applauded.
When Representative Kevin McCarthy, a California Republican and the House majority leader, got wind of the Abolish ICE bill, he gleefully offered to schedule it for an immediate vote. Jayapal and Pocan saw the bind they were in with their caucus and indicated that they would vote against their own bill if it were brought to the floor. McCarthy retaliated with a bill declaring support for ICE. “It’s a political vote,” Representative Nancy Pelosi, the minority leader, advised Democrats. “Treat it politically.” Jayapal and most of her fellow Democrats simply voted “present,” though several from conservative districts — including Visclosky — voted for the resolution.
Few issues have been made more black and white by the Trump administration than the highly complex matter of immigration. A quarter-century ago, both political parties had the same room-temperature appraisal of immigrants. But while Republicans have reacted to the question of whether immigrants strengthen the United States in a mostly static way over time — 30 percent responding positively in 1994 and 35 percent doing so in 2016, according to a Pew Research study — the favorable view among Democrats has risen sharply over the same period, to 78 percent from 32 percent.
Today the Democratic Party is generally pro-immigration. And yet many of its elected officeholders remain deeply wary of saying so and especially conflicted about how to address the flaws in the country’s immigration system — or whether to address them at all. Their reasoning may be as simple as this: Unlike Republican voters, who routinely punish their politicians for being insufficiently anti-immigrant, Democratic voters do not reward theirs for being forthrightly pro-immigrant.
There are other reasons immigration has yet to reliably animate Democratic lawmakers. One of them was evident when I met Sharry in his office in a WeWork rental space in downtown Washington. Relative to other progressive special interests, the immigrant rights movement has traditionally been a pauper’s crusade, lacking in billionaire benefactors and financially outmatched by ideological rivals like the Center for Immigration Studies, the Federation of American Immigration Reform and NumbersUSA.
Immigrants, meanwhile, are a less than formidable electoral force. Undocumented immigrants (there are roughly 22.1 million, according to a new Yale study) cannot vote. The country’s estimated 27.3 million eligible Latino voters, a subset of whom constitute the dominant demographic group among legal immigrants, consistently turn out in low numbers. Never was this more apparent than in the 2016 presidential election, when Hillary Clinton’s welcoming stance toward undocumented immigrants failed to generate any increase in Hispanic turnout, even against an opponent who began his campaign with a speech characterizing Mexican immigrants as rapists and drug dealers.
Instead, since long before Trump, Democratic politicians have feared that supporting immigrants would result in being voted out of office — specifically by conservative constituents who fear Muslim terrorists or undocumented Latinos taking advantage of public services, overrunning schools and hospitals. President Bill Clinton understood this dynamic well. During his triangulating quest for re-election in 1996, Clinton signed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act, which added more border fencing and piled on further penalties for those illegally crossing into the United States.
Immigration advocates were pleasantly surprised when Clinton’s successor, George W. Bush, made good on his campaign rhetoric to prioritize immigration reform. Bush’s White House advisers spent the summer of 2001 contriving a pathway to citizenship for some three million undocumented immigrants, with legislative support from fellow Republicans like Senator John McCain and Representative Paul D. Ryan. That effort extended to the early morning of Sept. 11, when White House officials had scheduled a gathering in a Capitol office building to discuss immigration policies, up to and including amnesty, that “were a lot more liberal than anything we’re seeing today,” says Mike Gempler, the executive director of the Washington Growers League, a nonprofit advocacy group for farmers in Washington State.
In 2008, Hate Free Zone morphed into OneAmerica, a group advocating equal justice and human rights for immigrants. In November of that year, Jayapal wept while watching Barack Obama win the presidency. Like most Democrats, she assumed that a progressive black senator who had been a community organizer and whose father was Kenyan would be more sympathetic to immigrants than a wealthy conservative Texan.
But Jayapal had no illusions about her party’s commitment to the issue. Aside from a few champions — chief among them Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Lofgren and Gutiérrez — Democrats had shown only flagging support for immigration reform during the Bush presidency. In 2006, the current and future Democratic Senate leaders, Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer, initially resisted a comprehensive reform package sponsored by McCain and Kennedy because, Frank Sharry says, “all they cared about was winning back the Senate, and they didn’t want to hand Bush a victory.” But when it failed in the House and was replaced by a bill to build several hundred miles of secure fencing along the border, both Democratic leaders voted for it — as did Hillary Clinton and Obama, both senators at the time.
That same year, a new immigration issue emerged that would test the convictions of both parties as well as the electorate. A decade before, Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois was inspired by a young constituent, Tereza Lee, a piano prodigy who had arrived in the United States with her undocumented Korean parents when she was 2½. Durbin first drafted the Dream Act, which would provide legal status to people in Lee’s position, in 2001. But it went nowhere until 2010, when he began showing up at the White House with lists of children who were at risk of deportation.
The concept of protecting children from deportation when America was the only country most of them had ever known appeared to enjoy more widespread public support than any previous immigration issue. A 2010 Gallup poll showed that 54 percent of respondents supported passing the Dream Act.
Durbin enlisted an important Democratic ally: Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader. As a congressman in 1993, Reid wrote a bill denying citizenship to children born in America to undocumented immigrants. But since then, he had undergone a metamorphosis, albeit a convenient one. Seeing the Latino vote in his home state of Nevada as the key to his re-election victory in 2010, he vowed to bring Durbin’s Dream Act to the floor right after the midterm elections.
Reid did as promised. But as had been the case with the Democrats and Bush in 2006, the Republicans had no interest in handing Obama a victory. Nor did they feel they had to: As with another proposal that polled well, universal background checks for gun purchases, the idea of protecting immigrant children from deportation seemed to enjoy only mile-wide-and-inch-deep support, with no discernible electoral consequence for defying it. Though a version of the Dream Act sponsored by Representative Lucille Roybal-Allard of California passed in the House by eight votes, the Senate bill fell five votes short of overcoming a filibuster, thanks in part to the “no” votes of five Democratic senators.
In September 2017, Trump ordered a six-month phaseout of Obama’s DACA executive order. Then in January, he summoned Durbin and Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican, to the Oval Office with the intention of signing a deal that would ratify DACA in exchange for funding for the border wall. When Miller and John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff, learned of the impending deal, they ushered Senators Tom Cotton of Arkansas and David Perdue of Georgia, both immigration hard-liners, to meet with Trump first.
The Democrats voted to shut down the federal government over Trump’s rescinded DACA deal. But Schumer, now the Senate minority leader, relented after a mere three days, prompting United We Dream members to stage sit-ins in his Senate office. Durbin privately reminded Cristina Jiménez Moreta that Congress was duty-bound to find legislative solutions.
In the immigration movement from which Jayapal rose to prominence, politicians are broadly seen as forces of intransigence and at times dismaying ignorance. People close to Jayapal told me that she ran for Congress in no small measure because of her disenchantment with the elected officials she had encountered in both the state and national arenas. It has also been her tendency, even going back to her early days as an activist, to assert herself in ways that might rankle those who had been putting in hard work long before she arrived on the scene.
She was speaking as the young and precariously documented immigrant she had once been, driving an Aerostar van filled with heart defibrillators through small towns in Indiana, where the locals often inquired as to where the dark-skinned saleswoman was from. But her words were also those of a policymaker chasing a frustratingly elusive consensus.
That a first-term congresswoman was presiding over such a gathering, before her party had retaken even one chamber of Congress, could be seen as presumptuous. Then again, House Republicans spent eight years perfecting their condemnations of Obamacare while giving little thought to what should replace it; now millions of Americans had lost their health care, and those same Republicans were at pains to explain their negligence to voters. Jayapal was not going to endure a similar fiasco.
It was the kind of substantive, forward-thinking meeting Jayapal had been craving. No sooner did she leave it, however, than there was yet another fire to put out. The House was set to vote at 1:30 that afternoon on a series of measures under “closed rule,” in which no amendments could be offered. Among them was a resolution offered by Kevin McCarthy, the majority leader.
Like his July countermeasure to support ICE, this new resolution bore all the telltale imprints of an election-year ploy. Taking note of the fact that the City of San Francisco permits undocumented residents to vote in local school board elections, the resolution declared that “allowing illegal immigrants the right to vote devalues the franchise and diminishes the voting power of United States citizens.” McCarthy’s resolution seemed designed to put Democrats in a corner. Either they would be voting against the liberal policy of a city that happened to be represented by Nancy Pelosi, or they would be voting to let undocumented immigrants cast ballots in an American election.
At about 11 that evening, she was home in her apartment near the Capitol when her legislative director emailed her the roll-call vote for McCarthy’s resolution. The numbers stunned her. Only 70 of her Democratic colleagues, including Gutiérrez, had joined her in voting against it. An additional 69 had voted “present.” Fully 49 — about one-fourth of the Democratic caucus — had voted for it.
“This is crazy,” Jayapal emailed me shortly after the vote. Maybe 10 or 12 of her compatriots were in districts challenging enough to warrant voting with the Republicans. But 49? There was so much fear inside her caucus — and outside, so much frustration from her organizer friends. Somehow Jayapal would have to navigate both sides — agitating and legislating, crossing the border back and forth, somberly aware that when it came to immigration issues, even an easy vote felt to some like a perilous journey, destination unknown.