ATLANTA — At a protest on the steps of the Georgia Capitol in 1992, Stacey Abrams, now the Democratic candidate for governor, joined in the burning of the state flag, which at the time incorporated the Confederate battle flag design and was viewed by many as a lingering symbol of white supremacy.
If elected, Ms. Abrams, 44, would become the first black female governor in the nation. In August 2017, after the violent white supremacist demonstrations in Charlottesville, Va., Ms. Abrams injected the issue of Confederate memorials into the governor’s race by calling for the removal of the giant Confederate carving on Stone Mountain, a granite outcropping east of Atlanta, noting, correctly, its ties to white supremacy and the revival of the Ku Klux Klan.
Ms. Abrams’s campaign, in a statement Monday, said her actions in 1992 were part of a “permitted, peaceful protest against the Confederate emblem in the flag” and part of a movement that was ultimately successful in changing the flag.
A photo that appeared with an article in the Atlanta Journal-Constitution in June 1992 showed Ms. Abrams, center, her first name misspelled, standing with students burning the Georgia state flag at the state Capitol.
A spokesman for the Kemp campaign, Ryan Mahoney, could not be reached for comment on Monday.
In the 1990s, few issues in Georgia were more politically explosive than the Confederate-themed design of the flag. After much debate and protest, the design was changed in 2001 in such a way that the battle flag’s size was minimized. The battle flag was completely removed from the design with a second change in 2003.
Until the changes, it had been vehemently opposed by African Americans and other Georgians who noted that battle flag design element had been introduced by a state legislature in 1956 that was intent on flaunting its contempt for pressure from the federal government to integrate after the Brown v. Board of Education decision.
Eventually, however, Atlanta city officials refused to fly the flag over municipal buildings, and many in the Atlanta corporate community considered it to be an embarrassment.
The change to the flag is believed to have cost Georgia’s last Democratic governor, Roy Barnes, his re-election bid in 2002, as he faced criticism from a vocal group of “flaggers” who argued that the symbol was not about racism, but the valor and sacrifice of the South’s Civil War troops.
The June 14, 1992, protest, and Ms. Abrams’s role in it, is described in a pair of local newspaper stories at the time. A photo of Ms. Abrams and two other African-American students burning the flag appeared on the front of the local section of the Atlanta Journal and Constitution newspaper the next day.
Hey, I’m Alex Burns, a politics correspondent for The Times. Send me your questions using the NYT app. I’ll give you the latest intel from the campaign trail.
In the article, Ms. Abrams spoke about how she kept her parents, who had been active in the civil rights struggle in Mississippi, abreast of her own budding activism in Atlanta.
Ms. Abrams had recently helped lead a peaceful protest over the acquittal of four Los Angeles police officers who had been accused of using excessive force in the beating of a black motorist, Rodney King. But other protesters had turned violent.