The new deal undermines investor certainty and makes disputes between the United States and Mexico more likely.
Professor Flores-Macías is an associate professor of government at Cornell. Professor Sánchez-Talanquer is an assistant professor of political science at the Center for Research and Teaching in Economics.
North American business leaders are breathing a sigh of relief after Canada agreed, at the 11th hour, to join the revised North American Free Trade Agreement between the United States and Mexico. But before they break out the Champagne, they should look at the details.
Although the revised deal brings much-needed modernization in areas such as e-commerce and intellectual property, the media spotlight on Canada has obscured a bigger problem for the region: Under the new terms, North American trade is headed off the rails and, perhaps along with it, political stability south of the border.
A key goal of Nafta, like all free trade agreements, is bringing certainty to the rules of the game to facilitate commercial exchanges. The new deal, called the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement, undermines that certainty in two ways.
First, the deal eliminates expert panels for resolving government-investor disputes in most industries, save for those covering energy and telecommunications. Although it preserves panels for bilateral disputes regarding dumping and countervailing duties, it defers to domestic courts as the main mechanism for solving controversies should governments change the rules down the road. This measure puts a lot of faith in the transparency and competence of the legal systems of the member countries and opens the door to potential cronyism, unequal access to those systems and even corruption.
Second, the agreement sets up a mechanism for automatically reviewing its terms on a periodic basis. This and the automatic expiration after 16 years as the default option introduce significant uncertainty by making it less costly for governments to upend existing rules and threaten to exit the agreement. Establishing periodic reviews as natural breaking points for the rules of the game would certainly shorten investors’ time horizons.
Given the changes championed by the Trump administration, investors will be especially wary of governments’ seeking to move the goal posts in the future. This would affect employment opportunities and job security across North America. Slowdowns in economic activity in both Canada and Mexico, as well as sharp declines in foreign direct investment, can already be traced to the uncertainty surrounding current negotiations.
Both of these changes point to a bigger problem with the new deal: the deinstitutionalization of North American economic ties.
The certainty and centrality of Nafta to United States-Mexican relations has proved integral to aligning the two countries’ economic and strategic interests. Before Nafta, relations were far from harmonious, in part because Mexico’s interests were solidly on the side of the global south. Pointing to a history of invasions, occupations and the loss of half of its territory to the United States, Mexico long saw its northern neighbor as a threat to be contained.
This explains why Mexico refused to support Washington-led initiatives at the Organization of American States to condemn Communism in Guatemala in the 1950s, rejected the expulsion of Cuba from the O.A.S. in the 1960s and acted with complacency toward the threat of leftist takeovers in Central America during the 1970s and 1980s.
Thanks to Nafta, Mexico developed a stake in the economic success of the United States, which went from threat to partner. It has been directly responsible for Mexico’s dependence on trade with the United States for its own economic development. With its economic fortunes intertwined with those of its northern neighbor, Mexico veered away from the Latin American political orbit and turned decidedly toward North America. In 1994, Nafta served as an important carrot for Mexico to gain membership in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a club of mostly developed nations.
Nafta also imposed constraints on the Mexican government’s latitude to depart from the alignment with United States interests. In Mexico’s legal system, international agreements are second only to the articles in the Mexican Constitution — above federal, state and local laws. Even if the government tried to depart from the pro-market orientation and respect for property rights provided for in Nafta, it would be subject to a number of legal challenges.
The dependability of this partnership is undermined every time the agreement is up for renegotiation, whether scheduled or not. That’s what we mean by deinstitutionalization: If it is subject to political whims in the three countries, then it is no longer a settled agreement, and its place as a foundation of cooperative United States-Mexican relations will quickly erode.
The Trump administration’s rush to sign the agreement before Mexico’s pro-business president, Enrique Peña Nieto, leaves office on Nov. 30 suggests that the White House considers the more nationalist, leftist successor Andrés Manuel López Obrador a riskier proposition. If President Trump is concerned about future Mexican governments’ seeing Nafta in a different light, this problem will be greatly magnified under the new terms the White House has pushed for.
Of course, it doesn’t have to be this way. President Trump must now send the deal to Congress for approval. It is up to Capitol Hill, then, to make sure that whatever deal emerges, it continues to provide a reliable, permanent basis for North America’s trade and political relationships. Although the up-or-down nature of the vote makes any changes unlikely, this experience should serve as a valuable lesson as America redesigns its trade relations with the rest of the world.
Gustavo Flores-Macías is an associate professor of government at Cornell University. Mariano Sánchez-Talanquer is a scholar at the Harvard Academy for International and Area Studies and an assistant professor of political science at the Center for Research and Teaching in Economics in Mexico City.
