During the construction of a new subway line, archaeologists discovered thousands of objects that reflect life in the city, from the Paleolithic era to the present day.
AMSTERDAM — The objects come as a surprise. In two display cases wedged between escalators in the Rokin metro station here, they emerge into view only as you travel up and down. Suddenly, thousands of fragments of the city’s past appear: vases, pipes, anchors, shards of china, buttons, human bones.
These glimpses tell a small part of a very long story. The displays are part of “Below The Surface,” an urban archaeological endeavor completed between 2003 and 2015, when Amsterdam’s North-South metro line was being excavated. It provided an unusual window into lost worlds: Rarely are riverbeds in cities pumped completely dry and examined thoroughly, as the River Amstel was during the excavation. Covered in soft silt, largely shielded from oxygen and light, and kept at a low temperature, objects were unusually well preserved. In total, some 700,000 artifacts were found, dating from 119,000 B.C. to 2005.
And there are the surprising, suspended display cases in the Rokin Metro Station. The objects have been divided into 11 categories related to use — transport and distribution and consumption, for example; interiors and accessories; and games and recreation.
As Mr. Gawronski and I rode the escalators and elevators at Rokin, we talked about some of these categories, and how looking at the objects can tell us about the history of the city, the practice of archaeology, and time. Here are edited excerpts from Mr. Gawronski’s explanation.
When you go backward, you realize that we thought we were modern because we had cellphones. But now you would have an iPhone with a swipe thing. This is already old-fashioned to people who are from 2018. When you go back through time longer and you think, “This is old-fashioned,” you realize that a book in 1500 was as modern as a cellphone to communicate things.
At the end, you arrive at the slate with a stylus. You can make your S.M.S. on this thing like you can make an S.M.S. now using these buttons. It tells you something about how we think we are modern, and what modernity is. On the other hand, it also tells you how quickly now our environment changes, and our surroundings. Things are not sacred even for five years.
There are some daggers that are very special, in terms of the quantity in which we found them. So far in 60 years of excavation in Amsterdam, we found two or three. Now on one spot in the river, we found 60. These are the most lethal weapons in the 16th century you could imagine. They are really like guns because they can go right through your armor, so the city would want to control this kind of arms. They didn’t want them to circulate. Where we found them, we think there was a control post where these things were taken. Not only is this an amazing collection for am arms specialist, but it also tells something about the sociology and the functioning of the city.
Then there are the personal objects of people themselves. You have umbrellas, toothbrushes, shoes. See this toothpaste, it’s Sensodyne, maybe you would have that now. But you won’t have this, which is radioactive toothpaste. We had a special police officer come from the army when they saw this in the catalog. This was in the 1930s, because in that time, radioactivity was seen as something very healthy. They took it away and they did a hundred tests on it before we get it back again. From this you could write a cultural history.
On the other hand, many of the artifacts in this category have remained remarkably unchanged. There are shoes dating back to roughly 1400, and they look much like shoes worn today. Umbrellas, too, have remained largely unchanged in the last 200 years. An umbrella has so many parts, you don’t even realize. If an umbrella falls into pieces, as an archaeologist, that is really fun. To be able to interpret and identify this piece of brass as a piece of an umbrella and then everything else fits together — so it’s an umbrella.
There wasn’t always a city where Amsterdam is now. There weren’t always people, either.
I thought, pollen is also an object, so this is one of the first catalogs where you see microscopic pictures of pollen. There are shells, fish fossils, pine cones and a prehistoric blade made out of flint. Subsoil is part of this too; all the fragments of an era before a city are collected in this place.
I wanted them to tell something about the city. By using these themes, you get a very strange combination of objects. It’s not all ceramics together. You find ceramics with toys, with production, and with consumption.
I’m inspired by the artist Mark Dion. He has done a lot of projects and installations on archaeology. He remakes and reconstructs archaeological reality in his art. He did this project where they collected objects at low tide on the banks of the Thames. Then they put them on display in the Tate gallery. It’s art. I was inspired by his idea of how you can use archaeology in a public way. I did it the other way around, sort of. I had my real archaeology and translated it into this showcase with an artist.
I don’t know where art starts and archaeology ends.