WASHINGTON — Members of Congress from both parties made clear on Sunday that they wanted to see Saudi Arabia punished for the killing of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi, as President Trump shifted his tone again on the issue and joined the lawmakers in expressing doubt about the Saudi government’s account of the death.
The president’s response to the Saudi accounts has likewise changed from day to day. Speaking to The New York Times on Thursday, Mr. Trump said he was confident in the intelligence reports about the episode, which paint a strong, if circumstantial, case that Mr. Khashoggi’s killing was ordered by the Saudi royal court.
On Friday evening, after the Saudis, more than two weeks after Mr. Khashoggi’s death, said he had been accidentally killed during a fistfight with Saudi operatives in Istanbul, Mr. Trump was asked whether he found it credible. “I do,” he said.
Lawmakers, several of whom had been briefed on the American intelligence, immediately rejected the Saudi account as lacking credibility. Allies of Mr. Trump like Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Representative Peter T. King of New York expressed some of the most scathing criticism.
Mr. Trump said he did not know if Prince Mohammed had ordered the killing of Mr. Khashoggi.
Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee, who leads the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and other Republicans were less equivocal on Sunday. Mr. Corker said that while he was waiting for the conclusions of American intelligence agencies before making a final judgment, he believed that Prince Mohammed was behind the killing.
Mr. Corker, who has often been critical of the president, said he hoped to get access this week to recordings that Turkish officials have said show that Mr. Khashoggi was tortured and dismembered.
Others called for serious punishments against Saudi Arabia, though any action will have to wait until Congress returns after the midterm elections next month. Senator Ben Sasse, Republican of Nebraska, suggested that the United States consider ending arms sales to the Saudis, while Senator Thom Tillis, Republican of North Carolina, said the Trump administration should consider pressing for the removal of the crown prince if it could be proved that he was behind the killing.
“If the facts lead to what we all suspect they will, I think it’ll be very problematic for our relationship going forward,” Mr. Tillis added, referring to the United States’ relationship with Saudi Arabia.
Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the No. 2 Democrat in the Senate, said on “Meet the Press” that the United States should expel the Saudi ambassador, and that American allies should follow suit.
“Unless the Saudi kingdom understands that civilized countries around the world are going to reject this conduct and make sure that they pay a price for it, they’ll continue doing it,” Mr. Durbin said.