Climate|‘I Don’t Know That It’s Man-Made,’ Trump Says of Climate Change. It Is.
‘I Don’t Know That It’s Man-Made,’ Trump Says of Climate Change. It Is.
WASHINGTON — President Trump now denies denying climate change. In an interview on Sunday with CBS’s “60 Minutes,” Mr. Trump backed off his long-held claim that global warming is a hoax. But he also made several new assertions unsupported by science.
Here’s a rundown of the president’s first extensive comments on climate change since Hurricane Michael ripped through the Florida Panhandle and the United Nations warned that time is running out to stave off the worst consequences of rising temperatures.
Climate change will not reverse itself.
Long-term average global temperatures have moved in one direction in the past 115 years: upward. The rise of 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit since the start of the Industrial Revolution has already led to more intense wildfire seasons and the melting of Arctic sea ice.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warned last week that the world would see even more dangerous conditions, including food shortages, by 2040.
Scientists do know that it’s man-made.
The same National Climate Assessment report, vetted by 13 federal agencies, finds “no convincing alternative explanation” that anything other than human activity, particularly the burning of fossil fuels and destruction of forests, is to blame.
A scientific report on climate change obtained by The New York Times shows that warming is already having a large effect on the United States.
NASA embraces the widely cited statistic that “97 percent or more of actively publishing climate scientists agree” that warming trends are the result of human activity, while also listing 200 worldwide scientific organizations that hold to the same findings.
The other approximately 3 percent that reject anthropogenic warming? Turns out scientists went back to try to recreate the findings of those studies — and in each one found major methodological flaws.
Not doing anything could cost trillions of dollars.
Here the president is referring in large part to the Paris Agreement, the voluntary pact among nearly 200 nations to curb rising greenhouse gas emissions, from which the Trump administration has vowed to withdraw. In announcing that the United States would abandon the Paris deal, Mr. Trump argued that it would have cost 2.7 million American jobs by 2025 and untold economic revenue.
The numbers came from think tanks opposed to the Paris Agreement. And while economics is less precise than science, here is another for balance: Stanford University researchers this year found that meeting the goals of the Paris deal would save the world tens of trillions of dollars in avoided climate damages, far outweighing most estimated costs.
Scientists dispute that.
Larry Kudlow, the president’s top economic adviser, and Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, also distanced themselves on Sunday from the I.P.C.C. report. Both made claims similar to Mr. Trump’s about a supposed disagreement among scientists about the role of human activity in climate change.
