EMO PHILIPS at the Bell House (Oct. 22, 7:30 p.m.). A unique voice in stand-up for well over three decades, Philips is still regarded by many comedians as one of the industry’s best joke writers and tellers. See for yourself.
‘PICTURE THIS!’ at Union Hall (Oct. 20, 7:30 p.m.). If a picture is worth a thousand words, then watch what happens when illustrators draw their own responses to live stand-up comedy, and see how the comedians react in real time. The concept started in Los Angeles in 2012 and has since begotten showcases around the world, along with a monthly incarnation in Brooklyn. Ian Fidance hosts. This time the comedians will be Drew Anderson, Anthony DeVito, Ayo Edebiri, Katie Hannigan, Andy Haynes and Shalewa Sharpe, and they will be paired with the animators Bryan Brinkman, Jason Chatfield, Rachel Gitlevich, Chrissy Fellmeth and Dan Pinto.
CHRIS REDD at Carolines on Broadway (Oct. 19-20, 7:30 and 10 p.m.). During the first off-week for Season 44 of “Saturday Night Live,” this featured player and newly minted Emmy Award winner (for the music and lyrics he co-wrote for “Come Back, Barack”) shows off his solo stand-up work headlining the venerable comedy club in Times Square. He’s an energetic and dynamic performer, as skilled at jokes as he is at hip-hop, and will leave you visualizing his comedy premises as future sketches.
‘TWO BEERS IN’ at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater East Village (Oct. 22, 7:30 p.m.). The “No Pants Subway Ride” likely will go down as Charlie Todd’s best-known contribution to city culture, but the founder of Improv Everywhere remains clothed each month with his wife, Cody Lindquist, to host a live podcast while drinking beers and talking politics with political insiders and celebs alike. This Monday will feature the actress Sunita Mani (“GLOW,” “Mr. Robot”). The show’s tagline? “It’s like ‘Meet the Press,’ but funnier and with more alcohol.” Bottoms up!
2018 GOLDEN PROBES at the Town Hall (Oct. 20, 8 p.m.). Old comedy formula, meet the new comedy formula: Tragedy plus #TimesUp equals comedy. Lizz Winstead, a creator of and former head writer for “The Daily Show,” started Lady Parts Justice in 2012 to bring attention to reproductive rights in a humorous way. For the second time in three years, her group will put on the Golden Probes, a full-on satirical ceremony mocking misogyny with award categories such as Best Original Science and Pro-Lifetime Achievement. Margaret Cho hostswith a comedy, music and presenter lineup that includes Sandra Bernhard, Michelle Buteau, Stormy Daniels, Jordan Klepper, Kathy Najimy, Reformed Whores, the sex-advice columnist Dan Savage, Taylor Schilling, Dulcé Sloan, Natasha Lyonne and Jessica Pimentel from “Orange Is the New Black.” If you cannot make it to the live event, it will stream online on Oct. 28.
