Best known for her staged portraits of nude black women in colorfully cluttered settings, Ms. Lawson says that her images often come to her in dreams.  What’s more, she is part of a broader movement that recognizes the attractiveness of bodies that don’t conform to the conventional standards of beauty, whether prescribed by race or gender.
A selection of Ms. Lawson’s photographs opens on Oct. 13 at the Underground Museum, an exhibition space in Los Angeles dedicated to African-American culture; much of the work was displayed earlier this year in a show at the Carnegie Museum of Art in Pittsburgh. And last month, the Aperture Foundation published a handsome monograph that showcases 40 of her images, with an introductory essay by Zadie Smith.
In constructing scenes that combine the clarity of observed life with the startling strangeness of dreams, Ms. Lawson draws on the pioneering work of Jeff Wall; and, like Philip-Lorca diCorcia in his “Hustlers” series of the early ’90s, she places her models in environments that appear to be their own but are actually chosen, and sometimes decorated, by the photographer. Ms. Lawson is as attentive to furniture as she is to faces and bodies.
She grew up with such furniture in Rochester, N.Y., a city that was the headquarters for Kodak. She believes her career was predestined. Her grandmother worked in the household of George Eastman, who founded Kodak, and her mother held an administrative position in the company. An identical twin, Ms. Lawson in her youth was often confused with her sister, Dana, until, when they were both first-year students at Pennsylvania State University, Dana was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis, a disease that over time affected her mind as well as her body.
Along with conjuring up a legend-inspiring African past, Ms. Lawson’s photographs express her personal history, right down to her color choices for walls and clothing. For example, an icy blue that she favors was worn on top of a dark brown vestment in the tabernacle choir of her family’s nontraditional African-American church, which worshiped on Saturday, celebrated Hanukkah not Christmas, and regarded Jesus Christ as a prophet rather than a divinity.
To obtain her 2017 photograph, “Eternity,” she followed a woman as callipygian as the Venus of Willendorf, who disembarked at Ms. Lawson’s home subway station in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
“If you didn’t look twice at her on the A train, you would have been blind,” she said. “It’s her body, but it’s something else, too.” In the picture, the scantily clad subject’s sultry expression is as self-composed as the welcoming smile of the massively proportioned “Coney Island Bather,” who was photographed about three-quarters of a century ago by Lisette Model.
It is surprising how still surprising it is to see photographs that present plus-size women as desirable. Unusual, too, are Ms. Lawson’s photographs of half-dressed women and men that include small children (usually not their own) and toys. “When a woman sees a man with a baby, it’s a primal thing,” she says. “That he could make a baby adds to the attraction.” In contemporary culture, physical attractiveness isn’t typically presented as a package of fertility and a lure to procreation.
Ms. Lawson is raising a son, Judah, 16, and a daughter, Grace, 3, with her former husband, Aaron Gilbert, a painter. . She says that watching Mr. Gilbert work — the painstaking process, the attention to color, his use of family as a metaphor for spiritual connection — has deeply informed her photography.
“I wanted to have the same kind of weight he could have in my pictures,” she says. The two are still close. Sometimes Ms. Lawson will describe to him a dreamlike image she’s trying to capture, and he will make a sketch that she can then use to persuade her prospective models to collaborate.
Her exploration of the African-American experience has led Ms. Lawson to the Caribbean, South Africa, Ethiopia, Ghana and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Searching in Africa for an indigenous culture not deformed by the ongoing legacy of colonialism, she was disappointed.
Her quixotic quest was not a lost cause, because she is inventing the tableaux she photographs. In a small town an hour outside of Kinshasa, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, in 2015, she persuaded a man and woman to pose nude for her in a luxuriantly green setting. She titled the photograph, “The Garden.” Like Adam and Eve before the Fall, they are unashamed of their nakedness and secure in their freedom.
It is a condition that doesn’t exist, a state that may never have been known outside the Bible. But for Ms. Lawson, the prelapsarian couple represents not so much a lost paradise as a living vision. When you regard her subjects, with their leopard-patterned bodysuits, elaborate hairdos and proud stares, she believes that you can discern the image of these African ancestors, if only you look hard enough.