New York|New York Knew Some Schools in Its $773 Million Plan Were Likely to Fail. It Kept Children in Them Anyway.
New York Knew Some Schools in Its $773 Million Plan Were Likely to Fail. It Kept Children in Them Anyway.
Mayor Bill de Blasio is poised to end a program that sent children to poorly performing schools even as officials knew they had little hope of improving.
Mayor Bill de Blasio promised to “shake the foundations of New York City education” in 2014 with a new program called Renewal, a signature effort to improve the city’s 94 poorest-performing schools by showering them with millions of dollars in social services and teacher training.
A year later, aides raised a confidential alarm: About a third of those schools were likely to fail. The schools were not meeting goals that the city set for higher test scores, increased graduation rates and other academic measures — and probably never would, staff members in the Department of Education warned in an internal memo prepared for the mayor.
Mr. de Blasio kept most of the schools open. Now, after sending thousands of children into classrooms that staff members suspected were doomed from the start, the administration appears ready to give up on Renewal. Its cost: $773 million by the end of this school year.
Cheryl Watson-Harris, the top deputy to the schools chancellor, revealed at a meeting with principals last month that the city is poised to end Renewal, according to a recording of the meeting obtained by The Times. Eric F. Phillips, a spokesman for Mr. de Blasio, said a final decision had not been made.
It would be a disappointing end to a program that Mr. de Blasio had hoped would be a national model for fixing broken schools and a political rebuke to former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, who closed more than 100 schools, sometimes with punitive rhetoric that angered the city’s teachers’ union and parents. When schools are closed, the principal is typically fired, only half the staff members must be retained, and the school usually reopens under new leadership.
Decades of failed experiments in improving struggling schools have bedeviled districts from Newark to Rhode Island. A national effort frustrated President Barack Obama, whose strategy for improving schools produced mixed results.
But Renewal’s ideas were untested, and, almost from the start, the program was hobbled by bureaucracy and a tight timeline imposed by a mayor eager to show on a national stage that schools could improve without censure, according to internal documents and interviews with more than two dozen people connected to the program.
Renewal had few measurable effects on academic performance over two years, according to a study by the research organization RAND Corporation that was commissioned by the administration and presented in July. The Times obtained a draft of that report, which has not been made public.
About a quarter of the 94 Renewal schools improved enough to leave the program; another quarter have closed, removed grade levels or combined; and 50 remain. It is unclear what will happen to the schools that are still in Renewal.
Renewal was built on the theory that academic performance would improve if children were given a wide array of social services and teachers were better trained. The city paid for an extension of the school day, professional coaches for teachers and a suite of social supports such as mental health clinics, dentists and food pantries on site.
But in interviews with nine city staff members who worked on Renewal, all said it was clear within the first year that the program was veering off track. The staff members requested anonymity because they were still working with the city and were not authorized to speak or they did not want to jeopardize future employment.
Principals interviewed said confusing lines of authority meant they often did not know who their bosses were, which in turn left teachers puzzled. Department of Education officials suggested making academic goals easier to reach so more schools could be called a success, an internal memo showed. Staff members hesitated to close at least one school to avoid political backlash.
Mr. de Blasio declined to be interviewed for this article. His spokesman, Mr. Phillips, defended the program.
In a radio interview on Friday, conducted after this article was published, Mr. de Blasio defended the concept behind Renewal and argued that Mr. Bloomberg’s policy of closing schools was often harmful.
New York City has the nation’s largest school system, and Renewal’s rocky tenure could have repercussions beyond its borders. Experts in failing schools watched with trepidation, and growing anger, as the program faltered.
Mr. de Blasio announced the Renewal plan at an East Harlem school less than a year after he took office. Its goals were ambitious and its methods, by the mayor’s own admission, untested.
New York City has never found a universal solution to transform its most troubled schools, but Mr. Bloomberg’s plan to replace large failing high schools with small schools was showing results when it was halted in favor of Renewal. Still, Mr. Bloomberg’s approach was hardly a panacea: More than a third of the schools placed into the Renewal program were created during his administration.
In interviews, about a dozen researchers who study failing schools — some of whom have publicly criticized Renewal in the past — said the theory behind the program was not based on evidence.
While Renewal provided social supports that are often crucial for low-income children and families, most research has shown that schools do not transform without fundamental changes aimed directly at academic improvement. Those measures have included replacing teachers and principals, integrating schools racially and socioeconomically, or converting schools into charter schools. Promising efforts in Camden, N.J.; Lawrence, Mass.; and Dallas have included some of those factors.
“We should stop ourselves from spending money on things that don’t work,” said James Kemple, the executive director of New York University’s Research Alliance for New York City Schools.
In the radio interview, Mr. de Blasio said he did not “accept” research showing that school improvement requires dramatic changes such as integration or a takeover by charter schools.
Even as Department of Education officials worried that some schools were all but destined to fail, the city looked for ways to prop up Renewal, documents showed.
At Public School 111, a Queens school that greets visitors with a brightly colored mural that reads, “where learning has no limits,” only 8 percent of students received passing scores on the state math test this year — a lower number than before the school joined the Renewal program. More students received the lowest score on that exam this year compared with 2014. The school’s enrollment is as low as it was when Renewal began.
Documents show that officials considered closing or shrinking P.S. 111 in 2015, 2016 and 2017 but kept it open each year. One obstacle, according to a 2017 memo by Department of Education officials, was that a key ally, Assemblywoman Catherine Nolan, a Democrat from Queens, “would probably not approve.” Ms. Nolan said in an interview that safety and absenteeism had improved at the school and that the school’s culture had brightened through amenities, like the newly renovated cafeteria.
Education officials also considered changing the goals used to judge whether schools were a success, according to a separate memo prepared before the 2017-18 academic year. They suggested removing a target that measured the number of students who graduate from high school in six years.
“While eliminating this benchmark will have public relations ramifications, it also affords an opportunity to address the impending outcome proactively, while setting more schools up for success,” the memo read.
The same memo also advised adding a more vague goal, measuring “growth” instead of whether a school hit specific targets. That change could save 13 schools from closing, shrinking or merging, the memo said.
The graduation metric is still in place; the Department of Education did not put the growth idea into effect.
A year ago, in another sign the city did not consider the program widely successful, City Hall rejected a plan to add about two dozen schools, documents showed. Still, Renewal continued into another year for the remaining schools.
“We’re not giving up on it at all,” Carmen Fariña, who was then the schools chancellor, said when she announced the yearlong extension of the program in December.
There has been some progress in the Renewal schools. Since 2014, the high school graduation rate for Renewal schools increased to 66 percent from 52 percent; the high school dropout rate fell to 16 percent from 18 percent; and overall attendance increased to 89 percent from 84 percent, a finding that was generally backed up by the RAND study.
In the years since officials first privately acknowledged that Renewal was unlikely to produce the results that Mr. de Blasio wanted, parents, like Deborah Raiford, have been caught in the middle.
Ms. Raiford had not heard about the Renewal program when she enrolled her three grandchildren and one of her sons in P.S. 111 last year. That was her zoned school for the Queensbridge public housing projects in Long Island City.
Almost immediately, she wanted out.
 She said that other students bullied her grandson and that the school offered little help. She wanted another grandchild to undergo testing for a learning disability but received little guidance from the school.
Last week, Ms. Raiford transferred two of her grandchildren to Public School 76, which is three blocks away from P.S. 111 and has a similarly vulnerable population but stronger academics.
Her two grandchildren at P.S. 76 “came home much happier than they have been for six months,” Ms. Raiford said.
Of P.S. 111, Ms. Raiford said, “I just don’t think they are doing all that they can do” for the children there.
Some parents echoed Ms. Raiford’s criticism; others said they were satisfied with the school.
Walking through P.S. 111’s hallways recently, the principal, Dionne Jaggon, said she concentrated on making the school a warmer and more structured place for the students, most of whom come from low-income households and are black or Hispanic, and many of whom have special needs. City data shows the school is safer now than it was when she took over in 2014.
Mr. de Blasio has three years left in his term to try something different for schools with challenges as formidable as P.S. 111’s.
