The triplex penthouse in the Pritzker Prize-winning architect’s only Manhattan building is for sale. The price? Just $50 million.
It’s the cherry on top of the sundae, the tiara that completes the bouffant.
Whom are we kidding? It is the $50 million triplex penthouse at 520 West 28th Street, the jewel in the crown of the Pritzker Prize-winning architect Zaha Hadid’s first — and final — personally conceived New York building. This property will be listed on Oct. 18 by the developer, Related Companies, the last unit completed in the building, which is approximately half sold.
Ever since renderings of the 11-story residential tower next to the High Line began circulating a few years ago, the triplex, now known as Penthouse 37, has been a talking point. As the details emerged, we learned of sleek, white-columned interiors and a large, private outdoor terrace. The three levels were to be connected by a theatrical, twisting staircase.
Ms. Hadid never did make things easy. Achieving the liquid effect of her architecture — the rounded corners and smooth, sculptured surfaces — takes skill and a pile of money. The bendy 520 West 28th Street facade was trimmed in 954 pieces of hand-cut and hand-ground stainless steel. A lobby mural consists of elephantine slabs of marble carved with a water jet.
Inside Penthouse 37, which has five bedrooms and six and a half bathrooms and is 6,853 square feet, the usual hierarchy of living spaces is inverted. The private quarters occupy the lowest level. Three guest bedrooms are each connected to a marble bathroom, while the master suite is a sybaritic hub with a dressing room and a balcony. In one of the two master bathrooms, glass partitions that give an open feeling to showering or using the privy turn opaque with the flip of a switch.
The views from the master take in the High Line and the 5,500-square-foot sculpture garden on top of the art dealer Paul Kasmin’s new gallery, at 509 West 27th Street.
The next level up has the public rooms — the most striking, a 1,250-square-foot great room with wraparound glass walls and a ceiling height approaching 11 feet. There are also white oak floors, a fireplace and a balcony.
The kitchen is anchored by a streamlined block of Corian with a sink; in other words, the island Ms. Hadid designed with the Italian company Boffi. The Gaggenau appliances include two ovens (one steams), two refrigerators and a wine cooler.
In the library off the great room, the ceiling was dropped so that at least one space might be fairly described as cozy. Next to it is a fifth bedroom with a bathroom.
On the top level, the penthouse narrows to a glassy capsule, and the main event is the 2,218-square-foot private outdoor terrace. Occupants will have the lushest stretch of Manhattan’s art world at their feet while watching the towers of Hudson Yards (also a Related project) sprout to the north.
And they will have no need to take the stairs, no matter how much time and aggravation they cost. All three penthouse floors are reached by a pair of lobby elevators that open on two sides, accessing service halls as well as central spaces. There is also a private elevator.
“Would you like to see the amenities?” a visitor was asked. The building’s 75-foot swimming pool — which no one was using because everyone was at work or school or staring out the window, including Sting and Trudie Styler, who were reportedly renting in the building — was covered by a skylight that was covered by its own pool. Light filtered in and skipped across the surface.
The IMAX screening room has a dozen reclining leather seats that are so comfortable one is tempted to spend the night in them. The plunge pool in the hammam-style spa looks equally inviting.
 The robots are also programmed to summon your car at the request of your smartphone.
The visitor’s only remaining question was one of timing: With New York’s ultraluxury real estate market softening, had the moment passed to introduce another $50 million apartment?
“If anything, in this neighborhood, it’s all getting better,” Mr. Gushée said. He was partly alluding to a suite of galleries that opened next to the Zaha Hadid Building last month under the name High Line Nine. Then there is Hudson Yards, which someday will no longer be a construction zone.
