For two years, the pseudonymous literary sensation corresponded regularly with the director adapting “My Brilliant Friend” for HBO. But the resulting show is a testament to her elusiveness.
It seemed unlikely that Ferrante would agree. Costanzo thinks she might have been disappointed by the adaptations of her two previous novellas and that she wanted nothing more to do with what she has called “the world of show business, with its many moving parts and conspicuous cash flow.” He had already abandoned the idea when he received, through her publisher, an admiring message from Ferrante, issuing him a challenge. She was willing to cede him the rights to “The Lost Daughter” for six months, enough time for him to devise an adaptation that would please them both. For six months, Costanzo labored; for six months, “The Lost Daughter” resisted his intrusions, until finally he told her publisher he would renounce the rights. “I was just a kid,” he recalls.
For nine years, Costanzo heard nothing from Ferrante. He grew up and became one of Italian cinema’s youngest and most challenging auteurs. He directed a series of claustrophobic dramas not unlike Ferrante’s novellas, featuring characters whose lonely and inscrutable acts of destruction — a teenager’s self-mutilation in “The Solitude of Prime Numbers” (2010), a mother’s slow starvation of her child in “Hungry Hearts” (2014) — poison the people around them. His female leads, especially, inspire pity, fear and revulsion before they inspire sympathy, and then only sparingly. Then one day in 2016, he received a surprising phone call from Edizioni E/O informing him that he was one of a few directors Ferrante suggested for a television adaptation of “My Brilliant Friend”; some weeks later, the producers called to tell him that he had been chosen to direct.
Costanzo was reluctant. The last thing he wanted to do with his career was adapt a novel — and not just any novel, but a novel that had surpassed ordinary best-seller status to emerge, instead, as an event, a sensation, a literary pathology: “Ferrante fever,” as readers had taken to calling the frenzy that greeted the publication of each Neapolitan novel — the midnight-release parties; the grave discussions about the books’ covers; the jostling reviews, with each critic claiming to know her art more intimately than the critic who came before. He did not want to deal with the expectations of Ferrante’s readers, who were inclined to project onto her punishing tale of female friendship the faces of women they had once loved and hated in equal measure. But “My Brilliant Friend” was the rarest of opportunities: a second chance for him to create his own story with Elena Ferrante. “She was giving me her hands and saying: ‘I did it — why don’t you do it?’ ” he told me, reaching his hands into the empty space before him, as if she might appear to fold them into hers.
Now when Costanzo talks about Ferrante, it is with a deference you rarely see directors exercise toward writers whose work they adapt. She has commented by email on drafts of all eight of his scripts. She has flagged moments when his dialogue verges on the melodramatic. (“She was just saying, ‘This dialogue is ridiculous, the way she talks here is ridiculous.’ ”) She has protected him from serious missteps, like when he thought to cut the loud, quarrelsome wedding banquet that ends “My Brilliant Friend” from the series because he was overbudget and running behind schedule. (“She said: ‘Listen, the first moment I thought about “My Brilliant Friend,” the first image I had was a banquet, a very vulgar banquet of Neapolitan life. Please put the banquet back in.’ ”) “She is very strong,” Costanzo repeated, permitting himself a sheepish little laugh. “I like that.” When he recalled all the times he had risked disappointing her, he pouted, like a child who has failed, yet again, to live up to his mother’s expectations.
The Neapolitan novels tell the story of a writer, also named Elena (“Lenù,” for short), whose subject is the filth of the neighborhood in Naples where she grew up and her long acquaintance with Lila, the brilliant, disagreeable classmate she leaves behind and returns to intermittently over the next 50 years. When Lila disappears without warning at age 66, leaving no clothes, shoes, letters or photographs to testify to her existence, Lenù decides to write about their long and troublesome relationship: their shared love of reading, the education they defied their parents to pursue, the writing they collaborated on, the men they both loved, the children they raised together, all set against the backdrop of postwar Italy’s social and political turbulence. Spurred by anger and a desire for vengeance, Lenù sets out to counter Lila’s self-erasure by preserving her life in the form of a novel, making their history irrevocably present in the reader’s imagination.
Though the novels are billed as tales of female friendship, “friendship” always skates on the edge of absurdity — intimacy is inseparable from violation. Lenù is the one making art out of Lila’s life, but she suspects that Lila has driven her to do it, that the pleasure she derives from writing and reading is spiked by the pain of submitting to another’s will. It is a fitting model for the relationship Ferrante’s readers have with her novels, which are universally celebrated for their addictiveness. You are pulled, sometimes dragged, along by Ferrante’s prose with an intensity that seems at once utterly singular and reassuringly dispersed. To read her novels is to feel that you are drawing on a reservoir of shared emotion — rage, disgust, pity, indignation, tenderness — to which you have somehow, secretly, contributed.
Ferrante’s women are inscrutable, their minds deep and disordered and disinclined to sentimentality, to easy morals. As a narrator, Lenù recalls her younger self tentatively, piecing together hypotheses that tend to obscure rather than clarify her motivations. Her choice words in examining her actions are “maybe,” “or” and “who knows.” “Maybe, I thought, I’ve given too much weight to the cultivated use of reason, to good reading, to well-controlled language, to political affiliation,” she reflects on her education, the reason she has escaped the neighborhood while Lila has stayed behind. “Maybe, in the face of abandonment, we are all the same.” There is consciousness here — the quickening of a mind eager to reflect on its past — but no interiority: no private, orderly, honest “I” that maps the depths and boundaries of the self.
Yet it is precisely because Ferrante’s characters are so undefined that they seem readily inhabited by others, both inside and outside the novel. “I realized then that she wasn’t capable of thinking that she was her self and I was my self,” Lenù observes of Lila. It is a will to identification she reciprocates. “My model remained Lila,” she writes. “I wanted to say and do what I imagined she would say and do if she had my tools, if she had not confined herself within the space of the neighborhood.” The “I” that Ferrante conjures is restless, unbounded, permeable to the monstrous desires that many women feel but few dare express. It is easy to slip on and to mistake for your own.
Though her characters’ minds are indefinite and abstract, their bodies are always present. The women in Ferrante’s novels bleed and break. They know the monotonous injuries inflicted on them by men seeking only their own satisfaction, as well as the frank, intense sexual pleasure that arrives when you least expect it. In an extraordinary scene toward the end of “My Brilliant Friend,” when Lenù bathes Lila before her wedding and, many years later, remembers “the violent emotion that overwhelms you, so that it forces you to stay, to rest your gaze on the childish shoulders, on the breasts and stiffly cold nipples, on the narrow hips and the tense buttocks, on the black sex, on the long legs, on the tender knees, on the curved ankles, on the elegant feet; and to act as if it’s nothing when instead everything is there.” Here, there is no doubting “I.” There is only “you” — you, the reader — seduced into sharing the exquisite, confounding pleasure of desiring an imagined woman’s body.
What fun, exactly? The theorist Michel Foucault once observed that literary anonymity was nothing more than a puzzle to be solved. But literary anonymity, as Ferrante practices it, is not a puzzle — it is an expressive strategy. It has a style and goals, one of which is to multiply and muddle the distinct egos of the author: Elena as the writer of the Neapolitan novels; Elena as their first-person narrator; Elena as a commentator on the novels she has written. Sometimes the tension that holds these egos in check is precisely calibrated, thrilling to behold. “Elena Ferrante is the author of several novels,” she wrote in an interview with The Guardian, weaving between the first and third person. “There is nothing mysterious about her, given how she manifests herself — perhaps even too much — in her own writing, the place where her creative life transpires in absolute fullness.” The final Neapolitan novel, “The Story of the Lost Child,” ends with Lenù writing a “remarkably successful story” about her and Lila called “A Friendship,” a double of the Neapolitan novels, which are full of ur-texts written by Elena Greco. Shielded by her anonymity, Ferrante has subsumed all traces of her life into an elaborate fiction, and asked us, her readers, to help sustain the enchantment — to dissolve the boundaries between the Elenas until we can no longer disentangle fiction from reality, or identify who among us is responsible for creating this enthralling state of affairs. We are all her collaborators.
Ferrante often describes her novels as mysterious, inviolable creatures that have escaped her grasp and journeyed freely into the world. Their immortal life offers a supplement to her mortal one — and suggests that we can revive the historical moment before authorship, before writers owned the words they wrote, before the spines of books came bearing names. Yet, paradoxically, Ferrante’s self-erasure has had the opposite effect from what she claims. It has resurrected a powerful, almost transcendent, myth of the author as removed from the realities of time and space, a creator whose novels spring from her head armored and fully formed, a theorist of her own conditions of existence. What other writer enjoys such power?
It is dangerous to draw too close to that power; it convinces you that you can share in it. When I first asked Ferrante’s English-language editor if I could put some questions to her for this article, he explained that she was not doing any interviews. Then for reasons unknown to me, she made an exception. It was impossible not to speculate about why. I was vain, imagining that the questions I proposed to her editor about literary form and the politics of collaboration were smarter, more respectful, than the questions she was used to fielding about friendship or identity. I wanted to please, and I imagined that if I did, our exchange would vibrate with intellectual camaraderie.
Yet over the course of a two-month correspondence, which was mediated by her editor, my editor and her translator, Ann Goldstein, the distance between us seemed only to expand. She answered questions I had not asked and ignored the ones I had. She got irritated, apologized, misinterpreted my phrasing — willfully, I suspected. When I asked her what living authors she enjoyed reading, she wrote: “I would have to give a very complex answer, talking about various stages of my life. I’ll answer you some other time.” When, I wondered, imagining that one day I might open my door and find a children’s wagon full of moldy novels, with no address, no note, no glimpse of a telltale figure hurrying away.
As the subordinate, I could only strategize how to ask questions that would compel her to write useful answers for me. My initial plan was to present myself as a new mother who found in Ferrante’s fiction the emotional tumult of motherhood as I am living it. In the note that preceded my questions, I told her that I have found myself returning to the third book in the Neapolitan series, “Those Who Leave and Those Who Stay,” many times since having my two children. No other novel I have read captures the vicissitudes of motherhood with such precision: the power and vulnerability of caring for others, the intimacy and distance between mother and child. When I became a mother, it was painful to realize that my mother had a separate life, a different self, before she became my mother; painful too to think that my children might not realize this about me until it was too late.
She did not acknowledge my note.
I tried again with a question, only this time my tone was less sentimental, more acerbic. I observed that contemporary writing on motherhood has an irritating tendency to treat children as psychological impediments to creativity — as if a child must steal not only time and energy from his mother but also language and thought. But her novels are different: They entertain the possibility that motherhood might be an experience conducive to creativity, even when it is tiring or onerous. For a short time, Lila transforms motherhood into an act of grace, and though she finds her children burdensome, Lenù’s greatest professional success comes after she becomes a mother. What did she take to be the relationship between time spent taking care of words and time spent taking care of children?
There was something different about the style of this answer. The “I” she wielded seemed more present, the defenseless voice of the writer behind the author. I asked her to say more about being a terrified mother. What, I asked, was the nature of that terror for her?
She retreated, adopting the impersonal tone of the commentator once again. “I’m afraid of mothers who sacrifice their lives to their children,” she wrote. “I’m afraid of mothers who surrender themselves completely and live for their children, who hide the difficulties of motherhood and pretend even to themselves to be perfect mothers.” It is tempting to rewrite these statements to reclaim the immediacy of her “I”: “I was afraid of sacrificing my life to my children; I was afraid of surrendering myself completely.” But nothing authorizes it. It may not even be the right interpretation; she may really be talking about her fear of other mothers. Why do I want to make it about her? To do so would be to traffic in fiction. But the traffic in fiction is pleasurable. It prompts me to study her language carefully, to appreciate anew the words she has chosen, the phrases she repeats, how easily she moves between sentences. It prompts me to rewrite her words to project fears I may or may not have onto the figure of the author — the character she and I are sustaining. It lets me speak without speaking for myself.
Last try. For the past two months, I told her, my 2-year-old son has developed an obsession with her children’s book “The Beach at Night.” The book involves a self-pitying doll a little girl abandons on the beach at sunset, preferring to play with her new pet cat. At night, the doll is discovered by the Mean Beach Attendant, a man who pulls a thin golden hook from his lips and forces it into the doll’s mouth, ripping from her a secret that she has guarded with great care: her name. It struck me as an unsubtle allegory for Ferrante’s anonymity, and it was hard to shake the sense that children were not its target audience. But my son has two copies of the book: one he keeps in his school bag, one for his bedside table, and sometimes before he goes to bed, he stares for a very long time at the strange, sad pictures of the doll.
My son has just had a little brother, I told her. He is also disappointed, and I use “disappointment” to mirror how I think she is using it: to minimize a child’s sense of abandonment, making his despair more palatable to the mother responsible for upending his world. Maybe my son is more discerning than I have realized. Maybe he has taken the book as it is, innocent of authors and allegories, and found in it a trace of his experience: a story that begins with the injury of replacement and ends with partial restitution — the reunion of the little girl, her doll and, begrudgingly, the new cat. In his innocence, my son may be a better reader than I am.
Having failed to see more than a glimpse of Ferrante in our correspondence, I sought traces of her influence in the early episodes of “My Brilliant Friend.” Over the course of two years, she and Costanzo have exchanged regular emails; screenwriter Francesco Piccolo described her as “a kind of supervisor” of his work. “There is nothing wrong with a man wanting to make a film from my books,” she wrote in The Guardian last month. But “even if he had a strongly defined vision of his own, I would ask him to respect my view, to adhere to my world, to enter the cage of my story without trying to drag it into his.” How had Ferrante coaxed Costanzo into the cage of her story? What were her instructions for transforming the uncertain stuff of Lenù’s consciousness into a definite series of images?
Ferrante pronounced the child Lila “perfect” and the child Lenù “effective” at setting up the narrator’s “indecipherable” quality. They and their teenage counterparts are amateur actresses chosen from an open casting call for the show that drew more than 9,000 people; Costanzo and his casting director were looking for girls with “sad eyes” and “something a little bit broken.” But their excellent performances do not stop the episodes from feeling constrained. Costanzo outsources the narrator’s emotional utterances to a voice-over, which he worried Ferrante would find “cheesy.” Unlike the voice-over, which addresses the audience in formal Italian, the actresses speak stiffly in a 1950s Neapolitan dialect tailored for the series. The sets are realistic, but strenuously so, resembling the backdrops you often see in heritage dramas. The neighborhood is sufficiently dusty and poor but curiously underpopulated compared with the human riot of Ferrante’s novels, whose atmosphere of violence Costanzo literalizes in overdrawn, almost comical, fights among angry women.
The show is not always successful in capturing the senselessness of inner life. Sometimes the glances or grimaces intended to convey disorder simply make the actresses look confused or vacant. But when they — Ferrante, Costanzo, the actresses — get it right, it is electrifying. There is a magnificent scene in the second episode of “My Brilliant Friend,” just after Lenù has been beaten for skipping school, when she and Lila gaze at each other from opposite ends of the courtyard where they live. It is a shot familiar from Costanzo’s recent films but intensified by Ferrante’s feminist sensibilities: The space between the girls hangs heavy with pain, injustice, loneliness, but also the dawning of a collective consciousness. You can sense the confused stirrings of opposition, which over the course of the four novels will swell into defiance, a desire for retribution, the mutual yearning to fight alongside each other — a desire we, as viewers, can share. It’s an opening of Ferrante’s cage, an invitation to join her in the shadows.