A gunman opened fire in a Pittsburgh synagogue on Saturday, leaving 11 people dead and six others injured.
We will be here to help you through this horrific episode. We’ll get through this darkest day of Pittsburgh’s history by working together. On Saturday, Oct. 27, at approximately 9:50 a.m., Robert Bowers entered the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh’s Squirrel Hill neighborhood. At that time, members of the Tree of Life Synagogue were engaged in religious services and worship. Bowers was armed with multiple weapons. He had three Glock 357 handguns and an AR-15 assault rifle. The most terrifying thing is just how normal he seemed. “No tattoos?” No tattoos that I could see, he just looked like an average, 50-year old dude. I got a text this morning, at a few minutes after 10. My friend who lives across the street said, “There is an active shooter at the Tree of Life.” And the first thing, of course, we did was turn on the TV, and that was confirmed. What we do going forward? We vote. This evil, anti-Semitic attack is an assault on all of us. It’s an assault on humanity.
What has changed, said several experts in interviews, is that conspiracy theories and “dog whistles” that resonate with anti-Semites and white supremacists are being circulated by establishment sources, including the president and members of Congress. Bizarre claims about Jews have moved from the margins to the establishment.
Prominent recent examples include unfounded conspiracy theories about George Soros, a wealthy donor to Democratic Party causes and a Jewish émigré from Hungary who survived the Nazis.
Mr. Soros has also been accused of financing the caravan of Hondurans and Guatemalans fleeing north on foot through Mexico — another claim with no factual basis.
Tom Steyer is an Episcopalian and is of Jewish descent. Michael Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York City, is Jewish. After more explosive devices were found in the homes and offices of other Democratic leaders and supporters, Mr. McCarthy deleted the tweet.
Anti-Semitism has also become a charged topic on many American college campuses, with Israel as the detonator.
Activists on the left — sometimes including young Jews — call for boycotts and divestments from companies doing business in Israel, or the occupied territories. Mainstream Jewish groups are now branding such campaigns as anti-Semitism. Where to draw the line between criticism of Israel and anti-Semitism is a growing source of friction in many colleges and state capitals.
In Europe, Jewish leaders have been confronting open hatred toward Jews, also sometimes linked to animosity toward Israel.
In France, Jews have increasingly faced attacks and insults from members of the country’s large Muslim community. In March, an 85-year-old Holocaust survivor, Mireille Knoll, was knifed to death in her apartment by a young man who shouted “Allahu akbar.” Prosecutors classified it as an anti-Semitic hate crime.
In a 2015 study, 42 percent of French Jews surveyed said that they had suffered insults or aggressive acts at the hands of Muslims.
In Germany, anti-Semitism remains a daily occurrence, sometimes taking on the form of criminal attacks on Jews or Jewish institutions, but often in more casual insults or the questioning of the country’s post-World War II commitment to “never again” repeat the Nazi Holocaust.
One of the most prominent anti-Semitic attacks this year, in which a young Syrian struck a man wearing a skullcap on the street of a trendy Berlin neighborhood, prompted the head of Germany’s main Jewish organization to warn Jews against openly wearing skullcaps, or other public displays of their religion.
A demonstration in support of the country’s Jews drew thousands of people to the streets, but months later, in the midst of violent demonstrations by neo-Nazis in the eastern city of Chemnitz, masked assailants threw rocks and bottles at a local Jewish restaurant and shouted anti-Semitic insults, the owner told the police.
Nadine Epstein, editor in chief of Moment, an independent Jewish magazine in the United States, said that in 2014 the magazine did a special section on anti-Semitism, interviewing a wide range of scholars and leaders in the field. She said that her conclusion was that anti-Semitism, while persistent, was mostly a problem in Europe. But “it wasn’t really an issue in the U.S.,” she said.
Moment magazine now has a web page to monitor anti-Semitism around the world, something Ms. Epstein said she never imagined doing.