Art & Design|Judd Foundation Is Renovating Its Marfa Buildings. The Project Isn’t Minimal.
Judd Foundation Is Renovating Its Marfa Buildings. The Project Isn’t Minimal.
Donald Judd entered the pantheon of Minimalist art for works like his “Judd boxes,” deceptively simple containers that stand on the floor or get stacked on walls.
This fall, the Judd Foundation has started shoring up the walls themselves, specifically the cluster of buildings it owns in and around Marfa, Tex., where the artist lived and worked starting in the 1970s.
Led by his children, Rainer and Flavin Judd, the foundation has embarked on a several-year project that will eventually involve renovating six of its structures, out of the 21 total it owns in the area, to fulfill plans the artist wasn’t able to complete in his lifetime.
The first phase, which costs about $2 million, is already underway and so is the fund-raising. It will rehab two buildings, the Architecture Office and part of the compound known as the Block. In the Architecture Office building, slated to be completed in 2020, visitors will now be able to see Judd’s architectural models and drawings, furniture and other design objects.
The overhaul comes as Ms. Temkin readies a coming retrospective of Judd’s work, which will open after expansions at MoMA, designed by Diller Scofidio + Renfro, are completed, and as the Judd sites in Marfa grow ever more popular as a pilgrimage destination for art lovers.
The foundation was created in 1996, and it was principally endowed in 2006 by a sale of Judd’s works at Christie’s.
“First off, we had to deal with the immediate emergency, which was the condition of 101 Spring Street,” Rainer Judd said of the artist’s home and studio in SoHo, which reopened in 2013 after a $23 million renovation.
There was no mystery as to the rest of the artist’s plans. “We were left with a lot of direction, and it’s just taking a long time to extend and finish it all,” Ms. Judd said.
She added that she was pleased that the first phase includes a small project space that wasn’t outlined by her father, allowing the siblings to make their own mark.
