Christine Blasey Ford. Deborah Ramirez. Julie Swetnick. Lisa Murkowski. Even Amy Chua. They will face the consequences. Justice Kavanaugh won’t.
In Justice Brett Kavanaugh’s testimony to the Senate Judiciary Committee recently, he lamented that his family and his reputation had been “totally and permanently destroyed” by allegations of sexual assault.
Yet Judge Kavanaugh became Justice Kavanaugh on Saturday. The people who will, for many decades, face the consequences for his tortured nomination are women.
 She moved her sons in with friends so they could continue to attend school.
Days after Dr. Blasey named the “uproarious laughter” of her assailants as her strongest memory of the assault, President Trump mocked her testimony at a rally in Mississippi — to uproarious laughter and applause.
When Deborah Ramirez came forward to share how she was “embarrassed and ashamed and humiliated” by Justice Kavanaugh in college, and offering witnesses she said could corroborate the incident, she was dismissed as a “phony” by Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah and “messed up” by President Trump.
Julie Swetnick, who also alleged sexual misconduct by Justice Kavanaugh at high school parties, was even more forcefully dismissed as a promiscuous liar by defenders of Justice Kavanaugh. Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee went so far as to release a salacious and uncorroborated letter from Dennis Ketterer, a man who claimed that Ms. Swetnick once told him she enjoyed group sex and that she had psychological problems.
Renate Schroeder Dolphin, the subject of sexual insinuations by Justice Kavanaugh and his friends in their high school yearbook, found her teenage sex life a subject of national speculation.
And of course this is only what’s been made public.
It was always likely that Justice Kavanaugh’s accusers would be crucified on a national stage. That has not changed since Anita Hill was vilified and Clarence Thomas ascended to the Supreme Court. And their mistreatment will undoubtedly deter other survivors from coming forward.
The repercussions of Justice Kavanaugh’s victory will directly affect other women as well.
They are not alone. Throughout the process, men overlooked Justice Kavanaugh’s behavior to criticize the women who reported it. Senator Dianne Feinstein of California has been roundly vilified, both for withholding Dr. Blasey’s claim in accordance with her wishes and for the fact that it eventually leaked. Without a hint of irony, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina rejected an investigation into allegations against Justice Kavanaugh but demanded a “wholesale and full-scale investigation” into Senator Feinstein’s handling of the letter.
The Senate owes an apology to the women whose reputations have been ruined by coming forward, and must develop better procedures for reporting and investigating sexual assault claims in the future.
We need to hold men accountable. A bigger man than Justice Kavanaugh would have apologized to Renate Schroeder Dolphin for turning her into a high school joke. A more responsible Senate Judiciary Committee would have taken their claims seriously and demanded a thorough, fair investigation.
Justice Kavanaugh won’t have to answer for the damage his confirmation process inflicted. We still should.
Ryan Thoreson is a lecturer at Yale Law School.