
The focus on local races comes as overhaul efforts have stalled on the federal level. Attorney General Jeff Sessions has vowed to aggressively prosecute nonviolent drug crimes, and President Trump has praised policing tactics such as stop-and-frisk.
The push to rethink criminal justice practices has been embraced by liberals and some conservatives, and polls show a majority of voters favor reducing the number of nonviolent drug offenders who are sent to prison. But disagreement remains about exactly how to revamp district attorney offices, which handle most criminal cases in the country.
Others are proposing more aggressive measures. Rachael Rollins in Boston, who has no Republican challenger in November, released a list of low-level crimes, such as disturbing the peace, that she would decline to prosecute altogether.
In Dallas, Mr. Soros has given more than $46,000 worth of polling to Mr. Creuzot’s campaign through the Texas Justice & Public Safety PAC. And the Texas Organizing Project, a grass-roots economic and racial justice organization that Mr. Soros also funds, has donated more than $190,000 worth of canvassing.
Some conservatives, however, said they preferred focusing on changing sentencing laws, and warned against dragging the prosecutor’s office into partisan fights.
The district attorney race in Dallas has attracted extra attention because the county has been rocked by high-profile police shootings and is home to one of the largest inmate populations in the country. A federal lawsuit accuses the county of unfairly holding poor suspects in jail until their trials, while wealthier suspects post bail and walk free.
The killing of Mr. Jean has increased the pressure on Ms. Johnson, one of the few remaining Republican officials left in a countywide position. Ms. Johnson, who was appointed by Gov. Greg Abbott to serve out the term of a predecessor who resigned over mental health issues, rarely advertises her party affiliation.
She has earned praise for stabilizing an office of more than 200 attorneys, which fell into disarray under previous leadership.
And she has championed some changes, including an “expunction expo,” in which people who have been arrested — but never convicted — can have their records wiped clean. She has also promised not to seek cash bail from people caught with small amounts of marijuana, although they are still subject to up to $2,000 in fines and six months in jail.
But others say that Ms. Johnson’s policies fall short of what is required. In the first eight months of this year, more than 600 people were arrested in Dallas County solely for possessing small amounts of marijuana. As many as half had to pay cash bail in order to be released before their trials, according to researchers at the Deason Criminal Justice Reform Center.
“Faith Johnson has articulated more progressive positions as they’ve become more popular within Dallas County, but she hasn’t actually followed through with them,” said Jennifer Soble, senior legal counsel at the Justice Collaborative Engagement Project, a new group that analyzes data for voters before district attorney elections.
“He was critical in changing the narrative and the hearts and the minds of these politicians,” said Ana Yáñez-Correa, who served as executive director of the Texas Criminal Justice Coalition at the time.
But even Mr. Creuzot has been pushed to adjust his message in this election. The Texas Organizing Project backed his opponent in the Democratic primary, Elizabeth Frizell, who promised even more sweeping reforms, such as halting prosecutions of low-level marijuana possession. After Mr. Creuzot prevailed, Brianna Brown, deputy director of the project, said she urged him to make ending mass incarceration a more central theme of his campaign.
“How do you end mass incarceration? We want to hear them say the words,” said Ms. Brown, of the candidates.
Now that phrase — “end mass incarceration” — is the first thing that visitors see when they go to Mr. Creuzot’s website. Diversion courts like the one he pioneered are only a small part of the solution now, he says. More drastic changes — such as reforming the cash bail system — are needed, he says.
