Some elections are about hope. Some elections are about change. And some elections are about fear.
I started the day watching the sun rise over the ocean in Miami, thinking that’s what I’d write you all today — how candidates from both sides had turned to scare tactics in the final weeks of the election.
Well, it turns out that if you stoke enough fake fears, they can become real.
Today, pipe bombs were discovered in packages sent to public officials all over the country, including former President Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton and the CNN offices in New York.
While officials haven’t yet announced a suspect or motive, all of the intended recipients are favorite targets of right-wing politicians and media.
But they’ve also created a political climate with such heightened rhetoric that, for people exposed to the constant drumbeat of fear, real danger can feel like an inevitable outcome.
Voters have spent months hearing about imagined threats — a caravan of criminals about to storm the border, the total demise of government, riots over immigration and an epidemic of false sexual assault allegations.
I’ve seen some of it myself during my trip to Florida this week.
As my colleagues wrote this week, President Trump has turned to fear as a campaign tactic, invoking “an angry left-wing mob,” and Republican candidates have latched onto the message.
But Democrats haven’t been mincing their words in response. In fact, as Election Day has neared, they’ve grown more aggressive in their remarks, too.
At a fund-raiser in Coral Gables this afternoon, Mrs. Clinton addressed the news of the bombs.
“It’s a time of deep divisions, and we have to do everything we can to bring our country together,” she told a crowd of 200 donors.
But it’s worth noting how she talked about this election just 15 days ago.
“You cannot be civil with a political party that wants to destroy what you stand for, what you care about,” she told CNN.
Obviously, there’s a difference between political protests and actual violence. But as politicians in this heated election encourage their supporters to fear the other side, it’s not hard to imagine that for some, that line can start to look a little bit blurry.
“Be cool!” one of the Democratic activists completely failed to whisper to another.
So began Tuesday evening at a suburban Atlanta phone bank, as Michelle Kwan, the most decorated American figure skater in history, arrived to dial for Georgia’s energized Democrats, including Stacey Abrams, the nominee for governor.
It was, Ms. Kwan suggested in a room filled with smartphones, a reliable old-school fix for a riddle of every campaign: how to stir voters to actually vote.
And so Ms. Kwan, who copped to feeling “frustrated” and having “moments where I have avoided watching the television” after the 2016 election, sat alone at a desk, dialing would-be voters ahead of Ms. Abrams’s debate with Brian Kemp.
But does she ever mention that she is that Michelle Kwan?
I’m Patting Myself on the Back Today!! Just finished my 1,000th Postcard to Urge People to Vote; ready to go to Post Office tomorrow. I can only hope and pray that it helps. Our country is in such a mess; it’s scary.
Your 92 yr. old Great Grandma from Iowa!
Our three best results for Democrats in G.O.P. territory have been in Virginia’s Fifth District, New Mexico’s Second and Florida’s 15th. One thing they have in common: no incumbents. Also, in the special elections over the last two years, the G.O.P. spent millions to knock back Democrats. These races have flown under the radar.
In our polling of the Florida governor’s and Senate races, we’re also asking Floridians whether they’ll vote for the ballot measure to restore voting rights to former felons. It’s early, but “Yes” is leading at 61 percent to 30 percent (9 percent undecided). The threshold for passage is 60 percent.
• Half a century ago, a typical Sears salesman could retire with a nest egg worth well over a million in today’s dollars. Today’s Amazon workers have nothing close to that. Here’s why corporate America stopped sharing the rewards of success with workers.

• Over the course of eight years, Google Earth updated its satellite imagery of every mile of the continental United States — except for one small square in Nevada. Over at Motherboard, two writers try to get to the bottom of it.
• Early voting begins in West Virginia.
• Debate in the New Jersey Senate race, 8 p.m. Watch it here.
• Debate in the Florida governor’s race, 7 p.m. Watch it here.
• Debate in the Michigan governor’s race, 8 p.m. Watch it here.
Bomb threats, the caravan, the midterm elections: I think we could all use some penguins in sweaters right now.
Isabella Grullón Paz and Margaret Kramer contributed to this newsletter.
