The potential bankruptcy of Sears is really a lesson in timing: It might have had a shot if its chief executive, Eddie Lampert, had ripped off the Band-Aid six years ago.
A deadline for Sears to make a $134 million debt payment hits on Monday, and the company has already missed payments to some vendors, Reuters reported on Thursday. Mr. Lampert, who is also the chairman and top shareholder of Sears, has bailed out the chain in the past. He and his fund, ESL Investments, are owed $2.5 billion as a creditor. His proposal to infuse $480 million into Sears and carry away some assets has been rebuffed by a special committee of directors. Other creditors have reached the end of their rope.
It’s easy to see why. Even among a sea of retail failures — from Toys “R” Us to Mattress Firm, which filed for bankruptcy protection last week — Sears’ failure is dramatic. Mr. Lampert acquired the company in an $11 billion deal in 2005, and merged it with Kmart, which he already owned. The market capitalization of Sears has fallen from nearly $30 billion to around $40 million in a decade.
One problem is underinvestment. Sears’ capital expenditure was $80 million in its last accounting year, around one-fifth of what it was in 2012. Poorly stocked shelves and a shabby environment drive customers away, and it is hard to get them back.
Restructuring a failing retailer isn’t impossible, but two things are needed.
One is a plausible plan to be profitable one day. Six years ago, Sears might just have been able to slip from the vise: That was the last year it made positive earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization, at $6 million. Now, it is understandably hard to convince creditors that there’s anything worth saving.
The other essential ingredient is a leader with credibility. If Mr. Lampert had aggressively worked to shutter Kmart (which competes too closely with Target and Walmart), shrink the footprint of Sears, and jettison commoditized product lines like clothing, he might now have creditors’ full attention.
That moment has now passed.