There were no surprise celebrity guests to come to the rescue of “Saturday Night Live” this weekend — no return visits from Matt Damon as Judge Brett Kavanaugh or Alec Baldwin as President Trump. So the show’s ensemble cast was on its own, for better or for worse, to address Kavanaugh’s contentious confirmation to the Supreme Court in its cold opening, just a few hours after the narrow Senate vote.
This broadcast, hosted by the comic actress Awkwafina (“Ocean’s 8,” “Crazy Rich Asians”) — one of the very few Asian women to host the show in its history — and featuring the musical guest Travis Scott, made an oblique acknowledgment of the representation issues that “S.N.L.” frequently faces. The episode also addressed, in comic fashion, a controversial speech that the rapper Kanye West made on set in support of Trump last week after the closing credits rolled.
But first, that cold open.
In a sketch purporting to be a TV broadcast from a raucous, revelry-filled Republican locker room, Heidi Gardner played the CNN correspondent Dana Bash, quizzing various senators who were cheering Kavanaugh’s appointment. “There a lot of pacemakers being put to the test tonight,” she said.
Back in 2000, I came here to 30 Rock and waited outside when my idol, Lucy Liu, hosted “S.N.L.” I was a kid — yes — I was a kid, I didn’t have a ticket so I knew I wasn’t getting in. But I just wanted to be near the building. And I remember how important that episode was for me and how it totally changed what I thought was possible for an Asian-American woman. Standing here tonight is a dream I never thought would come true. So, thank you, Lucy, for opening the door. I wasn’t able to make it in the building back then, but 18 years later, I am hosting the show. I love you, Lucy Liu.
At the “Weekend Update” desk, anchors Colin Jost and Michael Che continued to riff on the Kavanaugh confirmation.
My question is for the five out of six Republican women that voted for Kavanaugh. So are y’all like hostages? This feels like one of those horror movies where the white lady’s in love with the monster but doesn’t know it. And all the black people watching are like, “Aw, man, you about to get ate.” This is not good for any of us.  If a white lady in tears can’t get justice, then there’s no hope for my black [expletive] in Jordans.
With the midterm elections approaching, the actors playing the Trump sons said that they had both been given important assignments by their father. “He asked me to stump for Republicans on the campaign trail,” Day said.
