Readers reflect angrily on the divisive confirmation process, and what it says about America today.
The great sportswriter Grantland Rice wrote, “It’s not whether you win or lose, it’s how you play the game.” I am sure that as an athlete and a coach, Justice Brett Kavanaugh knows these words. It is indisputable that he lied multiple times to the Senate Judiciary Committee and that his angry outbursts and hostile accusations were embarrassingly undignified. Justice Kavanaugh clearly won the prize; he is now a Supreme Court justice for life. However, he will forever be remembered for how he played the game.
How naïve to think that a Supreme Court nominee would rely on education, credentials, experience, integrity — that sort of thing — to be confirmed. It might have been like that in the past, but now it’s like auditioning for a reality TV show, with intense coaching and role playing.
First, a crash course in how to show you have the right stuff, and then, if the parameters change, how to let the dogs out, and snarl and bark to make sure everyone knows just how mad you are at the political machinations of the other side. Practice blustering and challenging to avoid giving direct replies to difficult questions — like the ones you are expected to answer with a simple yes or no.
The backstage maneuvering of this confirmation was sordid — raw political skulduggery. Brett Kavanaugh could have said no, that he wouldn’t play the Republicans’ game, but it looks as if that’s not the kind of man he is.
My abortion was in 1956 on a kitchen table in a dingy house in a seedy area of Atlanta. I was impregnated during a workplace rape by a man of privilege and entitlement. Sixty-two years later I recall every detail of the assault, although I can’t tell you how I got home.
I am heartbroken to know we will have on the Supreme Court one alleged sexual harasser who has been there for more than a quarter of a century, one justice whose seat was blatantly stolen and another who lied repeatedly under oath while reimagining his youth.
None have empathy for those less privileged. And all three are committed to sending us back to the dark days I knew, when women were routinely denied the right to make their own medical decisions. God help us.
Senator Susan Collins’s speech to the Senate on Friday was breathtaking in its dishonesty, misrepresenting Brett Kavanaugh’s record and statements, and ignoring the scores of people who wanted to talk to the F.B.I. about Mr. Kavanaugh’s heavy drinking to the point of blacking out and who could back Deborah Ramirez’s allegations. They were never interviewed in a whitewash of an investigation.
Every vote setting back democracy that Justice Kavanaugh makes on the Supreme Court in the next few decades is on her.
So much for those who thought that Susan Collins was a modern-day Senator Margaret Chase Smith, the moderate Republican senator who represented Maine from 1949 to 1973. History shows that when the stakes were high for a truly conservative cause, Ms. Collins voted with the Republicans. Over the long run, her record does not show any evidence of independence when it came down to what the Republican leadership demanded.
I know the record of Senator Smith, and Susan Collins is no Margaret Chase Smith.
Senator Susan Collins is a thoughtful woman considered to be a moderate Republican who has always supported women. She delivered a thoughtful, well-reasoned speech in support of Brett Kavanaugh on the Senate floor. For her efforts, she was immediately vilified by various people and groups on the left. Thank goodness Senator Collins spoke out for Mr. Kavanaugh, not allowing the loudmouthed mob to get its way. She deserves our sincere thanks.
The writer is a former Senate page.
 No one will believe you. The president of the United States will mock you.  The F.B.I. won’t even talk to you. If your only witness is the other guy who held you down, good luck (especially if he was too drunk even to remember). You are the one who will be punished, not the perpetrator. We’ll even give him a seat on the Supreme Court. 
Regardless of how one feels about whether Brett Kavanaugh should sit on the Supreme Court, there is cause for alarm about the secrecy shrouding the process that has led to his nomination. The White House is withholding more than 100,000 pages of records from Mr. Kavanaugh’s tenure as a lawyer in the George W. Bush administration, and Senate Republicans refuse to release even scant information from the F.B.I. background check into sexual abuse allegations against Mr. Kavanaugh.
We have a right to know what our public officials and agencies are doing and the bases for their actions. Depriving us of this information puts our democracy in grave peril.
 Brett Kavanaugh’s appointment to the Supreme Court is a sad day in our history, but none of us have had to endure what you did over these past months. You have been a profile in courage, and we owe you a debt of gratitude. We have a lot of work to do, but you have inspired so many to keep working to make this a country that values women.
I fear that Senator Dianne Feinstein’s speech before the Senate on Friday was counterproductive. She pointed out concerns of many law scholars that Brett Kavanaugh would not be unbiased, would not be impartial and would be vindictive. Since these were exactly the traits that the Republicans were looking for, it helped to assure them that they had the right man.
The F.B.I. investigation of Brett Kavanaugh did prove something. It proved that the F.B.I. is not biased against President Trump.
