If a lawsuit over affirmative action is successful, would-be college students may have to hide their race.
Professor Boddie has advised universities on how to comply with federal law on affirmative action.
Imagine this scenario: An admissions officer sits down to read a stack of applications, but they’re heavily redacted because the college must censor all references to an applicant’s race.
The admissions officer can consider an applicant’s gender, where she grew up, whether she preferred the Yankees to the Red Sox and every other conceivable part of her background or identity. 
That could become the reality for every college if a group of Asian-American students denied admission to Harvard wins a lawsuit. They want to outlaw the modest use of race in admissions that the Supreme Court has twice upheld as vital to college students’ education. They claim that Harvard sets a cap on the number of Asian-Americans it will admit, an assertion the college will continue to vigorously deny when the trial begins Monday in Federal District Court in Boston.
The lawsuit asks the court to bar colleges from being able to consider, learn about or even become aware of an applicant’s race. Eventually, applicants might stop discussing their race altogether, omitting things like leadership roles in their high school’s Latino Student Alliance or choosing not to write about icons like Dolores Huerta — all because they might be worried about indicating their racial identity.
This case could have a devastating effect. Consider a black student who grew up on the South Side of Chicago or a Hmong applicant who lives in a working-class neighborhood in Minneapolis. Both of them have likely had very different experiences from white applicants.
Under Harvard’s current admissions process, they could discuss the role race played in their lives. A white applicant might also want to share her experiences with race. But in the plaintiffs’ alternate universe, it would be illegal for an admissions committee to take that into account.
The Asian-American students who have brought the case argue that colleges should focus only on grades and standardized test scores. But, according to Harvard, a large majority of its 40,000-plus applicants are academically qualified, and applicants with perfect grade point averages or standardized test scores far exceed the number of seats in its entering class. The proportion of Asian-American students in Harvard’s admitted classes has grown by 27 percent since 2010, and they make up nearly a quarter of the admitted class of 2022 (overall, Asian Americans make up about 6 percent of the United States population).
Others who oppose considerations of race in admissions claim that discussions of identity divide us as a country and that we all would be better off under a colorblind system.
The problem is that no one is colorblind, and acting as if we are makes us worse off, not better. Research shows that white people who try to be colorblind often seem more prejudiced and unfriendly to people of color. People of color report more racial hostility in so-called colorblind environments. While whites may be conscious of others’ race, they often are not conscious of their own because they do not have to be.
Colorblindness, therefore, forces race underground. It turns people of color into tokens and entrenches whiteness as the default.
It’s also demeaning to insist that university admissions officers become blind to race, which treats racial identity as taboo but other identities as legitimate. It forces applicants who identify by race to ignore their own experiences but allows other applicants to express themselves freely.
How would you feel if you were told you could not talk about your gender, your religion or your sexual orientation, that you could not discuss your disability or speak your own language? Silencing discussions about race silences people whose lives have been shaped by race.
The same is true for Asian-Americans, who are a very diverse group. The irony of the Harvard case is that they would be disadvantaged by compulsory colorblindness because it would stifle more nuanced discussions about intraracial differences in culture and access to opportunity that may have molded their individual experiences.
We need to stop pretending that affirmative action is the source of our problems around race.
To understand what this case is really about just look at who’s orchestrating it: Edward Blum, a former stockbroker who recruited a white plaintiff to challenge affirmative action at the University of Texas. He lost that case in the Supreme Court in 2016. Mr. Blum also financed a case that gutted voting rights for people of color. His real purpose is to deepen inequality in higher education, and in political participation, thus increasing our racial divisions.
Ignoring race denies all of us chances to build bridges across communities and to understand the lived realities of race in America. Race matters. Not because it should, but because it does.
As a leader in higher education, Harvard is trying to change this through its modest consideration of race in admissions. Its goal is to create a diverse community of students who can engage with and learn from people who are different, and carry those experiences with them beyond the university.
Expressions of racial identity are part of the fullness of our humanity. It’s not possible to be blind to race. Pretending as though it is ensures we will forever be divided.
Elise C. Boddie (@eliseboddie) is a professor at Rutgers Law School.