I met TaTy, as she is called, when the National desk here at The Times sent me back to Topeka, Kan., to my hometown, to write a yearlong series of stories about what it’s like to apply to college when you do not have the benefit of parents and others with the background and social capital to help.
After interviewing dozens of students at my old school, Topeka High School, and sitting in on classes, by the grace of the superintendent, Tiffany Anderson, principal, Rebecca Morrisey, and teachers like Phillip Wrigley, I decided to focus on three students, TaTy, Nathan Triggs and Zachary Shaner. TaTy impressed me with her leadership skills — she was the head of the step team — and because she wanted to see what life was like outside of Topeka. Nate had a winning sense of curiosity and a steady temperament; he had grown up partly on the farm in nearby Holton, and had a lot of practical skills that did not come from school, but from hunting, tinkering with his truck and doing construction work with his father. Zac was a talented musician and gifted student, whose teachers complained that he was not living up to his potential.
Their teachers, counselors and parents were encouraging all three of them to apply to college. Would they make it? The series ended on a note of uncertainty.
With the aid of Jennifer Stark Fry, a college counselor who read the series, TaTy was accepted at Newman University in Wichita, and received a large scholarship. But she still would have to take on more than $10,000 a year in loans, more than half of her mother’s annual income. She had what seemed to me like a naïve but infectious optimism that it would all work out, and that she should not let money get in the way.
Zac qualified for a large merit scholarship at the University of Kansas, but then let his grades drop the last semester and barely graduated from high school. Nate had an internship as a fleet mechanic with Westar Energy, the Kansas power company, and was considering trade school.
A lot has happened since then, though their lives are still, of course, evolving.
“I wish it would have never ended,” Nate told me of his internship. But he would need more education to continue working there, and does not feel ready for technical school yet. His hunting buddy, Tyler Rollins, had gone to work at Titan Trailer Manufacturing. Nate took the welding test, passed, and is now working on commission — the faster he builds, the more money he makes. The pay has been good enough to allow him to rent a farmer’s house with a friend.
TaTy’s conviction that she should not let lack of money stop her turned out to be true. In response to the articles, readers wanted to donate thousands of dollars to her tuition. One of the readers had the brilliant idea of recruiting Helen Crow, a Topeka real estate broker who had taken an interest in TaTy, to take charge of the donations. Ms. Crow agreed, with the money to be used strictly for college, and to be returned if she dropped out. There was even enough to give her a small allowance for supplies like a new computer, bedding and an occasional pizza with friends. Ms. Crow has been a strict steward, telling TaTy that she cannot use the money for gas for her car, for instance, or to pay her cellphone bill.
One of her biggest donors, Rayna Rapp, a professor at New York University, suggested that TaTy write a monthly update on her progress.
She is frank about the challenges. “Everything is progressively getting a little more difficult but it’s nothing that a good study regimen can’t handle,” she wrote to her benefactors in the fall of her freshman year. Her lowest grade was a B in theater. “The relevance to my life is the connection I’m struggling with,” she wrote.
In December, she wrote that she had decided to formulate a mission statement for herself, instead of a New Year’s resolution, because she knew that resolutions were often broken.
Many of her donors read the notes carefully, and some commented that her writing needed improvement. TaTy took their criticism seriously and agreed to see a writing tutor; her writing has improved.
One of her benefactors, Mary Crow, a former poet laureate of Colorado, sent TaTy an anthology of black writers for Christmas. “Already, I think she’s surpassed anything one could have hoped for,” Ms. Crow (no relation to Helen Crow) said.
This fall, she wrote that she was taking chemistry, piano, anatomy, sociology and college algebra, while working in the mailroom on campus. She likes all her classes. She is vice president of the Black Student Union. Over the summer, she became certified in phlebotomy, she said, and hoped to work as a phlebotomist to make extra money.
She and her roommates are saving for a trip to Birmingham, England, next summer, to visit an exchange student. She will not use donor money for the trip, she said, expressing a little anxiety about whether her benefactors would see the travel as frivolous.
