In this year’s midterm elections, social media has been Trumpified.
Political groups and candidates — whether for city council or the United States Senate — are imitating President Trump’s raw and combative style online. Many are attaching themselves to contentious national cultural issues like illegal immigration and kneeling N.F.L. players, which tend to garner more attention online than narrower local issues. Others are giving their opponents mocking, Trump-style nicknames in hopes of standing out from the pack.
It’s not surprising that campaigns are engaging in name-calling two years after Mr. Trump used all-caps aggression to energize his base and help lift him to the White House.
But the nature of social media platforms has turned up the temperature on such rhetoric. The algorithms powering the services often reward the reactions generated by outsize personalities by spreading their messages more widely, and can render bland wonks effectively invisible. Candidates from both parties have learned what Mr. Trump and his digital campaign gurus figured out in 2016: Visceral anger travels further online than inspirational messages, and the way to get noticed on the internet is to be loud and provocative above all.
Many political candidates are giving their opponents mocking, Trump-style nicknames in hopes of standing out from the pack.
The Trump effect is strongest among Republicans in areas where the president remains popular, but some Democrats are also copying his style. Randy Bryce, a Wisconsin Democrat running to fill the seat of Paul D. Ryan, the retiring House speaker, has nicknamed Brian Steil, his Republican opponent, “Lyin’ Brian.” Representative Jacky Rosen, a Democrat running against Senator Dean Heller, Republican of Nevada, has begun calling him “Senator Spineless.” And as she gears up for an expected presidential run in 2020, Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, has urged her social media followers to channel their anger into support for her party’s candidates in the midterms.
“I am angry, and I own it,” Ms. Warren said in a Facebook video last month, which was shared more than 10,000 times.
There is little evidence that Mr. Trump’s recipe for social media dominance translates well to smaller races. But many candidates are trying it anyway.
And the Supreme Court nomination of Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh lit up down-ballot races across the country, as candidates running for judgeships and district attorneys’ offices raced to signal their full-throated support for either him or his opponents. Several of the highest-performing posts on Facebook during then-Judge Kavanaugh’s confirmation fight came not from national news outlets like CNN or Politico but from Sid Miller, the Texas agriculture commissioner, who is running for re-election in November. In one post, which received nearly 20,000 shares, he praised Judge Kavanaugh’s wife, Ashley, and urged people to pray for her.
Aiming for mainstream appeal can also be a savvy financial move. Facebook’s advertising system is built on an auction process that takes into account the likelihood that a given ad will provoke an audience to engage with it. More engaging ads can cost less to buy than similar ads with less engaging language, and they can spread further as users share them with their friends.
Ben Kalasho, a city councilman in El Cajon, Calif., outside San Diego, may be taking Mr. Trump’s act to its logical extreme. Mr. Kalasho, 35, is a flashy businessman who oversees a local beauty pageant, lives in a mansion with his wife, a former model, and has been mired in legal trouble, including allegations of fraud and sexual harassment. He has denied those accusations.
Mr. Kalasho, who is running for re-election this November, credits social media with his ability to attract attention, calling it a “superpower.” He said he had been inspired by the way Mr. Trump used Twitter to shape the news cycle. And he admitted that the pressure to perform on social media had made him gravitate toward more polarizing topics.
Of course, winning in politics is not about racking up likes and shares — there is also the matter of getting votes. Some candidates with large social media followings have fared worse than expected in primary elections this year, including Cynthia Nixon, a Democrat who ran unsuccessfully for governor in New York, and Abdul El-Sayed, a Democratic candidate for governor in Michigan who finished well behind Gretchen Whitmer in the primary.
Amanda Litman, a founder of Run for Something, a liberal organization that helps recruit progressive candidates for office, said negative nicknames and provocative campaign messages might get more attention than positive stories, but they didn’t necessarily help candidates connect with voters.
