New York|Cuomo, Called a Chicken, Says ‘I Will Be Here’ for Debate. He Has Caveats.
Cuomo, Called a Chicken, Says ‘I Will Be Here’ for Debate. He Has Caveats.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo is totally, completely, absolutely willing to debate his Republican opponent, Marcus J. Molinaro. Just as long as it takes place within 24 hours, on the radio, at 8 a.m., on Saturday.
That was the offer that Mr. Cuomo unexpectedly made during a radio interview on Friday morning, after days of being criticized as too arrogant to debate his challenger (courtesy of Mr. Molinaro) or too afraid (courtesy of the New York Post, which splashed Mr. Cuomo on its cover two days in a row in a bright yellow chicken suit).
It was the latest twist in the long, dramatic saga of “will he or won’t he” over Mr. Cuomo’s willingness to debate Mr. Molinaro — complete, in typical New York political fashion, with snarky tabloid headlines, over-the-top rhetoric and an avalanche of opinions on Twitter.
But lest voters fear that the spectacle will end, worry not: Mr. Molinaro immediately rejected the invitation, citing the lack of television cameras and the short notice for voters — and promptly triggering a new wave of recriminations and insults (and another reference to the chicken suit).
Mr. Molinaro fired back. “I will consistently say yes to a debate. Not to a staged production,” he said while campaigning in Rochester.
The latest wrangling inspired more ridicule of and from both candidates. Mr. Molinaro accused the governor of ruling by fiat and suggested that Mr. Cuomo was disrespecting Jewish voters by offering to hold the debate during the Sabbath.
The governor’s supporters pointed out that Mr. Molinaro had once declared that he would debate Mr. Cuomo “standing up, sitting down, in a chair, at the fair — with a fox, in a box, in a plane, on a train,” suggesting that he was being hypocritical by refusing a proffered opportunity.
Mr. Molinaro said he stood by his earlier declaration — “as long as it includes voters,” he said, adding that such short notice would not give New Yorkers an opportunity to tune in or prepare questions. In a later statement, he said he would gladly accept the Saturday morning invitation so long as television cameras were also present.
But if the prolonged spat yielded no greater clarity on whether voters would get to hear or see Mr. Molinaro and Mr. Cuomo trade ideas on the subway crisis, homelessness or the upstate economy in the two weeks remaining before Election Day, it did illuminate one thing: the disadvantage Mr. Molinaro must overcome for an upset on Nov. 6.
But if he was hoping for a better offer, he will likely be disappointed.
That, at least, was what Mr. Cuomo seemed to suggest in his radio interview. When asked if he would be willing to sit for the debate on Monday, if Saturday did not work out, Mr. Cuomo demurred.
