Yes, it’s an outrage. But it is not the main reason that voter turnout is so low.
Obama was clearly smiling as he delivered the line. But as soon as I heard it, I knew the reaction that many progressives would likely have: Don’t blame us — blame voter suppression! It’s the same reaction that I’ve heard when I have written about the miserably low voter-turnout rates in midterm elections.
I think that reaction is wrong. I think, to paraphrase Obama, it’s a form of excuse-making. And it’s not just factually wrong but politically damaging. It breeds nihilism.
First, the Republicans’ voter-suppression push has become far more intense in recent years. Following a Supreme Court ruling that threw out a central part of the Voting Rights Act, Southern states undertook a new suppression campaign. And yet if you look at the voter-turnout data, you don’t see a big change after 2013.
Voter turnout is remarkably flat over time. These historical charts, from Michael McDonald of the University of Florida, show that stability. Turnout rises in presidential years, falls in midterm years and stays roughly constant over time. The recent spate of suppression laws has no doubt had an effect, but it’s not a dominant effect.
The second reason involves the group that is the main target of voter-suppression laws: African-Americans. If suppression were really the primary force driving turnout, then African-Americans would have the lowest turnout rates. But they don’t — not even close.
In 2016, the non-Hispanic black turnout rate was 59.9 percent, according to McDonald. That was below the non-Hispanic white turnout rate of 64.7 percent, but far above the Hispanic rate of 44.9 percent and the “other” (mostly Asian-American) rate of 46.3 rate. The black turnout rate was also well above the turnout rate for Americans aged 18 to 29: 43.4 percent.
And these same broad patterns also held in 2014, 2010, 2004 and other years when Obama, the first black president, was not on the ballot.
We should be able to hold two different ideas in our heads at once: Voter suppression is an injustice that violates American ideals; and voter suppression is not the No. 1 reason turnout rates are so low, especially among demographic groups that lean to the political left.
Yes, there are many understandable reasons that Americans do not vote. They don’t think their vote matters. Or they are too tired to wait in line after a long day of work. But it’s possible to make progress in solving those problems — and to lift turnout. Just look at what’s happened to turnout in many elections over the past year-and-a-half.
This is no time for nihilism.
Elsewhere: “Since Taylor Swift flexed her star power Sunday with an Instagram post that encouraged her 112 million followers to register to vote, Vote.org has experienced an unprecedented flood of new voter registrations nationwide,” Claudia Rosenbaum and Michael Blackmon of BuzzFeed News report.
“We are up to 65,000 registrations in a single 24-hour period,” Kamari Guthrie of Vote.org said. By comparison, 190,178 new voters registered during the entirety of last month.
