WASHINGTON — With his Supreme Court nominee’s confirmation under fire, President Trump lashed out on Monday at Democrats on the Senate Judiciary Committee, renewing his attack that Senator Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut lied about his service in Vietnam and embellishing the senator’s misdeeds far beyond the truth.
Mr. Trump also blamed Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, for leaking Christine Blasey Ford’s confidential letter accusing Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh of sexual assault, and assailed Senator Cory Booker, Democrat of New Jersey, for running Newark “into the ground” as mayor.
President Trump assailed three Democrats who serve on the Senate Judiciary Committee — Senators Richard Blumenthal, Cory Booker and Dianne Feinstein — criticizing their remarks during a hearing into sexual assault accusations against Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh.
In remarks at a news conference ostensibly on trade Monday, Mr. Trump went on offense in defending Judge Kavanaugh, portraying the committee Democrats who have opposed his confirmation as hypocritical and dishonest. His primary example: Mr. Blumenthal, one of his favorite foils, who has admitted being misleading about Vietnam-era military service.
Mr. Trump referred to a series of remarks Mr. Blumenthal, a Connecticut Democrat, made over several years, often at events celebrating veterans, in which he either directly stated that he “served in Vietnam” or made similar implications using more ambiguous language. In 2010, The New York Times reported that Mr. Blumenthal obtained at least five military deferments to avoid going to war, and later joined a unit in the Marine Reserve in Washington, virtually guaranteeing he would not be sent to Vietnam.
On Monday, Mr. Trump embellished, mocking the senator for a tear-ridden apology that never happened: “The tears were all over the place,” the president said in the Rose Garden.
Mr. Blumenthal responded on Mr. Trump’s platform of choice, Twitter.
In taking aim at Ms. Feinstein, Mr. Trump joined with other Republicans, including Senators Tom Cotton of Arkansas and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, who have called for an investigation into whether Ms. Feinstein or her office leaked the letter to the press, though Mr. Graham has said he does not think she personally leaked it.
A spokesman for Ms. Feinstein said in a statement that she “has made it crystal clear that neither she nor anyone on her staff leaked the letter or contents of the letter to the media,” adding that Ryan Grim, the Washington bureau chief of The Intercept, which published the first article confirming the existence of the letter, said on Twitter last week that neither Ms. Feinstein nor her staff was responsible.
In his stream-of-consciousness style, Mr. Trump also looped Mr. Booker, considered a possible 2020 presidential challenger, into his tirade.
The president was most likely referring to a column Mr. Booker wrote in The Stanford Daily in which he confessed to groping a date’s breast as they kissed in high school. The column was part of a larger musing on sex, which he once viewed as “best achieved through luck, guile, strategy or coercion,” until sexual abuse discussions changed his views.
“It was a wake-up call — I will never be the same,” he wrote.
