“Halloween” (1978), the quintessential slasher film, made John Carpenter famous. His follow-up, “The Fog” (1980), sought to put some narrative meat on the genre’s bones.
“The Fog” is more spooky yarn than streamlined scream machine; it’s the sort of crowd pleaser best enjoyed with an audience. Rarely shown theatrically (although easily streamed), it’s playing in a fine new 4K restoration at Metrograph.
As atmospheric as its title suggests, the movie is magnificently set: shot on the postcard-perfect Pacific Coast, north of San Francisco, not far from where Alfred Hitchcock filmed “The Birds.” The fog rolls into the town of Antonio Bay, on little cat feet, along with a seafaring crew of putrefied zombie ghosts.
Numerous impalements notwithstanding, the action is neither as bloody nor as gross as it might have been. Suspense is the movie’s motor. (It’s designed to hook the viewers as well as the characters.) As the director explained to The Times in 1980, “The Fog” largely depends on when and where the next “Boo!”-shouting menace is apt to appear. Hal Holbrook, who plays a minister with a terrible secret, makes his first innocent appearance as if popping out of a coffin.
The movie, which Carpenter wrote with Debra Hill, who also produced it, is unusual for a 1980s genre film, featuring three strong female characters. Making her first theatrical feature, Adrienne Barbeau was a seasoned Broadway and sitcom performer. (She was Rizzo in the original Broadway “Grease” and a regular on “Maude.”) Then married to Carpenter, she plays a supremely competent single mom, the owner of, and lone D.J. at, a radio station in a picturesque old lighthouse. Jamie Lee Curtis, who made her screen debut in “Halloween,” appears as a drifter who hitches a ride into Antonio Bay, while her real mother, Janet Leigh, is dryly comic as one of the town’s leading residents, in charge of organizing its centennial celebration.
The past is haunting the present. All manner of portents set up the full-scale, all-out ghost assault, revenge for a primal sin committed by the town fathers. As a guilty-town ghost story, “The Fog” has a generic resemblance to “Poltergeist,” which it predates, and is even more emphatic. It implicates the local church. “Our celebration tonight is a travesty — we’re honoring murderers!” Holbrook cries. Greed is an issue as well. In an odd echo of William Jennings Bryan’s famous populist speech, the town has been crucified on a cross of gold.
You can make of the movie’s politics what you will. The fog is a useful, all-purpose metaphor, not least for the falsehoods that seep into and cloud human minds; the radio is a competing system that serves as a source of clarity — at least in this film.