The wide-scale return of Lil Wayne — one of the most popular rappers of his generation, but one who has been stuck in record-business purgatory for years — has been received enthusiastically, to say the least.
“Tha Carter V,” his first major release since 2013 and the fifth installment in a series that last arrived in 2011, debuted with the third-largest overall sales week of the year and the second-biggest streaming total ever on its way to No. 1 on the Billboard chart. The album tallied 480,000 album equivalent units, according to Nielsen Music, including 433 million streams and 141,000 in traditional physical and digital sales.
Lil Wayne’s fourth No. 1 album, “Tha Carter V” landed behind only “Scorpion,” by the Lil Wayne protégé Drake, and “Astroworld,” by Travis Scott, in the rankings of this year’s first-week blockbusters. It found most of its success on streaming services, where only “Scorpion” was listened to more across a seven-day period (746 million streams in July).
Of the Top 10 songs on streaming services last week, six were by Lil Wayne, including the top four, led by “Mona Lisa” featuring Kendrick Lamar (43 million) and “Don’t Cry” featuring XXXTentacion (36 million), according to Nielsen.
“Tha Carter V” is the first Lil Wayne album in his two-decade-plus career not to be released by Cash Money Records, the label founded in New Orleans by his mentor and father figure Bryan Williams, better known as Birdman or Baby.
In June, Lil Wayne received a reported eight-figure settlement from Universal Music Group, which oversees Cash Money and Lil Wayne’s own Young Money Records, following a contentious yearslong legal battle in which the rapper claimed he had not been appropriately compensated and that his album was being held hostage beyond his control. “Tha Carter V” was released by another Universal label, Republic, in association with Young Money.
Three other new albums followed Lil Wayne’s chart-topper. “YSIV,” by the rapper Logic, reached No. 2 with 167,000 units; Cher’s “Dancing Queen,” an Abba covers album, landed at No. 3 with 153,000 units; and “Luca Brasi 3,” by the Baton Rouge rapper Kevin Gates, was No. 4. “Scorpion,” in its 14th week on the chart, held on to No. 5. Last week’s No. 1, the rap and R&B boy band Brockhampton, fell to No. 88.