Buyout groups are building broadband networks across Europe, attracted by stable, healthy returns — but the numbers get tricky if bigger operators choose to compete.
The British fiber infrastructure provider CityFibre is the latest broadband company to receive backing from a big financial sponsor. On Tuesday it announced a 2.5 billion British pounds, or $3.3 billion, deal with a Goldman Sachs fund and the private equity group Antin to connect up to 5 million homes to a fiber network. Deutsche Glasfaser, owned by KKR, is doing something similar in smaller German towns. So is Macquarie Group’s TDC Group in Denmark.
The returns look good if consumers choose to switch from the copper networks run by incumbent operators like BT Group.
Assume that a new player like CityFibre spends £550 per home and builds half a million connections a year. Next, assume that 40 percent of households take up the service and CityFibre charges £14 per customer, while making a margin of 70 percent on its earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization.
In six years the operator would have 3 million lines, £202 million of revenue, and £141 million of earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization. The total cost of building the network would be £1.65 billion, although perhaps 60 percent of that could be funded by debt, reducing the required equity to £660 million pounds. If the operator could sell the business at an infrastructure-like multiple of 15 times its earnings, the business could be sold for £2.1 billion, and the equity would have nearly doubled to £1.1 billion. That is equivalent to an internal rate of return of around 16 percent.
It sounds easy. But there are a couple of snags.
Competitors may invest in the same regions, leading to a lower uptake and more mediocre returns. That’s why some funds are focusing on small towns, where they hope to build a monopoly. Incumbent operators like BT may also have an interest in preserving a national position, resulting in excess capacity.
Consumers also need to play ball. Existing copper networks may be good enough for many households’ needs, which might make customers reluctant to switch. Over time that will change, as demand for data should skyrocket when everyday objects from fridges to cars are connected to the internet.
But private equity may have a longer wait than expected before its investment pays off.