Daniel Conroy of the New-York Historical Society was asking the questions during a recent Harry Potter trivia night.
With its 38-foot-high ceiling, bookcases stuffed with faded, leather-bound volumes and walls festooned with oil portraits that seem to wink, the second floor reading room of the New-York Historical Society bears a striking resemblance to a certain fictional school for wizards.
1. What is Albus Dumbledore’s full name?
2. When is Harry Potter’s birthday?
3. What is a recommended remedy for a visit from a Dementor?
4. Which pub provides a secret passage to Hogwarts?
If you barely recognize these names and care not how they are connected to the wizard world created by J.K. Rowling, you’re in the wrong oak-paneled library. (If you are curious, the answers are below).
The trivia contest, which was sold out, was part of a three-month schedule of programs offered by the society in conjunction with its exhibition, “Harry Potter: A History of Magic,” which opened Oct. 5.
The eclectic agenda of more than 20 events includes a potions workshop, a one-day course on the history of magic in America, an owl-spotting walk in Central Park and an open-mic night for Potter-inspired storytellers.
This is far beyond what museums typically program around an exhibition. It’s designed to attract younger audiences; and if there ever was a millennial magnet, it is the Boy Who Lived.
As its name suggests, the exhibition, on the first floor of the society’s Central Park West headquarters, includes real history as well, about alchemists, herbalism and astronomy. But it’s not the exhibition that attracted Ms. Augustine and her friend Rina Krevat; it’s the opportunity to test their Potter I.Q.
“We love trivia,” Ms. Krevat said.
This is a reason museums don’t usually create such ambitious calendars of special programming. “It’s hard to sustain because of staff energy,” said Susie Wilkening, a Seattle-based museum researcher and consultant. The Potter events, she said, far exceed what is generally done, even for a major show.
“With blockbusters, you tend to get a few programs, but there’s more reliance on the exhibit itself to draw people in,” Ms. Wilkening said.
The Astronomy room at the exhibition “Harry Potter: A History of Magic” at the New-York Historical Society.
Based on the first trivia contest, it seems a good bet that some young adults lured by the Potter sizzle might stick around for the historical steak.
Participants in a Harry Potter trivia contest at the New-York Historical Society.
That, of course, is part of the challenge. The Potter franchise’s popularity among millennials is hard to top. The society is hoping that future programs, such as one coming in 2019 on the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising, will prove almost as popular.
A two-hour trivia contest was certainly one way. Arrayed at 11 tables, the participants — mostly young women — broke into teams of up to six members with names like Snapes on a Plane and Dobby’s Revenge.
Pretzels and chips were provided and Potter-theme cocktails, including a Witch’s Tipple (white rum and pineapple juice) and a Crimson Cauldron (gin and pomegranate juice) were available at the cash bar.
The contest had 48 questions, most of which came from Pottermore, a fan site, and were posed by the bearded Historical Society staff member Daniel Conroy (who wore a red and gold Gryffindor scarf). Participants gave one another high fives when they thought they had the right answer and groaned when they didn’t.
“It’s a way to prove how big of a fan you really are,” said Peggy Nelling, who worked for a company that stages trivia contests and was there to help score that night’s event.
While millennials are the target audience, the passion for Potter can be shared across generations. Lynne Field of Manhattan threw her daughter, Caroline Field, her first Harry Potter-theme birthday party when she was in elementary school. Now 23 and living in Denver, she has returned home to join her mother for the contest. (They planned to attend the exhibition the next day.) Caroline Field said that she had never lost her love of the Potter world and had done extensive preparation for the contest.
“I did all the work,” she said, with a smile.
“And I bought the drinks,” added her mother.
