SEATTLE — Washington became the latest state to end the death penalty on Thursday, following a scathing State Supreme Court decision that declared the practice unconstitutional. The ruling commuted the sentences of the eight men currently on the state’s death row to life in prison and made Washington the 20th state where courts or legislatures have abolished or overturned capital punishment.
A five-member majority on the State Supreme Court did not say that executing people who commit heinous crimes is inherently wrong, but said evidence showed that death sentences had been “imposed in an arbitrary and racially biased manner.” Four other justices concurred with the conclusion in a separate, equally sweeping decision.
“We are confident that the association between race and the death penalty is not attributed to random chance,” the majority’s decision said. The finding grew out of an appeal brought by Allen Eugene Gregory, a black man who was convicted of the rape, robbery and murder of a waitress named Geneine Harshfield in 1996. Mr. Gregory, 46, was sentenced to death in 2001.
Use of the death penalty has been in decline across the nation for nearly two decades, and Washington has not executed anyone since 2010. In 2014, Gov. Jay Inslee, a Democrat, ordered a moratorium on all executions.
Capital punishment remains legal in 30 states, and is also allowed by the federal government and the United States military. But the number of death sentences actually imposed has steadily fallen since a peak in 1999, when there were 98 executions across the nation, according to the Death Penalty Information Center. In 2017, there were 23. Only 10 states, including Texas, Ohio and Florida, have carried out any executions since 2014.
In its decision, the Washington Supreme Court said that death as a penalty for crime is not in itself unconstitutional, but that the law as it has been written by the Legislature and applied by judges and juries was too deeply flawed to continue.
Mr. Inslee said in a news conference that he would veto any bill that attempted to reinstate the death penalty or to fix the flaws outlined by the justices. And the state attorney general, Bob Ferguson, a Democrat, said the court’s decision would reinvigorate his efforts to urge lawmakers to permanently repeal the death penalty from statute books.
Since 2009, five states — New Mexico, Illinois, Connecticut and Maryland and Nebraska — have repealed the death penalty, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures, though Nebraska’s was reinstated by a statewide vote in 2016.
In its 42-page ruling, Washington’s Supreme Court referred repeatedly to a study completed by researchers at the University of Washington, who examined the role of race in convictions between 1981 to 2014. “In aggravated murder cases, jurors are more than four times more likely to impose a death sentence if the defendant is black,” the study concluded.
Decisions by prosecutors to seek the death penalty varied widely. In one county, prosecutors sought the death penalty in 67 percent of aggravated murder cases, while prosecutors in another county didn’t pursue that punishment even once, the study found. Of the eight men who have been on Washington State’s death row, five are white and three are black.
Four of the Washington State justices concurred with the conclusion in a separate opinion.
“Where a system exists permeated with arbitrary decision-making, random imposition of the death penalty, unreliability, geographic rarity and excessive delays, such a system cannot constitutionally stand,” the four justices wrote.