141 pp. W.W. Norton & Company. $21.
“Crudo” is set in the summer of 2017 and its central character, the “I” and the “she,” is both Olivia Laing and Kathy Acker, the experimental writer and iconoclast who died of cancer in 1997. And so the novel is several things at once: a work of autofiction detailing key events in Laing’s life, a counterfactual fiction in which Kathy Acker is alive and getting married and a rigorous piece of fictional appropriation.
In her excellent biography, “After Kathy Acker,” Chris Kraus describes Acker as the first woman to achieve “the iconic status of Great Writer as Countercultural Hero.” A denizen of New York’s now-mythic ’70s downtown, Acker moved in the same circles as Robert Mapplethorpe, Carolee Schneeman, Simone Forti and Gary Indiana. Versed in conceptual art as well as the literary canon, she had a voracious intellect, a blender of a brain that processed and equalized a swirl of elements, from pornography and pulp novels to Georges Bataille and Charles Dickens.
Written with bristling intelligence, “Crudo” borrows liberally from Acker, a formal tribute to a master of appropriation. Laing drops unattributed quotes from Acker and others into her text (although they’re cited later, in an appendix). She also uses Acker’s technique of inhabiting multiple voices and identities, all contained within a single character — the “I” and the “Kathy” of those first sentences.
Where Acker’s fiction is full of hard juxtapositions and divided selves — pirates and postpunk feminists, Jackie Kennedy and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec — “Crudo” revolves around a less extreme but equally crucial disjunction: between the ordinary life of Olivia Laing in 2017 and the extraordinary life of Kathy Acker in the second half of the last century. This fissure of identity and voice is used not to stage a “model of schizophrenia” but to explore quieter states of anxiety and discontent.
As a result, the novel offers an altogether smoother ride than Acker’s fiction, both in its subject matter and its prose style. “Crudo” is concerned with domestication — with the central character’s anxieties about marriage as an institution, as well as the material clutter of what is commonly known as lifestyle. There are descriptions of dinner menus, of house and apartment interiors in England. There are mentions of Isabel Marant dresses and wedding plans.
It’s fair to say that the world of “Crudo” is somewhat cozier than the ’70s Downtown associated with Acker. At moments, the novel pokes deadpan fun at that divide: “Their new table arrived, that was exciting.” But at other times — when, for example, it reproduces a sincere but familiar expression of political anxiety — it tempts us to wonder what Acker’s febrile imagination would have created from much of our current landscape of accelerated Reddit threads and internet conspiracy. If alive today, how would Acker have articulated her political outrage?
But the larger questions that haunt the book are “Why Acker?” and “Why now?” Laing doesn’t try to make the case that Acker — a remarkably transgressive but also a remarkably privileged individual — is the voice best positioned to critique or represent these times. Instead, the impulse to resurrect Acker feels more personal. “Crudo” begins as a piece of conceptual swagger, only to morph into something far more intimate and in some ways more exceptional.
“Writing, she can be anyone,” Laing declares. At its heart, “Crudo” is aspirational in the best and most moving sense of the word. It’s a novel about middle age, about that moment when we start to recognize the boundaries and limitations of the people we have become. It’s about the longing to escape our ossified selves — to become, if only for a moment or within the pages of a novel, someone wilder and more radically free. And in staging that longing so directly and so honestly, Olivia Laing makes “Crudo” her own.