Paula Wright, a seventh-generation descendant of an interracial couple, has documented over 500 images that chronicle her family’s history.
He was buried in a white cemetery. She was buried in a black cemetery. Their marriage was unheard-of at the time.
Both William Ramey and his wife, Kittie Simkins, were born and raised in Edgefield, S.C., or “Bloody Edgefield,” a town known for its grisly murder rate in the antebellum South. Their relationship defied convention, and yet it survived war and bitter family resentment.
Mr. Ramey, born in 1840, came from a prominent white family. Ms. Simkins was born a slave in 1845, most likely on a property called Edgewood owned by Francis Pickens, who would become a Confederate governor.
The love affair could have been lost if not for Paula Wright, a seventh-generation descendant of the couple who inherited vintage photographs that inspired her to document eight generations of her family, dating to 1805.
The box of 500 mostly black-and-white photographs offered a rare glimpse into an interracial marriage that took place nearly 100 years before Loving v. Virginia, the landmark Supreme Court ruling that struck down miscegenation laws.
Ms. Simkins and her family worked from sunrise to sunset six days a week on the Edgewood plantation. “They were given a reprieve on Sundays, so they could go to church,” Ms. Wright, who lives in Atlanta, said in an interview.
Mr. Ramey was the youngest son of Nathaniel Ramey, a businessman who owned a small number of slaves. According to historians, William Ramey was one of six children; probably worked his father’s land; became a skilled carpenter; and discreetly educated slaves in his youth.
His father and Mr. Pickens had a mutual business interest in pottery, and young Mr. Ramey most likely attended parties at Mr. Pickens’s nearby plantation. That is probably where he met Ms. Simkins, in 1860, when Mr. Ramey was about 20 and she was about 14.
A year later, Mr. Ramey followed his older brothers into the Civil War, and enlisted in the Confederate army. He was wounded near Richmond, Va., and was soon discharged. He returned to Edgefield to convalesce and began an affair with Ms. Simkins.
Their relationship was interrupted when Mr. Ramey re-enlisted in 1863. By then, Ms. Simkins had become pregnant by him. She did not know if Mr. Ramey would return alive, let alone return to her.
Mr. Pickens opposed the mixing of races, but he did not send Ms. Simkins away. On April 8, 1864, she gave birth to a daughter, and that same month, Mr. Ramey returned to Edgefield for a three-month furlough. “I like to think that he came back to see his baby,” Ms. Wright said.
Back on the battlefield, Mr. Ramey was eventually captured and held prisoner until the war was over. When he returned to Edgefield, he continued to have a relationship with Ms. Simkins, who had remained on the plantation along with many former slaves.
She did eventually leave the plantation, and sustained herself as a seamstress and housekeeper. Mr. Ramey began a law career and later was appointed as a judge. At one point, he became engaged to a white woman, but he called the wedding off when his second child with Ms. Simkins, a son, was born in 1870.
He married Ms. Simkins two years later, in 1872, during an interlude in Reconstruction when statutes prohibiting interracial marriage had been suspended.
Tonya Guy is the director of the Tompkins Library in Edgefield, S.C., which houses the South Carolina Genealogical Society’s collections. The marriage between Mr. Ramey and Ms. Simkins “was something that was accepted in the community at a time when it probably shouldn’t have been accepted,” she said.
Ms. Wright with a few of the photos she inherited from her grandmother. Though she knew about her white ancestor from a very early age, she began a deeper exploration of her mixed-race roots 10 years ago.
In order to protect his family, Mr. Ramey listed himself in 19th-century census records as a head of household and his wife and their children as his servants. But that changed when he became ill in 1910.
He listed Ms. Simkins in the census that year as his wife, and said they had been married for 38 years. He sent her, their children and many of his assets to New York, where he believed they would be protected, after his sister threatened to take them away upon his death.
Mr. Ramey died in 1912, and his sister successfully petitioned the probate court to name her administrator of his estate, arguing that he had no widow and no children. But by then, most of Mr. Ramey’s assets had already been transferred to Ms. Simkins, who lived comfortably until her death 17 years later in 1929.
Ms. Wright knows that the story of Mr. Ramey and Ms. Simkins is full of contradictions. Many people assume that their relationship was yet another tragic example of a female slave being raped by a white man. She believes that this is far from the truth, and that the couple’s love was genuine.
