As part of a larger national effort to bridge our divides and bring people together, the media also has a responsibility to set a civil tone and to stop the endless hostility and constant negative and oftentimes false attacks and stories — have to do it. And by the way, do you see how nice I’m behaving tonight? This is like — have you ever seen this? We’re all behaving very well. And hopefully we can keep it that way. Right?
MOSINEE, Wis. — A day after a national call for unity in the wake of the bomb scares targeting several prominent Democrats, President Trump blamed the “Mainstream Media” and “Fake News” for the anger and division thriving in the United States.
Mr. Trump did not mention in his tweet that CNN, which is one of his favorite news media punching bags, was among the targets of a pipe bomb.
The president’s somber plea on Wednesday — “We have to unify” — morphed into familiar attacks on the media and has echoes of his previous short-lived roles as consoler in chief.
Mr. Trump has called for unity after mass shootings and other politically poisonous tragedies that have punctuated his time in office.
He does not seem to follow his own advice for long.
“We should not mob people in public spaces or destroy public property,” Mr. Trump said in a thinly veiled reference to his latest turn of phrase — “jobs not mobs” — and a castigation of how liberals reacted to Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh’s battle to be confirmed to the Supreme Court amid multiple accusations of sexual misconduct.
Still, the performance by Mr. Trump and the slate of Wisconsin Republicans who took the stage here served as further confirmation that, with less than two weeks to go until a round of midterm elections in which the leadership of the House is at stake, not even reports of explosive devices could do much to halt months of highly divisive messaging at campaign rallies.
Mr. Trump did address the reports in his opening remarks, calling the episodes “an attack on our democracy itself” and promising swift justice.
Two other Republicans who took the stage here at an airport hangar in the 4,000-person town of Mosinee began their speeches with a short disclaimer — essentially, terrorism is bad — before denouncing Democrats for their immigration policies and the cost of health care.
Speaker Paul D. Ryan had some trouble breaking through a “Build the Wall!” chant.
“Let me just say something that I think needs to be said on a day like today,” Mr. Ryan said.
“Build the wall!” a group in the crowd shouted.
Mr. Ryan replied that he would “get to that,” cracking a smile.
“Build the wall!” the group yelled, louder that time.
Gov. Scott Walker, a Republican who is battling for a third term, also briefly touched on those reports.
“An attempt to engage in a terrorist act against any American is an attack on every American,” he said.
In his remarks earlier at the White House, Mr. Trump said the packages of explosives were sent to “current and former high-ranking government officials,” without specifying the intended recipients: former President Barack Obama; the former Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton; John O. Brennan, the former C.I.A. director; and Representative Maxine Waters, Democrat of California — four of the president’s favorite political targets. Another device apparently intended for the man who served as Mr. Obama’s attorney general, Eric H. Holder Jr., was misaddressed.
Mr. Brennan has been an outspoken critic of Mr. Trump’s, ultimately leading the president to strip him of his security clearance. Mr. Brennan works as a paid consultant to MSNBC, not CNN. The return address on the package sent to CNN was that of Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Democrat of Florida and a former Democratic National Committee chairwoman.
“We will not be intimidated by this attempted act of violence,” Ms. Wasserman Schultz said in a statement on Wednesday evening.
Several of the president’s past rally targets seemed skeptical that he would temper his language, and others suggested that Mr. Trump’s words had put his political opponents in danger. Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader, and Chuck Schumer of New York, the leader of the Senate Democrats, called on the president to take back comments he has made that condone acts of violence — last week, Mr. Trump praised a Republican congressman for body-slamming a reporter.
At a conference on Wednesday in Texas, Mr. Brennan seemed cautiously optimistic.
The president has shown little regard for refraining from delivering divisive messages hours after more sober missives delivered in Washington, but he did not call out his frequent rally targets, several of whom received packages on Wednesday, by name. And though “lock her up” chants rang out, Mr. Trump did not bring up Mrs. Clinton.
The president instead directed the crowd to his usual potpourri of factually dubious claims about Democratic policies, lingering on the fear-first immigration messaging his White House hopes to harness in time for the elections.
“Democrats oppose any effort to secure our border,” Mr. Trump said, once again glossing over the fact that Democrats favor border security measures — but not the construction of the president’s long-promised wall on the southwestern border. Mr. Trump then hinted that he would be following through on repeated suggestions that he would send the military to the border, even though the military is prohibited from engaging in policing activities.
Through it all, Mr. Trump urged his supporters to pay attention to how quietly he was speaking. He tried, at different points, to emphasize the positive.
“Kanye’s an idiot!” a lone rallygoer shrieked in reply.
Indeed, at times, it was clear some attendees did not want to participate in a lower-decibel rally.
“I’m trying to be nice,” the president said in a reminder that seemed as much meant for himself as it was for the crowd.