Anna Burns won the Man Booker Prize on Tuesday for her novel “Milkman,” which is narrated by an unnamed 18-year-old girl living in 1970s Northern Ireland who is coerced into a relationship with a mysterious older married man with ties to a paramilitary group.
The Booker’s judges cited Ms. Burns’s use of dark humor to explore weighty themes like the perils of tribalism, state-sponsored terrorism, social division and the ways that sexual and political oppression often overlap.
The novel unfolds in an unnamed city during “the Troubles,” a prolonged civil conflict in Northern Ireland that gave rise to sectarian violence and guerrilla warfare. Against the background of this turbulent epoch, with the constant threat of car bombs and riots, the narrator deals with a menacing stalker, who is known only as Milkman, though he doesn’t deliver milk.
Ms. Burns, 56, who was born in Belfast, Northern Ireland, and now lives south of London, is the first Northern Irish writer to win the Booker in the prize’s history. She has published two previous novels and a novella; her first novel, “No Bones,” which also takes place in Northern Ireland during the Troubles, was shortlisted for the 2002 Orange Prize for Fiction.
“What I write about is absolutely and essentially interested in how power is used, both in a personal and in a societal sense,” Ms. Burns said in an interview with the Times Literary Supplement.
Ms. Burns, while well regarded in Britain, was a somewhat surprising choice, beating out more prominent writers like Rachel Kushner and Richard Powers, and a splashy debut by Daisy Johnson, who at 27 would have been the youngest person to win the prize.
The novels selected for this year’s shortlist reflected a preoccupation with dark times and apocalyptic themes like ecological destruction, slavery and mass incarceration. Finalists included the Canadian author Esi Edugyan’s “Washington Black,” about a boy who flees a slave plantation in Barbados and becomes an apprentice of sorts to his master’s adventurous brother; Ms. Kushner’s “The Mars Room,” set in a women’s prison in California; and Mr. Powers’s inventive environmental epic “The Overstory,” about a quest to save one of the world’s last areas of virgin forest, in which the trees are the novel’s real protagonists.
Judges also recognized unconventional literary forms this year, including, for the first time, a graphic novel by Nick Drnaso, titled “Sabrina,” which made the longlist but was not among the finalists. “The Long Take,” a genre-defying noir-tinged novel in verse by the Scottish poet Robin Robertson that unfolds in verse, prose and photographs, made the shortlist.
First awarded in 1969, the Booker is one of the literary world’s most prestigious and lucrative prizes. The winner receives 50,000 pounds, or about $65,000, and typically sees a big boost in book sales. Past winners include such literary titans as Kazuo Ishiguro; Ben Okri; Hilary Mantel, who won twice; and Michael Ondaatje, who was longlisted this year.
In 2014, the prize was opened to any novel written in English and published in Britain (it was previously limited to writers from Britain, Ireland, Zimbabwe and Commonwealth countries), and some prominent writers have argued that the rules change has diluted the impact of the prize.
Fears that the Booker would become “Americanized” were borne out to a degree in recent years, after the prize went to American authors for two consecutive years — to George Saunders in 2017, for “Lincoln in the Bardo,” and to Paul Beatty in 2016, for “The Sellout.” Earlier this year, the Rathbones Folio Academy, a literary society with prominent members such as Margaret Atwood, J.M. Coetzee and Peter Carey, insisted that the change be reversed.
This year’s crop of finalists included two American novelists, three writers from the United Kingdom and one from Canada.
Criticism that the prize has lost its British character may be dampened by the selection of Ms. Burns, who is a well established literary voice in the United Kingdom but is not widely known to the rest of the world. Mr. Appiah said the judges didn’t take the author’s gender or nationality into account when selecting the winner.
