In 2014, pundits, strategists and reporters dubbed the midterms the “Seinfeld election” — as in, an election about nothing.
Those midterms, the thinking went, had no overriding theme, no sweeping Democratic plan for the middle class, no big G.O.P. proposal to slash spending.
Four years later, the exact opposite feels true: President Trump has turned 2018 into an unpredictable, and often uncomfortable, election about the most divisive issues in American life.
The past two weeks have only served to underscore that intensity.
Let’s recap: On Friday, Cesar Sayoc Jr. was charged with sending explosive devices to at least a dozen Democrats and CNN. On Saturday, Robert Bowers was charged in the horrific massacre at a Pittsburgh synagogue. On Wednesday, Gregory Bush was charged with murder after fatally shooting two black seniors at a Kroger store near Louisville, Ky., after first trying to get inside a black church. And before that, of course, there was the hurricane in Florida, the migrant caravan and the killing of the Saudi dissident Jamal Khashoggi.
We know late-breaking events can swing elections (see: Comey, James; and a long list of other October surprises). But in this case, it’s hard to know exactly what — if anything — the impact will be.
Traditionally, this kind of unrest should play to Republicans, who have long positioned themselves as the party of law and order. And, typically, the incumbent party benefits during national crises.
But that’s assuming the White House is handling the sense of anxiety in a unifying way. In the 48 hours after the synagogue shooting, Mr. Trump did not do any of the things Americans expect of their presidents in these kind of moments. He did not deliver an address calling for harmony, meet with faith leaders, introduce new policies or console the victims. In fact, he didn’t even pause his campaign, the standard response to tragedy.
On Monday afternoon, the White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders announced that Mr. Trump and his wife would travel to Pittsburgh to meet with the Jewish community — but she blamed the media for the toxic political climate that led to the attack.
That leaves us in fairly uncharted waters, politically. It’s part of the reason that strategists from both parties are urging candidates to stick to their messages.
Meanwhile, in interviews with The New York Times, many voters have seemed to retreat even more into their corners as a result of the discord.
“It’s instilling a very strong sense of urgency, that we must have leaders who symbolize respect, integrity and honesty,” said Nancy Nichols, a volunteer for the Democratic Senate candidate Beto O’Rourke in the East Texas city of Tyler.
But will these past few weeks drive even more Democrats to the polls? Or remind those all-important suburban women of the kind of divisive rhetoric they don’t particularly like to hear from the president? Or convince Republicans that the president is being treated unfairly by the media?
We are making no predictions, beyond what we said last week: expect surprises. You’d be wise to keep that in mind next time someone — on cable news or at the water cooler — tries to tell you they’ve got this election all figured out.
If Texas ever turns blue, the Texas Organizing Project — or TOP — will almost certainly have something to do with it.
Last month I visited their Dallas headquarters, a bare-bones office in a strip mall off an expressway. I was curious to learn more about their efforts to turn out low-income voters in neighborhoods that have become disenfranchised — areas politicians avoid because of their low turnout, making residents even less inclined to vote, until whole communities are left out of politics altogether.
What does that mission look like up close? The day I arrived, about 80 people in blue T-shirts sat in chairs, listening to a pep talk before heading out to knock on doors. Many of them had found their way to TOP through fliers that advertised $15-an-hour work. But once they were hired, trainers underscored a sense of political urgency and possibility.
It usually takes three connections — a door knock, a call and an offer of a ride to the polls — to make sure a low-frequency voter actually casts a ballot.
A paper on the wall reminds Ms. Taylor’s group of their goals over the next two weeks: knock on 8,905 doors; get 1,188 commitments to vote. They are but one piece of a much larger project that aims to reach 72,000 doors in Dallas County before the midterm election, in order to turn out 26,000 infrequent voters.
To organizers like Kimberly Olsen, the political field director who helped establish the organization, turning Texas blue is not a mysterious or elusive goal. It simply boils down to math. This year, she said, the numbers may not add up for Democrats outside of the big cities. But someday they could get there.
In the last few weeks, we’ve polled 14 of the 29 G.O.P.-held districts that are rated as tossups by the Cook Political Report. The average result is a tie. For 10 of the 14, the margin is one percentage point or less.
In Iowa’s Third, the Democrat Cindy Axne is up by two points. With Trump under water on job approval and Democrats favored on the generic ballot here, this seat looks like part of the Democratic path of least resistance to a majority.
I’m very interested to see what we get in New Jersey’s Seventh. We had Leonard Lance, the Republican incumbent, up by one point a month ago. It’s hard to think of a district that comes closer to being the average of the suburban battlegrounds.
You can see all our polling here.
• Five months ago, the disgraced Hollywood mogul Harvey Weinstein was indicted in New York on sexual assault charges. The case against him already appears to be fraying.
• CBD has gone from the shelves of California pot shops to the menus of every trendy spa and cafe. How did it get so big so fast? Here are answers to some of your questions.
• In Vancouver, a tidal wave of Chinese wealth has dramatically changed the city’s economy. Now, Bloomberg reports, the government is trying to figure out how to stop it.
• Debate in the Vermont Senate race. Watch the replay here.
• Debate in the House race for Kentucky’s Sixth District, 8 p.m. Eastern. Watch it here.
A Netflix documentary on dogs? Not going to lie, the trailer made both me and editor Tom tear up. And he has cats!
Credits for today’s lead image: Shaban Athuman/The Dallas Morning News, via Associated Press; Lesley Abravanel, via Associated Press; Timothy D. Easley/Associated Press; Erin Schaff for The New York Times; Michael Henninger for The New York Times; Chang W. Lee/The New York Times; pool photo by Scott Utterback; Osman Orsal/Reuters; Brian Snyder/Reuters; Joe Raedle/Getty Images; Chris Mcgrath/Getty Images; Scott Olson/Getty Images.