Mark G. Peters, the Department of Investigation commissioner, has neither been shy about exerting his authority nor about expanding it.
Shortly after he was appointed, he crowed about a big increase in his budget and head count. And over the last few years, he has effectively taken control of four semi-independent agencies.
But now, it seems, that last takeover bid — his most recent attempt to expand his empire — exceeded his authority.
That was the finding of an independent whistle-blower investigation that was disclosed on Thursday. The six-month inquiry concluded that Mr. Peters had erred in seizing control of the agency that polices misconduct in city schools, and then fired its newly hired leader and demoted her deputy in retaliation for their assertion that his actions were illegal.
The results of the inquiry include recommendations that Mr. Peters cede control of the schools investigation agency, restore its independent status and rescind a number of other unilateral changes he made when he took over the agency, according to documents and people briefed on the matter.
The findings represent a significant setback for Mr. Peters, who has steadfastly maintained that his takeover of the schools investigation agency was legal and well within his power. The agency, which investigates allegations of corruption, criminal activity, conflicts of interest and unethical conduct in the 1.1 million-student school system, had been largely autonomous since its creation in 1990.
After the findings were disclosed, Mr. Peters said he accepted the recommendations, and reinstated the two officials who had been fired or demoted.
The effort by Mr. Peters to take over the schools investigation agency in March was one of several recent clashes with Mayor Bill de Blasio, who at the time had considered firing him. The mayor and Mr. Peters had long been friends; Mr. de Blasio appointed him in 2014 after Mr. Peters served as the treasurer for his first campaign for mayor.
At the time, their close relationship raised questions about whether Mr. Peters had the independence to pursue investigations that might reflect poorly on the mayor. Those questions were effectively set aside when his agency conducted several aggressive investigations that left the mayor angry and embarrassed.
The whistle-blower investigation, conducted by a respected former federal prosecutor, James G. McGovern, substantiated complaints made under the city’s whistle-blower law by the two officials who claimed they were fired or demoted because they objected to Mr. Peters’s actions. Mr. McGovern recommended that the officials be reinstated to their former positions with back pay, according to the documents, which were letters sent to the officials.
Mr. McGovern also recommended that Mr. Peters issue a written apology to the former head of the agency, Anastasia Coleman, “for the discourteous and unprofessional manner in which he conducted himself” during a meeting on Feb. 27, the day before he fired her, and that a copy of the letter be placed in both of their personnel files.
The outcome is particularly embarrassing to Mr. Peters and the investigation agency because he violated the city’s whistle-blower law — which was designed to protect those who report municipal wrongdoing from retaliation for speaking out — and is being disciplined for the very same sort of conduct he is supposed to prevent and punish.
Mr. McGovern was hired by Mr. Peters to conduct the whistle-blower inquiry because the commissioner and everyone on his senior staff could play no role since they all were either subjects of the complaints or witnesses to the conduct described in them.
Mr. McGovern, who served for 16 years as a federal prosecutor in the Eastern District of New York, most recently as the chief of the criminal division, detailed his complete findings in a lengthy report provided to Mr. Peters, as is required by the city’s whistle-blower law, on Wednesday.
The full document was described by people with knowledge of the matter as exhaustive and highly critical of the conduct of the commissioner, his first deputy, Lesley Brovner, and his senior staff.
On Thursday, Mr. McGovern sent one-page letters to Ms. Coleman and her lawyer, and to her deputy, Daniel Schlachet, notifying them that their complaints had been substantiated. The letters included his list of recommendations.
Ms. Coleman’s lawyer, Milton L. Williams, said in a statement his client was a public servant who was just doing her job and acting in the best interests of the people of the city. “As a result, she has had to sustain needless damage to her reputation and career,” he said.
Mr. Schlachet declined to comment.
Mr. Peters issued a statement acknowledging Mr. McGovern’s findings and said he would accept them.
