While wandering through an antique book fair in Florence, Italy, in 2005, Jane Fortune, a philanthropist from Indiana, came across a book about Plautilla Nelli, Florence’s first known female artist, whose works date from the 1500s.
The book inspired Ms. Fortune to visit the San Marco Museum in that city to see Nelli’s painting “Lamentation With Saints.” Sadly, Ms. Fortune saw, it was caked with dirt and had lost its luster. She decided then and there to pay for its restoration.
She died on Sept. 23 in her hometown, Indianapolis. She was 76. The cause was ovarian cancer, said her brother, William L. Fortune Jr.
Her rescue of “Lamentation With Saints” was especially fortunate. When the painting was removed from the wall, it was found to be crawling with woodworms. If the insects had gone undiscovered, they could have damaged a large portion of the museum’s collection.
In addition to reclaiming forgotten paintings and sculptures, the foundation seeks to have the restoration work performed by female conservators and to exhibit each final product.
“In the long run they would have a voice and reclaim their places in history,” Ms. Fortune said of the paintings in an interview this year.
Female artists were extremely rare back then; Ms. Fortune estimated that perhaps fewer than 15 were in Florence during the 1500s and 1600s. Women were not allowed to attend workshops or see nude male bodies, so those who learned to paint did so by studying with their fathers, who often then put their own signatures on the canvas. This has made it even harder to detect works actually done by women. When she studied art in Florence as a college student, Ms. Fortune said, no women were ever mentioned.
“The idea to restore art by women started as a way for me to give something back to the city I most love,” she wrote in the The Florentine, Tuscany’s English-language newspaper, in 2015.
The foundation has identified 2,000 forgotten works, some of which are awaiting restoration, said Linda Falcone, director of Advancing Women Artists and a close friend of Ms. Fortune’s. So far it has restored 61 such objects “to their original dignity,” she said, and shown them in prominent places in Florence, including the Uffizi, the Basilica of Santa Croce’s cloister and the Accademia.
The most significant reclaimed works include Artemisia Gentileschi’s “David and Bathsheba,” at the Palatine Gallery in Florence and Nelli’s “Last Supper,” which is to be unveiled at the Santa Maria Novella Museum there next year after four years in the restoration studio.
Her feat of revealing part of Florence’s history to its own people earned her the Fiorino d’Oro, the city’s highest honor, in 2015.
Jane Fortune was born in Indianapolis on Aug. 7, 1942, the oldest of four children of William L. and Jane (Hennessy) Fortune. Her mother had been a journalist. Her father was a journalist who was later elected Indiana state treasurer; he had come from a long line of civic leaders and philanthropists who were instrumental in developing Indianapolis.
Ms. Fortune’s great-grandfather William Fortune started the city’s first phone company and the local chapter of the American Red Cross, had the city’s streets paved and served on the board of Eli Lilly and Company, the Indianapolis-based pharmaceutical giant. His daughter Evelyn Fortune Bartlett — one of Ms. Fortune’s great-aunts — was married at one time to Eli Lilly, the grandson and namesake of the company’s founder.
In a 2010 interview, Ms. Fortune recalled her parents as “powerful role models” as philanthropists.
“Giving back was in their DNA,” she said.
Ms. Fortune graduated from public high school in Indianapolis and attended Western College for Women in Ohio (now called the Western College Program, part of Miami University there). She spent her junior year in Florence, where she began her lifelong love affair with the city.
She continued her studies at Rosemont College, outside Philadelphia, but did not graduate.
Her marriage, to John Medveckis in 1964, ended in divorce. Besides her brother William, she is survived by a son, John, and a daughter, Jennifer Medveckis Marzo, both from her first marriage; and two other siblings, Pamela and Richard Fortune.
Ms. Fortune remained in the Philadelphia area, supporting museums and educational programs there and in New York and Washington, with much of her focus on increasing the accessibility of the arts to people with disabilities.
Eventually, at a charity event in Philadelphia, she met Robert R. Hesse, who had been president of the Chautauqua Institution, the arts and education organization in upstate New York, as well as executive director of the Joffrey Ballet and who was later the chief fund-raiser for Unicef.
They were partners for 25 years. Together they created the Indianapolis City Ballet in 2008. As lovers of Italian food, they opened a seasonal Tuscan restaurant, Bella Fortuna North, in Northern Michigan. And they established a small vineyard there, where they made pinot grigio and prosecco with grapes from vines brought from Italy.
They had homes in Indianapolis; Boca Grande, Fla.; Leland, Mich., and Florence. Mr. Hesse died in 2016.
It was in Florence where Ms. Fortune blossomed. She served as cultural editor of The Florentine and wrote several books about Florence, including “Invisible Women, Forgotten Artists of Florence,” which was adapted into a PBS documentary film that won a regional Emmy Award.
Her last book, “When The World Answered: Florence, Women Artists and the 1966 Flood,” written with Ms. Falcone, was also the subject of a PBS documentary.
Most recently, Ms. Fortune helped establish “A Space of their Own,” an online collaboration between Advancing Women Artists and the Eskenazi Museum of Art at Indiana University; its goal is to build the world’s largest research database on international female artists from the 1500s to the 1800s.
Ms. Fortune received multiple awards and honors, including an honorary doctorate from Indiana University. But she was most proud of the medal from Florence that made her an honorary citizen.
