New York|The Subway Is a Major Problem for Cuomo. Here Are 7 Reasons Why.
The Subway Is a Major Problem for Cuomo. Here Are 7 Reasons Why.
The system descended into crisis on the governor’s watch. Here are some decisions he made in his first two terms that have come under fire.
As Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo runs for a third term, the subway is a thorn in his side.
Mr. Cuomo is expected to easily win re-election Nov. 6. But that doesn’t mean New Yorkers are happy about his management of the crumbling transit system.
A new ad by Marcus J. Molinaro, his Republican challenger, features Twitter posts from angry subway riders and declares: “Under Andrew Cuomo the #MTA is derailing,” referring to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs the subway.
Mr. Molinaro has offered his own transit agenda, which focuses on reducing construction costs.
Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, helped create the subway crisis by failing to adequately support the system — his administration even diverted transit funding to ski resorts — and he has been pilloried by subway advocates for prioritizing aesthetics over maintenance.
But the governor, who declared the subway to be in a state of emergency last year, has also won praise for hiring Andy Byford, a highly respected transit executive who introduced a $40 billion overhaul plan to save the subway. Mr. Cuomo supported the agency's roughly $800 million subway repair plan and has committed about $8 billion from the state for capital spending. And Mr. Cuomo revived a push for congestion pricing, a proposal to raise money for public transit by tolling vehicles entering Manhattan’s busiest areas, even though it carries political risks.
Mr. Cuomo has focused on attention-grabbing projects like the Second Avenue line on the Upper East Side of Manhattan — which, so far, comprises three new stations — instead of on routine repairs to the subway’s infrastructure. It was the failure to keep the tracks and trains properly maintained that led to the subway’s crisis, according to an investigation last year by The New York Times.
Mr. Cuomo, for example, pushed the M.T.A. to spend nearly $1 billion on enhanced lighting and signs and other upgrades to stations that did not improve train service. He also pressured the authority to study outfitting M.T.A. bridges with lights capable of choreographed display.
Cuomo’s take: The governor has said that the Second Avenue line is an important project that had been languishing, and that he wants stations to have modern amenities.
Since Mr. Cuomo took office in 2011, the M.T.A.’s debt has risen to more than $38 billion from about $32 billion. The debt, transit groups note, is higher than the national debt of several countries, including Iceland and Panama.
Nearly 17 percent of the agency’s budget goes to paying down debt — roughly triple what it paid in 1997. The debt is expected to reach more than $42 billion by 2022, according to a new report by the state comptroller.
The M.T.A. has approved generous agreements with labor unions under Mr. Cuomo, awarding raises that have taken a bite out of the agency’s budget.
And the Transport Workers Union, which represents thousands of subway and bus workers, has donated more than $180,000 to Mr. Cuomo’s campaigns and waged a public push to support him. Union members won a total of 19 percent in pay raises between 2009 and 2016, compared with 12 percent for the city’s teachers’ union over the same period.
A Cuomo aide told transit officials to approve the raises and worry about finding the money later, according to two former M.T.A. officials.
Cuomo’s take: Mr. Cuomo’s office has said the M.T.A. handled its own labor negotiations and campaign contributions had not influenced any of his actions.
Many of the subway’s problems were well known before service reached a crisis point last year. Yet Mr. Cuomo was slow to act.
When the state won billions of dollars from large settlements with banks after the 2008 financial crisis, Mr. Cuomo chose not to spend a major slice of the money on mass transit. He also brushed aside the findings of the M.T.A. Transportation Reinvention Commission, a 2014 panel of transit leaders Mr. Cuomo convened from around the world, which warned of growing concerns about maintenance.
Cuomo’s take: He has said that the subway fell apart not just on his watch, but after decades of underinvestment, and that the state had other priorities for the settlement money, including upgrading highways.
Mr. Cuomo continued the practice of forcing the M.T.A. to pay the state for something known as bond issuance fees, which essentially pay for financial advice on borrowing.
The M.T.A., which has multiple bond experts, had to pay $328 million in bond issuance fees over the past 15 years. After The Times raised questions over the fees, state officials said they would no longer impose bond issuance fees on the M.T.A.
Cuomo’s take: State officials defended the payments, saying their staff met periodically with M.T.A. officials to discuss when to issue bonds.
Mr. Cuomo’s administration forced the M.T.A. to send $5 million to bail out three state-run ski resorts that were struggling, a decision that was first reported by The New York Daily News.
The bailout was part of a trend in which the state made the transit agency help other entities, including sending $5 million to the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority to cover the cost of reducing tolls in 2013, according to The Times investigation.
Cuomo’s take: State officials have said that the M.T.A. owed the state the $5 million it sent to ski resorts and that it paled in comparison to the funding the state provides to the transit agency each year.
During Mr. Cuomo’s second term, he suddenly took an intense interest in the M.T.A.
Mr. Cuomo placed aides within the organization and, in an unusual move, made some report directly to him. Mr. Cuomo’s style troubled the well-liked former M.T.A. chairman Thomas F. Prendergast, who retired in early 2017. Mr. Prendergast said his decision was not related to the governor, but several of his former colleagues said it was a factor.
Mr. Cuomo badgered Mr. Prendergast and other leaders to finish the Second Avenue subway by Jan. 1, 2017. The pressure led officials to rush the work. When the new stations opened, the fire alarm testing was not completed and more than 17,000 defects found during inspections had not been fixed, according to oversight reports obtained by The Times.
Cuomo’s take: He has said that the M.T.A. is a mess and needs his help, and that it was important for the Second Avenue line to open on time to improve the agency’s credibility with the public.