One dancer is clothed. The other isn’t. They do the same precise motions, locked into the same rhythm, an endlessly looping drum track. The stage floor is outlined in tape, and after 20 minutes, they split it in half with more tape, restricting themselves to one side. Ten minutes later, they split it again — and again after five more minutes, and so forth, as time and area keep diminishing by half until there isn’t room for two.
A dance with a design this schematic could be awfully dry. But Lucy Guerin’s “Split” isn’t. This Australian choreographer’s duet, which had its United States premiere at the Baryshnikov Arts Center on Thursday, is nearly a thriller.
That’s largely because it’s split in one more way. The choreography for the first and longest section is abstract. But the second is something completely different: a strange, two-character drama of shamanistic gestures involving fingers and mouths (and fingers in mouths) that convey a strong threat of violence.
These two modes alternate, putting two kinds of suspense into play. Time and space keep shrinking, the walls of tape closing in. But the formal sections also keep interrupting the drama, as in a cliffhanger.
In the first section, the relentless beat of the drums (by the electronic composer Scanner) is obeyed with rocking repetitions — flipping a hand between palm up and palm down, for instance — like a highly sophisticated exercise routine. Yet few of these detailed sequences return. Rather, they follow a physical logic: how an arm swinging, again and again, can develop into a spin.
That one of the dancers (Lilian Steiner) is naked and the other (Melanie Lane) is covered by a frumpy dress seems at first not to mean much. Even when they strike odalisque poses and caress themselves, their shared objectivity equalizes them. As in any unison duet, you compare the two dancers, but the questions raised are mostly formal: Is Ms. Steiner’s greater (and truly exceptional) lucidity enhanced by her nudity?
In the dramatic sections, though, the nudity takes on dramatic meaning: What is the relationship between this clothed person and this crouching naked one? Is Ms. Steiner a servant, a slave, a spirit?
The sensitive lighting, by Paul Lim, distinguishes the formal from the dramatic sections, but the drums connect them and they color each other. After a dramatic part, a wildness in the formal style (as when the dancers roll their heads vehemently or do the Jerk) seems more resistant to restraint, more dangerous, especially as the space gets tighter.
In the meantime, the drama is coming to a head, a power struggle between the women escalating into what could be cannibalism.  But the formal frame maintains some distance. You might read the whole dance as being about art and instinct, about the split nature of humanity. Whatever the interpretation, it’s the split nature of the dance that makes it work.