Paul Thomas Anderson’s acclaimed second feature is on IFC. And PBS airs a documentary on the Concorde airplane.
BOOGIE NIGHTS (1997) 11 p.m. on IFC. Electing to begin watching Paul Thomas Anderson’s 155-minute take on the Los Angeles pornography industry of the 1970s-1980s at 11 p.m. takes commitment. Those who sign on will find colorful company in Eddie Adams (Mark Wahlberg), the teenager at the center of the film who early on decides that his true calling is in pornography and that Dirk Diggler is a wise choice for a professional name. He goes to work for a film director played by Burt Reynolds, who is one of many notable members of this movie’s smashing ensemble, which includes Julianne Moore, Don Cheadle, John C. Reilly, Heather Graham, William H. Macy and Philip Seymour Hoffman. In her review for The New York Times, Janet Maslin wrote that “everything about ‘Boogie Nights’ is interestingly unexpected,” a terrific note of praise. For those who want to start a bit earlier, the film is also available to stream on Amazon, iTunes and Vudu.
NOVA: FLYING SUPERSONIC 9 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). This month, it will be 15 years since the final Concorde flight touched down on the tarmac at Heathrow International Airport in London, putting to rest commercial supersonic travel (at least for now). To mark the occasion, “Nova” is debuting a documentary on the making of the notable (and notably troubled) aircraft, which was introduced commercially in the mid-70s.
SAVING BANKSY (2017) on Amazon. The recent prank shredding of a Banksy painting during an auction at Sotheby’s brought one of the world’s most famous street artists (once again) into the headlines. Andy Webster wrote in his review for The Times that Colin Day’s documentary weighs “graffiti’s populist ethos against art-world profiteering.” He named the documentary a Critic’s Pick.
MARNIE (1964) on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. Nico Muhly’s adaptation of Winston Graham’s 1961 novel, “Marnie,” just opened at the Metropolitan Opera; stream the ’60s Alfred Hitchcock version, with Tippi Hedren and a “Goldfinger”-era Sean Connery.