The Times bureau in Kabul mobilized all of its stringers and Afghan reporters to record every attack on the Afghan security forces and civilians that they could find, as a weekly chronicle of the war.
The number of casualties across Afghanistan increased compared to the previous week, occurring in 13 provinces, even as the weather has turned cold in many parts of the country. The week saw fewer attacks by Taliban fighters compared to last week, but more deaths among security forces. The Times confirmed reports of 96 security force members and 31 civilians killed in the past week.
Three soldiers, two police officers and one member of the National Directorate of Security were killed in Taliban attacks on Qarqin District. The Taliban suffered an unknown number of casualties.
The Taliban attacked six security outposts in Qala-i-Zal District, killing 15 border police and wounding 18 others. One of the security outposts was overtaken by the Taliban. The attack was carried out by a Taliban Red Unit. Seven Taliban militants were killed in the fighting.
The Taliban attacked border police outposts in Patan District. Two border police officers were killed and two pro-government militias were wounded. 
One police officer was killed in a Taliban attack on security outposts in Burka District.
Six police officers and pro-government militia members were killed and eight others were wounded in clashes between government forces and local militia groups in Balkhab District.
The Taliban attacked Waghaz District, killing six police officers — three Afghan National Civil Order Police and three national police officers — and wounding two more.
Two police officers were wounded in a Taliban attack in Deh Yak District.
One soldier was killed in a Taliban attack on security outposts in Burka District.
The Taliban attacked Sancharak District, killing one pro-government militia member and wounding four others.
An explosion at a rally in Lashkar Gah for Haji Salih Mohammad, a parliamentary candidate in the coming election, left eight civilians dead and wounded 12 others.
The Taliban attacked an army base in Andar District, killing one soldier and wounding four others. Meanwhile, NATO forces launched operations in multiple districts of Ghazni against the Taliban, which suffered heavy casualties in these operations.
The Taliban attacked security outposts in Mizan District. A police officer and three members of the Taliban, including a group commander, were killed in the clashes.
The Taliban attacked the center of Almar District, where the fighting continued until the next day. Two soldiers were killed.
Thirteen soldiers and two members of the National Directorate of Security were killed, and 20 soldiers and four police officers were wounded in Taliban attacks on military bases in Qush Tepa District. The fighting continued for 11 hours. Two military bases were overtaken by the Taliban.
An I.E.D. explosion in Kabul city killed one civilian and wounded one civilian and one police officer.
The Taliban attacked police outposts in Jahangir village of Arghistan District. Five police officers were killed and seven others were wounded in the clashes. Thirteen Taliban fighters were also killed and 17 others were wounded. None of the security outposts fell to the Taliban; reinforcements from the district center forced the Taliban to flee.
The police chief of Sayed Abad District and 13 other police officers were killed in attacks on the district center. A number of security outposts were captured by the Taliban, but then taken back by Afghan security forces, who arrived to support the police forces.
The Taliban attacked and destroyed an Afghan National Police outpost and an Afghan Local Police outpost in Pashtoon Kot District. Ten police officers and a female civilian were killed and five police officers were wounded in the clashes between the Taliban and security forces. Reinforcements that tried to reach the area were also ambushed by the Taliban.
Ten civilians were killed and at least 20 were wounded in airstrikes in Gerda Serai District that were carried out after an attack on campaign provincial forces, a group of Afghan forces supported by Americans in Paktia.
The Taliban attacked a military outpost in Qazi village of Khogyani District of Ghazni. One soldier was killed and two others were wounded. The Taliban also suffered an unknown number of casualties.
Clashes between Afghan forces and a local militia left seven civilians and four police dead.
Two roadside mines exploded in Kabul, killing one police officer and one civilian and wounding nine civilians.
The Taliban attacked a police checkpoint in Qala-e-Zal District, killing four police officers and wounding one other.
Two civilians were killed when an I.E.D. exploded in their home in Ismail Khail Aw Mondozai District. Three children were wounded in the explosion.
An I.E.D. attached to a vehicle exploded in Khost city, killing the bodyguard of a parliament candidate and wounding four others.