When they outgrew their two-bedroom, a family of six and their pet rabbit, Max, managed to stay in Manhattan by finding a three-bedroom in Inwood.
A three-bedroom with double living rooms and a sunroom in Inwood would seem like a dream apartment to many New Yorkers. But once you fit in six people and a rabbit, perhaps not so much. In the Trader/Wolma family, however, you won’t hear anyone complaining.
Jackson Trader, 14, shares a bedroom with his brother, Wesley, 12, and stepbrother, Jonathan Wolma, 15. The tiny third bedroom in their apartment belongs to their sister, Chloe Wolma, 17, and the living room is occupied by a rabbit named Max.
Four years ago, when Rick and Dana Trader combined their two families, Rick and his two sons, Jackson and Wesley, moved into the Battery Park City two-bedroom that Dana shared with her two children from her first marriage, Chloe and Jonathan.
New York City children are used to sharing bedrooms, and even if squeezing four to a room was less than ideal, they made it work with a loft bed for Chloe and a bunk bed with a pullout trundle for Wesley, the youngest. To address disagreement over TV channels, they installed a TV-watching nook under Chloe’s bed.
They considered chopping up the master bedroom to carve out a room for Chloe, but concluded that it would be easier to move. At the time, they were paying $4,500 a month — Ms. Trader had moved into the Gateway Plaza building in 2007, and their rent-stabilized unit was considerably below market rate.
Still, that amount, they figured, would go a lot further in a neighborhood that didn’t have Gucci and Burberry stores, recent arrivals courtesy of the Brookfield Place renovation. Even their bodega had been replaced by Le Pain Quotidien.
Occupation: Ms. Trader is the vice president of employee experience at Meetup; Mr. Trader is in sales at Braze, a mobile marketing company.
School commutes: Chloe and Wesley head to the Upper East Side to attend Eleanor Roosevelt High School, where she is a senior, and Robert F. Wagner Middle School, where he is an eighth grader. Jackson is a sophomore at the Bronx High School of Science, which is significantly closer than it was when he was living in Battery Park City. But Jonathan, a sophomore at Millennium High School, now has an hour commute rather than a 10-minute walk.
Why they didn’t stay in Battery Park City: Because of the growing crowds and the cost. After leaving their $4,500-a-month apartment, Ms. Trader said it was re-listed for $2,000 more a month. All the three-bedrooms they saw in the neighborhood cost at least $7,500 month.
But Manhattan is not a place with an abundance of reasonably priced family-size apartments.
And cramped though it felt, they soon learned that their two-bedroom was actually spacious by the standards of the borough.
After a brunch with friends in Inwood, they walked past Inwood Hill Park, and Ms. Trader mused that she would move in an instant if a place in one of the townhouses along the park ever opened up. Mr. Trader had lived in nearby Hudson Heights years earlier, and they had initially been optimistic about finding a sizable place nearby, but the inexpensive, sprawling apartments of his youth had disappeared, replaced by awkwardly laid out one- and two-bedrooms.
“That was more discouraging than anything else, to know that that model was gone,” he said.
Then, hunting through StreetEasy on a family vacation, Ms. Trader saw a listing for a “huge three-bedroom” in a “rarely available full-floor townhouse” across from Inwood Hill Park. Rent was $3,300 a month. She immediately called the broker, Lincoln Wettenhall of Douglas Elliman, and was relieved to find out that she didn’t have to fly back to secure the apartment, as showings wouldn’t start for several days.
Fortunately, the competition dropped out and the Traders moved in a little over a year ago.
While the addition of a tiny third bedroom might seem a modest improvement, their new apartment’s layout is airy, with a sizable kitchen, a sunroom overlooking the park and, crucially, double living rooms, so the children have one of their own, with their own television and couch.
And while the family misses many things about Battery Park City — the movie theater, the Shake Shack, going ice skating at the Brookfield Place rink after a half-day of school, the community garden and the short commute for Jonathan, a sophomore at Millennium High School in the financial district — there are ample advantages to their new home. For instance, a shared backyard where they grow tomatoes and basil.
And using Inwood Hill Park as their front yard — “Manhattan’s last natural forest,” said Chloe, who is happy to have a room of her own, at least for now. She will most likely be assigned a roommate when she starts college next fall.
Who, if anyone, will be allowed to take her space when she leaves is a matter of some contention.
