THIS IS LA LA LAND ON STEROIDS.... I CAN NOT COMPREHEND THE #%*%#$^%* THAT IS THIS DECISION.
Nice Joke. DISGUSTING.
For these explosive remarks and others, Mr. Giorgini received a three-month suspension from practicing law in New York.
In its opinion, issued last month, the court cited his oft-capitalized and heavily punctuated writing in the decision.
Here are some of the choice remarks that Mr. Giorgini, who declined to be interviewed, shared with state judges.
Mr. Giorgini was accused of violating New York’s code of professional conduct in 2015 by the state’s attorney grievance committee, which investigates complaints against lawyers.
But his impassioned writing appears to have first come to the court system’s notice in 2005.
That’s when he submitted an emphatic denunciation of a Suffolk County judge’s decision.
The decision, in case it wasn’t clear, did not go in Mr. Giorgini’s favor.
Mr. Giorgini also took issue with the way the court came to its judgment.
“I find it hard to believe that after the Court had the motion for 5 months to decide, that it could make up facts to support a finding,” he wrote.
He suggested that judges ignored his filings or failed to read them.
He wrote that the court’s decision, which he described with a string of varying punctuation marks, was “so bizzaro land that it is hard to type.” Though, of course, he managed.
Months later, another judge reversed the decision. But that judge warned Mr. Giorgini that he could face punishment if he engaged in similar behavior in the future.
In 2008, Mr. Giorgini did just that.
After a ruling that didn’t favor his client, he accused judges in Suffolk County of being corrupt.
Mr. Giorgini then accused judges of making decisions that would benefit their political supporters rather than considering the facts.
“I guess if you hire the right politically active lawyers … anything is excusable with this court,” he wrote.
In addition, Mr. Giorgini asserted that his client’s opponents and their lawyers had filed “fake and manufactured” documents in the case. He said he spent “countless hours” working to prove these claims and suggested that the judges had turned a blind eye.
In its decision, the appeals court said that while lawyers were not permitted to berate judges “for what the lawyer suspects is corrupt political behavior,” Mr. Giorgini did so repeatedly.
The court cited the lawyer’s blaming judges for his conduct as a factor in Mr. Giorgini’s suspension.
When reached Thursday, Mr. Giorgini declined to say on the record whether he planned to appeal the suspension.
His tone was civil and polite.