Updated, Nov. 2018 with links to some of the classroom projects described below.
There’s a lot to read and talk about this election season. As we wrote in September, this primary season has been full of surprises. There are highly competitive races that might — or might not — lead to a “blue wave”; divisive issues like immigration, health care, gun control and the Supreme Court; the continuing Mueller investigation; questions surrounding elections and social media; and, of course, the role of President Trump — and former President Barack Obama — in who will vote, why and how.
And that was before the current Supreme Court nomination fight that has dominated headlines for weeks.
To help educators prepare for the final month leading up to the midterms, we have collected a range of ideas submitted by teachers and added some of our own to create this list of seven ways to use the midterms as an opportunity for teaching and learning. If you have any other ideas to add, please share them in the comments section.
1. Understand the basics by posing questions.
The Times recently published an “Everything You Need to Know” guide to the midterm elections that asks and answers many of the same questions students might have about the midterms. The authors went out of their way to provide succinct answers to questions like...
■ When are the midterms?
■ What’s at stake in Washington?
■ What about outside of Washington?
Before you show your students the guide, however, you might conduct a K-W-L activity in which students share what they already know about the midterms and generate questions about what they wonder. Consider having students write their questions in a way that’s easily shareable, like via index cards or Google Classroom. Then, invite them to search for answers in the Times guide, and teach each other what they learned.
In my government classroom, students will be creating and publishing a nonpartisan election guide designed to engage and support first time voters in our region. My students created a survey to determine which issues are important to younger voters. They will use this survey data to guide the questions they ask the candidates included in our guide. Students will also create a “how to vote” section of the guide in order to educate first time voters about the process and requirements of voting. Through the project students will learn about civic engagement, different levels of government and their functions, and how to vote.
Update: Here is the election guide these students created.
2. Create a get-out-the-youth-vote campaign.
All fall, news sources have been reporting that the pace of new voter registrations among young people is accelerating. After the Parkland, Fla., school shooting — and with heated emotions for and against President Trump — perhaps young Americans will show up at the polls in record numbers. But in 2014, in the last midterm elections, fewer than one in five 18- to 29-year-olds voted. Four years before that, the number was only slightly better: fewer than one in four. Will this year be notably different?
We have published a related lesson that goes in-depth on this topic, asking students to investigate questions like: Why do you think so many young people don’t vote? Is it important that they do? What can we do, as a society, to get more young people to the polls?
In the culminating activity, students create a campaign to motivate young people to go to the polls in the form of a video, song, podcast, poster, editorial, speech or podcast.
3. Explore voting rights.
Students will address whether and how governments (federal and local) act — extralegally and legally — to keep target populations from voting: tactical measures like closing polling places in target districts, withholding the right for felons and former felons to vote, voter ID laws, etc.
How do these actions communicate our collective values? We will ask students to bring their personal, global perspective into the conversation, including their experiences with voter suppression tactics in their home countries.
One way to start this investigation is by learning about voting history and laws in the United States. Our lesson plan from 2014 “Fair Elections in Jeopardy? Connecting the Dots Among Voting Rates, Rights and Restrictions” helps students make connections among voter participation rates, the history of voting rights and state voter ID laws.
You might also have students read about and debate who legally should have the right to vote in the United States — and who shouldn’t. For example, should people younger than 18 be able to vote? What about felons and ex-felons? Residents of United States territories, like Puerto Rico? Mentally disabled people? Immigrants? Why might laws that prevent these groups from voting exist? Is stripping the right to vote democratic? How might the outcome of the midterm elections be affected if one or more of these groups were allowed to vote in your state?
To learn more, they might do their own research into the obstacles faced by certain populations of voters, for example, older and physically disabled Americans, minorities and poor and working-class Americans.
4. Hold a mock election.
Over the last decade, our High School here in Etown has put together an extensive mock election simulation that not only teaches our 12th (now 11th) Grade Government & Economics students how campaigns work, but about the issues and candidates themselves. This year is no different as we will be running two Congressional, the Pennsylvania Lieutenant Governor and Gubernatorial races with the whole school voting on the outcome.
Take a look at Elizabethtown’s mock election program to learn more.
5. Analyze political messaging and rhetoric.
Students will analyze how values are embedded in (and exploited by) the design of political messaging. Assessing tone, visual language, verbal language and sound design, they will be asked to unpack the ways in which political messaging incites emotional responses, and the degree to which political messaging is aligned with or divorced from policy, action and governance. Students will also analyze how/whether political messaging is intended to ignite action or apathy, which either increases or depresses voter turnout among targeted voters.
For example, your students might look at how candidates are using texting, social media and viral videos to their advantage to reach voters in 2018. How effective are they compared to offline strategies, like door-to-door campaigning, phones calls or television ads, and why?
6. Predict election results.
Students get to don their best forecaster hats and try to predict toss up races in the House and Senate after breaking down demographics, political profiles, and candidate comparisons. They present on their predictions before Election Day (in 2016 students did cakes when cut up would reveal red or blue, we also had a piñata filled with blue candy for one prediction). We track predictions on a congressional districts map and debrief the day after elections are held. It’s a great way to learn about the election process, polling, how demographics influence voting behavior, hot button issues, and what makes certain districts/states unique to their own experience.
If you want to do your own midterms forecasting project, The Times has many useful resources, including these real-time polling results, this list of the most competitive House races, plus all the midterms coverage in the Politics section.
7. Follow a candidate.
Working in pairs, students will also find one intriguing race (either regional or national) and follow one neophyte on his or her journey, from August to November. Each week, that campaign’s representatives in our class will report on what happened in the race that week. In addition, we’ll have the students contact their chosen campaign to ask questions, or even get an interview.
If you want your students to choose a candidate to research, they can find out who is running in races important to them in Ballotpedia, such as for Congress, governor and state attorney general.
And they can get inspired, or do research, through extensive Times coverage of races across the country in the Politics section — such as reporting on the more than 200 L.G.B.T. candidates and the record number of women running in November. The Times has also profiled individual candidates across the country, like Safiya Wazir, a refugee from Afghanistan who might join the New Hampshire Legislature, or Stacey Abrams of Georgia, who is bidding to become the first black woman to serve as governor of an American state.