The Japanese company became the most powerful tech investor in the world when Saudi Arabia pledged $45 billion to its Vision Fund. But outcry over the disappearance and suspected killing of a Saudi journalist has cast a cloud over SoftBank’s alliance with the country.
It is a delicate balance for Mr. Son, who is on the one hand receiving investment capital from a conservative nation that built its vast wealth with oil and on the other hand using that very wealth to fund progressive young companies with a different set of values.
But SoftBank is considering a worst-case scenario: It may have to refuse any more Saudi money.
More Saudi news: Why President Trump appears keen to protect the Saudis. Siemens’s C.E.O. waffled in public over whether to attend the Saudi conference. And the final column by Mr. Khashoggi laments a lack of free press in the Arab world.
The U.S. central bank intends to continue raising rates, according to the minutes of its latest policy meeting — despite Mr. Trump’s frustrations.
The Fed raised its benchmark interest rate by a quarter percentage point last month, to a range between 2 percent and 2.25 percent. And it’s broadly expected to raise it again by a quarter of a point in December.
The Fed remains uncertain about its plans for the coming year, and one reason is that Fed officials also are concerned that Mr. Trump’s trade policies could impede economic growth, the minutes said. The Fed has said Mr. Trump’s policies, including tariffs on steel, aluminum and a wide range of Chinese goods, have not yet dented aggregate measures of economic growth.
Rising rates are prompting investors to rethink where they put their money: The WSJ reports that the recent market slump may be the start of a so-called rotation, where funds are reallocated from risky assets like tech stocks into safer ones like bonds.
The White House said yesterday that the U.S. would pull out of a 144-year-old postal treaty that governs shipping rates across borders. It’s an unexpected new weapon in Mr. Trump’s trade war with China.
The White House has, however, shied away from opening another, more controversial front in the trade war: The Treasury Department chose not to label Beijing a currency manipulator, though it said that movements of the renminbi needed greater scrutiny.
More trade news: The U.S. is trying to strike bilateral agreements with signatories of the Trans-Pacific Partnership treaty (that the Trump administration withdrew from last year) to limit China’s economic influence in Asia.
Steven Mnuchin reportedly to decide if he will attend Davos in the Desert. The Treasury secretary has said that he still plans to attend the now-controversial investment conference in Saudi Arabia, but Bloomberg reports that he will “revisit” that decision today.
Another day of earnings. American Express and Blackstone will both publish quarterly results, and both are expected to have performed well.
The European Council summit kicks off. Trade will be high on the agenda, along with migration, climate change and other issues. Meanwhile, 50 European and Asian countries will convene in Brussels for a two-day summit to talk trade, the denuclearization of Korea, the Iran nuclear deal and more.
Has the D.N.C. done enough to be hack-proof?
Krikorian’s team regularly discusses emerging threats with experts at Microsoft, Facebook, Google and other tech firms. They chat via the encrypted messaging apps Signal and Wickr with cyber experts from the DNC’s sister committees and third-party vendors, discussing suspicious incidents and other information. The DNC also works with Facebook and Twitter to ensure the committee learns when candidates contact social media firms about possible account takeovers.
But Alex Stamos, Facebook’s former security chief, is skeptical that campaigns have done enough. “We have not seen the kind of massive upgrade in campaign infrastructure that you would need to stand against a professional hacking agency like that,” he told NBC News.
The Third Point chief suffered a blow yesterday: Descendants of Campbell’s founder said they would vote for the company’s current board at next month’s annual meeting. They hold 41 percent of the soup maker’s shares, while Mr. Loeb and his allies own just under 10 percent.
That’s a tough margin for Mr. Loeb to overcome in his effort to oust the company’s entire board. The activist investor has said that Campbell’s poor performance shows it needs new oversight — and a plan to sell itself.
All hope isn’t lost for Mr. Loeb. Campbell’s corporate bylaws state that whichever board candidate receives the most votes wins, so some of Third Point’s nominees could still be elected. But the odds of replacing the entire board just got much worse.
Prudential, whose shares rose about 2 percent Wednesday, has more total assets today than when it was designated a SIFI. Regulators acknowledged Wednesday it also has greater derivatives exposures and a complex legal structure that could make it hard to unwind in a crisis.
Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, noted that talks had hit a “deadlock” and other leaders expressed frustration at political paralysis in Westminster, according to diplomats briefed on the meeting.
More Brexit news: Mrs. May will brief 150 British C.E.O.s on her plans tomorrow.
Rob Sands will step down as C.E.O. of the beer brewer Constellation Brands next year.
New York City’s comptroller and other state investment officials want to strip Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook’s chairman role.
Wan Ling Martello, the Nestlé executive who turned around its Asian operations, will leave the Swiss food giant.
Gilbert Passin reportedly left his post as vice president of manufacturing at Tesla earlier this year.
• Uber raised $2 billion in its first-ever bond offering. Here’s the back story.
• The billionaire Shahid Khan withdrew a £600 million, or about $790 million, offer to buy London’s Wembley Stadium. Meanwhile, fans of the Arsenal soccer team don’t want to sell their shares to the club’s majority owner, Stan Kroenke.
• Twitter will soon tell you why tweets were deleted. It also released an archive of 10 million tweets from troll accounts for researchers to study.
• China is a living laboratory for the retail sector. And Europe’s luxury brands are nervous about losing customers there.
• America has too much milk — but a shortage of Tab.
Thanks for reading! We’ll see you next tomorrow.
