What union organizers can teach Democrats.
Prognosticators are wildly confused about which “side” will benefit from the highly contentious process around Brett Kavanaugh. Whose anger will prevail? they ask. On the left, some ask, what’s the point? Nothing matters, it is all stacked against us now and forever.
Unions are deeply familiar with this reality. Workers who have managed to win National Labor Relations Board elections are up against seriously rigged rules that strongly favor management. They face highly motivated, well-resourced “union avoidance firms” that deploy any means possible to prevent workers from organizing. This same billionaire class, including some of the very same funders behind the Federalist Society’s list of judges handed to their populist front — the president — first perfected warfare against workplace democracy, i.e., unions. Billionaires unleashed these methods and machinery against American democracy in the midterms of 2010 and 2014, culminating in the 2016 national election.
Because the very tactics long used against workers in workplace elections have now been exported to the broader electoral arena, it’s important to understand three lessons about how to win by those of us who continue to achieve victory even when faced with a ruthless, break-all-the-rules, determined opposition.
Through all platforms available, they hammer away the message that no matter whether workers show up or don’t show up to vote, nothing will ever change. Futility is a strategy. An indispensable aspect of this is to make people associate the unionization election itself with the pain and discomfort of the polarized, harsh language coming at them from all sides: The sooner the election goes away, the better they will feel. Things will return to “normal,” since they will stop fighting with friends and family, and the once-bad normal — the reason for the struggle in the first place — suddenly feels better, until their employer cuts benefits weeks after the election. Futility makes the act of voting, discussing and even thinking about the election feel bad. A persistent refrain in the fall of 2016 was “I can’t wait till this thing is over already.” Making Americans want to make the election (democracy) “just go away” is a main tactic of the futility strategy.
Second, you must build supermajority participation, because, as the election approaches, the opposition will succeed at stripping support from a key percentage of previous yes voters. All effort must be focused on what successful union organizers call “going to the biggest-worst”: spending all our time with workers who are undecided or leaning anti-union. The biggest mistake inexperienced union organizers make is spending precious time preaching to the choir, i.e., talking to pro-union activists.
The activists, about a third of any work force, don’t need attention. It’s the workers who get misled by the consultant’s lies who need focus and energy. These conversations are hard, so people avoid the urgent and instead do the easy (and lose). In hotly contested districts, building a supermajority means identifying the neighbor, congregant or family member who can help hold or move undecided or shaky voters (strangers simply can’t do this) and making sure the conversations are happening. To win, forget wishful thinking and build to the number needed to win assuming you lose 10 points the days before the election.
Third, to counteract the litany of outrageous lies from the employer’s hired guns, it takes discipline to constantly connect the undecided and anti-union voters to the issues they themselves think matters most, like reasonable workload limits, on-the-job safety, putting sexually harassing managers in their place and the right to retire (to know this, you have to have asked them first). Union organizers help the voter realize that the union buster offers zero solutions. The most important aspect of defeating the avoidance specialists is to inoculate people against the opponents’ lies before they start and throughout the campaign.
That means saying all the nasty things about unions that the employer will use to bombard workers as the campaign heats up. When we reveal the limitations of the bad unions first and discuss, in concrete terms, the many real examples of how workers themselves can build good unions, it helps people understand the message war. Likewise, in today’s highly polarized election debates, it’s important to get out front by saying, “In the final weeks of this election, you will hear the opponent say, ‘Raising wages kills jobs.’ Why do you think they say that?” and “You will hear that immigrants stole your jobs.” And it’s important to ask — not tell — “Do you think C.E.O.s are making the decision to send your job to countries where they can pay people $1 a day, or did immigrants make that decision?” You have to let the person actually think, then redirect back to why their low wages or underemployment make life impossible. These are conversations in a sustained ground game, not one-way media.
Trust in institutions is low. Skepticism about social media is finally emerging. Americans have long trusted their flesh-and-blood neighbors and co-workers more than the media or their employers. A supermajority — not a small plurality — approach will be crucial to defeating the forces behind Donald Trump because billionaire-funded electoral operations will succeed at shaving votes just before Election Day.
Building new unions and rebuilding last century’s unions will be the way to reduce income inequality because workplace democracy changes the horribly skewed power disparity in American society. But workers and organizers who have won hard-fought workplace elections or led strikes — as we saw among teachers in so many states this spring and on hotel picket lines in Chicago, Boston and San Francisco — also offer the best insights needed to overcome defeat this fall, in 2020 and beyond. To save American democracy, learn the lessons from successful union organizing.
