The trumpeter Ambrose Akinmusire’s new album, “Origami Harvest,” is an absorbing work that makes a powerful statement about race, anxiety and injustice.Credit...
Ambrose Akinmusire, 36, may be the most distinctive, elusive and ultimately satisfying trumpeter of his generation. With a prickly, attenuated tone, he plays in little diving gestures, often wrapping his phrases around a crooked peg. When moving up a scale, he sometimes skips across an unexpected interval, as if he’s just built you a bust and left off the nose.
But what if his trumpet isn’t the biggest point? Looking at his career, his horn might matter most as a periscope into his compositions, which tend to be full-group affairs, too rich for any one instrument to carry. On “Origami Harvest,” his scorching and emphatic new album, the trumpet is often absent altogether.
This is Mr. Akinmusire’s most absorbing work since “When the Heart Emerges Glistening,” from 2011, a contemporary classic by his quintet. “Origami Harvest” stretches six lengthy tracks across a full hour of snarled interplay between the classical strings of the Mivos Quartet; Mr. Akinmusire and his two improvising brethren, Marcus Gilmore on drums and Sam Harris on piano; and the poet and rapper Victor Vazquez, a former member of Das Racist, who goes by Kool A.D. The result is a tangled portrait of anxieties, one that adheres to its own standards of beauty, taking no particular tradition for granted.
“Origami Harvest” features the Mivos Quartet, the drummer Marcus Gilmore, the pianist Sam Harris and the rapper Kool A.D.Credit...
More than almost any other contemporary improviser, Mr. Akinmusire has invented a way of composing that’s unfixed from jazz’s stickiest conventions: Musicians trade the melody; solos evade a clear path or just cut out; tempos disintegrate. He’s rooted but not referential. So, while “Origami Harvest” is being billed as a kind of classical-meets-rap album, his source materials were bound to be more complex than that. If anything, he’s working from his own deconstructed versions of chamber music and hip-hop.
This is restless music, a sound of half-comforts and constant uncertainty, partly thanks to its lack of a bassist. Key signatures shift all the time. So do the cadences. And so does Kool A.D., who has internalized about equal doses of Ishmael Reed, William Faulkner and O.D.B. He stays away from simple storytelling or the comfortable flow of an M.C., spiraling instead through small-scale revelations and recapitulations, often getting there via wordplay. As he enters on “a blooming bloodfruit in a hoodie” — a 13-minute, multipart piece whose title refers to the killing of Trayvon Martin — the mood is both basking and fatalist. “The soul infinite/Never mind who cares/I’m gettin’ lit,” Kool A.D. raps.
The pigs kill men with the pigments darka.
Later in the track, with Mr. Harris throwing piano gusts behind him and Mr. Gilmore letting the ground disintegrate below, Mr. Akinmusire comes to the fore. But still he doesn’t really solo — he holds notes, repeats himself stubbornly, only lights upon a melody after the spotlight has shifted back onto the strings.
Not all of Kool A.D.’s wry sendups of hip-hop chauvinism land just right. (He has been accused of sexual coercion and put out a statement last year acknowledging that he’d “hurt people.”) And on “Free, White and 21,” Mr. Akinmusire handles the vocals himself. Continuing a personal tradition, he devotes this track to the names of black people killed by law enforcement officers, whispering the roll call over lively strings and discomfited, irregular drumming.
“Origami Harvest” is about more than naming injustice; it’s an expressive document, a testimony to lives lived freely while under state suspicion. When Mr. Akinmusire starts reciting these names, he is stripping things down, taking us close to the source of the manifold frustrations articulated earlier. But toward the end of the track, between the whispered names, a spoken voice cuts in for a moment. “We are not protest songs,” the voice says, bold and clear, reminding you that there’s really no simplicity to be had.