The Mexico Dispatch on Friday about a migrant caravan approaching the United States misstated where María and her daughters would be sent if her asylum petition is rejected by the American government. They would be sent back to Honduras, not to the United States.
An article on April 28 about a proposal in San Diego for a government-run electricity program misstated the name of a group opposed to the proposal. It is the Clear the Air Coalition, not the Clean Air Coalition. This correction was delayed because the error was only recently called to the attention of editors.
A comedy entry in the Listings pages on Friday erroneously included a performance of “It’s Maybe Something With Wyatt Cenac” at Union Hall on Sunday. That event was canceled after press time.
An article on Friday about the fifth installment of Tefaf New York misstated the length of the fair. It opens on Saturday, Oct. 27, and runs through Wednesday.
A picture caption with the Streaming column on Page 13 about “The Black Cat” reverses the identities of two actors. Bela Lugosi is on the left, and Boris Karloff is on the right.
An article on Page 16 about the 200th anniversary of the novel “Frankenstein” misstates the given name of Frankenstein in the 1931 movie. It was Henry, not Victor.
A picture caption with an article on Page 8 about a museum covering World War I in Kansas City, Mo., misstates the museum’s name. It is the National World War I Museum and Memorial, not the National World I Museum and Memorial.
An article on Page 12 about artists showing their work in real estate developments misidentified the artist whose work will be featured at a condominium opening next year in Miami. The artist is Robert Indiana, not Gary Indiana.
Because of an editing error, an article on Page 16 about the Canadian artist Rafael Lozano-Hemmer misstates the name of the museum in Washington where Rafael Lozano-Hemmer’s work will be on view. It is the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, not the Hirshhorn Museum and Culture Garden. The error is repeated in a picture caption. The article also describes imprecisely the scale of the show. It is the exhibition that takes over the second floor of the museum, not just one of the three supersize works.
An article on Page 26 about the Magnificent Jewels sale by Christie’s misspells the surname of a financier-collector who died in March. He was Larry Vandervelde, not Vandergelde.
A picture caption on Page 29 with an article about Islamic art from Syria misspells the name of a type of tile. It is fritware, not Firtware.
An article on Page 35 about the use of high-tech platforms and artificial intelligence at modern museums refers incorrectly to Channel Studio’s partnerships. While Channel Studio is working with NEW INC, it is not working with Nokia Bell Labs.