Darius Bazley, a top basketball prospect, is skipping college and charting a new path for draft prep: earning $1 million as an intern for New Balance.
BOSTON — The third-floor corner cubicle reserved for Darius Bazley comes with a window view and overflows with athletic shoe prototypes and sports memorabilia. There was a Liverpool soccer jersey, still in its plastic packaging, folded over the back of Bazley’s new desk chair when he arrived. On a shelf adjacent to the desk sit retro James Worthy high-tops in North Carolina colors. Not-yet-released baseball spikes for Jose Altuve of the Houston Astros sit on another.
It is an inviting setup for an internship — at least for college-age trainees who love sports. Bazley, of course, isn’t your typical intern.
He is a 6-foot-9, 210-pound top basketball prospect who planned to spend this winter starring at the Carrier Dome as a prized freshman for Syracuse University. Then, in March, Bazley stunned many in the sport by announcing he was decommitting from Syracuse so he could play out his one-year wait for the 2019 N.B.A. draft in the N.B.A.’s developmental-tier G League.
Yet that plan has also been nixed. In May, Bazley signed with the prominent agent Rich Paul, who represents LeBron James, John Wall and Ben Simmons among Klutch Sports’ 18 N.B.A. clients. Last week, Paul revealed that he had arranged for Bazley to spend the heart of the college basketball season — January, February and March — as an intern at New Balance.
The internship, to be precise, is folded into a handsome shoe contract Bazley, 18, has landed with New Balance on the lure of his pro potential. According to Paul, Bazley’s multiyear deal will pay him $1 million “no matter what happens” with his N.B.A. career — and can pay up to $14 million if he reaches all performance incentives.
“They hooked me up,” Bazley said.
The N.B.A. made a move last week to try to change the perception of the G League as a basketball backwater, introducing a new “professional path” for 2019-20 in which certain one-and-done talents like Bazley will be able to earn $125,000 for a season in the G League before becoming eligible for the N.B.A. draft. The most players can currently earn in the G League, unless they possess a two-way contract or an Exhibit 10 contract from an N.B.A. team, is $35,000.
The N.B.A., by introducing these $125,000 “select contracts,” is clearly trying to make the G League path more enticing until the one-and-done rule is repealed, which league officials have said isn’t expected to happen until June 2023 at the earliest, as any such changes must be collectively bargained with the players’ union.
But based on the current options for Bazley, Paul insists nothing compares to the New Balance arrangement, even though it means he and Bazley are frequently asked why they have chosen office space over court time in the run-up to the N.B.A. draft in June.
When Paul began representing Bazley, a McDonald’s All-American from Cincinnati, one of his first missions was dissuading the teenager from trying to cast himself as some sort of pioneer.
Joining the G League out of high school undoubtedly would have exposed Bazley to a higher level of competition. But the working conditions are distinctly minor league, with commercial flights and modest arenas, compared to those at an N.C.A.A. power like Syracuse. The slender Bazley also would have found himself competing against older and much more physically imposing players whose overriding focus is securing their own N.B.A. call-up.
Players in Bazley’s situation have more often chosen to play abroad in Australia (Oklahoma City guard Terrance Ferguson) or China (Emmanuel Mudiay of the Knicks), or work out on their own with private trainers (Utah’s Dante Exum) for a year until becoming draft eligible.
The Knicks rookie Mitchell Robinson slipped to the second round of June’s draft, down to the 36th overall pick, after he elected not to attend Western Kentucky and spent a season largely out of sight. A similar fate could befall Bazley, but Paul contends that the three months he spends as an intern, to complement daily strength and skills work, will give Bazley a taste of “a business that actually aligns with his interests way more than taking History 101” — and put him in an environment N.B.A. teams can tap into for character study.
Currently training in Memphis and living with the Memphis assistant Mike Miller — one of James’s favorite former teammates — Bazley will move to the Boston area in early January to start his off-court business education. He is expected to spend time with New Balance’s marketing department, digital and social teams and footwear and apparel design arms and the company’s sports laboratory in Lawrence, Mass.
New Balance hasn’t marketed basketball shoes since the 1990s, when Worthy, by then a fixture with the Los Angeles Lakers, was its star endorser. Bazley is the company’s first signee as part of the reintroduction.
Yet the last actual basketball game Bazley played in was the Nike Hoop Summit in Portland, Ore., on April 13. He is not likely to play in another competitive game until July 2019, when he would presumably join the summer league with the N.B.A. team that drafts him.
He was rated No. 26, near the bottom of the first round, in ESPN’s most recent mock draft on Aug. 29.
Given the leaguewide demand for wing players, Bazley is regarded in N.B.A. personnel circles as a virtual lock to be drafted next June, thanks to his length and athleticism. But can he stay in the first round after a year-plus of inactivity?
“This is my risk,” Bazley said. “I’m going to go ahead and do it this way, and I’m still going to succeed, even when others say I won’t.
The longtime Syracuse coach Jim Boeheim is convinced that Bazley “needed college more than most” because of that willowy frame. Yet Boeheim, in a telephone interview, insisted that he was rooting for Bazley to “get through it this way.” He recounted how the left-handed Bazley had asked for access to the practice gym on his recruiting trip instead of sampling the university’s night life.
And while to Boeheim, sitting out a year is “not good for most anybody,” he remains high on Bazley’s talent.
Paul arranged for the Boston-born Bazley — who lived in Brockton, Mass., until he was 8 — to tour his future New Balance surroundings last week before heading to TD Garden for the Celtics vs. the 76ers on opening night, so Bazley could watch the player he considers a role model: Philadelphia’s Simmons.
