364 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $28.95.
Who should be considered the more malign liar, a Holocaust denier or a Holocaust impostor? The denier in effect falsely accuses millions of a horrible fraud and wounds the very souls of those who suffered and died — and their descendants. A Holocaust impostor doesn’t deny the Holocaust, he affirms it and claims falsely to be one of the survivors. When he or she is exposed, it does however cast doubt on those whose suffering was genuine, and most lamentably, feeds the beast of denialism.
It’s one of the difficult questions raised by a reading of “The Impostor,” Javier Cercas’s book about the Spanish Holocaust impostor Enric Marco. This Catalonian mechanic was exposed as a liar and con man back in 2005, but his defiant defense of his imposture as a matter of minor “errors” and “mistakes” continues to this day — even as Marco approaches 100 — and prompts counterintuitive thinking about the role of what Cercas disparages as a “beneficial lie.” Is there such a thing, especially on this inflammatory subject?
Cercas is a respected Spanish novelist; his book on Marco was published first in 2014. It appears in English at a time when the debate about separating fake from fact is at the forefront of contemporary historical and political debate here. He decided he wanted to know not so much whether Marco lied (though he turns the question into a fascinating and suspenseful historical whodunit) but why. Spaniards believed Marco for a long time and hailed him as a celebrity, a hero of suffering, “a rock star of historical memory,” as Cercas contemptuously calls him. He addressed the Spanish parliament, had a medal bestowed upon him by the Catalonian assembly. He gave numerous talks to schoolchildren, to colleges and union halls. Why, what need did his imposture serve? Can we take his claims of good intentions seriously that he wanted to educate a populace unaware of the magnitude of Hitler’s horror?
Cercas got in deeper than he thought he would, deeper than those who merely called Marco “a monster.” The book is both a tribute to Cercas’s investigative zeal and a series of dramatic confrontations between the writer and the impostor. Years after his exposure as a fraud, Marco would not give up his posture of defiance.
In his attempt to understand why Marco would lie, Cercas rounds up some of the usual explanatory tropes — including looking at narcissism as a clinical condition — but they fail to fully account for a historical crime, a rebuke to truth. As one suspects Cercas knows, trying to uncover the psychological motives for Marco’s deception might not be the appropriate response. As the Italian Holocaust survivor and thinker Primo Levi argued, explanation can lead to a false sense of exculpation, can lead one to the dilemma posed by the French proverb “To understand all is to forgive all.” Cercas struggles with the question of whether Marco’s crime can ever be forgiven for any reason.
By the time Cercas makes the forensic discovery that resolves his persistent doubt about what to think of Marco’s story, the con man has driven the novelist to wonder if — as a novelist, a writer of fiction — he is some kind of impostor himself, although his obsession with this idea can sometimes seem a tired postmodern touch.
The Marco saga begins with the democratic Spanish Republic’s defeat at the hands of Franco’s fascists in the civil war that lasted from 1936 to 1939. Marco would later claim that he had fought bravely for liberty on the republican side; Cercas is unconvinced but unable to refute these stories, especially since few veterans of that conflict are still alive.
At the end of the civil war, Spain remained officially neutral as the Nazis occupied most of Europe, but expressed its tacit support of Hitler by shipping those identified as supporters of the vanquished Spanish Republic to Germany in work battalions to help maintain Hitler’s home front. Some of these men were incarcerated in concentration camps. Marco’s claim was that he was one of these deportados (as they were called in Spain), who was involuntarily rounded up for work in Germany. Cercas finds evidence that instead Marco actually volunteered to help Hitler, perhaps not out of ideological commitment but a desire to be on what he thought would be the winning side. His proclaimed affinity for the republic may be one reason he was later treated with sympathy when he began to tell his story of being incarcerated in a concentration camp in Flossenbürg. It was one of the smaller German camps but no less brutal. Cercas estimates that tens of thousands died there.
Marco didn’t begin to spread his Flossenbürg stories until the late ’70s, after Franco’s death and the fall of the fascist regime — when it was suddenly more safe to do so.
But the celebrity worship he always seemed to crave did not come to him then. Cercas believes this is because the entire Spanish nation was resolving its shameful complicity in fascist rule and Hitler friendship and forging its own imposture of resistance. So Marco’s stories about his brave deeds in defense of his dignity in the camp — including a dramatic showdown chess match with the SS camp commandant, which Marco claims to have won — were not subject to much public examination or dispute then.
It was not until two decades later, in the late ’90s, that he became the celebrity hero of “historical memory” and enjoyed some seven years or so riding the wave of Holocaust remembrance before it all fell apart when a dogged historian revealed Marco’s lies. What a tempting character for a novelist to write about, especially the aftermath of the exposure when he was revealed to have been a fabulist.
One of the highlights of Cercas’s portrait of his impostor quarry is a tour de force imposture of his own, in which he captures Marco’s grandiose comic rhetoric — an imposture of an impostor.
One begins to understand Cercas’s attraction to Marco as a character. He’s a great Falstaffian incarnation of the braggart soldier type that dates back to Plautus.
In fact the book almost takes on the shadow of a novel in which Marco the hardened con man seems to play the long game in an attempt to convince Cercas that, despite his “mistakes” and “errors,” he is somehow more than a memory thief. He finally concedes, when Cercas finds documentary evidence, that he was never in Flossenbürg. Rather he was jailed in the north German town of Kiel in a prison for common criminals. But was it so wrong to shift his sentence to a concentration camp, he asks, if he could become a spokesman for the dead and dying who were there?
But though Cercas seems on the verge of being taken in, it turns out that he has been conning the con man; at the end, the evidence of Marco’s continued lying and imposture makes it impossible for him to defend himself any further.
It’s satisfying to think that this monster has finally been painted into a corner. My only dissatisfaction is Cercas’s recurrent attempt to draw a parallel between Marco’s imposture and that other Spanish fabulist Don Quixote, who also lied to become the hero of his fantasies. This has the effect of normalizing Marco — almost everybody wants to be a hero, everybody loves Don Q. Does it not matter what lies one tells to attain the love and adoration of others? Does it excuse the delegitimization of history and the very notion of truth? Cervantes at least gives Quixote the undeceived Sancho Panza.
And Quixote was a dreamy romantic, who loved books too much and hurt no one but himself. 