The dark sky casts an ominous haze over a demonstration in Ferguson, Mo. Protesters congregate in front of a firehouse. In the foreground a man stands guard, his back to the camera, a metal baton in one hand, multiple handcuffs dangling from the other.
The tense image by Sheila Pree Bright evokes civil rights photographs of the past. But the clothes and hairstyles mark it as contemporary, taken at a 2015 demonstration against police brutality and the killing a year earlier of Michael Brown, a black teenager.
The past often resonates in Ms. Bright’s photographs, which are collected in a new book, “#1960Now: Photographs of Civil Rights Activists and Black Lives Matter Protests” (Chronicle Books). Committed to documenting recent activism through the lens of history, she reminds us that the struggle for racial equality and justice in the United States has been longstanding and ongoing. The book includes portraits of past and present activists, photographs of Black Lives Matter demonstrations and meetings, and texts by Ms. Bright, Alicia Garza, Deborah Willis, Kiche Griffin, Aaron Bryant and Keith Miller.
Ms. Bright’s photographs offer an intimate and humanistic view of black protest: a demonstrator staring mournfully into the camera, a tear running down his cheek; a somber activist, his mouth covered by tape inscribed with the name of Freddie Gray, the 25-year old African-American man killed while being transported by police in Baltimore; a marcher in rapt attention, his eyes closed, his hands clapping as if almost in prayer; and a moving juxtaposition of portraits — the artist Bree Newsome, who took down the Confederate Flag at the South Carolina Capitol in 2015, and Roslyn Pope, a member of the 1960s Atlanta Student Movement.
The fight has progressed through such disparate movements and events as the abolitionism of the 19th century, the birth of the African-American press in the early 20th century, the Harlem Renaissance of the 1920s, the civil rights demonstrations of the 1950s, the Black is Beautiful movement of the 1960s and Black Lives Matter today. Despite different motivations and strategies, all belong to a shared legacy of African-American resistance to prejudice, white supremacy and oppression.
“The movements of now are faced with the same and worsening challenges that organizers and activists encountered in the 1960s — substandard conditions in Black communities, a lack of political power, and an amnesia that says that Black suffering is a product of our imagination rather than our lived experiences” wrote Ms. Garza, a co-founder of the Black Lives Matter Global Network.
Implicit in “#1960Now” is another common historical thread: the role of photography itself in recording historic events, motivating political action, and empowering African Americans. That several of Ms. Bright’s portraits are of photographers — Robert Houston, who documented the 1968 Poor People’s Campaign in Washington, D.C., for example, or Devin Allen, whose dramatic image of the Baltimore Uprising was published on the cover of Time in May 2015 — speaks to the importance of the medium to the struggle.
By embracing the lush black-and-white aesthetic of legendary civil rights photographs, Ms. Bright underscores this historical continuity. While millions of cellphone photos are generated each day — some forceful testaments to racial violence and injustice — few possess the grace and quiet lyricism of her images.
Ms. Bright hopes that her pictures will broaden our understanding of today’s struggle for racial equality and justice, and the history that inspired it. She is heartened, too, by the conversations her photographs have generated about race, prejudice, police brutality, and social justice in the United States.
