Dimitrov has taken more responsibility for his career this year, and says he has found out a lot about himself along the way.
After a summer in which his results plummeted so far that he nearly walked away for a long break, Grigor Dimitrov has reset himself in time to become the most surprising semifinalist at the United States Open.
Dimitrov’s current upswing, which he hopes to continue Friday in his semifinal against fifth-seeded Daniil Medvedev, has followed a summer of lows.
After starting last season No. 3 in the world, Dimitrov opened this year in the top 20 but soon floundered. His ranking slipped as low as 78th, with his nadir coming in Atlanta in July, when he lost to 405th-ranked Kevin King. At the Rogers Cup and the Cincinnati Masters, Dimitrov lost in the first round.
As he continued to struggle, Dimitrov said at one point he even considered ending his season early. He had never advanced past the fourth round in New York, anyway, and there was no indication this year would be different.
Dimitrov, a 28-year-old from Bulgaria, had once been considered among the most promising prospects of his generation. Because of the similarity between his strokes and Federer’s, he was labeled Baby Federer, a nickname he quickly came to resent.
There is one quality of Federer’s that Dimitrov actively emulates, however: his ability to carry on after disappointments.
Dimitrov has had to rely on himself more than usual in this tournament. After his disappointing summer, his coaches Andre Agassi and Radek Stepanek elected not to travel to New York to be with him at the Open. They remain in close contact on the phone, Dimitrov said, but he now makes more of the decisions about how to spend his hours away from the court.
At times, that means instead of resting he has been spending extra time in the gym or going on long runs.
Dimitrov also said he has been taking moments to enjoy being at the Open more than before, to make a conscious decision to avail himself of small privileges he had once overlooked, such as practicing on the tournament’s main courts or attending a Backstreet Boys concert in Brooklyn in August. Dimitrov posted dozens of videos from the concert on his Instagram account, filming the stage as he loudly and proudly sang along.
