The discussion was another instance of the president using American diplomacy for potential personal gain.
The White House curbed access to a transcript of the call — which the president made at Mr. Barr’s request — to a small group of aides, one of the officials said. The restriction was unusual and similar to the handling of a July call with the Ukrainian president that is at the heart of House Democrats’ impeachment inquiry.
Like that call, Mr. Trump’s discussion with Prime Minister Scott Morrison of Australia shows the president using high-level diplomacy to advance his personal political interests.
The discussion with Mr. Morrison shows the extent to which Mr. Trump views the attorney general as a crucial partner: The president is using federal law enforcement powers to aid his political prospects, settle scores with his perceived “deep state” enemies and show that the Mueller investigation had corrupt, partisan origins.
The Justice Department inquiry and a parallel but unconnected effort by the president’s personal lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani represent a kind of two-front war. Mr. Trump has said that Mr. Barr can help him validate his 2016 electoral victory, and Mr. Giuliani has been trying to unearth damaging information about former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. in anticipation of the 2020 race.
As part of his efforts, Mr. Barr in recent months has asked the president to facilitate communications with foreign officials and has made at least one trip to Italy to secure cooperation, according to a department official. The inquiry is examining American intelligence and law enforcement activity around the Trump campaign and whether it was legal.
In making the request — one of many at Mr. Barr’s behest — Mr. Trump was in effect asking the Australian government to investigate itself. F.B.I. investigators began examining Trump ties to Russia’s 2016 election interference after Australian officials reported that Russian intermediaries had made overtures to Trump advisers about releasing information that would damage Hillary Clinton’s campaign.
Mr. Barr met with Italian government officials on Friday in Italy. A Justice Department spokeswoman, Kerri Kupec, would not say whether he discussed the election inquiry or Mr. Mifsud.
As he did with Mr. Morrison, Mr. Trump told the officials that the Justice Department planned to contact their law enforcement agencies, a Justice Department official said.
In a statement, Hogan Gidley, a White House spokesman, sought to focus on Mr. Trump’s political opponents. “The Democrats clearly don’t want the truth to come out anymore as it might hurt them politically, but this call relates to a D.O.J. inquiry publicly announced months ago to uncover exactly what happened,” Mr. Gidley said.
A guide to the key figures and dates as President Trump and his allies pressured Ukraine to investigate his political opponents.
Mr. Barr has taken an active role in overseeing Mr. Durham’s work, American officials said, and is pushing his team to move as quickly as possible, according to other people familiar with the investigation. Mr. Durham needs to identify key witnesses and go through the time-consuming process of procuring documents or other material from foreign governments, a lawyer briefed on the case said.
The Justice Department said last week that law enforcement officials were exploring the extent to which other countries, including Ukraine, “played a role in the counterintelligence investigation directed at the Trump campaign.” At the very least, Mr. Barr has made clear that he sees his work treading into delicate territory: how closely allies’ law enforcement and intelligence agencies share information with American officials.
No evidence has emerged to support that claim, but the conspiracy theory has been advanced by some of the president’s allies in Congress, by Fox News commentators and by Mr. Papadopoulos, who served about two weeks in prison for lying to F.B.I. agents who questioned him about contacts between the Trump campaign and Russian intermediaries.
The attorney general set off controversy in April when he told lawmakers that “spying” on the Trump campaign had taken place as part of the Russia investigation, and that there was a “failure among a group of leaders” in the intelligence community.
“I hope he looks at everything because there was a hoax that was perpetrated on our country,” Mr. Trump added.
Days afterward, Australia’s ambassador to the United States wrote to Mr. Barr saying that Australia “will use its best endeavors to support your efforts in this matter,” according to a letter made public late Monday.
