New York|Giuliani Divorce: It’s Ugly, It’s Operatic. What Did You Expect?
On a spring afternoon in 2000, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani used a news conference in Bryant Park to drop a personal bombshell: He was separating from his wife. That was news not just to New York City but also to Donna Hanover, the woman he was married to at the time.
It was a fitting way to introduce a relationship made for high tabloid style. He was the king of the city and soon to be “America’s mayor”; Ms. Nathan would become his muse, constant counterpart and eventual third wife, married in a pearl and diamond tiara on the lawn of Gracie Mansion.
They presided over box seats at the opera and at Yankee Stadium, as well as over a national tragedy: He comforted a shaken city after 9/11; she manned call centers for its victims.
Mr. Giuliani would become a global brand, a Republican presidential candidate, and, most recently, the president’s personal lawyer, using his worldwide speaking engagements to amass millions of dollars, six homes and 11 country-club memberships for the high-flying couple.
Were their relationship to ever end, it could do so only in operatic fashion.
Last spring, divorce proceedings began for the Giulianis after 16 years of marriage, setting off a rancorous battle that, like most everything Mr. Giuliani touches, demanded attention.
In caustic legal proceedings this summer, the separated couple has battled over things as prosaic as her kitchen renovations and as rarefied as his splurges — $7,131 on fountain pens and another $12,012 on cigars.
Despite the judge’s advice, a trial date has been set for January next year, and the underlying reason, as it often does, stems from money.
A primary issue is Mr. Giuliani’s current income. His wife believes that Mr. Giuliani left his law firm, Greenberg Traurig, in 2018, a month after the divorce was filed, and chose to work for President Trump pro bono in order to reduce any future alimony.
Mr. Giuliani earned $7.9 million in 2016 and $9.5 million in 2017, funding the couple’s roughly $230,000 a month lifestyle, according to Mrs. Giuliani’s lawyers. In 2018, the year he began working for the president, Mr. Giuliani’s earnings dipped to $6.8 million, and he has suggested that this year’s income will be well below that.
Mr. Giuliani now gives his wife $42,000 a month, as well as covering other bills, including the carrying costs for their properties, as ordered by Judge Katz in February. Mrs. Giuliani must pay for the landscaping at their home in Southampton.
Mrs. Giuliani says she had no choice but to take him to court, to prove what he is actually worth financially and to get what she believes she is fairly entitled to.
But to hear Mr. Giuliani’s circle and his legal team tell it, Mrs. Giuliani’s endgame tactics are merely an extension of her personality, which they have not and do not describe kindly.
As long as Mr. Giuliani has been with his now-estranged wife, many among his cadre of loyalists have provided a steady stream of knife-in-the-back impressions to reporters, almost always delivered anonymously.
They portray her as being a social climber through marriage, someone who rose from her background as a nurse by marrying twice, before meeting the mayor of New York City.
And once she found her third husband, Mrs. Giuliani was accused of pushing her new husband’s children and many of his nearest friends away in an effort to control him.
On a recent day trip in from their Southampton mansion to the Midtown office of her lawyer, Bernard E. Clair, who has represented, among others, Jocelyn Wildenstein in another made-for-tabloid divorce trial (her settlement was reported to be $2.5 billion), Mrs. Giuliani sat drinking a coffee.
The cup said Dunkin’. “Cops’ and nurses’ coffee,” she said.
She slid a packet of press clippings about her and her husband across the table. On top was a 2006 edition of “Women and Cancer” magazine, which chronicles her role as her husband’s caregiver as he battled prostate cancer.
After his devastating loss in the 2008 Republican presidential primary, she said, Mr. Giuliani was almost catatonic. She nursed him then, too, hunkered down at her parents’ Florida condo. In 2017, when he was incapacitated after a fall, she nursed him again in Southampton, she said.
She recalled how his posse complained at the time that she pushed away even his security team; according to Mrs. Giuliani, she wanted to protect her husband’s pride.
Mr. Giuliani’s personal life seems to disintegrate in roughly decade-and-a-half cycles: His 14-year marriage to his first wife, Regina S. Peruggi, ended in a comparatively subdued manner in annulment shortly before he became United States attorney for the Southern District of New York in 1983.
His second marriage, to Ms. Hanover, lasted 16 years, and went far less quietly: After Mr. Giuliani’s startling news conference came more headlines, when Ms. Hanover sought and received a legal order barring Ms. Nathan from the mayoral residence in 2001.
Swirled into the current divorce proceedings is more scandal-ready fodder: intimations of Mr. Giuliani’s involvement with yet another woman.
In court, Mrs. Giuliani has claimed that her husband spent $286,532 since their divorce commenced on a woman named Maria Rose Ryan, the chief executive officer of a small New Hampshire hospital, with whom he has traveled abroad.
Any suggestion that Mr. Giuliani and Ms. Ryan were having an affair would be categorically false, according to Ms. Ryan’s daughter, Vanessa Ryan, who is Mr. Giuliani’s personal assistant.
Mr. Giuliani has also denied any romantic relationship with Ms. Ryan’s mother, but the accusation is another echo of the past: Ms. Hanover accused him of being intimately involved with a staff member, Cristyne Lategano-Nicholas; they both have consistently denied any improper relationship took place.
Mr. Giuliani insisted that his relationship woes did not affect his stewardship as the mayor of New York City, just as it does not affect his ability to assist Mr. Trump’s legal defense. If anything, he said, the president’s familiarity with how marital squabbles can be front-page news earned him a fair amount of empathy.
He continued: “There is a great opera, ‘Pagliacci.’ He finds out — he has a much younger wife — and he sees her kissing another man. He says, ‘I’ve got to go out and laugh, and my heart is breaking, but this is the job I have to do.’ Then he gives a great performance,” Mr. Giuliani said.
