Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, announced on Wednesday that the government would withdraw an extradition bill that led to months of protests in the city.
Incidents over these past two months have shocked and saddened Hong Kong people. We are all very anxious about Hong Kong, our home. We all hope to find a way out of the current impasse and unsettling times. First, the government will formally withdraw the bill in order to fully allay public concerns on dropping charges against protesters and rioters, and shelving prosecutions. I have explained that this is contrary to the rule of law and is not acceptable. Our foremost priority now is to end violence, to safeguard the rule of law and to restore order and safety in society. As such the government has to strictly enforce the law against all violent and illegal acts.
The move responds to a major demand of the protesters, who feared China would exploit the measure to extradite suspects for prosecution in China’s opaque judicial system. But it was unclear if the concession would be enough to bring an end to intensifying demonstrations, which are now driven by multiple grievances with the government.
Her decision, which was met with skepticism by some pro-democracy figures in Hong Kong, comes as the protests near their three-month mark and show little sign of abating, roiling a city known for its orderliness and hurting its economy.
Jean-Pierre Cabestan, a professor at Hong Kong Baptist University and the author of “China Tomorrow: Democracy or Dictatorship?” suggested on Wednesday evening that Beijing had asked Mrs. Lam to make the decision as a tactical calculation ahead of the Oct. 1 anniversary of the establishment of the People’s Republic of China.
By early Thursday, the Chinese government had not made any public comment on Mrs. Lam’s announcement, and state-run Chinese media gave her withdrawal of the extradition bill relatively brief, muted coverage. Absent was any of the fiery commentary that has dominated mainland Chinese reporting of Hong Kong’s turmoil, suggesting that Communist Party officials may still be working out a reaction designed to counter accusations of retreat.
Mrs. Lam had suspended the bill in June and later said that it was “dead,” but demonstrators have long been suspicious of her government’s refusal to formally withdraw the bill and feared that it could be revived at a later date.
Withdrawal of the bill has remained at the top of the list of protesters’ demands. But the list has grown to include an independent investigation into the police response, amnesty for arrested protesters and direct elections for all lawmakers and the chief executive.
At least some of the hard-line, pro-Beijing camp in Hong Kong expressed skepticism on Wednesday evening about Mrs. Lam’s overture, seeing it not as a clever gambit to ease pressure but rather as a sign of political weakness that would only encourage further protests.
One hard-liner, who insisted on anonymity because of political sensitivities, said that the initial hostility to the overture from democracy advocates showed that the hard-liners’ worries about concessions were being vindicated.
Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Index closed up 3.9 percent on Wednesday as the prospect of Mrs. Lam’s news conference began circulating. Cathay Pacific, the Hong Kong-based airline that has faced criticism from the Chinese government for its employees’ participation in the protests, climbed more than 7 percent. After the market closed, the company announced the resignation of its chairman.
On LIHKG, an online forum popular with protesters, several posts on Wednesday repeated longstanding calls not to compromise until all demands are met. The Civil Human Right Front, which has organized huge protest marches against the bill, said it would also continue its campaign until the protesters’ calls were satisfied.
Over weeks of protests, state news outlets and other commentators on the mainland unleashed scathing criticism of the protesters, portraying them as rioters and, in some cases, suggesting they were traitors or terrorists. One analyst said Beijing may have been motivated to allow a concession in order to begin reining in the nationalistic rhetoric to some degree.
Saturday, the fifth anniversary of a decision by China’s legislature to put limits on direct elections in Hong Kong, saw some of the most intense clashes since the protests began. After a march by tens of thousands, some protesters gathered around the main government offices, hurling rocks and firebombs. Riot police officers fired tear gas and pumped blue-dyed water from trucks at protesters.
Protesters built barricades and set fires, and the police later pursued them across several neighborhoods, arresting dozens. In a subway station in the Prince Edward neighborhood, officers from the police’s Special Tactical Squad entered a stopped train, using batons to hit people who were crouching on the floor and dousing them with pepper spray.
