“What we’re hoping to do with this process is just to simplify things so we can get back to doing what we do best,” Linda Chang, the chain’s executive vice president, said in an interview. Ms. Chang’s parents, Do Won and Jin Sook Chang, who still run the chain, founded Forever 21 in the 1980s after immigrating to California from South Korea.
Mr. Chang, the company’s chief executive, said in a 2012 interview that the chain was named Forever 21 because it targeted 20-somethings and because “old people wanted to be 21 again, and young people wanted to be 21 forever.” A large part of the company’s base is minorities, Ms. Chang said, and customer studies have suggested that 40 percent of Forever 21 shoppers are between the ages of 25 and 40. She said the company would still aim to keep merchandise below $50.
“A number of these folks don’t want boxes back of the size we have with what’s going on in the mall space,” he said of the chain’s landlords. While the company did not have specific data available, Mr. Goulding said that underperforming stores were likely located in lower-quality malls and those that had lost other bankrupt retailers, like Sears.
Ms. Chang said that the company still saw promise in areas like men’s and girls’ merchandise, but that it planned to pare down other areas like home décor, electronics and cosmetics.
While trying to quickly mimic designer wares for its customers, Forever 21 has been the subject of multiple copyright and trademark lawsuits over the years, including a recent complaint from the singer Ariana Grande that the company used a “look-alike model” to make it seem like she was endorsing its goods. The company said it could not comment on how ongoing litigation may be handled during its reorganization.
The information set to emerge in a bankruptcy will be of interest for the retail industry. Forever 21 has maintained a tight-knit corporate culture even as it spread across shopping malls in the United States and expanded to other countries. Mr. Chang and his wife rarely give interviews, though they nod to their faith by having “John 3:16,” a reference to the Bible verse, printed on every one of Forever 21’s bright yellow shopping bags. The elder Changs have long planned to pass the company on to their two daughters.
Ms. Chang said that she and her sister intended to keep working for the brand, but could not speak to whether they would still take it over someday.
