He was admired by Kurt Cobain and Tom Waits and earned comparisons to William Blake. But his career was cut short by his struggles with mental illness.
Daniel Johnston, a singer-songwriter and visual artist whose childlike, haunted songs brought him acclaim as one of America’s most gifted outsider voices, was found dead on Wednesday morning at his home in Waller, Tex., outside Houston. He was 58.
His brother and manager, Dick, said in an interview that Mr. Johnston had probably died overnight. He did not specify the cause.
In a career filled with stops and starts, Mr. Johnston became something of a man-child celebrity of the artistic underground, earning the admiration of rock stars like Kurt Cobain and Tom Waits as well as comparisons to William Blake. His cartoon drawings — rendered in Magic Marker and frequently inspired by characters like Casper the Friendly Ghost — were included in the Whitney Biennial exhibition in 2006 at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
Yet Mr. Johnston was dogged by mental health problems that stunted his career and occasionally hospitalized him. In recent years he had largely been confined to his family’s home; in 2017, he went on a farewell tour backed by members of the bands Fugazi, Wilco and Built to Spill.
Mr. Johnston was born on Jan. 22, 1961, in Sacramento, the youngest of five children in what he described as a Christian fundamentalist household. At a young age he moved with his family to West Virginia, but by the early 1980s he had relocated to Austin, Tex., a center of underground rock, where he handed out homemade cassettes to friends and customers while working at a McDonald’s. According to his website, those tapes were recorded on a $59 Sanyo boombox.
He quickly gained the notice of fellow musicians and the music press with songs, like “Speeding Motorcycle” and “Don’t Play Cards With Satan,” that had a poignant clarity yet showed glimpses of a fractured mind. He became almost as well known for the strange, cartoonish art that decorated the tapes. One, “Hi, How Are You,” featured a froglike alien; the image became his signature.
At the same time, Mr. Johnston’s songs were becoming indie-rock standards. “Speeding Motorcycle,” capturing the thrill and fear of passion — “Speeding motorcycle, don’t you drive recklessly/Speeding motorcycle of my heart” — was covered by Yo La Tengo, the Pastels, Mary Lou Lord and others.
In 1991, Mr. Johnston made a joint album with Jad Fair of the band Half Japanese, who had cultivated a similar reputation as an eccentric. But as the rock magazine Trouser Press noted in a record guide, Mr. Fair “seems about as offbeat as an insurance salesman” in comparison to Mr. Johnston, who on one track muttered “Poor you, no one understands you” in a warped, ghostlike voice.
In the music industry’s alternative-rock gold rush of the 1990s, Mr. Johnston was briefly signed to Atlantic Records. But his sole major-label album, “Fun,” released in 1994, was a flop, and the label dropped him.
As Mr. Johnston’s mental problems mounted — he suffered from manic depression and schizophrenia — he largely withdrew from performing and remained at his family home.
In the 2000s, even as Mr. Johnston seemed to disappear from public life, his reputation as a singular artist was growing. On a 2004 compilation album, “The Late Great Daniel Johnston: Discovered Covered,” his songs were performed by Mr. Waits, TV on the Radio and Death Cab for Cutie. The next year, Jeff Feuerzeig’s film “The Devil and Daniel Johnston” won the documentary directing award at the Sundance Film Festival.
In recent years, Mr. Johnston worked sporadically on a new album, based on recordings from the 1990s and early 2000s, which he wanted to call “If.” But according to an account in New York magazine, the project languished amid disagreements between Brian Beattie, the producer, and Dick Johnston and others involved in Mr. Johnston’s management. On Wednesday, Mr. Beattie said that the album was complete and that he hoped it would be released soon.
Still, Mr. Johnston remained dedicated to his art, planning his 2017 tour despite failing health.
