Business leaders in Mineral Wells, Tex., are rallying behind a $65 million renovation plan to reopen the Baker Hotel and cement a downtown revitalization.
MINERAL WELLS, Tex. — Equipped with a flashlight, Laird Fairchild unlocks a side door of the Baker Hotel and begins a darkened 14-story ascent to the top.
Along the way, each floor reveals a grim tableau from decades of neglect. Graffiti and vandalism. Crumbling plaster. Shards of glass. Stripped walls. Broken, uprooted boards that once collectively served as brilliantly polished dance floors.
For much of the early and mid-20th century, the Baker and its North Texas city shared a vibrant economy. Lithium-laced healing waters gave Mineral Wells its name and turned it into an internationally famous spa and tourist destination. T.B. Baker, a Texas hotel magnate, opened the hotel bearing his name in 1929.
A towering Spanish Colonial Revival hotel in the heart of Mineral Wells, the Baker closed in 1972 and has stood as an inescapable reminder of the city’s economic misfortunes over the past 47 years.
Now, however, energized business leaders are rallying behind a planned $65 million renovation to reopen the Baker in 2022 and cement a downtown revitalization that has been underway for several years.
For decades, the Baker embodied elegance, with a guest list that included Clark Gable, Judy Garland, Marlene Dietrich, the Three Stooges and, according to local legend, Bonnie and Clyde. But advances in medical science eroded Mineral Wells’ appeal as a health resort, and the city’s economy plummeted after the shutdown of Fort Wolters, a military base where helicopter pilots were trained during the Vietnam War.
Mineral Wells, with a population of just over 15,300, had a poverty rate of 23.5 percent in 2017, according to census data, compared with a state average of 14.7 percent. Median household income was $39,292, lower than the statewide median of $59,206.
At the center of the redevelopment is the Baker, which has what Mr. Fairchild called a “cultlike following” across the globe, with thousands of followers on Facebook. City officials say they are repeatedly asked about the hotel during out-of-town trips. The Chamber of Commerce receives about 100 requests a year to hold weddings there.
Mr. Fairchild said he had become enamored of the imposing building more than a decade ago. Working with a longtime friend and business associate, Chad Patton, he successfully negotiated with the hotel’s owner, Times Industrial Limited Partnership of Mesa, Ariz.
They declined to reveal the purchase price, but they offered broad outlines of a complicated financing package heavily dependent on state, federal and local tax incentives.
“It’s kind of like putting together a complicated puzzle, and each piece is required in order to make the puzzle work,” said Mr. Patton, a first vice president and branch manager at Wells Fargo Advisors.
The Baker project is the capstone in revitalization efforts that Mr. Nix began spearheading several years ago. Without a vibrant downtown, he said, any effort to reopen the Baker was likely to face the same fate as past unsuccessful attempts to bring the hotel back to life.
One of Nix’s key undertakings is focused on the Crazy Water Hotel, which opened in 1912, burned to the ground and then reopened in 1927, two years before the Baker. Like other things in Mineral Wells, it bears the nickname of the recuperative waters that supposedly helped cure a woman in serious mental distress.
Mr. Nix, owner of Nix Rental Homes, was among 10 local business leaders who put up $200,000 apiece to form a public benefit corporation to convert the seven-story Crazy Water Hotel into upscale apartments that can also be used for short-term rentals when tourism begins to take off. He said the project exemplified the community’s renewed commitment to revitalizing Mineral Wells, saying he expects 150 investors to be on board when the hotel fully reopens in December 2020.
Restaurants and night life have also returned to the once-moribund city center, along with murals that brighten aging storefronts. Another Nix family project is the downtown Market at 76067, named for the ZIP code, where more than 100 vendors across two stories offer an array of items, from antiques to contemporary cuisine. An urban park is also part of the city master plan.
The goal is to transform Mineral Wells into a leading tourist destination in picturesque North Texas hill country, which will help draw more diverse industries and businesses to expand the city’s economic base. Mr. Nix said tourism was a natural for the region, pointing out the city’s proximity to the popular Possum Kingdom Lake, state parks and a 100-mile stretch of the Brazos River.
As part of that vision, the Baker’s developers espouse the brand “Palo Pinto chic” in describing plans to cater to a diverse clientele, including business conferences, school proms, reunions and weekend travelers looking for a small-town getaway. A major goal, Mr. Fairchild said, is to convert the Baker and Mineral Wells into “the wedding capital of North Texas,” if not the entire state.
Mineral Wells still has abundant supplies of “crazy water,” which will enable the Baker to reopen a second-floor spa as part of a larger fitness and wellness center. A private elevator will ferry patrons to an outdoor, Olympic-size pool downstairs. Workers will also reshape the interior into 157 spacious rooms instead of the current 450.
During a tour of the hotel this summer, Mr. Fairchild pointed out tarnished features from the hotel’s glamour days, and with a little imagination, it wasn’t hard to picture a ’30s-era celebrity being escorted through the lobby or lounging poolside, surrounded by autograph seekers.
Brass chandeliers, badly in need of polish and refurbishing, hung in the lobby. An acoustical dome in the ceiling once amplified the voices of guests so they could be heard by anyone in the room.
Mr. Fairchild’s favorite part of the hotel, he said, is the spacious Cloud Room on the top floor, which, as it did in the past, will host special events such as weddings and reunions. Now, however, its floors are destroyed, and the walls are marred with graffiti. A young oak tree has somehow taken root on the ledge outside, 14 stories above the sidewalk.
Planners are confident that the vast majority of residents eagerly await the Baker’s re-emergence.
“When I was growing up here, there wasn’t anything going on, and there was no reason for it to,” said Perri Leavelle, a co-owner of the Brazos Market and Bistro downtown.
