Baltimore’s Lamar Jackson, assumed to be a runner, emerged as a productive passer, and the Cleveland Browns, forecast as a contender, proved hapless.
John Harbaugh should be everyone’s new favorite N.F.L. coach. With a smile, he proved that there is still room for subterfuge in this age of the all-seeing internet and all-knowing social media.
Moreover, we are better for it. Let it be a reminder that until the opening kickoff of that first full day of N.F.L. games, there is so much that fans, and writers, do not know about the 32 teams.
Take Harbaugh’s Baltimore Ravens.
If there is one thing we thought we knew about the Ravens it was this: Their second-year quarterback, Lamar Jackson, was going to run the football so often he would threaten single-season rushing records for a quarterback.
Harbaugh, whose go-to facial expression is a disarming grin, nodded in agreement with that speculation all summer, even if he did insist that Jackson would be an improved passer. But what did that mean? Jackson threw only six touchdown passes last season.
Then on Sunday Jackson threw five touchdown passes and ran the football only three times in Baltimore’s 59-10 rout of lowly Miami.
What about those quarterback rushing records, John?
“He’s going to have to get going,” Harbaugh said afterward with a chuckle.
And so it goes once the N.F.L. games start to count and the starters actually have to play the entire game. Sunday, in a handful of spots around the league, we saw the expected preseason story lines of teams dissolve or be significantly altered.
Yes, it’s only one week, but tell me, after the Cleveland Browns’ humiliating 43-13 loss at home to Tennessee, who still sees those Browns as plucky, defiant and ascendant?
Cleveland’s poster boy quarterback, Baker Mayfield, threw three disastrous interceptions in the fourth quarter, with the last returned for a touchdown. He was also sacked for a safety.
The Browns, depicted as freewheeling and loose throughout training camp, lacked any kind of professional restraint. They were whistled for 18 penalties totaling 182 yards, which was the most for the team in 68 years. One of their starters was ejected from the game for kicking an opponent in the head.
Today, the Browns’ lopsided loss might be the most popular defeat in N.F.L. circles. Tennessee tight end Delanie Walker probably summarized how the league’s rank-and-file assessed the nonstop publicity enveloping the Browns during the preseason.
“Yeah, Cleveland this, Cleveland that,” said Walker, who caught two touchdown passes directly after Mayfield interceptions.
In Jacksonville, there was despair of a different kind since their new quarterback, Nick Foles, broke his clavicle moments after he lofted a spectacular 35-yard pass for a touchdown in the first quarter. The Jaguars lost to Kansas City, 40-26, and the Jacksonville rookie Gardner Minshew filled in admirably for Foles, but the once vaunted Jacksonville defense missed dozens of tackles and failed to curb the Chiefs’ attack even after Kansas City’s Pro Bowl wide receiver, Tyreek Hill, left with a shoulder injury.
It was a bright, sunny day in Jacksonville, but things looked dark for the franchise by the final whistle.
The Chiefs left the game banged up, too, with Patrick Mahomes, the reigning league most valuable player, limping badly on a sprained ankle that might inhibit him for a while. But Kansas City is still the juggernaut we thought it was, and a bona fide Super Bowl contender as well.
The same goes for the Los Angeles Rams. If they are suffering from a post-Super Bowl hangover, they still held off a spirited rally by the Carolina Panthers, 30-27. The Panthers’ charge was led by Christian McCaffrey, who might be the most entertaining running back in the N.F.L.
On one of his two touchdowns, McCaffrey had his momentum stopped near the goal line by two Rams defenders who had wrapped both of his legs in their arms. Being careful not to touch the ground with any other body part, McCaffrey clawed forward with his right hand and then plunged the football into the end zone with his left arm.
Not every team failed to meet expectations during the opening slate of N.F.L. games. Minnesota blocked an early punt and roared to a four-touchdown lead, trouncing Atlanta, 28-12. The Philadelphia Eagles were down by 17-0 to the underdog Washington Redskins, but wide receiver DeSean Jackson looked delighted to be back home in Philly, where he made three Pro Bowls from 2008 to 2013. Jackson’s two touchdown grabs, of 51 and 53 yards, clearly sparked teammates and the home crowd alike, and led Philadelphia to a 32-27 comeback victory.
Some other things around the league seemed unchanged. The Jets somehow blew a 16-point second-half lead and lost, 17-16, to Buffalo. The Jets’ latest kicker, Kaare Vedvik, missed an extra point and a field goal. There will once again be tryouts for a new kicker at the Jets’ practice facility this week.
The Giants scored a touchdown with an impressive drive on their first possession against Dallas, with Eli Manning looking as if he had turned back the clock to 2011. But the Cowboys are considered the class of the N.F.C. East and they played like it, steamrollering the Giants, 35-17.
Manning completed 30 of 44 passes for 306 yards without an interception but the rookie Daniel Jones replaced him for the final Giants drive. Jones completed three of four passes before fumbling on a scramble, a turnover that effectively ended the game.
Nonetheless, the mere sight of Jones on the field in a regular-season game will amplify the clamor to begin the Daniel Jones era in New York.
Some things are to be expected.