A director and a composer play versions of themselves in a fascinating but frustrating reconsideration of a movie infamous for its use of blackface.
Henry Street Settlement – Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand St.
Yet Alan Crosland’s picture is now mostly remembered, and discredited, for a scene in which Jolson performs his signature song, “My Mammy,” in blackface — a form of entertainment that has long stopped being acceptable.
Like much art, though, “The Jazz Singer,” based on Samson Raphaelson’s 1925 play, is not easy to entirely dismiss. It is a fascinating, complicated text dealing with assimilation and community, transgression and forgiveness, tradition and innovation. It’s that fraught terrain that the director Joshua William Gelb and the composer/music director Nehemiah Luckett are surveying in their “jazz singer,” a new multimedia show at Abrons Arts Center.
In the first part, Mr. Gelb, Mr. Luckett, the performer Cristina Pitter and the onstage co-sound designer Stanley Mathabane play themselves, or at least versions of themselves; Ms. Pitter also appears as a composite character named Tracey.
They are all working on what they call an “interrogation” of “The Jazz Singer,” and it’s not smooth sailing as they scrutinize the movie, issues of representation and artistic responsibility, and their evolving attitudes toward one another.
Mr. Luckett, who is black, calmly says, “You’ve seen me perform. Why would you think I’m a jazz musician?” after Mr. Gelb blithely identifies him as such.
The original story involves the refusal of Jolson’s Jewish character, Jakie Rabinowitz, to become a cantor like his father; instead he achieves Broadway fame by performing “jazz” (actually more like Tin Pan Alley tunes) under the name Jack Robin. The performance of identity is at the heart of “The Jazz Singer,” and it is on everybody’s mind here.
The proceedings are not nearly as compelling in the messy second part, when the show moves into the retelling of the film. “Jazz Singer” meanders erratically as it tries to do too much at once: retrace the plot, superimpose a meta-commentary over the action, correct historical wrongs, insert the jazz that’s missing from the movie. (There is a different musical guest every night; on Thursday, it was the cornet player Linton Smith II, of “Playing Hot”).
Here, though, it feels as if the creative team was paralyzed rather than stimulated by their ambivalence and took refuge in a kind of florid obfuscation. Trying to cover all the bases and all the sensibilities, they ended up with a cautious show — and that doesn’t seem very jazz at all.
Through Oct. 12 at Abrons Arts Center, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , abronsartscenter.org. Running time: 1 hour 40 minutes.