Television|The Obamas Want ‘Higher Ground.’ Someone Got There First.
The Obamas Want ‘Higher Ground.’ Someone Got There First.
Hanisya Massey’s computer training firm is coming up against the former first couple’s similarly named production company. Sorting it out could take years.
Hanisya Massey, the owner of Higher Ground Enterprises in Covina, Calif., first heard from a lawyer for Higher Ground Productions early this summer.
Barack and Michelle Obama wanted to trademark their company’s name, but the United States Patent and Trademark Office had deemed it too similar to the mark Ms. Massey registered in 2017 for her computer training company. Higher Ground Productions was looking to strike a deal.
So began the dispute, which escalated from an initial note sent by the Obamas’ lawyer to requests by Ms. Massey for onscreen roles in their productions and, now, an attempt by the former president and first lady’s company to have Ms. Massey’s trademark wiped off the books.
The case isn’t expected to slow the Obamas’ post-presidency plans to break into the entertainment business — or to prevent them from using the name. The first film from their Netflix deal, “American Factory,” has already been released on the streaming site, and more content is in the works.
The Obamas landed on Higher Ground, inspired by the Stevie Wonder song of the same name. But Ms. Massey got the name first.
The Obamas’ Higher Ground Productions has successfully found resolutions with other similar trademark holders, the company’s trademark lawyer, Jim Vana, said in a statement. But with Ms. Massey’s company, the Obamas have hit a snag.
Ms. Massey and her lawyer, Larry Zerner, came back with a proposal to sell the mark — in exchange for what Mr. Vana called “significant demands,” including appearances in the Obamas’ TV and film productions.
Ms. Massey referred all questions about proposed terms to her lawyer, who confirmed that acting roles for Ms. Massey were part of her suggested deal.
A few weeks ago Higher Ground Productions filed a petition to cancel Ms. Massey’s trademark. Rebecca Tushnet, a Harvard Law School professor and an expert in intellectual property law, said in an interview that the goal of this move would be to determine whether Ms. Massey is actively and regularly using the trademark to conduct business. The Obamas’ filing starts a fact-intensive inquiry that could take years to sort out.
“If there’s not sufficient use of the mark, then the registrant has no rights and the Obamas can go ahead,” Ms. Tushnet said. If there is sufficient use, she added, Ms. Massey could have a potential trademark infringement claim.
Mr. Vana said Higher Ground Productions filed the petition after having difficulty finding evidence of Ms. Massey’s company or use of the trademark. Ms. Massey said she has invoices and advertisements to present as evidence. A client — Yvette Rodriguez, who said in an interview that Ms. Massey has handled her nonprofit's social media presence for about four years — sang her praises.
Even without having had that presence online for some time, this case and the petition has left Ms. Massey concerned about the digital effect of the Obamas’ prominence.
Mr. Vana, however, said that the petition “in no way” hinders Ms. Massey’s ability to run Higher Ground Enterprises.
It could be a while before there is an outcome. Trademark cases are decided on paper rather than in a courtroom, Mr. Zerner said, and for a petition such as this one, the Trademark Office automatically sets up dates and deadlines. This case could stretch into March 2021.
