Members of Parliament pressed ahead with a measure designed to prevent Prime Minister Boris Johnson from taking Britain out of the European Union on Oct. 31, delivering another blow to Brexit.
Mr. Speaker, it is completely impossible for government to function if the House of Commons refuses to pass anything that the government proposes, and in my view and the view of this government there must now be an election on Tuesday, the 15th of October. And I invite the right honorable gentleman to respond to decide which of us goes as prime minister to that crucial council on Thursday, the 17th of October. I think it’s very sad that M.P.s have voted like this. But if — if I am still prime — I do. I think it’s a great dereliction of their democratic duty, Mr. Speaker, but if I’m still prime minister after Tuesday, the 15th of October, then we will leave on the 31st of October with I hope a much better deal. “No deal” is opposed by every business group, every industry body, every trade union and by this house as today’s votes and others have shown. Mr. Speaker, we want an election so we look forward to turfing this government out. I was about to point out before I was gently interrupted by the honorable member that the offer of the election today is a bit like the offer of an apple to Snow White and the wicked queen, because what he’s offering is not an apple or even an election. but the poison of a “no deal.” So Mr. Speaker, I repeat, I repeat what I said last — last night. Let this bill pass and gain royal assent. Then we will back an election. So we do not crash out with a “no deal” exit from the European Union.
Mr. Johnson lost two votes on that bill as it cleared the House of Commons. It then moved to the House of Lords, where Brexit supporters initially sought to stall the measure with a filibuster.
Members of the unelected House of Lords brought food, drinks and bedding to Westminster in preparation for a long session, but the government later said that an agreement had been reached for the House of Lords to approve the no-deal legislation by 5 p.m. on Friday.
