Mr. Sanford, the former governor and representative from South Carolina who has become a fierce critic of the president, said he would focus his campaign on fiscal issues.
Bill Weld, the former governor of Massachusetts, was the first Republican to announce that he would run against President Trump for the party’s 2020 nomination. Mark Sanford and Joe Walsh have also joined the race. We look at their political résumés and their strategies.
“The lights are on in the White House, but no one’s at home.” “This guy is destroying the country.” “Put the Twitter away.” President Trump is facing Republican challengers to his re-election campaign. Joe Walsh, Bill Weld and Mark Sanford. They don’t have much of a chance at securing their party’s nomination, but primary challenges can lead to problems for the incumbent. So who’s trying to take Trump on? First up: Joe Walsh. “These are not conventional times. These are urgent times. Let’s be real: These are scary times.” A one-term Tea Party congressman who represented a Chicago suburb from 2011 to 2013. “Pisses me off!” His style? It’s aggressive. Even with his constituents. “Quiet for a minute! Or I’m going to ask you to leave.” He is also known for his offensive tweets. “I wouldn’t call myself a racist, but I would say, John, I’ve said racist things on Twitter.” He’s shared his far-right views on his nationally syndicated radio show. “When he was elected to Congress, he showed up in Washington and refused to play by their rules.” In a recent program, he slammed President Trump for his handling of immigration. “Donald Trump has royally screwed this thing up.” His show is going off the air due to FCC rules on airtime rights for presidential candidates. So why is he running? “All Trump cares about is himself.” “He’s a horrible human being.” “He’s nuts, he’s erratic, he’s incompetent!” Critics have said the same about him. Next: Bill Weld. He was the first to announce his run against President Trump. “I would be ashamed of myself if I didn’t raise my hand and run.” Weld is a lawyer and former Justice Department official. He was the governor of Massachusetts during the ’90s, and has switched party loyalties a few times, endorsing Barack Obama for president in 2008 over John McCain, and then supporting Mitt Romney in 2012. He ran as a libertarian vice presidential candidate in 2016. “I hope to see the Republican Party assume once again the mantle of being the party of Lincoln.” Weld is a fiscal conservative, but socially liberal. He supports abortion rights, same-sex marriage and legalizing marijuana. He’s been campaigning in New Hampshire and Iowa, hoping to best Trump in those early primary contests. “I think we’re in something of an inflection point.” And the former governor of South Carolina, Mark Sanford, is also running. “We need a change in spending, debt and deficits, and we need it now.” He’s a vocal critic of President Trump, and served a total of six terms in the House of Representatives. Ultimately, he lost his seat after a primary challenge by a Trump-backed candidate. His second term as South Carolina governor was stained by a scandal involving an extramarital affair. Trump referenced this scandal in a tweet mocking all three Republican candidates running against him. So what are their chances at winning? Not good. As of now, Trump’s approval rating is very high among Republicans. However, primary challengers in recent decades have shown that they can leave the incumbent wounded in the general election.
Former Gov. Mark Sanford of South Carolina said on Sunday that he would challenge President Trump for the Republican presidential nomination, criticizing Mr. Trump’s stewardship of government spending and the global economy and questioning the financial ethics of his administration.
Mr. Sanford said he would mount something of a guerrilla campaign against Mr. Trump, who is overwhelmingly popular with Republican primary voters, according to polls. But Mr. Sanford said in an interview that he believed Mr. Trump’s popularity was “certainly wide but perhaps much thinner and much more fragile than people realize,” and that Republicans should be alarmed by the way women and young people recoil from the president.
He said he would focus his campaign on the early-voting states of Iowa and New Hampshire — “going to any place that two or more people are gathered” — and lamented that Republicans in his home state had canceled their 2020 primary out of deference to Mr. Trump.
A longtime fiscal hawk who served two stints in the House of Representatives, Mr. Sanford, 59, said neither Mr. Trump nor his Democratic challengers were speaking to the concerns of voters dismayed by trillion-dollar deficits and “trade uncertainty” spurred by Mr. Trump’s enthusiastic use of tariffs.
“I think, legitimately, people raised eyebrows when the vice president stayed 180 miles from a meeting in Ireland, to stay at a Trump facility, and the taxpayer’s on the dime for it,” Mr. Sanford said.
Mr. Sanford is the third Republican to announce plans to challenge Mr. Trump, along with former Representative Joe Walsh of Illinois, a one-term lawmaker turned talk radio provocateur, and former Gov. William F. Weld of Massachusetts, a moderate who ran for vice president in 2016 on the Libertarian Party ticket.
Mr. Sanford said he had called both his fellow insurgents over the weekend, speaking with Mr. Weld and leaving a message for Mr. Walsh. Though the three are nominally competitors, Mr. Sanford said he believed they would benefit from strength in numbers.

And he argued that the cancellation of a number of Republican primary contests, including South Carolina’s, should be seen as a sign of weakness on the part of the president.
In some respects, Mr. Sanford is the most conventionally qualified challenger of the group, a onetime heartthrob of small-government activist groups who was twice elected chief executive of a politically consequential Southern state. Little more than a decade ago, a Sanford presidential campaign was seen as something close to inevitable, under starkly different conditions than the ones confronting him now.
But Mr. Sanford’s career took an abrupt turn when he acknowledged in 2009 that he was having an extramarital affair with a woman overseas and had furtively left the state to visit her in Argentina. His plans to challenge President Barack Obama unraveled and he was reduced to a figure of fun on late-night television. Mr. Sanford later won a seat in the House, only to lose the Republican nomination last year to a primary challenger, Katie Arrington, who was backed by Mr. Trump.
But Ms. Arrington lost to a Democrat, Joe Cunningham, in the general election — another development Mr. Sanford called a warning sign for his party.
Mr. Sanford’s brand of anti-spending conservatism has faded as a dominant strain in Republican politics in recent years, and it is entirely unclear whether the Tea Party-aligned activists who once thrilled to his platform might still find him a compelling figure.
The federal deficit has ballooned during the Trump presidency and will widen to $1 trillion for the 2020 fiscal year, according to the Congressional Budget Office. But Mr. Trump has been largely dismissive of deficit spending as a political issue, instead offering a message about national identity and racial and cultural grievances that the Republican base has heartily embraced.
As a member of Congress, Mr. Sanford amassed a solidly conservative voting record, including support for key Trump administration priorities like the 2017 tax-cut law. While the law increased the deficit, Mr. Sanford said he did not see it as a “gargantuan change to the revenue stream” and argued the law had made the American corporate tax rate more competitive with other countries.
But Mr. Sanford said he would be putting together a plan for reforming some of the most expensive and popular government programs, including entitlement programs like Social Security, and chided Mr. Trump for having dismissed government spending as a political issue.
“This is a president who said we’re not going to touch entitlements and, basically, we don’t have a problem,” Mr. Sanford said.
Mr. Sanford may have the opportunity to model fiscal austerity as a presidential candidate. Like Mr. Trump’s other challengers, he is likely to struggle to raise money, and on Sunday he outlined his thinking about the presidential race on board a bus from Washington to New York.
Mr. Sanford conceded with a chuckle that he did pay for a premium seat.
