Calls to a central telephone line are categorized by nine different “social determinants” related to health care, finances and other issues. A database is home to information on the veterans who are served to help refine the program.
Department officials hope the program will funnel more veterans into its services, since nearly 64 percent of vets who die by suicide are not connected to the veterans department’s health care system.
“We do see a decrease for vets treated in the V.A. who are diagnosed with depressive disorder,” said Dr. Matt Miller, the acting director of the V.A.’ s Suicide Prevention Program.
While the number of overall veteran suicides was highest among veterans 55 to 74 years old, accounting for 38 percent of all veterans deaths by suicide, veterans between 18 and 34 had the highest suicide rate in 2017, with 44.5 deaths per 100,000, a 76 percent increase from 2005.
There remain troubling trends among female veterans as well. After adjusting for age, the 2017 rate of suicide among women veterans was over two times the rate among women who were not veterans.
Robert L. Wilkie, the secretary of veterans affairs, has repeatedly called veteran suicide his “No. 1 clinical priority.” He was confirmed in July 2018 and has spent much of his first year traveling to areas where the problem is particularly acute and putting together a team to attack the issue.
In the 2019 fiscal year, the department’s suicide prevention office is on track to spend $47 million, $20 million of which is allotted for outreach.
The agency’s prevention office had been in turmoil in recent years. Caitlin Thompson, its previous director, resigned in 2017 after tangling with political appointees. According to a Government Accountability Office report last year, the office has essentially languished, and spending on some outreach efforts had declined 77 percent since 2015, enraging lawmakers who thought the agency was letting the issue fester.
There is no data yet to demonstrate the program that worked so well on a small scale with National Guard veterans will reduce suicide nationally, but veterans department officials believe hard evidence will come.
