A state commission has the power to enact public financing, and make New York’s elections more competitive.
New York this fall has the best chance in years to adopt a strong system of public financing. Done right, this new policy could increase competition and amplify the voices of small donors in elections. That is, if career politicians don’t kill it first.
Candidates who choose to participate in public financing programs receive a match in taxpayer dollars for donations they raise privately. New York City’s public financing system, in place since 1988, has helped make elections far more competitive, by helping newcomers with fresh ideas run for office.
In Albany, securing a public financing system for state elections has been harder, and proposals have languished. Advocates for public financing were hopeful when Democrats took control of the State Senate this year. But lawmakers demurred, largely over opposition in the Assembly. The state budget called for the establishment of a public financing system, but Gov. Andrew Cuomo and the Legislature left its details and fulfillment up to a nine-member commission.
On Tuesday at 4 p.m., that commission is scheduled to hold the first of four public hearings at the Borough of Manhattan Community College in Lower Manhattan. Its final plan is due Dec. 1, and that plan will automatically become law unless the Legislature moves to block it within 20 days.
So far this year, Mr. Cuomo and Andrea Stewart-Cousins, the Senate majority leader, have been supportive of public financing. The Assembly speaker, Carl Heastie, though, expressed earlier reservations about whether such a system, which could lower individual contribution limits, might leave members vulnerable to the high-spending whims of independent expenditure committees. Heastie’s is a well-worn argument against public financing, but proposals under consideration so far would allow candidates to continue to raise private dollars after they’ve reached the limit on public matching funds. That raises the question as to whether the bigger concern among legislators is the competition a new financing system might bring.
Effective public financing offers matching dollars not just for general elections, but also for primaries. That’s especially important in heavily Democratic New York State, where a primary is often functionally a winner-take-all election.
A successful plan would also grant candidates enough matching dollars to fund a competitive campaign. New York City’s system, for example, offers City Council candidates $8 for every $1 they raise up to $175 per donor. In order to participate, Council candidates must raise at least $5,000 on their own from at least 75 people in their district. In 2017, the city’s system paid out $17.7 million for all offices, including the race for mayor.
The legislation that created the state commission set aside up to $100 million annually for the program. That’s a worthwhile investment in better government in a state with a budget of $175 billion.
The state commission was also tasked with scrutinizing fusion voting, a practice that allows multiple parties to appear on the ballot and direct votes to a single candidate. The commission would be wise to sidestep specific recommendations on this complicated issue and instead focus on helping put into place the strongest possible public financing plan for New York. There can and will be other opportunities to examine fusion voting.
Mr. Cuomo and legislative leaders can show support by ensuring the commission has adequate resources and listens to public input. The benefits of public financing are clear: better government, led by politicians who are more independent and more responsive to communities they are meant to serve.