Thousands of students like me are protesting today. We know that we can’t solve the climate crisis without addressing the root causes of oppression.
Ms. Margolin is the founder of Zero Hour.
 I started as a community organizer with “Plant for the Planet” in Seattle, giving climate action presentations to middle and high schools, testifying at bill hearings in my state legislature, and lobbying my City Council to adopt warning labels on gas pumps.
In the summer of 2017, after climate-change-fueled wildfires in Canada blew smoke over the Pacific Northwest and coated Seattle in a thick gray smog that made me sick, I decided to take my local activism to the national level. I had a vision of young people marching in the streets demanding climate justice. I decided to make it happen. I founded an organization called Zero Hour because #ThisIsZeroHour to act on the climate crisis. We have no more time to wait around.
Zero Hour organizes mobilizations, events and campaigns to bring youth voices to world leaders — all while being a bunch of scrappy kids just trying to survive high school. Worldwide, we have nearly 100 chapters, and counting.
In July 2018, we organized the Youth Climate March in Washington, D.C. and in 25 cities around the world. This event included Youth Climate Lobby Day on Capitol Hill, and with local governments around the country, where we delivered a platform of what we need to have a livable future.
On the day of the protest, it was pouring rain. I held a blue banner that said: “Youth for Climate Action Now.” Several hundred people turned out, all of us soaked. My mascara was running. One sign, “We Are in a Mass Extinction,” became illegible, the paint running down the canvas.
It was a mess, but a good mess. A powerful mess.
Little did we know that our march in a rainstorm would lay the groundwork for a student climate movement so massive that no one would be able to ignore us anymore.
One month after the Zero Hour marches, a Swedish teenager, Greta Thunberg, began her climate strike. It has been incredible to see the movement grow even more with the school strike movement. The same people who organized the Zero Hour marches of 2018 are now Fridays for Future organizers and strikers.
The climate strikes today are projected to be the largest mobilization for climate action the world has ever seen.
Why do I do this? I am striking for a decolonized future. A decolonized world is one in which the wealthiest nations and industries do not continue to exploit communities in the global south, and instead support them in dealing with the effects of the climate crisis, like droughts, hurricanes and floods. A decolonized world is one where those most affected by the climate crisis — poor and indigenous communities and those in the global south — are heard and have a seat at the table where decisions are made.
I am fighting for a decolonized future, because a decolonized world is the only one that will be able to turn the tide on the climate crisis.
Many people pin the start of the climate crisis to the Industrial Revolution, when we started digging for coal, mining fossil fuels out of the ground and burning them at a large scale. It actually started long before that.
Colonization started the climate crisis. With colonization, European settlers destroyed natural habitats, hunted species to death and brought in invasive plants that indigenous and African slaves were forced to grow.
With colonialism came the idea that everything on this earth is made for our extraction and that everything is to be bought and sold. We see this in the arrival of European colonizers to the Americas, where the land, water and other natural resources were stolen and abused.
With colonialism came the idea that nothing — not air, water, trees or animals — was sacred or priceless. And this historical mind-set is the core of how we got to the climate disaster. Before the first coal was mined, even before the first factories opened, the seeds for the climate crisis had been planted, and colonialism never went away, it just evolved.
If we can agree that the root of climate change is colonialism, then the solution is to decolonize our society — from the way we get our food and energy to the way we relate to each other. Let’s divest from fossil fuels and phase out those toxic systems to build anew.
By 2030, in order to prevent 2.7 degrees of global warming, the IPCC reported, greenhouse pollution must be reduced by 45 percent from 2010 levels. In 2030, I will be 29 years old. My dream is to run for president, but I won’t be old enough. By that time, we must already be on the path toward climate recovery.
I am driven by a desire to see the beauty of the world survive and exist not only for me, but for generations that come after.
If adults want youth to be studious and pay attention in school to prepare for our futures, then they need to do their jobs to make sure that a future exists for us.
I am striking because it is pointless to study for a future that does not exist.
I am striking for complete system change. Will you strike with me?
Jamie Margolin (@Jamie_Margolin) is the founder of Zero Hour.