Politics|Elizabeth Warren and Joe Biden Will Finally Debate. Here’s What to Expect.
Elizabeth Warren and Joe Biden Will Finally Debate. Here’s What to Expect.
The two Democrats arrive at Thursday’s forum with contrasting styles and policies — tensions that will be laid bare as they appear onstage together for the first time.
Former Vice President Joe Biden and Senator Elizabeth Warren will face off for the first time at Thursday’s debate. Here’s how they differ on key issues.
He is a relative centrist who is seen by Democrats in early polls as the strongest candidate against President Trump. She is a self-styled progressive fighter whose ability to appeal to the broad electorate in a general election still worries some voters and party officials.
Ms. Warren is unlikely to pursue the kind of personal, premeditated broadside that Senator Kamala Harris launched against Mr. Biden in the first debate. But she has emerged onstage as a skilled advocate for her message of “big, structural change” and has shown that she is capable of crisply defending her far-reaching proposals.
At Thursday’s debate, Ms. Warren will have another opportunity to stress the urgency of fixing what she views as an economic and political system that caters to the rich and powerful at the expense of working people. Mr. Biden, a Beltway veteran, is expected to preach pragmatism, with a focus on how to achieve Democratic priorities in a divided political moment.
They also see several opportunities for him to draw contrasts that could work to his benefit. That list includes emphasizing his foreign policy credentials — as a former vice president and a former chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee — amid several prominent foreign policy-related controversies involving the Trump administration.
His team is convinced that the Democratic electorate is far more moderate than some activists suggest, and welcomes a debate over issues like health care — Mr. Biden supports a public option but opposes eliminating private insurance, something Ms. Warren supports under “Medicare for all” — and which social programs should be offered for free. And allies are eager to deepen an argument Mr. Biden has been previewing: that it is not enough to have ambitious plans if those proposals cannot survive the political realities of Washington.
