Celebrated in song by John Coltrane as “Cousin Mary,” she helped preserve his legacy and keep the jazz scene vibrant in Philadelphia.
Mary Lyerly Alexander, who worked to preserve the legacy of her cousin John Coltrane and in the process became a pillar of the Philadelphia jazz scene, died on Aug. 31 at a nursing home in Philadelphia. She was 92.
Lovett Hines, the artistic director of the Philadelphia Clef Club of Jazz & Performing Arts and a friend of Ms. Alexander’s, confirmed the death.
Whether they realized it or not, music fans across the globe knew Ms. Alexander’s name thanks to “Cousin Mary,” a composition that Coltrane wrote in her honor and included on “Giant Steps,” his pathbreaking 1960 album. A first cousin, she had shared a home with him for much of his life until then.
After Coltrane’s death in 1967, Ms. Alexander remained a devout jazz advocate and became a widely respected torch-bearer on the Philadelphia scene. In 1984, with a team of female jazz musicians, aficionados and spouses, Ms. Alexander founded the John W. Coltrane Cultural Society, a nonprofit organization that operated out of the home she had shared with him in the Strawberry Mansion neighborhood, and where she continued to live.
The group organized jazz workshops and master classes in public schools, day camps and public housing around Philadelphia, and hosted a concert series in the house’s backyard. Ms. Alexander sometimes featured famed musicians with a direct association with Coltrane, like the bassist Reggie Workman and the saxophonist Ravi Coltrane, John’s son. But she tended to focus on lesser-known local luminaries like the tenor saxophonists Bootsie Barnes and Odean Pope.
She led occasional tours of the home, where she displayed artifacts from Coltrane’s life, including original music manuscripts and paintings he had made. In 1999, Ms. Alexander secured a National Historic Landmarks designation for the house.
She also worked frequently with the Trane Stop Resource Center, a nonprofit dedicated to jazz preservation, and the Clef Club, which focuses on youth education and concert production.
Mary Alice Elizabeth Lyerly was born on July 23, 1927, in High Point, N.C., to Goler and Bettie (Blair) Lyerly. Both she and John Coltrane were only children, born just 10 months apart, and they grew up together in the house of their maternal grandparents.
No immediate family members survive. Ms. Alexander’s husband, Billy Alexander, died in 1995.
She moved to Philadelphia with her mother in 1944, a year after Coltrane did. Eight years later, Coltrane, who had served in World War II, used a G.I. Bill loan to buy a house across from scenic Fairmount Park. Ms. Alexander moved in, along with her mother and Coltrane’s mother, Alice (Blair) Coltrane. Ms. Alexander lived there until 2004; after a severe stroke left her without the ability to speak, she spent her final years at the Watermark nursing home.
Mr. Pope, who studied with Coltrane as a teenager, remembered Ms. Alexander as having a deep spiritual connection to jazz.
