The broadcast television fall season continues with many new shows making their debuts on Thursday night. Here are reviews of four of them.
This CBS drama is a metaphysical procedural — more or less at the junction of “The X-Files” and “Ghost Whisperer” — about a church-sponsored team investigating claims of demonic possession and miracles, consisting of a priest in training, a skeptical psychologist and a tech guy.
And some of the hallmarks of those shows are present: crisp pace and fluent dialogue; a self-conscious focus on trendy tech; a female lead struggling with work-life balance (the psychologist, played by Katja Herbers); the pleasure of Mike Colter’s laid-back basso in the role of the team leader.
So while the episode’s “cases” — whether a driven Broadway producer is possessed, whether a seemingly dead soccer player’s revival is a miracle — have answers, they’re in the definitely-maybe category. Meanwhile, the show drifts along in a nebulous and not very interesting middle ground, dropping hints about a possibly supernatural conspiracy involving a character played by Michael Emerson in his squirrely-sinister “Lost” mode. If the Kings commit to the horror — and give Emerson more to do — “Evil” might become a less refined but more entertaining show.
Not only does Patricia Heaton’s new CBS comedy have a laugh track, it has a round of applause when Heaton first walks on set playing an unusually old internal-medicine intern. It’s a bit like being at a Broadway play, if that play were a particularly contrived and superfluous star vehicle.
Heaton’s Dr. Carol Kenney, an empty nester whose husband is off finding himself, is having a second act after a career as a high school science teacher. The title can also be taken as a reference to Heaton, who comes to the show after a very successful nine-year run on “The Middle,” where she played basically the same garrulous, bossy, oversharing, amiably narcissistic character.
It’s a pretty decent act, and Heaton presents it with the same practiced, self-effacing charm. But the show around her isn’t nearly as funny. The creators, Emily Halpern and Sarah Haskins — two of the writers of the film “Booksmart” — don’t do many standard punch lines. (It’s just as well — one prominent exception is when Carol tells her daughter, “The last time we were in a hospital together, I was screaming and you were naked.”) But their situations and characters, like the egotistic pretty-boy intern and the domineering but compassionate senior resident, are terminally familiar.
There’s also something retrograde, in the first two episodes, about the show’s portrayal of Carol. The age jokes are a given, but they’re accompanied by a tendency to celebrate her not for her medical ability but for the human touch that her age (and, implicitly, her gender) give her. In the pilot, she triumphs by being the best at delivering bad news. If you’re an older female doctor, apparently you specialize in empathy.
Lesley Wake Webster was a writer and producer of “Go On,” which starred Matthew Perry as a sportscaster trying to get over the death of his wife. Now she has created this NBC comedy starring Bradley Whitford as a music professor grieving his recently dead wife. It’s a morbid niche.
Whitford leads a talented and funny cast that includes Anna Camp, Will Greenberg, Rizwan Manji and John Carroll Lynch. In the pilot, they put an awful lot of polish and professionalism into — well, it’s not clear exactly what.
“Perfect Harmony” starts from the premise that the abrasive blue-state academic Arthur Cochran, drinking in his car after his wife’s funeral in her old Kentucky home, hears a second-rate church choir butchering the “Hallelujah” chorus and storms in to yell at them. Several equally flimsy contrivances later, he’s browbeating them into shape for a choral contest in which the competition includes the megachurch that wouldn’t bury his wife in its cemetery.
It’s “The Man Who Came to Dinner” with karaoke: a nasty egghead from out of town insults and manipulates the locals, who in turn irritate and humanize him, followed by a medley of Handel and “Eye of the Tiger.” So far, there’s not much more to it, besides an unpromising love triangle among choir members and a potentially spicy rivalry between Cochran and the megachurch choir’s director (Lynch). The pilot coasts along on the performers’ likability, but they could use some new notes.
Kal Penn stars as Garrett Modi, victim of a “Do you know who I am?” moment that went viral. Penn, who left television to join the Obama administration and later played a presidential press secretary on “Designated Survivor,” created the show with Matt Murray, who worked with Michael Schur (a “Sunnyside” executive producer) on “Parks and Recreation,” another comedy about local politics.
The pilot has some of the loose rhythm of “Parks and Recreation” but not much of the cleverness. Garrett’s shallowness is shallowly drawn, and the study group he reluctantly takes on feels like a holding cell of immigrant clichés: an Ethiopian surgeon reduced to driving a New York cab, a Dominican woman working at a comically endless series of jobs, a rich and haughty Chinese brother and sister. (Those siblings, probably the show’s most flagrant caricatures, are hilariously portrayed by Joel Kim Booster and Poppy Liu.) “Sunnyside” has some work to do if it’s going to pass the test.