The Learning Network|How Do You Feel About Active-Shooter Drills in Schools?
How Do You Feel About Active-Shooter Drills in Schools?
Nearly every American public school now conducts lockdown drills. Do they make you feel more safe?
Do you have regular active-shooter drills at your school? If so, what happens during these drills? What are you expected to do? How do you feel about having to participate?
If not, do you wish your school had them? Why or why not?
WASHINGTON — After the first day of school at Mark T. Sheehan High School in Wallingford, Conn., Mackenzie Bushey, a 15-year-old junior, came home upset that a teacher enforced a no-cellphones policy by confiscating students’ phones before class. She needed her cell, Mackenzie told her family last month, to notify police should a gunman attack her school.
Nearly every American public school now conducts lockdown drills — 96 percent in 2015 and 2016 — according to the Education Department’s National Center for Education Statistics. Law enforcement officials and many school administrators say they are crucial for preparing and safeguarding students, but methods vary widely and now include drills that child trauma experts say do little more than terrify already anxious children.
The news media attention and policy debate surrounding school shootings, and the heartbreaking details of massacres like Columbine, Sandy Hook and Parkland, heighten the perceived risk among parents and students alike. After the shooting last year at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., nearly 60 percent of American teenagers said they were very or somewhat worried about a mass shooting at school, a similar proportion as parents, according to a survey by the Pew Research Center.
In fact, while the vast majority of gun-related homicides involving children occur in the United States, only a tiny percentage occur on school grounds. But August’s spate of mass shootings, including in Dayton, Ohio, and El Paso, Odessa and Midland, Tex., have lent urgency to a flood of new preparedness efforts.
How worried are you about a mass shooting occurring at your school? The article states that “while the vast majority of gun-related homicides involving children occur in the United States, only a tiny percentage occur on school grounds.” Does that statistic make you feel any less worried? Why or why not?
Have you ever been in an active-shooter drill? Tell us about one of those experiences. What happened? What did you do? How did you feel during and after it? Why does this particular drill stand out in your mind?
What do you think about the active-shooter drills at your school? Do they scare you? Do they make you feel safer? What other effects have they had on you and your classmates?
What, if anything, would you change about the way your school prepares students for a shooting? Do you think schools should conduct drills? Or should they focus more on preventive measures? Why?
