America ceases to be unique when we reject individual rights and equality among citizens of various origins, faiths and creeds.
Does the Bible make us American? On one side of this debate stand those who see America as a “Christian nation.” On the other stand those who highlight religious skepticism among the founders and insist on strict separation of church and state.
Hebraic nationalists have a historical point. Contrary to interpretations of the American Revolution that stress the influence of enlightenment philosophy or Roman republicanism, patriots were more likely to cite the Bible than any other source in making the case for independence. Even Benjamin Franklin, among the most heterodox leaders, proposed Moses crossing the Red Sea as the new nation’s emblem and “rebellion to tyrants is obedience to God” as its motto.
But focusing on nationalist elements of the Hebrew Bible can obscure its broader teaching. The ancient Israelites are not only a model of political autonomy. They are chosen by God to model righteousness as a “light unto the nations.” If Americans can be compared to the biblical Hebrews, it is as a people with a special responsibility to uphold universal principles. In a moment of nationalist fervor, conservatives should not neglect this distinctive, if paradoxical, aspect of America’s heritage.
New England Puritans did not consider themselves separate from the mother country. Many of their descendants, however, concluded that Americans had become one people entitled to independence. Even religious skeptics such as Thomas Paine drew on the ancient Israelite example in his brief against monarchy.
Unlike the Puritans, American patriots were not copying political forms out of Deuteronomy. But many read the Hebrew Bible as a template for a self-governing nation with a federal arrangement of “tribes.” And biblical stories and language were powerful rhetorical tools. The 18th-century audience was more familiar with Scripture than with the English philosopher John Locke or the Roman historian Livy.
It is far from clear how these traditions could be restored on the national level. Consider education. Since the 1990s, efforts to establish a common curriculum have foundered on public opposition — even without a controversial emphasis on religion. Rather than uniting a fractured people, such an effort seems more likely to divide us.
And the political implications of the Bible are not straightforward.  During the revolution, by contrast, the central issue was the danger of monarchy. Not only Paine and Franklin but also more orthodox writers contended that the Hebrew Bible promotes skepticism toward charismatic rulers and the centralization of authority. With the growth of executive power since World War II, this lesson remains essential.
The fundamental problem is that the Bible balances a depiction of an autonomous Hebrew commonwealth with a transcendent standard of justice. “If there is a central political message for Israel throughout the Bible, it is this,” writes Rabbi Meir Soloveichik. “For Israel to deserve independence, it must remember that it exists for a calling more important than independence itself.” Indeed, much of the biblical narrative is devoted to Hebrews’ failure to uphold their covenant.
Lincoln further developed that argument following his election to the presidency. During his journey to Washington to take the oath of office, he speculated that “there must have been something more than common that those men struggled for; that something even more than National Independence; that something that held out a great promise to all the people of the world to all time to come.” Americans, Lincoln concluded, are an “almost chosen people” dedicated to principles of freedom and civic equality.
It is understandable that conservatives — and others — have become wary of this rhetoric. Too often it has served as an excuse for costly and unnecessary wars. Americans’ responsibility to oppose tyranny at home is not a calling to overthrow it abroad.
At the same time, we should resist an impulse that also afflicted the biblical Hebrews. In 1 Samuel 8, the Hebrews demand to become “like all the other nations” by abandoning their special obligation to God and choosing a king who fights for only them. Like Israel in its faithless moments, America is untrue to itself when we neglect individual rights and equality among citizens of various origins, faiths and creeds in favor of cohesion and power. Nationalism that opposes what is unique in the nation is not conservative. It is a contradiction in terms.
