Peter Nichols, the British dramatist whose first and most frequently revived play, “A Day in the Death of Joe Egg,” startled and moved London and Broadway audiences of the 1960s by telling the story of a brain-damaged child’s brief life in a darkly comic style that would become his signature, died on Saturday in Oxford, England. He was 92.
His death was announced on Twitter by the agency Alan Brodie Representation.
One of Mr. Nichols’s most popular works, “Privates on Parade,” an entertaining blend of reminiscence, satire and music staged by the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1977, drew on his military service in Malaya, where he, the future director John Schlesinger and several future actors and radio personalities served in a unit that brought songs and sketches to British troops.
All told, Mr. Nichols wrote 17 staged plays, nearly two dozen television plays and one episode of the long-running “Inspector Morse” detective series.
“I believe entertainment is good in itself, and anything else is a bonus,” he said.
Humor almost always found a place in his plays, sometimes expressed in vaudeville style, but behind the laughter lay shrewd, often acerbic, sometimes discomforting observations: of the family, of marriage, of human foible, of Britain’s colonial past, and of the state of Britain itself.
Peter Richard Nichols was born in Bristol, England, on July 11, 1927, to Richard and Violet (Poole) Nichols. His father was a sales representative, his mother a homemaker who gave piano lessons at home. Peter often went to the theater with his father, who had been asked by his father’s brother, a London-based theatrical agent, to look for promising performers. Those visits left him stage-struck and determined to pursue a theatrical career.
He took odd jobs, including selling hosiery at the luxury British department store Harrods and acquiring what he called “a dread of schools” while teaching difficult boys in underprivileged areas. Meanwhile he began to write television plays, 12 of which were aired between 1959 and 1965.
In 1960 he married Thelma Reed, who survives him, along with three children, seven grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. His daughter Abigail died when she was young.
A major break for Mr. Nichols came in 1965 after his friend the filmmaker John Boorman persuaded him to write the screenplay for his production of “Catch Us if You Can” (later retitled “Having a Wild Weekend”), a comedy featuring the pop band the Dave Clark Five. The money he earned from it bought Mr. Nichols time to fulfill his ambition to write for the stage (though he also kept his hand in the movies, earning a screenwriting credit for the 1966 hit “Georgy Girl”). It led to “Joe Egg,” which portrayed the parents of a child who resembled his daughter Abigail haplessly coping with her affliction.
Mr. Nichols’s original version of the play — he later called it “savage, sentimental and overdone” — was universally rejected by theaters and might have been relegated to the dustbin had not his friend the Australian actor and director Michael Blakemore persuaded him to rewrite it almost entirely. Mr. Blakemore then staged it at Citizens Theater in Glasgow.
The new version — “more Coward than Strindberg,” Mr. Nichols said — received enthusiastic reviews. It moved to the West End, where a Times of London critic praised it for “significantly shifting our boundaries of taste.” It won The London Evening Standard’s prestigious best-play award and moved to Broadway in 1968, with Albert Finney playing the beleaguered father. It received four Tony Award nominations and a Tony for the actress Zena Walker, who played the mother.
“Joe Egg” struck its admirers as daringly original, a work that brought humor to a painful subject and had its characters address the audience directly. The same qualities marked most of his later plays, notably “The National Health,” which drew on his experiences in hospital wards; he had twice been a patient after suffering collapsed lungs.
“The National Health” won an Evening Standard award when it was presented in 1969 by the National Theater, as did the Royal Shakespeare Company’s productions of “Privates on Parade” and, in 1981, Mr. Nichols’s boldly experimental “Passion Play.” In that play, its two main characters were each played by two performers, separately voicing their characters’ overt and inner reactions to adulterous love.
All three plays honed what Mr. Nichols called his “funny boohoo” style. This, he once explained, owed much to Thornton Wilder’s “Skin of Our Teeth” — “a very serious play, dealing with the history of the human race in a comic-strip style” — which he had seen in Bristol, England, as a teenager.
Three of his plays were made into feature films, all with screenplays by Mr. Nichols: “A Day in the Death of Joe Egg” in 1972, with a cast led by Alan Bates; “The National Health” in 1973, starring Lynn Redgrave; and “Privates on Parade,” directed by Mr. Blakemore, in 1983. “Forget-Me-Not Lane,” with Mr. Finney (who died in February), and “Passion Play” were adapted into television movies.
A quarrel with the R.S.C. over its 1982 staging of his “Poppy,” a musical play about the opium wars in China, alienated Mr. Nichols from the theater for a time. Feeling “terribly depressed and angry,” he turned to writing novels. They went unpublished. When he tried to resuscitate his playwriting career, it was with little success. “A Piece of My Mind,” in which an embittered dramatist tries to turn an autobiographical novel into a play, received favorable reviews but ran only briefly in the West End in 1987. Regional productions of other plays never reached London at all.
Though his early plays were successfully revived in London and on Broadway — “Joe Egg” won a Tony for best revival in 1985 and a Tony nomination for best revival in 2003, and a new production of it is to open in the West End next week — Mr. Nichols felt that his later work was undeservedly neglected. The Royal Shakespeare Company commissioned but rejected “WE,” which involved the Duke and Duchess of Windsor in exile. And when the National Theater turned down two other plays, Mr. Nichols responded by publishing a parody of Coleridge’s “The Rime of the Ancient Mariner,” in which a curmudgeonly dramatist (“writers, writers everywhere, and each the worse for drink”) mocked that theater and its director then, Richard Eyre.
Mr. Nichols published an autobiography, wryly called “Feeling You’re Behind,” in 1984; in 2000 he published the entertainingly acerbic diaries he kept from 1969 to 1977. But it was the theater that continued to preoccupy and disappoint him.
In an interview with The New York Times in 2003, he claimed to have written 40 unproduced plays, many in the preceding few years. “I’m always working hard, but my plays get performed in my head,” he was quoted as saying. A rare exception to that came in 2010 with “Lingua Franca,” derived from a period in which the young Mr. Nichols taught English in Italy. But even that play was seen only briefly on the London fringe and Off Broadway.
