It’s Wednesday, the first day of a new state law requiring a moment of silence in schools on the anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks.
Weather: Mostly sunny, but there’s a chance of thunderstorms tonight. The high may reach into the upper 80s.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Sept. 30 (Rosh Hashana).
As a student at Bowdoin College, Matt Byrne hardly seemed like a candidate for the New York City Fire Department.
But he became one of many applicants after the 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center, 18 years ago today.
By 2006, he was a nozzleman on the fire hose in Engine 9 in Chinatown, pushing him close to the action, and to death.
The devastation of the 2001 attacks on the Fire Department is well known, from its 343 members killed that day to the psychological trauma and medical ailments sustained during recovery efforts at ground zero.
But harrowing conditions for firefighters, of course, did not end with the attacks. In 2007, Mr. Byrne fought the seven-alarm fire at the Deutsche Bank building, which killed two firefighters and injured more than 100 others.
These and other experiences on the job left Mr. Byrne with post-traumatic stress disorder and severe depression.
Also, working odd shifts and night tours, “he would come home some mornings all wired and start drinking beer,” Mr. Byrne recalled.
After taking painkillers for a knee injury, the younger Mr. Byrne developed an opioid addiction that included stints at rehab clinics and psychiatric wards.
Finally, Mr. Byrne decided to leave the department in March 2014. Then he lost his longtime job as a Jones Beach lifeguard and was charged with driving while intoxicated. That August, he died by suicide at age 34.
“He tried keeping all the emotion down, but in the end, he just couldn’t handle it,” his father said.
Michael Schreiber, a health and safety officer for the firefighters union, said the department’s counseling services unit expanded after 2001 to provide services for mental health and addiction issues, and suicide prevention.
The 9/11 Memorial & Museum is holding a commemoration ceremony at 8:40 a.m. at the 9/11 Memorial Plaza in Lower Manhattan.
The Tribute in Light will begin shortly after 7 p.m. at the 9/11 Memorial, whose plaza will be open to the public from 3 p.m. to midnight.
At 8:46 a.m., St. Paul’s Chapel at Broadway and Fulton Street will ring the Bell of Hope given to the city by London after the attacks.
The time-lapse film “2001” will be shown from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. free of charge at the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine in Morningside Heights.
Events are subject to change, so double-check before heading out. For more events, see the going-out guides from The Times’s culture pages.
Don’t expect a platter of herring and bialys. But prepare to be hungry anyway at the new “Russ & Daughters: An Appetizing Story” exhibit produced by the American Jewish Historical Society at the Center for Jewish History in Manhattan.
The exhibit, which opens to the public on Friday, aims to teach visitors about the Russ & Daughters appetizing shop on the Lower East Side and its impact on New York’s rich food and cultural history.
Joel Russ’s first shop opened on Orchard Street in 1914. A few years later, he moved to the current location on East Houston Street. He had no sons and eventually named his three daughters as partners — changing the name J.R. Russ Cut Rate Appetizers to Russ & Daughters. The fourth generation of Russes now operates that shop and others.
Annie Polland, the executive director of the A.J.H.S., said she wanted to create an exhibit to share the Russ family’s archives, as well as artifacts from the historical society’s collection.
“The things that we have saved over the years, whether we thought it was archival or not, there was substance there,” said Niki Russ Federman, who co-owns the shop with her cousin Josh Russ Tupper.
Guests will encounter old photos, including one of a fishmonger on the street; an audio recording of two of the Russ daughters, Hattie and Ann; and posters of Yiddish theater performers. You can even wear one of the workers’ famous white coats for a photo op.
The exhibit is free and on view until January.
It’s Wednesday — what will your legacy be?
and a brilliant critique of the Modern art market.
while the gallery attendant avoids his eyes.
We’re experimenting with the format of New York Today. What would you like to see more (or less) of? Post a comment or email us: nytoday@nytimes.com.