Enrique Mazzola, a specialist in bel canto, French repertoire and early Verdi, will follow Andrew Davis’s two-decade tenure.
For Enrique Mazzola, the path to the conductor’s podium began when he was a boy in the children’s chorus of the Teatro alla Scala in Milan.
“Backstage, there were all these monitors showing the conductor conducting, used by the stage managers,” Mr. Mazzola, who was announced on Thursday as the next music director of Lyric Opera of Chicago, recalled in a telephone interview.
Now, after distinguishing himself with stylish, energetic performances of bel canto operas, French repertoire and early Verdi, he will succeed Andrew Davis, who plans to conclude his two-decade tenure in Chicago at the end of the 2020-21 season.
It will be a major changing of the guard at Lyric, which has been struggling, like many opera companies, to survive as audience habits shift, and which went through a brief musicians’ strike last season. Mr. Davis, who has conducted 674 opera performances and been music director since 2000, said he had initially planned to step down after conducting Wagner’s “Ring” cycle in the spring, but agreed to stay on one more season.
Anthony Freud, the company’s general director, said in a statement that he looked forward to working with Mr. Mazzola, citing the conductor’s “wealth of international experience” and adding that “he is tremendously well liked and respected” by Lyric Opera’s orchestra and chorus.
Mr. Mazzola, who is currently the principal guest conductor at the Deutsche Oper in Berlin and was until recently artistic and music director of the Orchestre National d’Île-de-France in Paris, declined to give his age, describing himself as “old enough to take the position of music director, and young enough to take it with energy and enthusiasm.” He won praise conducting Donizetti’s “La Fille du Régiment” last season at the Metropolitan Opera and Offenbach’s “Orphée aux Enfers” at the Salzburg Festival in Austria this summer.
Mr. Mazzola is the scion of generations of musicians. When his voice changed and he could no longer sing in the children’s chorus, he became a page-turner for recital accompanists and then a pianist at La Scala while he was still a teenager, then a chorus master in small opera houses and eventually a conductor.
He will return there in October to lead Verdi’s “Luisa Miller.” And what does he think of Chicago’s deep-dish take on another Italian classic, pizza?
“I like it very much!” he said.