Gustavo Fernandez of Argentina and Dylan Alcott of Australia are chasing sweeps in divisions that didn’t exist until recently for the four tennis majors.
One of the celebrations this year at the United States Open is the 50th anniversary of Rod Laver’s second Grand Slam, when the Australian won all four major men’s singles titles in 1969.
No man has come close to that singles feat since then, while in women’s singles, Margaret Court captured a Grand Slam in 1970 and Steffi Graf did the same in 1988.
This year at the U.S. Open, though, two men can clinch Grand Slams in newer disciplines. Dylan Alcott, who has become a major media personality in his native Australia, won the first three majors in quad singles, a newly created division, while Gustavo Fernandez, an Argentine, took the first three titles in men’s wheelchair singles.
Until recently, a sweep of the four tournaments wasn’t possible in the quad and wheelchair divisions. All four majors held wheelchair tournaments during the same year for the first time in 2017. Quad singles, for players evaluated by the International Tennis Federation to have “substantial loss of function in one or both upper extremities,” made its debut this year at the French Open and Wimbledon, opening up the Grand Slam possibility for Alcott.
For Fernandez, the feat would fulfill a childhood dream.
Fernandez was in trouble during the Wimbledon final after losing the first set with erratic play. He rallied for a 4-6, 6-3, 6-2 victory over Shingo Kunieda, a Japanese player who has won 23 Grand Slam tournaments.
Fernandez, 25, opened his bid for a fourth straight Grand Slam title with a 7-6 (4), 6-3 win over Stefan Olsson in the quarterfinals on Friday. He faces Stephane Houdet of France on Saturday.
The mental strides Fernandez has made, he said, have been “the huge improvement” crucial to his success this year.
Fernandez’s most obvious strength is physical. In a sport known for lithe athletes, Fernandez’s hulking arms cut an unusual figure.
“I don’t want to build up for nothing; the thing is to be strong and fast, to have enough acceleration and power to be able to do all the things,” Fernandez said.
Fernandez’s manager, Agustin Segreti, has helped him land several sponsorships in his home province of Córdoba in central Argentina. The sponsorships are important for earning opportunities to play Grand Slam tournaments, with draws limited to eight players.
A Grand Slam for Fernandez or Alcott could increase the profile of the divisions and perhaps, as some players hope, build momentum for more prize money. 
Fernandez said he was not yet thinking that far ahead.
