Modern subway signals, new elevators and an extension of the Second Avenue line: The New York transit agency released its 5-year wish list.
Installing modern subway signals along the perpetually crowded Lexington Avenue line in Manhattan. Adding elevators to 70 stations in a system where only about a quarter of the stops are wheelchair accessible. Extending the Second Avenue subway north to East Harlem.
These are some of the key pieces of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s new $54 billion blueprint to overhaul the subway and the rest of the city’s floundering transit network.
On Monday, transit leaders released their proposal for the agency’s largest ever capital plan, a critical document that offers a wish list of projects to tackle over the next five years.
The price tag might seem stunning — it is $20 billion more than the last capital plan — but it reflects an aging system with immense needs, from the subway and buses to commuter railroads.
“At the end of this five-year period, New Yorkers will see a revitalized and modern system for the 21st century and beyond,” the authority’s chairman, Patrick J. Foye, said at a news conference.
Now comes the hard part: convincing state, city and federal leaders to provide huge sums of money to pay for it all.
The agency is starting from a better position than in some other years. Earlier this year, state leaders approved congestion pricing, a plan to toll drivers entering the busiest parts of Manhattan. Congestion pricing and other new state revenues are expected to raise $25 billion for the capital plan.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who controls the subway and is perhaps the person most responsible for its fate, praised the plan and said the upgrades would give riders the “transit system they deserve.” He called on Mayor Bill de Blasio and state legislative leaders to support it.
Mr. Foye said he needed $3 billion from Mr. de Blasio, who has had a long-running battle with Mr. Cuomo over who is responsible for funding the subway. Mr. Foye said he planned to meet with officials at City Hall on Monday to brief them on the capital plan and seek their help.
Seth Stein, a spokesman for the mayor, did not commit to city funding, but said it was important for the subway to run on time.
The spending plan, which covers the years 2020 to 2024, includes many items likely to make New Yorkers and transit advocates rejoice: more than 1,900 new subway cars; 500 electric buses; adding a third track on the Long Island Rail Road’s main line; four new stations in the Bronx along Metro-North Railroad; and improvements to the Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge.
The highest level of spending would go toward the subway, which fell into crisis in 2017 after years of underinvestment. Officials want to spend $7 billion to upgrade signals on six new pieces of the subway, including the Lexington Avenue line’s 4, 5 and 6 trains and $5 billion on station accessibility, including new elevators and ramps at 70 stations.
The capital plan relies on $2.9 billion in federal funding for the next segment of the Second Avenue subway, which would extend the Q line to 125th Street in Manhattan. Federal officials have not signed on to a funding agreement, though President Trump recently posted on Twitter that he supported the project.
The first piece of the Second Avenue subway, which added three new stations on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, opened nearly three years ago and was quickly embraced by New Yorkers. The second piece would add three more stations, extending the line about 1.7 miles at a total cost of about $6 billion. The new stations are not expected to open until at least 2029.
While experts agree that New York’s subway needs to expand, they have expressed outrage at the high construction costs. Transit projects in the city are several times more expensive than projects in other cities like Paris.
The Second Avenue subway, which has been discussed by city leaders for nearly a century, was meant to travel south to Lower Manhattan, but those plans have seen little progress.
Janno Lieber, the authority’s head of capital construction, said officials had not given up on eventually finishing the line.
“Boy are we focused like all get out on Phase Two, which really will make a difference to East Harlem and Central Harlem and makes good on a commitment that’s been out there for 75 years,” Mr. Lieber said.
Transit leaders suggested that the rest of the funding for the capital plan come from the authority taking on more debt, $3 billion from the state government — a commitment Mr. Cuomo said he supported — and other sources. The authority already has a mountain of debt; it is projected to reach $41.8 billion by 2022, according to the state comptroller.
The subway’s leader, Andy Byford, has fought to make subway signals a major priority while occasionally sparring with Mr. Cuomo. On Monday, Mr. Byford said the capital plan “exceeds my wildest expectations” and warned subway riders that he would need their patience during station closings to upgrade the system.
“I’m ecstatically happy,” Mr. Byford told reporters.
Experts agree that installing modern signals will make the subway more reliable and increase capacity so that more trains can run closer together. Some of the subway’s current signal equipment is antiquated and was built before World War II.
New York has upgraded subway signals on just two of its 22 lines: The L train and the No. 7 train. Those lines have the best on-time rates in the system at more than 90 percent each.
Gaining approval for a capital plan can be a long and arduous process. The authority’s board is expected to vote on the capital plan later this month. Then it goes to the capital program review board, an opaque group that includes representatives of the governor, the mayor, the Assembly speaker and the Senate majority leader.
The last capital plan, for the years 2015 to 2019, was delayed and amended several times. Mr. Cuomo committed $8 billion in state funding to that plan, but the authority has not yet received most of that money even though it is the final year of the plan. The governor’s office says the money is available when the agency needs it.
But even critics of the authority and Mr. Cuomo’s leadership over the agency mostly welcomed the spending plan, saying it appeared to focus on the right priorities. Benjamin Kabak, a transit advocate who writes the Second Ave. Sagas subway blog, said the plan was the culmination of a long campaign to make New Yorkers care about subway signals.
