President Trump said on Tuesday that he would release the transcript of his July phone call with the Ukrainian president in an effort to quell the controversy over whether he pressed for Kiev to investigate a political rival.
....You will see it was a very friendly and totally appropriate call. No pressure and, unlike Joe Biden and his son, NO quid pro quo! This is nothing more than a continuation of the Greatest and most Destructive Witch Hunt of all time!
While the July transcript will answer some questions, the call is only one aspect of Mr. Trump’s dealings with the Ukrainians that have come under scrutiny in recent days. A whistle-blower complaint, which the administration has blocked lawmakers from seeing, is said to deal at least in part with Ukraine and cover multiple actions.
Mr. Trump’s sudden announcement, made between meetings at an annual gathering of world leaders at the United Nations in New York, comes a day after he wavered on whether he wanted the transcript made public. “I don’t think it’s a great precedent, so I didn’t say I was going to release it at all,” Mr. Trump told reporters on Monday.
Mr. Trump’s announcement comes as House Democrats move closer than ever before to beginning impeachment proceedings against him. The Democratic chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, Rep. Adam B. Schiff of California, also tweeted that the unnamed whistle-blower may testify before the panel as soon as this week.
Earlier on Tuesday, Mr. Trump said he had held up American military aid to Ukraine this summer because European countries have not paid their fair share to help defend the former Soviet republic from Russian aggression, and pointed to the money’s eventual release this month as evidence that he had done nothing wrong. A day before, Mr. Trump cited Ukraine’s notoriously corrupt government as the reason for the delay.
“I’m leading in the polls and they have no idea how to stop me,” Mr. Trump said, addressing reporters minutes he spoke at the United Nations gathering. The president trails the leading Democratic candidates in most polls. “The only way they can try is through impeachment,” he added.
