In this lesson, students will learn what Brexit is, how it developed into the mess it is today and how it could ultimately be resolved.
Find all our Lessons of the Day here.
Britain has been in turmoil in recent days as its two main political parties haggle over the nation’s withdrawal from the European Union.
This article provides an overview of Brexit, from the 2016 referendum to Parliament’s latest rebuke of Prime Minister Boris Johnson. In this lesson, students will learn what Brexit is, how it developed into the mess it is today and how it could ultimately be resolved.
 What do you know or think you know? Compile as long a list of Brexit facts — or, what you think are facts — as you can on the board or online. As you read, you can confirm or cross out each fact.
Britain’s two main political parties are haggling over the nation’s withdrawal from the European Union, known as Brexit. The badly divided government is in crisis, unable to agree on an approach to the country’s biggest peacetime decision in decades. The deadline to come up with a plan is fast approaching.
The struggle has already cost one prime minister, Theresa May, her job; she announced on May 24 that she would resign after failing to come up with a plan that satisfied her party, her coalition partners and officials in Brussels, the seat of the European Union.
Now it is taking a toll on her successor, Boris Johnson. The Conservative Party chose Mr. Johnson, a brash proponent of withdrawal, to succeed Mrs. May and take control of the Brexit process.
What ultimately emerges could determine the shape of Britain and its place in the world for decades.
Why is Britain currently in crisis?
In July of this year, Boris Johnson, an ardent supporter of Brexit, took over as prime minister from Theresa May. How have things gone for him so far and why?
1. How did Brexit come about?
2. Britons voted on June 23, 2016 on a referendum to Leave or Remain in the European Union. What role did politics and social factors play in the way the vote broke down and its outcome?
3. What are some of the potential economic and social consequences of Britain withdrawing from the European Union?
4. Why has it been so difficult for a Brexit bill to pass in Parliament? Identify at least two key reasons.
5. Why is there a deadline for Brexit and why has it been pushed back so many times?
6. What are three possible ways Brexit could ultimately be resolved? In your opinion, which seems to be the most preferable and why?
As Brexit has developed into the mess it is today, a litany of creative interpretations have sprung forth — from memes and metaphors to editorial cartoons and music videos.
How would you creatively encapsulate Brexit? Try your hand at designing some visual work that demonstrates your understanding of it. You might choose to create something that captures the overall mood or something that illustrates one aspect of the process, like a particular political moment or its social impact.
Whatever you choose to create, write a short paragraph to go along with it that explains how your piece comments on or describes Brexit, and cite evidence from the article to support your interpretation.
Create a meme that illustrates some aspect of Brexit. For example, the photo of the British lawmaker Jacob Rees-Mogg reclining in Parliament as the Brexit debate raged around him spawned the meme above about how his slouch mirrored his party’s political fortunes. You might use a well-known meme or browse The Times’s coverage of Brexit to find an image that you can turn into one of your own.
Use an image or video to represent some aspect of or the overall morale around Brexit. For example, in this video of Mrs. May stuck in her car, some saw the perfect metaphor for her struggles as she tried to win approval for a Brexit plan that seemed to anger all sides of the debate.
Patrick Chappatte, an editorial cartoonist for The Times, has created several Brexit-related illustrations that comment on different points in the political process, like the one below. Choose a moment from the article and create your own.