There was no evidence that medical procedures were performed at the Illinois property where the remains were found, the authorities said.
The family of a doctor in Illinois discovered more than 2,200 medically preserved fetuses at his property a little over a week after his death, the authorities said.
The Will County Coroner’s Office received a call on Thursday from a lawyer representing the family of the doctor, Ulrich Klopfer, who died on Sept. 3, the Will County Sheriff’s Office said in a news release.
While going through Dr. Klopfer’s property, the family found 2,246 medically preserved fetal remains, the release said. At the request of the family, the lawyer asked the coroner’s office to remove the remains.
The coroner’s office took possession of the remains. The release said that the doctor’s family was cooperating with the investigation and that there was no evidence that any medical procedures took place at the property.
A call to the Will County Sheriff’s Office was not returned and attempts to reach the Will County Coroner’s Office were unsuccessful. A person who answered the phone at Dr. Klopfer’s residence declined to comment.
Dr. Klopfer’s license history revealed that he was an osteopathic physician whose license was suspended for failure to keep abreast of current professional theory or practice, according to Indiana state records.
He had a practice in South Bend, Ind. and was also licensed to practice in Illinois but his license to practice there expired in the 1990s, according to state records.
The Women’s Pavilion, the abortion clinic where Dr. Klopfer worked, closed in 2016, The South Bend Tribune reported. Dr. Klopfer stopped performing abortions in November 2015, the site said.
The Journal Gazette said that Dr. Klopfer received a six-month license suspension in 2016 after a hearing with the Indiana Medical Licensing Board. He was found guilty of five of the nine charges he faced.

Dr. Klopfer had not told the authorities and had let the girl return home with her parents, who chose not to seek charges against the relative, The Journal Gazette reported.
Dr. Klopfer also told the board that in his 43 years of practice, he had never lost a patient.
