Movies|Does Jennifer Lopez Have a Path to an Oscar for ‘Hustlers’?
Does Jennifer Lopez Have a Path to an Oscar for ‘Hustlers’?
The 50-year-old actress is earning career-best reviews for playing a stripper turned criminal mastermind. Can the role result in her first Oscar nomination?
TORONTO — Oscar voters, let me hear you make some noise: Are you ready for the one, the only, Jennifer Loooopez to take the stage?
Many a highly hyped awards campaign has been launched from the Toronto International Film Festival, but with this year’s edition, which wraps up on Sunday, all anyone can talk about is whether J. Lo’s ferociously entertaining role as a stripper who runs a credit-card crime ring in “Hustlers” can earn the 50-year-old star her first Academy Award nomination. And if you’re a fan of hers, there are plenty of reasons to be bullish.
For one, Lopez is earning some of the best reviews of her career for “Hustlers,” which premiered in Toronto this week in advance of its wide release in theaters on Friday. In the fact-based film, written and directed by Lorene Scafaria, Lopez plays Ramona, a veteran stripper who takes some of the club’s new dancers under her wing and starts coaxing them toward a life of crime. Introduced with a stunning striptease to Fiona Apple’s “Criminal,” Ramona gathers her bills and coos, “Doesn’t money make you horny?” to our protagonist, Destiny (Constance Wu), who gazes back at Ramona as if she’s looking at God.
It’s the juiciest role Lopez has had in two decades, and one as complicated as her own star persona: Ramona is soft but steely, a careerist yet a caretaker, maternal but forever young. It would be easy to make her the film’s adversary, but “Hustlers” doesn’t quite do that: Ramona bails her girls out of trouble just as often as she leads them into it, and though she’s utterly shameless, she’s still motivated by a sincere desire to make things better for her fellow dancers. It’s as if Gina Gershon from “Showgirls” believed in Shine Theory.
So will “Hustlers” serve as a reminder? And will Oscar voters be willing to think of the film, and Lopez’s performance in it, as something more than just a mainstream entertainment?
I suspect critics’ groups could get behind Lopez, too, especially the influential New York Film Critics Circle, which has a habit of rewarding stars the rest of the cognoscenti might be tempted to dismiss, like Cameron Diaz (for “There’s Something About Mary”) and Tiffany Haddish (for “Girls Trip”).
Still, Lopez’s bid is not without potential pitfalls. The academy gravitates toward male-driven crime films, but when women are pulling off the cons — as in last year’s crackerjack “Widows” — the movies don’t always get the attention they deserve. The strip-club milieu of “Hustlers” may also be a turnoff to certain voters: Matthew McConaughey was similarly deserving for his wild-eyed supporting role in 2012’s “Magic Mike,” but the academy declined to stuff his G-string.
Award campaigns can be a monthslong endurance test, and while the busy Lopez will certainly book her fair share of actress roundtables, she may not have time for the Q&As and handshakes that are often required for a first-timer trying to break into the Oscar race. It’s rumored that she’s in negotiations to headline the halftime show of the 2020 Super Bowl, which takes place a week before the Oscars and may complicate her schedule even further.
