Colts and Jets kickers left crucial points on the table in Week 1 losses.
Amid all the hooting and hollering about the brilliance of quarterback Lamar Jackson, the return of running back Ezekiel Elliott and the homecoming of receiver DeSean Jackson, several players made news in Week 1 at a less heralded position: kicker. And that news was not always good.
Adam Vinatieri, the grand old man of the N.F.L. at age 46, missed an extra point and field-goal attempts of 29 and 46 yards for the Colts in a 30-24 loss to the Chargers. Last season, Vinatieri missed just four field-goal attempts, all of 30 yards or more, and only three of 47 extra points.
The Jets might not have the same faith in their rookie kicker, Kaare Vedvik, a Norwegian who played at Marshall. The team claimed Vedvik off waivers in early September when Chandler Catanzaro retired after missing two extra points in a preseason game. On Sunday, Vedvik missed his only extra point and his only field-goal attempt, a 45-yarder. Again, the points were crucial: The Jets lost to the Bills, 17-16.
Jets Coach Adam Gase was noncommittal about whether he would stick with Vedvik. The kicker’s performance led some to suggest it might be time for the Jets to look into signing Carli Lloyd, the United States women’s national team soccer player who made a 55-yard kick on a visit to the Philadelphia Eagles last month.
The one other missed extra point through Sunday in Week 1 came from the rookie Austin Seibert of the Browns, and it was devastating in its own Cleveland-like way.
There had been much excitement about the Browns this year after an uncharacteristically competent 7-8-1 season, and even playoff talk. The team raced to a quick touchdown in the first quarter on Sunday, and the home fans were thrilled. Then Seibert missed the extra point, perhaps to remind fans that the Browns are gonna Brown. Cleveland went on to lose, 43-13.
Another much-watched veteran kicker, Matt Bryant, did not really get a chance to show what he could do. Bryant, 44, had been with Falcons for 10 years, earning the nickname Money Matt, but was released in February. It appeared that his time in Atlanta, and perhaps the league, was over, but after a couple of other kickers struggled, the team brought him back at the end of August.
But Bryant did not try a field goal or an extra point in the team’s game against the Vikings. Playing from behind, the Falcons got two fourth-quarter touchdowns but went for 2 on both (and missed both) in a 28-12 loss.
The kicking failures of Week 1 were another reminder that in pro football, a kick is far from automatic. So let’s give a shout-out to the kicking stars: Justin Tucker of the Ravens was 8-for-8 on extra points. Three kickers, Harrison Butker of the Chiefs, Zane Gonzalez of the Cardinals and Stephen Gostkowski of the Patriots were all 4-for-4 on field-goal attempts. And the Rams’ Greg Zuerlein made the fantasy owners who drafted him as the top kicker this season look smart, belting the longest field goal of the week at 56 yards.
Danielle Allentuck contributed reporting.