Growing up in an all-female household, I never owned a gaming console and never yearned for one. Whenever I did play a console game, always at the house of a male friend, I would quickly grow frustrated because I didn’t know how to use the controller. The one for PlayStation, for instance, has 18 (18!) buttons, none particularly intuitive to use. And none of the boys or their friends had the patience to teach me.
So I viewed video games as boring and hard, distinctly masculine, inaccessible.
When I reached my early college years and began to fancy myself an intellectual type, I adopted the familiar cerebral framework about why video games are bad: They’re culturally worthless and — while not the source of mass shootings, as conservatives argue — a drain on young men’s brains, maybe even their humanity, hobbling their ability to form real bonds.
The way so many of us talk about gaming, it’s easy to miss the fact that 49 percent of women under the age of 30 play video games (according to Pew, at least).
It took a couple of months to crack me, but my view began to change with the first game my boyfriend persuaded me to play, Earth Defense Force: You get to be soldiers fighting aliens that look like massive bugs, horrific creatures dead set on total world invasion. They sprayed fatal toxins at us as we tried to kill as many of them as possible with guns and explosives.
Initially, I was terrible at it, hopelessly smashing the gazillion buttons on the controller. But for the first time, I was playing a video game with somebody who loved me, who wanted to teach me how it all worked. All so we could have more fun together. And we did.
My boyfriend’s gaming never actually put a strain on our relationship, but when I started playing with him, it went from being one of his boy hobbies I could never possibly understand to an experience we could share, something that highlighted why we worked so well together.
Many couples discover how much they absolutely adore each other by going on hikes, doing pottery, making a meal or hitting up parties together — and my boyfriend and I certainly bonded and continue to bond over many things aside from gaming. But every time we boot up the PS4 we feel a little closer.
It’s still true that gaming has a long way to go in connecting to women. If I wanted to play as a female character in E.D.F., I could only be a big-breasted, small-waisted kind of soldier called a Wing Diver, who was always scantily clad and spoke in such a high-register her voice seemed better fit for a little girl. But the game was exciting enough that I didn’t really dwell on problematic gender dynamics. Funnily enough, while I ended up murdering most of the killer alien bugs as a male soldier, my boyfriend opted to play as the sexy girl.
Still, if you want to understand why gaming is less popular among women than among men, check out Grand Theft Auto: The female characters tend to be either prostitutes or nagging wives, slutty daughters or abusive mothers. Which is why I was so surprised when I fell head over heels in love with it.
Grand Theft Auto V lets you play through the perspective of one of three characters, none of whom are women. But the number of female gamers is steadily increasing, and with that has come more women-friendly options within games. In the online version of G.T.A. V, you can create your own character of either sex, which meant I was finally able to realize a dream: creating a perfect likeness of myself.
My boyfriend and I now take turns playing a terrifying version of Eve, rolling through the fictionalized streets of Los Angeles, ruining lives, stealing cars, murdering both the police officers who chase us and strangers on the street with glee. She is a sociopathic badass, often donning a baby-pink ski mask. While I never want to actually be her, boy do I love to pretend!
As violent as G.T.A. is, it’s also full of cheeky commentary about the world that birthed it: The social media network in the G.T.A. universe is called LifeInvader, the gun store clerk often reassures you he doesn’t keep a list of whom he sells his deadly weapons to. The game itself is a parody of our culture’s excesses and extremes. And healthy gamers, no matter their gender, understand that — limiting their rapaciousness to the virtual world in the same way no sane person watches a Tom Cruise “Mission Impossible” flick and decides to flirt with treason by subverting the C.I.A.
We now refer to making money in G.T.A. as “providing for our family,” one of several inside jokes it has spawned. Games have opened up a whole new type of media we can explore, much more stimulating than just bingeing Netflix together.
One of the best things about falling in love and building a partnership is that you get to try out new things, to discover aspects of yourself you never knew existed. In my case, I’m now a gamer, and never turning back.
Eve Peyser (@evepeyser) is a Brooklyn-based writer whose work focuses on politics and popular culture.