Andreas Gabalier’s folk-influenced songs praise Austrian traditions. But his critics say they are a vehicle for right-wing messages.
VIENNA — On a recent Saturday, the Austrian singer Andreas Gabalier interrupted his concert at a stadium here to give a short speech about the importance of tradition.
Gabalier, 34, who plays a blend of Alpine folk and country rock, is by far the most popular homegrown musical performer in Austria. He had just finished playing his piano ballad “Steirerland,” a paean to his home region in the southeast of the country, in front of a screen showing jagged mountain peaks.
His songs, he explained, celebrated the customs of the “incredible, down-to-earth” people of Austria.
Many audience members had traveled from other parts of the country to see the concert, which marked the first time an Austrian artist had sold out the 50,000-capacity Ernst Happel Stadium. Most had dressed in traditional Austrian outfits. For the women, this meant a dirndl, a low-cut dress that often includes an apron and a lace-up bodice. For the men, lederhosen and a checkered shirt.
Katja Breg, a 35-year-old drugstore employee in the audience, said that Gabalier represented the Austrian zeitgeist. “Before, you couldn’t say you were proud of being Austrian,” she said, because of the country’s Nazi past. “He represents the values of the people,” she added.
Over the past decade, the singer has built a new mainstream audience for Alpine folk-inspired music — even recently recording a duet with a still more famous Austrian, Arnold Schwarzenegger — and helped launch a wide-ranging revival of traditional Austrian clothing. He has also been sharply criticized by activists and other performers, who see his music as a vehicle for nationalist-populist messages, and spurred a debate that has sometimes mirrored the political divisions in the country.
Austria has lurched to the right politically. Until this spring, the country was governed by a coalition between the center-right Austrian People’s Party (Ö.V.P.) and the far-right Freedom Party (F.P.Ö.) under Chancellor Sebastian Kurz. The coalition collapsed after an F.P.Ö. leader was caught on camera offering government contracts in exchange for financial support for the party. New elections have been scheduled for Sept. 29.
While figures from the right-wing parties have expressed their admiration for Gabalier, local leaders of the center-left Social Democrats (S.P.Ö.) recently banned his music from being performed at a campaign function in the southern Austrian city of Graz.
Others have argued that on the cover of the 2011 album “Volks-Rock’n’roller,” on which Gabalier strikes an awkward-looking running pose, the singer is contorting himself into the shape of a swastika.
Gabalier has also been denounced by figures from Austria’s music scene. Anja Plaschg, a prominent Austrian singer who performs as Soap&Skin, declined to appear at this year’s Amadeus awards, the Austrian equivalent of the Grammys, after she was nominated in the same category as Gabalier.
On Facebook, she wrote it was because of his “reactionary, nationalist, chauvinist and sexist concept of life.” In a phone interview, she said she had received threats of violence and sexual assault after the announcement.
In July, an Austrian rapper named Kid Pex released a music video in which he pulled a tied-up figure wearing a Gabalier mask behind a tractor.
Gabalier, who was raised in Graz, began his musical career while working toward a law degree there. After his father and younger sister committed suicide, he said, he “couldn’t concentrate on studying,” and began writing poems and setting them to music. Inspired by Austrian folk melodies and American rock bands like Bon Jovi, he sought to put a modern spin on traditional Alpine music.
He also argued that he deserved credit for a revival of the market for traditional Austrian clothing and for a rise in tourism. “We have become a huge economic factor,” he said.
His most recent single, “Pump It Up (The Motivation Song),” is an English-language collaboration with Schwarzenegger, with a video in which the former California governor sings his most famous catchphrases and pumps iron. Gabalier explained that the men met in a decade ago and become friends partly because of their shared interest in sports. “I tried to create a small musical monument to him,” he said.
Gabalier’s biggest hit, however, remains “Hulapalu,” a yodeling-inspired party anthem that has garnered over 140 million plays on YouTube. As he launched into the song at the end of his concert here, the energized audience raised their arms into the air and screamed along. When Gabalier dropped to the stage floor at the end of the song, streamers in the color of the Austrian flag shot into the audience, and thousands of dirndl and lederhosen wearers cheered.