The theory: Four choices featuring the Statue of Liberty would split the vote, allowing the Cuomo Bridge design to prevail. It did not.
ALBANY — It seemed, at first glance, to be an innocuous idea.
Late last month, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced that he would sponsor a “statewide survey” to allow New York State residents to vote on the design for new license plates, featuring a number of landmarks.
Four of the five options were strikingly similar: On each, the state’s one-word motto, excelsior, is emblazoned across the bottom in capital letters; the color scheme is white and dark blue, with gold accents; and they all include the Statue of Liberty.
Then there was the fifth.
It has no gold accents, and no mention of excelsior — just a simple image of the new bridge over the Hudson River that happens to be named for the governor’s father, the former governor Mario M. Cuomo.
The fact that the governor included the image of the Cuomo Bridge — completed in 2018 and hardly a tourist stop — in the competition immediately attracted conspiracy theories on Twitter, including from Nate Silver, the election analyst and editor in chief of FiveThirtyEight, who suggested that the survey was “kind of rigged” because the multiple images of the Statue of Liberty would split the vote.
In the end, voters agreed: Late Friday afternoon, state officials announced that the bridge design had come in a tie for last among the five designs, with less than 10 percent of the vote. The runaway winner was a composite of various sites, including Niagara Falls, the Manhattan skyline, Lady Liberty and a lighthouse.
The defeat of Mr. Cuomo’s favorite bridge, however, did not seem to appease Republicans, who have been shunted to the sidelines in Albany after disastrous electoral results last year, from pouncing on the issue. They have called it “PlateGate,” and have promised hearings, petitions and legislation to remedy it.
“New Yorkers have a right to full transparency,” Mr. Langworthy said in a statement.
Much of the Republican ire is focused on another aspect of the decision to overhaul the state’s plates: Under Mr. Cuomo’s plan, all license plates over 10 years old must be replaced with the new design, at a cost of $25 per plate.
If motorists want to keep their plate number, including personalized plates, there would be an additional $20 charge. The fees would take effect April 1, which is the first day of the state’s fiscal year and a famous holiday for fools.
Mock-ups of plates showing legislators picking taxpayers’ pockets spread on social media, as did a battery of automotive puns.
“It’s highway robbery,” said Senator James Tedisco, a Republican from a district near Albany.
Mr. Cuomo said the new plates were necessary to “eliminate legibility issues” with older plates when detected by red light cameras, cashless tolling systems and other devices.
Days after the contest was proposed, Mr. Carlucci joined with another Democrat, State Senator James Skoufis, to propose a bill that would bar any new license plate fees so long as the plates were still legible.
But rather than back down, the governor has counterattacked, blaming the Legislature for the fee — noting that it was authorized by legislation dating to 2009, before he was elected to his first term.
But for critics of Mr. Cuomo’s sometimes bruising political style, the license plate kerfuffle was emblematic of his inability to admit error and his propensity for self-promotion.
Mr. Kolb and other critics of the plan also point out that the law only dictates that the fee not exceed $25; the governor, they argue, could charge less.
Richard Azzopardi, a senior adviser to Mr. Cuomo, also noted that other states have plate replacement programs. Alabama and Kansas, for example, require such changeover every five years.
As for the new plate itself, however, Mr. Schroder struck a more poetic tone, saying the design “truly represents what the Empire State is all about,” including the state’s diversity, architecture and natural beauty.
