With its $85.4 billion purchase of Time Warner last year, AT&T announced to the world that it was becoming a new kind of corporate behemoth, one that would be a force in media and entertainment while also maintaining its dominant position in the telecommunications industry.
Elliott Management, a hedge fund with $38 billion under management, made the letter public as part of an announcement that it had taken a $3.2 billion stake in the Dallas-based AT&T.
Although its holdings represent just over 1 percent of AT&T’s $271 billion market capitalization, Elliott Management — led by the billionaire businessman and Republican donor Paul E. Singer — made a splashy entry into the ranks of company stakeholders with its 24-page letter, telling AT&T that it needed to change to bolster its share price.
Activist funds like Elliott Management often take small positions in companies with the idea of rallying other investors to their way of thinking. The Monday letter questioned whether AT&T had strayed from its mission when it acquired Time Warner, the company behind CNN, the Warner Bros. movie studio and HBO, among other properties.
In July, AT&T announced that its streaming service would be called HBO Max. Scheduled to make its debut next spring, it will offer more than 10,000 hours of content, including HBO hits like “Succession,” “Game of Thrones,” “Sex and the City” and “The Sopranos,” not to mention exclusive access to the sitcom “Friends.” HBO Max will compete in a crowded field of well-funded newcomers like Disney Plus and AppleTV, as well as pioneering streaming companies like Netflix and Amazon.
In fact, CNN has been a consistently profitable machine and continues to generate money for its new parent company. In the first half of this year, the division under which CNN operates made more than $2.4 billion.
Elliott Management went on to ask the company to stop striking new acquisitions, increase dividends and share buybacks and improve its efficiency. The fund also said it was seeking seats on AT&T’s board. Shares in AT&T rose about 1.5 percent on Monday.
While it has battled its main telecommunications rival, Verizon, in a bitter price war that has made each customer less profitable, AT&T, led by the chairman and chief executive Randall Stephenson, has acted decisively when it has come to WarnerMedia.
It put a veteran AT&T executive, John Stankey, in charge of the new division. Eight months into his tenure, the longtime HBO chief executive Richard Plepler, a gregarious figure who was known for having a way with Hollywood talent, stepped down. People familiar with Mr. Plepler’s thinking said at the time that he found that he had less autonomy as an AT&T employee. HBO had won 160 Emmys on Mr. Plepler’s watch.
Mr. Stankey named Robert Greenblatt, the former head of entertainment at NBC and Showtime, as the new chairman at WarnerMedia, a job that gave him oversight of properties like HBO, TBS and TNT.
Mr. Stankey has trimmed costs and is looking to increase profits through new business lines. In addition to unlocking higher returns on advertising, he has spent considerable time and money to create HBO Max. The service may help AT&T offer special discounts to its customers, potentially keeping them from defecting to other services.
Last week, in a vote of confidence, AT&T elevated Mr. Stankey to president and chief operating officer of AT&T, putting him in line to succeed Mr. Stephenson as chief executive. He continues serving as the chief executive of WarnerMedia.
AT&T has more than $149 billion in net debt and has been steadily losing television customers at another of its businesses, DirecTV. In the 12 months through March, it lost more than 1.5 million subscribers, leaving it with about 23 million. AT&T acquired the satellite TV service in 2015 for almost $50 billion. Elliott Management advised that AT&T should consider selling DirectTV, among other businesses.
