The watch industry is a man’s world. Or is it?
The business’s pantheon ranges from the likes of the 18th-century pioneers Abraham-Louis Breguet and Jean-Marc Vacheron to the contemporary makers François-Paul Journe and Philippe Dufour. And the majority of its products are large-scale timepieces produced for brawny wrists and sold with male-tempting images of Formula One cars, intrepid mountaineers or deep-sea divers.
But untold numbers of women have worked in watchmaking, too.
From its earliest days as a cottage industry to the multinational brands of today, the industry has benefited from female designers, artisans and specialists in movement construction and assembly. “With their smaller hands, women have always done the work that men couldn’t do,” said Anita Porchet, a watch enamel artist.
Yet even now there are no breakdowns of the work force by gender, and little debate about diversity in watch circles.
Still, a few women have won top positions in recent years. Some had family connections, like Nayla Hayek, chairwoman of the Swatch Group and chief executive of Harry Winston, and Caroline Scheufele, co-president of Chopard. Others rose through the ranks, including Richemont’s two female chief executives: Chabi Nouri, who has headed Piaget since 2017, and Catherine Rénier, leading Jaeger-LeCoultre since 2018.
These are six of those tales.
In 1998, Fabienne Lupo wanted to lead the Comité International de la Haute Horlogerie, an industry organization founded seven years earlier by a group of luxury brands including Cartier and Piaget.
As chairwoman and managing director of what now is called the Fondation de la Haute Horlogerie, Ms. Lupo’s duties include organizing the annual Salon International de la Haute Horlogerie, the trade show best known as S.I.H.H., which highlights independent watchmakers.
Ms. Lupo, 52, was born in Toulouse, France. With a graduate degree in business, marketing and mathematical modeling, she started her career in advertising before moving into trade-show organization.
“As fair organizers, we still play an important role in creating momentum for the brands,” she said. “Also, I believe that together, we are stronger.” That premise will be tested next year as the fair moves from its traditional January dates to April 26 to 29, with the Baselworld fair following April 30 to May 5.
Ms. Lupo said her gender never had an effect on her professional path. “Personally, I have never felt that my career has evolved differently because I am a woman,” she said.
The luxury giant Richemont owns some of the world’s most famous watch makers, including Vacheron Constantin and IWC Schaffhausen. In 2016 its chairman, Johann Rupert, said he wanted to see “less gray Frenchmen” in top management posts.
And her counsel to others? “My advice to women today is to be confident and not apologetic,” she said.
She studied law and economics before earning a master’s degree in economics from the University of Stuttgart in Germany. In 1998, she joined Cartier, where she stayed for 11 years, and during that time, completed the graduate gemologist program at the Gemological Institute of America in New York.
In 2009, she took a job with British American Tobacco in London as global head of Vogue Cigarettes, to broaden her experience. The “lure of craftsmanship” brought her back to Switzerland where, in 2014, she took a job in marketing and communication at Piaget.
During her time at Piaget, she has focused on emphasizing the house’s craftsmanship heritage and expanding its jewelry segment, with the relaunch of its Possession collection and the creation of such haute jewelry pieces as the Green Aurora cuff, by the marquetry specialist Rose Saneuil, presented early this year as part of the Sunlight Escape collection. Among her other duties, Ms. Nouri said, she has been developing ways to make employee work hours more flexible and to attract millennials who do not want standard 9-to-5 jobs.
Livia Russo describes herself as an “intensely private” person — which seems like an odd admission from someone who is half of one of the watch industry’s most powerful auction teams.
Ms. Russo and her husband, the star auctioneer Aurel Bacs, founded Bacs & Russo in 2013, just before joining forces with the Phillips auction house to run its watch department. Her personal connection with a seller helped secure a rare Patek Philippe single-button chronograph, one of only three made, for the team’s inaugural sale in May 2015. It sold for $4.9 million.
But, to date, the team’s greatest achievement has to be the 2017 sale of the Paul Newman Daytona, a $17.8 million record that still is the highest price paid for a wristwatch.
After high school, Ms. Russo studied law, then languages, before her father suggested that she enroll in an art connoisseurship program at Sotheby’s. In 1998, she was working at Sotheby’s in Milan, where she met Mr. Bacs, then a watch specialist at the house’s Geneva office. In 2000, they joined a private watch sale business that was sold to Phillips within six months. They married in 2000, and the next year they both moved to Christie’s, where Mr. Bacs became global head of watches and Ms. Russo continued working as a specialist until they left to begin their own business.
But, “I have never seen myself in the shadow of Aurel,” Ms. Russo said. “I have my talents and he has his. He is creative and outgoing. I am more disciplined, structured and analytical.
Ms. Russo also has enjoyed doing what she loves — even though the male-dominated world of watch collecting has been a challenge. “For years, as the only woman at collectors’ dinners, I felt like a special guest,” she said. “If the conversation didn’t drift to cars or soccer, I was at ease.
“I have been fortunate to do exactly what I liked and what I was good at,” she said.
In 2016, Jacqueline Dimier briefly stepped out of retirement to celebrate the 40th anniversary of Audemars Piguet’s Royal Oak for women, a model she had imagined in 1976.
Ms. Dimier, 81, came to the industry by chance. After high school in Geneva, she studied decorative arts but gave that up to design jewelry for a local retailer — a role, she said, that was “unsufficiently challenging.” She moved on to watches and, with some experience, began proposing designs to Rolex, Patek Philippe and Vacheron Constantin.
For Ms. Dimier, the task went beyond just reducing the Royal Oak’s size. Technical modifications had to be made so the model, with its signature octagonal bezel and eight exposed screws, would sit well on a woman’s wrist.
In her 24 years at Audemars Piguet, Ms. Dimier developed two collections a year. “I was always respected at work and given the freedom I needed to design,” she said.
Much of her time, though, was spent at the company factory in Le Brassus, about an hour’s drive north of her family home in Geneva. “I spent more time at work than at home, even when my two kids were young,” she said. “It was a sensitive subject in the family for a long time, and my kids blamed me for not being there.
After retiring from Audemars Piguet in 1999, she continued to work as an independent consultant in the watch industry.
“Looking back, I see that I fell into this magnificent métier by chance,” Ms. Dimier said. “Or maybe I happened to be in the right place at the right time, but I am very proud to have found my place in the watch industry.
Anita Porchet made a rare public appearance in 2017 to receive a special prize at the Grand Prix d’Horlogerie de Genève, the watch world’s Oscars.
Ms. Porchet, 58, works from home, in the Swiss town of Corcelles-le-Jorat, about an hour’s drive northeast of Geneva. She lives with her husband, a retired doctor.
The art of enameling is undergoing a revival today, and Ms. Porchet is widely considered the best in her field. She is known for her particular mastery of the champlevé technique — filling an engraved area with enamel that then is fired and polished — but her expertise extends across the field, including cloisonné, grisaille and miniature painting. “There are no limits to creativity with enamel, only possibilities, just like a painter and a blank canvas,” she said.
Ms. Porchet attended art school in La Chaux-de-Fonds, considered one of the cradles of Swiss watchmaking, and taught painting before coming to enameling. It was a craft she first learned from her godfather; later, she trained with some of the best-known names in enameling, including Elisabeth Juillerat and Ms. Rohr.
With 20 years of experience designing sports watches and complicated timepieces, Magali Métrailler is something of an industry veteran at 42.
She spent the first decade of her professional career at Jaeger-LeCoultre and has spent the next 10 working as an independent designer from her home in L’Isle, a 30-minute drive northwest of Lausanne, Switzerland. Married and with two young children, she starts her workday early and ends by midafternoon.
“I still work full time, but I take 10 weeks off per year,” Ms. Métrailler said in an interview. “As a consultant, I have less contact with others, but more time to be creative.” Her focus is the overall look and functionality of a timepiece; she leaves the design of movements or complications to specialists.
Ms. Métrailler was born in Sion, a small town in southwestern Switzerland. At school, she studied architecture but soon veered toward interior design, then industrial design, specializing in furniture, at the Istituto Europeo di Design in Milan.
In a decade, Ms. Métrailler worked on nearly every complicated and sport model at Jaeger-LeCoultre, including the Master Compressor, the Amvox and the timepieces that the brand produced in partnership with the English carmaker Aston Martin.
“As a woman facing an engineer, you must first prove that you know how to use a screwdriver,” she said. “For me, ‘no’ has never been an answer. That is why I was transferred from ladies’ jewelry to men’s complications.
“In the design department at Jaeger, we were considered a dream team of three women and one man, because we were young and we brought a mostly feminine touch to the product,” she said.
Since then, she has worked as an independent consultant for a number of watch brands, including Ball, an American brand now based in La Chaux-de-Fonds. She was behind the design of a limited-edition line that Ball produced with the German carmaker BMW, including the BMW Trekker, introduced at Baselworld in 2015. Since then, she has designed a number of sports models for Ball, including a pilot GMT, a chronograph and divers’ watches.
“Today, I am totally fulfilled professionally because my own talent has served me well,” she said.