This year’s festival will include Pete Buttigieg and Julián Castro at separate events, in addition to Pelosi and an array of artists and entertainers.
Days before several Democratic presidential nominees debate in October, people in New York will have an opportunity to see two candidates interviewed in person.
Pete Buttigieg, the mayor of South Bend, Ind., and Julián Castro, a former mayor of San Antonio who served as the federal housing secretary under President Barack Obama, will appear at separate events at the 20th New Yorker Festival, which runs from Oct. 11 to Oct. 13 in various venues around Manhattan.
“We wanted to really seize on the moment,” David Remnick, the magazine’s editor, said in a phone interview on Tuesday.
The festival will also host another prominent Democrat: House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, who will be interviewed onstage by the journalist Jane Mayer. It will be a reunion of sorts: Mayer interviewed Pelosi at the festival in 2011.
Remnick will speak to Buttigieg in a one-on-one session. At a different event, Castro will be interviewed alongside his twin brother, Representative Joaquin Castro, Democrat of Texas, by the reporter Jonathan Blitzer.
“If you come away from any one of these sessions knowing not only what people think and what their opinions are on their given fields but also about themselves, then the interview is a success,” Remnick said.
The festival’s lineup also includes a discussion with John Kasich, a former Republican governor of Ohio and a critic of President Trump who sought the presidential nomination in 2000 and 2016.
In addition to political figures, the lineup includes an eclectic mix of artists, writers, musicians and actors.
The comedians Paul Rudd, Sarah Silverman, Kenan Thompson, Hasan Minhaj, Ramy Youssef, Rob Delaney, Desus Nice and the Kid Mero will be there — as well as the authors Zadie Smith, Teju Cole and Michael Chabon.
Remnick will interview the NPR host Terry Gross, which Remnick will prepare for “with great trepidation,” he said.
“It will be like taking guitar lessons from Buddy Guy or Eric Clapton,” he added.
While neither of those guitarists will be in attendance, a multigenerational collection of musicians will appear including Florence and the Machine, Patti Smith, Liz Phair, Dua Lipa, David Byrne and Bon Iver. Many will give interviews accompanied by performances.
Panel discussions will tackle a range of topics including President Trump, Brexit and the work of the writer Toni Morrison, who died last month. Morrison’s life and legacy will be discussed by the writer Edwidge Danticat, the academic Farah Griffin, the poet Tracy K. Smith and the playwright Jackie Sibblies Drury, in a panel moderated by the critic Hilton Als.
A full lineup is available at newyorker.com/festival.