Theater|Harry Potter Brought Him to Broadway. Now His Work is Everywhere.
Harry Potter Brought Him to Broadway. Now His Work is Everywhere.
Eccentric and prodigious, the writer Jack Thorne won a Tony for “Cursed Child.” Up next: “Sunday” at the Atlantic Theater Company, and “His Dark Materials” on HBO.
Mr. Thorne, a 40-year-old English writer, describes much of his life as a succession of dark chapters, including a disabling skin condition that affected him for years.
But now he finds himself in a spot he could never have imagined: a happily married father with thriving stage and screen careers that have made him one of the most prodigious — and sought-after — storytellers of the moment.
He won a Tony Award last year for his first Broadway outing — writing the script for the global juggernaut “Harry Potter and the Cursed Child.” His movie credits include “The Aeronauts” (with Eddie Redmayne) and, next year, “The Secret Garden” (with Colin Firth).
And this summer he made his first appearance at Comic-Con, promoting “His Dark Materials,” the upcoming BBC/HBO series he adapted from Philip Pullman’s fantasy novels.
Mr. Thorne has been writing for television since he was 25, winning five BAFTA awards (the British equivalent of the Emmy). His mini-series “National Treasure,” about a comedian accused of rape, was widely praised; the first episodes of Damien Chazelle’s “The Eddy,” a musical series written by Mr. Thorne, are to be released next year by Netflix; and he was just commissioned to write a new family drama for the BBC.
This summer, “the end of history …,” a stage drama based on Mr. Thorne’s own upbringing, opened at London’s Royal Court Theater. And this fall, he will have two plays on the New York stage: “Sunday,” about New York 20-somethings navigating the shoals of early adulthood, is having its world premiere Off Broadway this month at the Atlantic Theater Company, and “A Christmas Carol,” his much-lauded stage adaptation of the Dickens classic, will open on Broadway in November.
Mr. Thorne’s office is the one room in the house where his career artifacts are displayed, and, although the awards are mostly in the basement, it is packed with other meaningful treasures.
There is the drawing of customized wands created for the “Cursed Child” team by the play’s designers, and a framed onesie that reminds him of the birth of his son.
At 6 feet 5 inches tall, Mr. Thorne is a gangly bundle of nervous energy. He fidgets with his toes. He’s too distractible to ride a bike, and he dislikes the subway, so he walks long distances. “Sitting on a tube is just like the most upsetting thing you can do,” he said.
Of course, not everything succeeds. He was dropped as the writer of the forthcoming film “Star Wars: Episode IX” when the director was replaced. And he wrote the book for the big-budget stage adaptation of “King Kong,” which was poorly reviewed and closed as a flop on Broadway, although the producers are hoping to revivify the musical in Shanghai.
He grew up in Bristol and Newbury, England; his father was a town planner, and his mother worked with adults who had learning disabilities. His parents were politically active Laborites. “We were always going on marches,” he said.
The illness was diagnosed as chronic cholinergic urticaria, a skin ailment triggered by heat, and at first it was debilitating and defining. “It became an allergy to body movement, basically, because every time I moved, I generated heat, and so I would get a reaction, and it was very, very painful,” he said.
Elliott is named for the boy in “E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial.” For his 40th birthday Mr. Thorne had “be good,” E.T.’s parting words to Elliott’s sister, tattooed on his right wrist. “I remember seeing ‘E.T.’ as a sort of slightly lonely kid and going, ‘Brilliant, there’s an extraterrestrial out there that’s going to make it all O.K.,’ ” he said.
Fatherhood has prompted Mr. Thorne to write at home, “because I want to be near him, and we see each other all the time.” Inspired by a radio interview in which Zadie Smith described how she balances writing and parenting, he established an open-door policy — Elliott comes into the work space whenever he wants to, and is free to scrawl in Mr. Thorne’s writing notebooks, which he often does.
Mr. Thorne has often written perceptively about young people — children, adolescents, and early adults — and his latest project, “Sunday,” is set among a group of New Yorkers just starting their grown-up lives.
The play, which is now in previews, is set during the meeting of a boozy book club at which a group of five friends discuss Anne Tyler’s “Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant.” The gathering turns into an increasingly revealing conversation about ethical choices, toxic masculinity, and what is now sometimes called adulting.
“He’s got an incredible ear for the small ways that old friends talk to each other — his ability to capture the different layers of history that are present between this group of friends is astounding,” said the play’s director, Lee Sunday Evans. Ms. Evans was paired with Mr. Thorne by the Atlantic, which had commissioned the play, and in June she flew to London to oversee a workshop with British actors before further developing the show in New York with an American cast.
Mr. Thorne said the play emerged from his fascination with the Aziz Ansari situation — a much-debated instance in which a woman accused a comedian of inappropriate behavior on a date — but that it had changed as it grew.
