Kristen Elizabeth Romano Holmes and Noah William Gray were married Sept. 7 in Nantucket, Mass. Rabbi Jonathan Fisch officiated at a private home rented for the occasion.
The bride and groom work in the Washington bureau of CNN, the cable news network, she as an on-air correspondent and he as a White House and political producer, currently assigned to the 2020 presidential campaign.
Ms. Holmes, 32, graduated from Northwestern and received a master’s degree in journalism from Columbia. From 2009 to 2011, she was a corps member of Teach for America in Chicago, teaching third and fifth grade at Chicago International Charter School Longwood.
She is a daughter of Lois Romano and Sven E. Holmes of Washington. The bride’s father is a vice chairman of KPMG, the New York accounting firm, and is also a trustee of St. Mary’s College of Maryland, in St. Mary’s, Md. Her mother was until 2017 the editor of Washington Post Live, the newspaper’s live events platform, and is now working on a book about Mary Todd Lincoln. She is also a director of both the International Center for Research on Women and the Women’s Foreign Policy Group, both in Washington.
Mr. Gray, 27, graduated from American University and is also a volunteer emergency medical technician with the Bethesda Chevy Chase Rescue Squad.
He is the son of Ellen Feig Gray and Richard V. Gray of Miami. The groom’s mother consults on parenting and educational issues, and is a co-author of “Hacking School Culture: Designing Compassionate Classrooms” (Times 10 Publications, 2018). She also advises on the parent-educator resource center at the Community Classroom Project in Delray Beach, Fla. His father is a lawyer in private practice in Miami.
The couple initially met in 2015 over the telephone, when she was a new on-air producer at the White House and he was a booking producer in Atlanta. There was an illegal drone over the White House, and he called her to go on-air with breaking news. Afterward, he emailed and suggested they meet for coffee, but the timing didn’t work out and it wasn’t until a year later that they met in person, when both were covering the Trump campaign.