Opinion|Does Anyone Really ‘Love’ Private Health Insurance?
Does Anyone Really ‘Love’ Private Health Insurance?
I am alive today not because of insurance companies but despite them.
Twenty minutes after I learned I had Type 1 diabetes — after narrowly avoiding a diabetic coma — a nurse pulled my parents away from my bedside and urged them to call our insurance company immediately. If they didn’t call right away, she warned, insurance would not cover the stay. At that moment — now 10 years ago — my parents had to choose whether to comfort their sick and frightened 14-year-old daughter, or spend hours on the phone with our insurer. Of course, they left me to make those calls, and my nightmarish relationship with the insurance industry began.
Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease that destroys the body’s ability to produce insulin or maintain normal blood-sugar levels. There are no days off from this illness. Without careful monitoring and daily insulin injections, Type 1 diabetics risk blindness, kidney failure and death.
On top of the full-time job of monitoring blood sugar, American diabetics and their families have to work a second shift fighting insurance companies to cover their care. Even though my parents had insurance and both worked multiple jobs, the hospital bills, insulin and supplies drove them into debt, forcing them to forgo insurance, and medical care, for themselves.
The high (and rising) cost of insulin is forcing diabetics to risk their lives to get the drug.
I should not have to cross a border to buy my insulin. I should not have to buy my insulin in a parking lot off a stranger as if it were a drug deal. None of us should fear death from a perfectly manageable disease, but we do because American drug makers can arbitrarily raise prices to line their pockets. And Congress hasn’t done anything to stop them. Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease. Your pancreas doesn’t produce any insulin. You have to rely on injecting insulin every few hours or so. In 2001, this vial cost $34.8. Today, the list price is about $275. Insulin has been around for 100 years and hasn’t really changed in the last 20. So you’d expect insulin prices to go down, not up. Instead, just by slightly tweaking formulas or packaging, Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisk and Sanofi can extend patents, increase prices and prevent affordable generics. The sticker price is made higher by so-called safe harbor regulations. These protect what would otherwise be illegal kickbacks between greedy pharma companies, pharmacy benefit managers and other middlemen. The price for kickbacks is ultimately passed on to me, the diabetic. We either buy insulin or we die and we would like to live. We would like to live. We would like to live. My son Alec was an energetic, fun loving.  When Alec was no longer eligible to stay on my insurance, he went to the pharmacy, the very first time, without insurance to purchase it and was told that it was $1,300. So he ended up leaving the pharmacy with nothing. He tried to eat a low-carb diet and stretch out his insulin. His body was found about three days prior to payday. Every single one of his insulin pens were completely empty. So he had used everything that he was able to use and passed away. What are we doing, Robin? We’re going to be patronizing the good pharmacies of Tijuana, Mexico. Dang, that’s a lot of medicine. So we have about $8,000 to $10,000 worth of insulin sitting here on my lap. And we got it for about between 5% and 10% of U.S. retail price. So, I found this guy, since I got introduced to this underground world on the app called OfferUp, and he constantly has insulin on deck. I just text him. He tells me the expiration date. He tells me the price per box. He’s been like my number one dealer, like drug dealer, I would say. I created an Instagram account to show Type 1 diabetics leading normal lives, but it’s also become this platform for people to donate and trade diabetes supplies. It’s terrifying that people have to turn to Instagram or any type of social media for insulin. For us, this is like oxygen. Some local representatives have had the audacity to say that if we struggle to find insulin, we should go to the emergency room. But I take six to 10 shots a day. Should I move into the nurse’s station? Now, to their credit, Congress is finally investigating the rising cost of insulin, but there is a long road between this investigation and real change, because big pharma companies like Eli Lilly are huge donors to congressional re-election campaigns. I have been working with legislators to create not only state laws, but federal laws that would hold pharmaceutical companies accountable. Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisk and Sanofi should answer our calls for transparency. If they can’t, they should welcome generic competition, which will set a fair price. They’ll tell you they just released a cheaper insulin at about half the cost. But it’s not good enough. As long as big pharma can get away with zero transparency and patent abuse, they will. It’s time that Congress moved beyond this investigation. We need our representatives to actually hold drug companies accountable by fixing our broken patent and kickback laws. Because we shouldn’t have to risk our lives to save our lives.
When I turned 19, I was kicked off my parents’ plan. I took out thousands of dollars in extra student loans to buy insulin and diabetes supplies. After the Affordable Care Act passed, I was able to regain insurance, a high-deductible plan that cost me hundreds of dollars for each doctor’s visit and insulin refill.
So when I hear politicians talk about how much Americans love their private health insurance, I think: Really?
I am alive today not because of insurance companies but despite them. My insulin refills have been delayed countless times, not because of medical reasons, but because of what seem to be arbitrary insurance limits and requirements to continuously document my condition, which is permanent. Once, my insulin refill was delayed so long that I ran out, just when the insurance office closed for a three-day weekend. I was a student, away from home, with no other way to pay for my prescription. Terrified, I rushed to the pharmacy in tears. The pharmacist took pity on me and slipped me a vial of insulin without charge, saving my life.
The worst part about my story is that it isn’t unique, at least not in this country. Young adults with Type 1 diabetes suffer life-threatening diabetic ketoacidosis — a complication caused by insufficient insulin — at much higher rates in the United States than in Canada. Canada’s single-payer system provides seamless, lifelong coverage. But in the United States, diabetics must wage war with insurance companies to get the care we need, if we have insurance at all.
I’m glad that politicians are finally talking about health care reform. But those who only want to “protect” the Affordable Care Act or add a public option to our already byzantine mix of private and public plans are missing the point. Americans don’t “love” their private insurance, as many of them claim. They’re grateful for any coverage at all. Americans love their doctors, nurses and pharmacists, because those are the people who save our lives.
What diabetics — and all Americans — need is care that is lifelong and portable, covers all medically necessary services and drugs, and is accepted by all doctors and hospitals. Only a single-payer version of “Medicare for all,” in which care is publicly funded by one entity and privately delivered, would guarantee coverage to everyone in the United States, and eliminate the greed and administrative waste of private insurance.
It has been 10 years since my diabetes was diagnosed. I can’t help but think about the doctors and nurses who cared for me with such skill, my parents who sacrificed their needs for mine and the pharmacist who kindly slipped me that vial of insulin. I’m alive today because of them.
Will I have to live the next 10 years holding my breath through every doctor’s visit, praying that insurance will approve my medication, and in time? Will I ever be able to stop my endless fights with insurance middlemen? I know I’ll never live a day without worrying about my health. But maybe one day I, and millions of other diabetics in America, can live without worrying about how to pay for it.
Rachel Madley, a Ph.D. student at Columbia University Medical Center, is a student board member of the New York chapter of Physicians for a National Health Program.