WASHINGTON — On the morning of the 18th anniversary of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, President Trump began his day by tweeting about his poll numbers and attacking the news media.
Soon afterward, Mr. Trump spoke at an annual ceremony remembering 9/11 at the Pentagon, where one of those planes was crashed.
He repeated an exaggerated account of how he had assisted the recovery effort after the World Trade Center was brought down by two of the planes; recounted how he had been about to watch a television interview “with Jack Welch, the legendary head of General Electric” when “all of a sudden they cut away” to the scene; and reminded his audience that he had recently sought to meet with leaders of the Taliban, who provided safe haven to Al Qaeda, which was responsible for the attacks in New York and Washington.
That Mr. Trump could even consider such a meeting was a reminder that a president whose 2016 campaign was shaped by the threat of foreign terrorism — and particularly by the rise of the Islamic State, whose beheading videos and mass-killing attacks peaked as Mr. Trump was seeking the Republican nomination — has spent little time addressing the “radical Islamic extremism” he once railed against.
And his tone on Wednesday morning underscored how Mr. Trump, who struggles to project empathy, maintains an awkward connection to the memory of an epochal American tragedy.
“It’s bizarre seeing the tweets that are completely off topic” on a typically solemn day, said David Lapan, a former aide to John F. Kelly, the president’s second chief of staff, and a former Pentagon spokesman and retired Marine. “He just doesn’t seem to get the significance of the event to the people in the audience,” which included survivors of the attack on the Pentagon and relatives of people who were killed.
“And I’m not even talking about nuclear power,” Mr. Trump added.
It was unclear what other “power” Mr. Trump might have been referring to. But the threat was notable in part because Mr. Trump speaks far less often than his two predecessors about the threat of terrorism.
That is largely because foreign-inspired terrorists have not executed an attack within the United States since October 2017 — when an Islamic State sympathizer drove a pickup truck down a bike path in Lower Manhattan, killing eight and injuring 11 — and attacks by Islamic radicals in Europe have abated in recent years.
In place of terrorists inspired by radical visions of Islam, Mr. Trump has presided during a surge in mass shootings by white American men who subscribe to racist and anti-Semitic ideology. Mr. Trump vowed last month that such “sinister ideologies must be defeated,” but has barely reckoned with the charge that his own language may have played a role in their rise.
After Mr. Trump won several primaries that March, he told supporters that it was the reaction to the California massacre — as well as to the killing of 130 people by the Islamic State in Paris — that had vaulted him ahead of his political rivals.
As a result, many terrorism experts and some top officials in the Obama administration predicted that a Trump presidency would radicalize segments of the country’s Muslim-American population and produce still more terrorist attacks. That has not happened.
Meanwhile, Seth Jones, a terrorism analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, noted that the United States military had largely defeated the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. Mr. Jones added that Al Qaeda had recently focused on regional conflicts in places like Syria and Yemen.
Mr. Trump has filled the political space by amplifying his warnings about undocumented immigrants, said Juliette N. Kayyem, a former Department of Homeland Security official in the Obama administration. Instead of raising the specter of terrorist attacks, Mr. Trump has warned of hardened criminals and gang members whom he calls “animals” illegally crossing the Mexican border and terrorizing peaceful communities.
“What Trump has done now is, in the absence of a bunch of attacks here that he can manipulate politically, he has created the mythology of the undocumented immigrant as terrorist,” Ms. Kayyem said.
Through three Sept. 11 anniversaries as president, Mr. Trump has dutifully attended memorial events, but said little in public about the group that executed the attacks. Asked in late July about reports that the United States had killed a son of Osama bin Laden, who had become an important terrorist operative in his own right, Mr. Trump declined to comment.
Although Mr. Trump is a native New Yorker, his connection to the attacks of that day has never been particularly emotional.
He did not visit the memorial and museum where the World Trade Center once stood until April 2016, nearly five years after it opened. After a relatively brief tour, he decided not to hold the news conference that aides had discussed. He later told advisers it was a mistake, according to people familiar with the event.
And even as Mr. Trump called for severe measures to prevent terrorists from entering the country, vowing to “bomb the hell out of” the Islamic State, he also capitalized on voter fatigue with the seemingly endless war in Afghanistan, rejecting the post-Sept. 11 neoconservative vision that had long dominated the Republican Party.
