Women’s professional tennis includes four annual Grand Slam tournaments: Wimbledon, the United States Open, the French Open and the Australian Open.
This graph originally appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com. By Friday morning, Sept. 20, we will provide the “Reveal” — the graph’s free online link, additional background and questions, shout outs to student comments and headlines, and Stat Nuggets.
What do you notice? If you make a claim, tell us what you noticed that supports your claim.
What do you wonder? What are you curious about that comes from what you notice in the graph?
What’s going on in this graph? Write a catchy headline that captures the graph’s main idea.
The questions are intended to build on one another, so try to answer them in order. Start with “I notice,” then “I wonder,” and end with a catchy headline.
3. After you have posted, read what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting a comment. Use the “Reply” button or the @ symbol to address that student directly.
On Wednesday, Sept. 18, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. By Friday morning, we will reveal more information about the graph at the bottom of this post. Students, we encourage you to post an additional comment after reading the reveal. How does the original article and the moderators’ comments help you see the graph differently? Try to incorporate the statistical terms defined in the Stat Nuggets in your response.
Read our 2019-20 introductory post, which includes the archives of past releases by topic and graph type.
Learn more about the “Notice and Wonder” teaching strategy and how and why other teachers are using this feature from our on-demand webinar.
Add our remaining 2019-20 “What’s Going On in This Graph?” 25 live-moderated discussion Wednesdays to your Google calendar (9/18, 9/25, 10/2, 10/9, 10/16, 10/23, 10/30, 11/6, 11/13, 11/20, 12/4, 12/11, 1/8, 1/15, 1/22, 1/29, 2/8, 2/12, 2/26, 3/4, 3/11, 3/18, 3/25, 4/1, 4/8). Graphs are always released by the Friday before to give teachers time to plan ahead.
Go to the A.S.A. K-12 website, which includes This is Statistics, resources, professional development, student competitions, curriculum, courses and careers.
The four Grand Slam tournaments — Australian, French, Wimbledon, and this month’s U.S. Open, are tennis’s most important events. They offer ranking points, prize money, the strongest competitors and lots of public attention. Statistics are kept on their winners, whether men’s or women’s singles or doubles, or mixed doubles.
In the women’s singles finals, 37-year old Serena Williams lost to 19-year old Bianca Andreescu, 20 years after Williams won her first Grand Slam title at the U.S. Open at the age of 17. Nonetheless, Williams is still today’s most winning women’s singles tennis player at 23 titles earned in the past 18 years plus 2 Olympic gold medals. (Margaret Court, whose career spanned 1961 - 1975, won 24 Grand Slams.) Andreescu has 22 more to win before equalling Williams.
This graph appeared in the New York Times article “Serena Williams Reaches For Margaret Court.” The graph, which goes all the way back to Helen Wills Moody’s 1920s titles, compares the cumulative number of Grand Slam titles won and also displays the player’s age at which each title was won. The age of winners ranges from 17 to 35 years old. Based upon the graph, who do you think is the best woman tennis player of all time? The article goes on to describe some of the triumphs and challenges of each player.
Here are some of the student headlines that really capture the meaning of this graph: “Senior Serena Still Swinging at Success” by Shannon of Hampton (Pennsylvania), “Love for Tennis Champs: Their Successes Through the Years” by Kingsbury 1st period of Minnesota, and “Slamming into History” by Raquel of East Texas.
You may want to think critically about these additional questions.
Do you think there is an association between the number of titles and the age that the first title is won. Graph the data points for total number of Grand Slams in terms of age of first Grand Slam win. What do you notice and wonder?
Which two players shown in the graph do you think are the best? For each player, calculate the number of career Grand Slam titles divided by the number of years the player won titles. Does the result change your belief about who is best? Explain your answer.
— What does a horizontal line segment suggest? You may also notice that Graf, Evert and Navratilova each have a horizontal segment at zero Grand Slam titles. What do you think that represents?
— Why are there no line segments with a negative slope?
— What can you infer from the slope of the lines regarding the performance of the player? Using this criteria, who is the best player?
Here is summary data for Serena Williams’ Grand Slam record. Study the table in the link. What do you notice? What do you wonder?
— Use this data to make a graph that may answer the question you wonder about. Give the graph a catchy headline that captures your findings.
There are many variables, in addition to being a better tennis player, that affect winning Grand Slam titles. Some of them are mentioned in the article. After reading the article, list contributing factors to winning a title.
Below in the Stat Nuggets, we define and explain mathematical terms that apply to this graph. Look into the archives to see past Stat Nuggets.
Thank you for participating in “What’s Going On in This Graph?”, which is intended to help you think more critically about graphs and the underlying data. Critical thinking is an essential element of statistics, the science of learning from data.
Keep noticing and wondering. We continue to welcome your responses.
Join us Wednesday, Sept. 25 between 9 a.m. - 2 p.m. to notice and wonder about U. S. population changes during our live, online moderation session.
A line chart, also called a line plot, line graph or curve chart, is a graph which displays paired data as points connected by line segments. It is similar to a scatter plot except that the points are ordered, typically by their x-axis value, and are connected by lines.
In the Grand Slam graph, the data points give the cumulative total of Grand Slam singles titles as well as the player’s age. The points for the pairs of data values are joined by lines. Only the points, and not the lines in between, have statistical meaning. The lines are drawn to more clearly show the trend. Because the x-axis displays the player’s age, the chart shows a trend over the careers of the players.
A cumulative sum is the addition of the current and all prior values.
In the Grand Slam graph, the number of Grand Slam titles, displayed on the y-axis, is the cumulative sum of all titles won from the corresponding x-axis age and younger.
A discrete variable can be counted. Discrete variables always take distinct values with gaps in between these values. Examples are number of siblings or number of books in your locker. A continuous variable can be measured. Continuous variables take any value in an interval on the number line. Examples are height and speed.
The number of Grand Slam titles won is a discrete variable. Players may have won 1, 2, 3 or even 23 Grand Slam titles. Age, however, is a continuous random variable. Although the graph only plots the player’s age at their previous birthday, one’s age is always increasing and is measured based upon your date and time of birth. So while the graph shows that Serena won her last Grand Slam title at age 35, her age actually is a continuous variable and she was more precisely 35 years, 4 months and 2 days old when she won the finals on Jan. 28, 2017.
The graphs for “What’s Going On in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms. Hessney wrote the “reveal” and Stat Nuggets with Erica Chauvet, a professor at Waynesburg University in Pennsylvania, and moderates online with Kathy Dickensheets, who teaches math and statistics at Hampton High School in Pittsburgh.