KABUL, Afghanistan — For several days after Abdul Sami was sent tumbling and knocked unconscious by a powerful Taliban car bombing last week, he had no idea that an American soldier was among the 12 people killed.
Perched on a hospital bed on Monday, his legs and abdomen wrapped in bandages, Mr. Sami just shrugged when told that the soldier’s death had been cited by President Trump as the basis for his decision to abort peace talks with the Taliban.
For many Afghans, the abrupt suspension of talks after 10 months of negotiations was not entirely unexpected. What jarred them was the notion that a single attack, and the death of one American, could really have upended the talks when the deaths of thousands of Afghans this year — not to mention at least 15 other American soldiers — had not.
That was the question on the mind of Ghulam Mohammad, 35, a laborer wounded in the bombing that killed the American, Army Sgt. First Class Elis Barreto Ortiz. His wiry body was bent in pain Monday from a hole ripped in his stomach by shrapnel.
The doctor who treated him also was skeptical.
“This is all a political game. Why talk for 10 months and then suddenly stop — and just because an American soldier was killed?” asked the doctor, who was not authorized to speak with reporters.
“I’d like to ask Mr. Trump why he didn’t stop the peace talks after all those attacks when the Taliban killed so many civilians,” the doctor said.
There had been deep skepticism in Afghanistan that the Taliban would ever agree to share power, cut ties with terrorist groups or stop killing civilians — especially after the group ramped up suicide attacks in urban centers during the talks.
In the countryside, Afghan forces supported by American advisers and air power also have intensified operations since last fall. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said Sunday that more than a thousand Taliban fighters had been killed over the previous 10 days.
Since negotiations between the United States and the Taliban began last fall, many Afghans had lived in a state of suspended animation, between hope and dread. There was hope that decades of war might finally come to a close, but dread that under a peace deal the Taliban would return to power and reimpose their brutal repression.
Many Afghans also have expressed concern that the United States, eager to end nearly 18 years of war in Afghanistan, would withdraw its 14,000 troops abruptly. Some fear such a move would precipitate the kind of mayhem that nearly destroyed the country and brought the Taliban to power in 1996.
The suspension of talks between the United States and the Taliban appeared to open the way for proceeding with a presidential election Sept. 28. The election had been in doubt because of concerns that it would interfere with talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban, which had been expected to begin as early as this month as part of the proposed agreement scuttled by Mr. Trump.
President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan, who had fumed while his government was excluded from the Taliban talks with the United States, is running for a second five-year term. The Taliban, which fiercely opposes elections, has attacked polling stations in previous campaigns.
Violence continued unabated Monday. The Taliban besieged parts of three northern provinces, with civilians killed in the fighting along with government security forces and Taliban fighters.
In Kabul, gunmen in trucks raced through the streets, firing in the air to commemorate the anniversary of Al Qaeda’s assassination of a famous politician and military commander, the Northern Alliance leader Ahmad Shah Masood, two days before the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. Some clashed with security forces.
The police said one security force member and a civilian bystander were killed. A roadside bomb wounded three Masood supporters.
Speaking at a ceremony honoring the slain commander, Abdullah Abdullah, Afghanistan’s chief executive, said, “Today, we are as far from peace as we were years ago,” an Afghan news channel reported.
For many Afghans, such scenes only deepened a sense of futility and despair born of exhaustion from the violence that intensified on both sides during the 10 months of talks between the Americans and the Taliban in Doha, Qatar.
American diplomats are negotiating a peace deal with the Taliban. We talk to women about the future of freedom for women in Afghanistan.
[sounds of film crew setting up] “Yes, yes, yes. Good, good. O.K.” “Yes.” This is Farahnaz Forotan. “She’s writing. And then, she’s talking, O.K.?” A young Afghan journalist living in Kabul. “Yes.” “Yes, yes. This is beautiful. This is beautiful.” I meet her while she’s directing a campaign called The Red Line. She’s pushing women to take a stand, and declare what they refuse to sacrifice if the Taliban regains power — before it’s too late. “I was curious what your personal fears are.” I follow Farahnaz from neighborhood to neighborhood as she meets women in their homes or offices, any place they’re willing to talk. “Light’s not O.K.” A young woman directing a team of men. Farahnaz isn’t exactly the traditional Afghan woman, but she’s not a total exception either. When the Americans ousted the Taliban in 2001, they triggered a revolution for the country’s women. “O.K., guys. Good morning, class.” “Good morning, teacher.” Girls went to school for the first time in years. “What do you want to study after English? At university?” “I want to do journalism.” “A journalist?” “Yes.” “Really? Oh, we should talk.” Since then, millions of women have pursued careers, broken taboos and emerged as a visible force in public life. But all of the progress could be reversed. Now, the Americans are negotiating to leave the country altogether, and bring the Taliban back into the government. At risk? All the hard-won rights women have gained over the last 18 years. So I’m here to ask women if they trust that a deal for peace won’t cost them their freedom. This is Shamila. She’s intimately familiar with the ways of the Taliban, because she’s married to one of its members. He beat her regularly, until she left him. Now, she’s a police officer in Kabul. I want to know what she would do if the Taliban returns to power. “Shamila, do you have thoughts of leaving the country?” At work, Shamila regularly handles domestic violence cases. It’s a reminder that this country, despite its changes, remains deeply patriarchal. She’s flooded with calls for help from women who are being beaten and abused. The majority of women here are already treated like second-class citizens. In the current negotiations, the Taliban is promising to protect their rights, but it’s hard to see how, unless their views on women have transformed. I visit Maulvi Qalamuddin, once one of the most feared men in the country. In the ’90s, he headed the Taliban’s religious police. They were responsible for things like flogging women if their burqas were not long enough to cover their ankles, and seizing and destroying people’s televisions. In some ways, he’s changed with the times. But when it comes to women, he refuses to acknowledge how the Taliban abused them in the first place. “What was the punishment for a woman going out in public without the hijab?” “So you believe that life for women, under the Taliban, in the ’90s was just?” He’s saying that he respects women’s rights, as defined by his version of Islam, which is precisely why it’s hard to trust the Taliban when they promise to protect women. Take Zainab Fayez. She was the only female prosecutor in Kandahar until a few weeks ago, when the Taliban sent her a death threat wrapped around a bullet. She fled. I meet her in Kabul on her way to the attorney general to plead for protection so that she can keep working. Later, we sit down at her relative’s house, where she’s taking refuge. “What do you think when you see the Taliban negotiating right now to be part of the government again?” But when I press her on whether she plans to go back to work — “Do you think you’ll return to Kandahar?” — she ends the interview abruptly. “She’s not feeling well.” “Yeah. O.K. Yeah.” It is something I see again and again. Even with the Taliban out of the government, some of the most courageous women in the country are afraid to share their full stories. And they have good reason. The truth may cost them their lives. But for other women in Afghanistan, the fight for their rights takes a backseat to their struggle for survival. I traveled to the conservative south near Kandahar, where everyday life is disrupted by constant fighting. Payendu is living in this makeshift camp with her three children. She told me a coalition airstrike destroyed her home after the Taliban forcefully took refuge there. The attack killed her husband and at least four other family members. Women’s rights are a faraway abstraction here. Would you be willing to live under the Taliban again, if it meant peace for your family? What Payendu and others like her want is security, money and more than anything, peace, from whoever can provide it.
For many Afghan women, who were confined to their homes by the Taliban and forced to cover themselves in public, the halt to negotiations was a blessing. Women interviewed in recent months have said the rights and freedoms won since the American-led invasion toppled the Taliban in 2001 would be threatened by any deal that returned the Taliban to power.
Ms. Farid was so disillusioned by the proposed deal, she said, that she had planned to take nearly 500 burqas to the United States for women to wear in protest if the agreement were consummated.
She said she believed Mr. Trump had seized on the American soldier’s death as a pretext to halt the proposed agreement, in part, over Taliban intransigence and concern that the group would not honor its commitments once American troops withdrew.
If not for public complaints about the proposed deal from women and other skeptics, a flawed agreement might have been finalized, said Mary Akrami, head of the Afghan Women’s Network, a coalition of rights groups. She said the deal would have legitimized the Taliban.
On social media Monday, many Afghans mocked the American special envoy, Zalmay Khalilzad, who said last week that a peace agreement had been reached “in principle,” pending approval by Mr. Trump.
“Khalilzad had a miscarriage in the ninth month,” one Facebook post read.
In the north, several civilians cut off by Taliban assaults but reached by telephone expressed relief that the talks were off.
When they heard the news, “people were happy, but still worried that this was another plot to hand us over to the Taliban,” said Malalai Saad, 46, a women’s rights activist in Kunduz.
At the hospital in Kabul, Momin Rasooli, 18, sat shirtless with a bandage covering a chest wound gained in a Taliban suicide bombing on Sept. 2. His brother, Jawad Jawed, 25, tried to console him.
Mr. Jawed said he never believed the American talks with the Taliban would produce real peace.
