The formidable “Mayans” brotherhood returns for Season 2. And “Conan Without Borders” sees the talk-show host travel abroad.
MAYANS M.C. 10 p.m. on FX. Spoiler alert! In the first season of this “Sons of Anarchy” spinoff, about a biker gang on the United States-Mexico border, E.Z. (J.D. Pardo) chose to stay with the group, ticking off his brother Angel (Clayton Cardenas) in the process. In Season 2, E.Z. is still a prospect, but he’s earned more respect. Even so, he remains unsure whether he can keep one foot in the club and the other in his past life.
GREENLEAF 10 p.m. on OWN. The Greenleaf family is back for a fourth season, and the stakes are only getting higher for the family’s Memphis megachurch, Calvary Fellowship. Its fate hangs in the balance in the aftermath of a merger with the rival Harmony & Hope Ministries. A phone call presents another challenge to family unity and leads to a bombshell revelation about Grace (Merle Dandridge).
THE SHOP: UNINTERRUPTED 11 p.m. on HBO. This traveling talk show, set in barbershops across the country, returns with a conversation between Lil Nas X, Kevin Hart, and athletes including the recently retired football player Rob Gronkowski.
BOLDEN (2019) Stream on Hulu; rent on Amazon, Google Play, Vudu or YouTube. Jazz enthusiasts may appreciate this biopic about Buddy Bolden, a little-known cornetist who is said to have been a pioneer in the genre. Primarily set in the early 1900s in New Orleans, the drama traces Bolden’s promising early days as a predecessor to Louis Armstrong to his demise in an asylum where he spent half his life. The musician, played by Gary Carr (“Downton Abbey”), didn’t leave behind a single recording, and because his life is largely an enigma, one imagines the director Dan Pritzker took some liberties here. But the result is an enjoyable tale about a tragic life.
HUMAN DISCOVERIES Stream on Facebook Watch. The first season of this animated series about a pack of friends living in prehistoric times has covered their discovery of fire, wine and the wheel. Now it’s time for death. In this finale, Gary (voiced by Zac Efron) confronts his mortality after contracting a fatal rash. Hence, the world’s first funeral is born. The episode will be available to stream after 9 p.m.