Many of the league’s insurers have claimed they did not have to pay for the concussion settlement with players because the N.F.L. had not disclosed the dangers of the game.
The N.F.L. ended its seven-year fight with an insurance company that had refused to cover its portion of the costs of the league’s more than $1 billion settlement reached in 2013 with retired players found to have cognitive and neurological problems.
The N.F.L. and Westport Insurance Corp. settled for an undisclosed amount, according to a filing in the New York State Supreme Court.
The concussion settlement has produced more than $600 million in claims so far. Players are paid up to $5 million depending on their type of cognitive or neurological problem, which can include A.L.S. and Alzheimer’s disease, and their age at the time their illness was diagnosed.
Because the retired players accused the N.F.L. of fraud, not just negligence, for deliberately hiding the dangers of concussions from them, the insurers argued that they did not have to cover the league’s legal costs or the payments from the settlement, which was finalized in 2015.
The case was originally brought by 32 insurers who wrote liability policies for the N.F.L. dating back to the 1960s. But their case was largely shelved while the N.F.L. and the retired players negotiated their settlement. Once that was finished, the insurers resumed their case, which included collecting documents from the league and its teams.
The insurers banded together for the purposes of their suit, but they had different amounts of exposure. Some insurers were the primary parties covering damages, while others wrote so-called excess liability policies that covered damages over a certain amount. Some insurers wrote policies for only a year or two, while others worked with the N.F.L. for many years. Some of the insurers took over the claims from other companies in mergers and acquisitions. A half dozen insurers settled with the N.F.L. in 2017, leaving 26 companies, including Allstate and Travelers, to continue fighting. Most of their cases remain active, though those companies had to sign off on the Westport settlement. In addition to asking for documents from the league, lawyers for the insurers have also subpoenaed the N.F.L. teams looking for records, and filed motions in a number of state courts when some teams did not comply. The insurers also questioned how the league and lawyers for the retired players established the criteria for their settlement.
During a hearing in June, Judge Andrea Masley expressed displeasure that the case had gone on so long. At one point, a lawyer for the N.F.L. noted that the case had gone on seven years already. “Well, that’s not my fault,” the judge responded.