A wild after-school brawl erupted on Monday outside a Long Island strip mall, and when it was over, a 16-year-old student was gravely wounded with a stab wound to his chest.
But most of the 50 or so teenagers in Oceanside, N.Y., who either took part in the fight or witnessed it made no attempt to defend him. In fact, some stood by recording the fight and his suffering on their cellphones, the police said.
The victim, Khaseen Morris, died at the hospital.
On Wednesday, the police said they had arrested Tyler Flach, 18, of Lido Beach, in connection with the killing and charged him with second-degree murder. He was to be arraigned in First District Court in Hempstead on Thursday. It was not immediately clear whether he had a lawyer.
The fatal fracas started at about 3:30 p.m. on Monday and was precipitated by a dispute over a girl, and whom she was dating, according to the detective.
The teenagers were all from around the neighborhood, he said, and had gathered at the strip mall on Brower Avenue, a popular hangout where the confrontation was supposed to occur. Khaseen was aware of the dispute, and that other boys were coming to the strip mall, Detective Lt. Fitzpatrick said.
Witnesses at the mall said a car drove up, then a group of boys emerged and rushed Khaseen and his friends. Video footage shows Khaseen collapsing to the ground, as teenagers around him film his fall but do not come to his aid, the police said.
The police arrived at about 4 p.m., after a 911 call. Khaseen was taken to a hospital in critical condition and died of his stabbing wounds overnight, according to information provided by the police. One other boy sustained a fractured arm, and others had minor injuries. The girl was not present at the fight, Detective Lt. Fitzpatrick said.
On social media, Khaseen, whom friends called Kha, is seen in photos posing with friends, smiling, pulling faces, his short cropped dreadlocks worn in a rakish style, one half of his head dyed a rusty red color. He described himself as a devotee of anime and love.
“Speak the truth even if your voice shakes,” Khaseen wrote.
His family moved to Oceanside this summer from Freeport, a neighboring town on the South Shore of Long Island. There, Khaseen saw the promise of a fresh start at a school where he could fully express himself through fashion and art, said his sister, Kedeemah Morris, 22.
He was a free-spirited skateboarder who wore his dreadlocks colorfully: half orange, half black, Ms. Morris said in an interview on Tuesday, adding that he loved to draw and that he had planned to study photography.
The siblings got the same tattoo, she said, in memory of their favorite musicians, Lil Peep and XXXTentacion, both of whom sported bicolored hair. Ms. Morris said she and her brother were so similar that she called him her “twin” despite their six-year age difference.
On Sunday, she said, a 10th-grade girl asked her brother to walk her home and he obliged. Ms. Morris said she believed that the girl had been trying to make her ex-boyfriend jealous.
Before Khaseen left for school on Monday, he told his family that he had received a threat from the girl’s ex-boyfriend, Ms. Morris said.
Ms. Morris said she thought that Khaseen’s walking the girl home had prompted the fight. “Him being so nice, that one good deed that he did got him killed,” she said.
The high school on Tuesday had grief counselors at the ready to help students cope with the loss.
The police initially identified at least seven boys involved in the fray via the videos circulating online, and were working to determine the identities of several more, Detective Lt. Fitzpatrick said. It’s uncertain if Mr. Flach was one of those initially identified.
The attack was not linked to any gang activity, the detective added.
He urged witnesses to tell the police what they had seen. “When I have you in handcuffs is not the time” to come forward, he said.
Arielle Dollinger reported from Oceanside.