Tension has grown among a 6,000-person work force as it waits to sell company shares, people with knowledge of the situation said.
SAN FRANCISCO — Last summer, several Airbnb employees wrote a letter to the online room-rental start-up’s founders.
According to interviews with more than a dozen current and former employees and investors, most of whom declined to be identified for fear of retaliation, Airbnb’s 6,000-person work force has become increasingly frustrated by not being able to cash in the company stock that was received in compensation packages. Waiting for the start-up to go public has become a growing source of stress, many said, preventing some from making career changes, starting a family or moving on with their lives.
To try to keep employees happy, Brian Chesky, Airbnb’s chief executive, and other top executives have made some adjustments, the people said. They began offering sabbaticals to longtime employees, extended Airbnb’s parental leave policy and increased the retirement matching program. They also created a program to provide low-interest general-purpose loans of hundreds of thousands of dollars to employees. In performance reviews this spring, the start-up issued higher bonuses and raises, one of the people said.
Airbnb’s situation illustrates a paradox of the start-up dream. Many tech workers join fast-growing privately held companies with the hope of gaining stock in the firms and converting those shares to riches when the start-ups go public. But employees are dependent on the company’s founders and board before that can become a reality.
Mr. Chesky, who co-founded Airbnb in 2008, has been vocal about not rushing to take it public. In January 2018, he published a letter saying the company will have an “infinite time horizon.” He is now exploring a nontraditional initial public offering by potentially listing the shares directly, or on the Long-Term Stock Exchange, which is backed by venture capital but not yet operational, three people with knowledge of the situation said.
Doug Leone, a venture capitalist at Sequoia Capital, one of Airbnb’s backers, said that while start-ups had “an implied social contract” to go public at some point, there was no rush for them to do so. “The I.P.O. is just a moment in time,” he said.
Yet Mr. Chesky’s go-slow stance has become problematic as other high-profile start-ups of the same generation as Airbnb have started listing their shares on the stock market. This year, the ride-hailing companies Uber and Lyft, the online pinboard company Pinterest and the business software maker Slack are among those that have gone public. That has allowed their employees to cash in their shares.
Employee tension is unusual for Airbnb, known for its cheery mission of “belong anywhere” and for fostering a kumbaya culture among its staff. The company has grown rapidly, with more than seven million listings in 100,000 cities. In the second quarter, its revenue exceeded $1 billion. Many employees work out of an airy building in San Francisco, which features rooms that replicate its famous listings. Several former employees said they were grateful for the windfall they would eventually receive from their shares.
But any reward from owning Airbnb stock has been held back. Starting in 2011, when the young company topped a $1 billion valuation, Airbnb prohibited workers from selling shares, while allowing its three founders — Mr. Chesky, Nathan Blecharczyk and Joe Gebbia — to cash out a total of $21 million.
The transactions typically involve a cash loan in exchange for a pledge of shares to a buyer at an agreed-upon price when the company goes public, according to investment offers viewed by The New York Times. The firms charge as much as a 15 percent fee and more for insurance. Former employees who did these deals said they existed in a legal gray area — not authorized by Airbnb, but not explicitly banned.
When the small group of Airbnb employees sent their letter to Mr. Chesky and other top executives last year, they received no response, two of the people who viewed or were briefed on the letter said.
In February, Mr. Stephenson was injured in a skiing accident. That slowed Airbnb’s I.P.O. timeline, two people with knowledge of the situation said. An Airbnb spokesman said the accident did not have any impact.
