The pro-Trump media has wasted no time constructing its own version of events about Ukraine.
With the president facing an impeachment inquiry, and a whistle-blower report made public Thursday that raised new questions about whether he tried to cover up his efforts to enlist Ukraine’s help in discrediting a political rival, allies of the White House in the pro-Trump media wasted no time constructing their own version of events.
Their narrative omits key facts, like Mr. Trump’s entreaty to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelensky: “I would like you to do us a favor.”  “Russia, Russia, Russia. Racism, racism. And recession. And now it’s going to be Ukraine,” Jeanine Pirro, a friend and fierce defender of Mr. Trump said on the Fox Business channel.
The potential political benefit is significant. Mr. Limbaugh, Mr. Levin and Sean Hannity have a combined weekly radio audience of nearly 42 million listeners. Combined with the programming on Fox News and stories from Trump-friendly outlets like Rasmussen Reports, which publishes a daily tracking poll of the president’s approval ratings that is typically several percentage points higher than other surveys, the conservative media is wrapping Mr. Trump and his supporters in a security blanket of their own facts, data points and story lines about the Ukraine controversy.
The president’s media defenders often characterize the investigations and media coverage not merely as political attacks on Mr. Trump but as a culture war against people who support him.
Mr. Savage was one of Mr. Trump’s first talk radio boosters during his 2016 campaign. But he had been publicly doubting the president and criticizing him for failing to keep promises like building a wall on the southern border. The issue of impeachment has helped reignite Mr. Savage’s passions.
Richard Nixon played to similar “us versus them” grievances during the Watergate investigations and also blamed the media, which he said “hate my guts with a passion.” That approach helped keep a sizable chunk of Americans behind him even when he resigned. Roughly a quarter of Americans said at the time that Nixon’s conduct was not serious enough to warrant resignation, polls showed.
Nixon, of course, had nothing like the pro-Trump media to defend him. Talk radio in its current format, with its heavy tilt toward conservative provocateurs, did not develop until the 1990s. In Nixon’s day, cable news was still a few years away and the most popular hosts on the radio talked about subjects like extraterrestrial activity.
Mr. Trump’s allies repeatedly invoke the special counsel investigation into his campaign’s dealings with Russia during the 2016 election, which failed to produce the smoking gun-type revelations that many on the left had predicted. The president’s critics, they say, are once again engaging in a smear campaign to declare him guilty before all the evidence is out.
They also appear to have learned an important lesson about how Mr. Trump and his attorney general, William P. Barr, managed the narrative of the release of the special counsel report: They are moving fast to tell the story on their terms. And that is a story in which Mr. Biden and his son Hunter Biden — not Mr. Trump — have covered up wrongdoing involving their Ukrainian interests.
Mr. Trump has also characterized the investigations as a Democratic conspiracy to weaken his standing, which he said is formidable. “Democrats feel they’re going to lose,” he said on Wednesday, pointing to Rasmussen numbers that had his approval rating at 53 percent, which he insisted was too low. “They say you could add ten to it. A lot of people say you can add more than ten to it,” Mr. Trump said.
