About 1.2 million American children have peanut allergies. A new drug, Palforzia, does not cure the condition, but it can blunt life-threatening reactions.
A Food and Drug Administration panel on Friday recommended approval of the first-ever drug to treat life-threatening peanut allergies in children, a condition that confounds and frightens families across the country.
The recommendation all but assures the agency will approve the drug, called Palforzia and made by Aimmune Therapeutics. The F.D.A. typically follows the advice of its expert advisory committees.
Some panel members expressed reservations about the safety of the drug, since patients receiving treatment experienced more allergic reactions than those given a placebo. There is also little long-term safety data about a treatment that may be lifelong, the critics noted.
The drug’s goal is not to cure the allergy, but to reduce the risk that an accidental exposure to small amounts of peanut will set off a life-threatening reaction. It might also relieve some of the fear and anxiety many families experience as they struggle to cope with a child’s severe peanut allergy.
“This is one of the most important unmet needs of medicine,” Dr. James R. Baker Jr., director of the Mary H. Weiser Food Allergy Center at University of Michigan, told the agency’s advisory committee. He was paid by Aimmune.
The demand for treatment among patients and their families is enormous, Dr. Baker noted. “Right now the only approved approach to this allergy is to avoid peanuts, and the amount of effort and cost involved in making sure everything your child is exposed to is peanut-free is overwhelming to most families,” he said, adding that even scrupulous efforts to prevent exposures fail, resulting in life-threatening medical emergencies.
“The quality of life of patients and their caregivers is adversely affected due to fear and anxiety about accidental ingestions,” he added.
Allergists who treat children with peanut allergies applauded the decision, though they acknowledged the treatment regimen was demanding and not appropriate for everyone.
The new drug is an oral immunotherapy regimen that aims to reduce sensitivity to peanut allergens. It gradually exposes children to small amounts of peanut protein over the course of six months, until they can safely eat the equivalent of two peanuts.
The treatment is not always effective and it is accompanied by side effects, including severe allergic reactions to the peanut exposure. One in five children who were treated stopped because of side effects; 14 percent experienced severe allergic reactions, double the percentage in a comparison group receiving a placebo.
The F.D.A. will require Aimmune to restrict the drug to patients who agree to carry epinephrine with them at all times to treat sudden allergic reactions. The agency also will require that the initial doses and increased doses be given at a medical facility capable of treating allergic reactions.
There will be a black-box warning on the package calling attention to the risks of peanut exposure, and Aimmune must warn patients that they still must avoid peanuts.
The regimen begins with trace amounts of the protein, which are carefully measured and increased incrementally under medical supervision as tolerance develops.
About 1.2 million American children have a peanut allergy. The allergies are believed to cause more deaths from anaphylaxis — an acute physiological response that includes lowered blood pressure, shock and constriction of the airways — than any other food allergy, though the precise number is not known.
Because children generally do not outgrow peanut allergies, they must avoid peanuts, peanut oil and foods contaminated with traces of peanuts for their entire lives.
Guiliana Ortega, who participated in the Aimmune study, described life as an 8-year-old with a severe peanut allergy: sitting at a separate peanut-free lunch table in the cafeteria, for example, and having to ask relatives if they have eaten peanuts before giving them a hug.
Tessa Grosso, 16, a high school junior from Menlo Park, Calif., told the panel she was allergic to peanuts, dairy and many other foods until she was 10, when she was treated with an early form of oral immunotherapy at Stanford University.
Now, she said, she eats just about anything and has peanut butter every morning before school.
She appealed to the committee to recommend approval of the drug. “Every child deserves this therapy that provides freedom, safety and the ability to live without fear of food,” Ms. Grosso said.
But several experts at the hearing raised questions about the drug’s long-term safety and effectiveness.
Nina Zeldes, a senior fellow at the National Center for Health Research in Washington, pointed out that only one study had examined the drug’s effectiveness. The participants were mostly white, she also noted, so little is known about how children of other backgrounds may respond to treatment. Long-term consequences of exposure to the drug are unknown.
“This is the first treatment for peanut allergies, and if this drug is approved despite the unanswered questions, it will set a precedent for future drugs to treat food allergies,” Ms. Zeldes said.
The group urged the F.D.A. to require additional research data about risks before approving the drug, “because it will be difficult if not impossible to obtain it afterward,” Ms. Zeldes said.
A trial of the new drug published last year in The New England Journal of Medicine found that after a year, two-thirds of the 372 children who received the treatment were able to tolerate at least 600 milligrams of peanut protein — the equivalent of two peanuts — without having an allergic reaction.
Only 4 percent of the 124 children who had been given a placebo powder were able to consume that amount without a response.
Most of the participants were aged 4 to 17, and when they enrolled, all of them suffered from severe peanut allergies triggered by the equivalent of one-third of a peanut or less.
The trial, carried out at multiple medical centers, was designed and sponsored by Aimmune, the drug’s developer.
The drug itself consists of peanut flour. It is carefully measured and packed into capsules or foil sachets of varying doses that can be easily opened and mixed with food.
The starting dose is three milligrams, which is gradually increased to 300 milligrams, the equivalent of one peanut, over a six-month period, followed by six months of maintenance therapy of the same amount. In order to retain their tolerance, patients would need to continue taking the maintenance dose, possibly indefinitely.
Several of the treated children developed eosinophilic esophagitis, an inflammatory disease of the esophagus that is triggered by exposure to an allergen.
Company officials say that over 1,100 patients have enrolled in the clinical trials, and they continue to follow patients to evaluate the long-term safety and effectiveness of the therapy.
In July, the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review, a nonprofit research organization in Boston that evaluates medical evidence, concluded in a report that there was inadequate evidence to justify the immunotherapy treatment over simply avoiding peanuts.
Lianne Mandelbaum, who has a teenage son with a severe peanut allergy and writes the No Nut Traveler blog, said that the organization’s report displayed a lack of understanding of what is required for parents to ensure that a child does not inadvertently ingest traces of peanut that contaminate many food products.
The institute’s report also called for more long-term data about safety and effectiveness, and said there was no evidence the Aimmune drug had any advantage over similar desensitization regimens that some physicians offer patients.
But many physicians do not offer the treatment, Ms. Mandelbaum noted, and it is not always covered by health insurance.