There was “next to nothing” about Muslims in the Brooklyn Historical Society’s century-old archives. Now there are 54 oral histories, which serve as the foundation for a new art exhibition.
Nsenga Knight, a 38-year-old artist, recalls visiting the Brooklyn Historical Society archives after receiving a research grant, curious to explore what sort of material she could find about Muslims in Brooklyn. She didn’t find much of anything.
“The archive of Brooklyn isn’t necessarily representing Brooklyn,” she concluded.
Recently, that has changed drastically.
Oral historians associated with the Brooklyn Historical Society spent last year traversing the borough, recording interviews with dozens of Muslims. The intention was to preserve the conversations to fill what the institution admits was a gaping cultural hole in its famous archives.
They collected 54 oral histories, which amount to over 100 hours of audio, publishing the conversations online for public listening. Many interview subjects were born and raised in Brooklyn. Others immigrated here from about a dozen countries, including Pakistan, Morocco and Trinidad and Tobago.
They come from a variety of religious sects, including Sunni, Shiite and the Nation of Islam. They discuss everything from the social dynamics in their families, marriages and mosques to the repercussions after the Sept. 11 attacks and the most recent presidential election.
On Saturday, the Brooklyn Historical Society opened a sound-and-art exhibition drawn from the oral history project that includes a series of black-and-white geometric prints by the Brooklyn artist Kameelah Janan Rasheed. The installation is titled “An Opening,” a reference to the first chapter of the Quran, called Surah Al-Fatiha.
But engineering a space for viewers to explore the exhibition independently while listening to intimate interviews posed a technological challenge, Ms. Rasheed said.
Their solution was to provide visitors with headphones and iPod Touches that attach to lanyards around their necks. The iPod Touches have a newly created program that recognizes 11 of Ms. Rasheed’s larger prints. When visitors walk in front of a print, the program sets off an oral history chosen by the artist. As they walk between the prints, they hear a patchwork of overlapping voices — a murmur, a snippet of speech, a laugh.
Mr. Braithwaite talks about the cultural tradition of the bean pie, which is sold at Abu’s Homestyle Bakery, a shop in Bedford-Stuyvesant that he used to manage.
Because the storytelling in the oral histories is anything but linear — the narratives tend to stop and start and jump around throughout the person’s life — Ms. Rasheed reflects that concept in her exhibition, which often travels off the frame and into the space in between the prints.
Ms. Rasheed, who grew up in East Palo Alto, Calif., was raised by parents who converted to Islam. She is particularly drawn to narratives about Muslim history and identity that don’t often get mainstream attention, like the story told by Ms. Knight, who was ultimately interviewed for the project, and spoke of celebrating the Eid festivals, two important Muslim holidays, in Prospect Park as a child.
The exhibition is one piece of a broad effort by the Brooklyn Historical Society to create an archival presence of Muslims, who comprise about 4 percent of the borough’s population, according to a 2016 analysis by the Public Religion Research Institute.
Ms. Knight discusses celebrating the Eid festivals in Prospect Park as a child.
Deborah Schwartz, president of the Brooklyn Historical Society, said that the institution was established in 1863, and for over a century the archives mostly reflected the backgrounds of the white men who founded it.
“Before this project if you had come to the Brooklyn Historical Society to do research about Muslims or any topic related to Muslims, you basically would have found next to nothing,” Ms. Schwartz said.
Throughout the past two decades or so, she added, the organization has made a concerted effort to fill those gaps.
The idea for this project came from Zaheer Ali, a scholar of Muslims in the United States, who was hired as the society’s resident oral historian in 2015 and drew on his ties to Muslims in Brooklyn to compile an extensive list of potential interview subjects.
There was a point where Ms. Schwartz said she and other staff members questioned whether the project was still viable. It was when President Trump won the 2016 election after proposing to ban Muslim immigration to the country. Ms. Schwartz said some Muslims in New York City had serious concerns about surveillance in their communities; others were worried about losing their immigration status.
Ms. Salimah-Bell discusses her time leading a Girl Scouts troop at a Muslim community center.
Baseera Khan, another artist in the BRIC exhibition, also recorded a two-hour interview recounting her upbringing in Denton, Texas, by Muslim parents who immigrated from India. Ms. Khan said she grew up “afraid of being Muslim,” until she moved to Brooklyn in 2007, where there were Muslim residents all around her.
In different interviews, a man talked about the New York City Police Department’s targeted surveillance of Muslims after the Sept. 11 attacks. A woman spoke about the work that she had done to build interfaith relationships between Muslims and Jews in Brooklyn, and another about designing clothes that embrace religious modesty.
Mr. Ali, the oral historian, said in an interview with a Brooklyn Historical Society curator that he and Ms. Rasheed had imagined an aural experience that was reminiscent of overhearing snippets of conversation from the surrounding tables in a cafe.
People who grew up in similar communities in one borough but who had never met had their voices overlaid, as if they were under one roof.
Through June 30, Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn, |||PHONE_NUMBER||| ; brooklynhistory.org.