Lucy Prebble’s new play, “A Very Expensive Poison,” dramatizes the assassination of Alexander Litvinenko. How did it feel for his wife, Marina, to watch?
LONDON — In November 2006, Marina Litvinenko watched her husband, Alexander, die in a London hospital. The Russian spy-turned-whistle-blower — whom she called Sasha — had drunk green tea laced with the radioactive element polonium. President Vladimir V. Putin probably approved the murder, a public inquiry in Britain later said.
Last Friday, Ms. Litvinenko went to London’s Old Vic Theater to watch “A Very Expensive Poison,” a new play by Lucy Prebble, running through Oct. 5. She knew she would have to watch her husband die again.
Ms. Litvinenko said she had felt nervous going to the theater, partly because she didn’t know what to expect. There had been several documentaries about her husband’s murder, but never a play. The only previous dramatization was screened on Russian state television, she said. In it, Mr. Litvinenko was poisoned by another critic of the Kremlin.
It has been a decade since Ms. Prebble became the talk of British theater with “Enron,” a play that told the story of the American energy company’s implosion, and that featured song and dance numbers and even, at one point, dinosaurs. “Enron” was a hit in the West End, but closed on Broadway after just one week.
The idea for “A Very Expensive Poison” came to her by surprise in 2017, Ms. Prebble said. Lately, she has been writing mostly for television (notably the HBO family drama “Succession”), and she felt she might be through with theater, she said. But then the Old Vic sent her a copy of a book about the Litvinenko case.
Ms. Prebble said she was only a short way through it when she felt she had to write a play about it. And she knew instantly how to do it.
She decided to tell the complex story of Mr. Litvinenko’s life and murder by having the character investigate his own death, with Mr. Putin trying to direct the action, or at least divert the audience’s attention from the truth, from the sidelines.
Ms. Prebble said she was also drawn to the love story behind the news event.
The writer met Ms. Litvinenko several times while researching the play, she said. The first was in a basement cafe of the London bookshop where Mr. Litvinenko used to meet his handler from the British secret service. Ms. Prebble worried that she might lose her sense of professional distance, she said, but that doesn’t seem to have happened: In the play, Mr. Litvinenko is sometimes portrayed as overly proud, or dangerously obsessed.
The play, Ms. Prebble said, has several messages: about Russian politics, about how governments in the West overlook murders like Mr. Litvinenko’s for economic or political reasons, and about male pride. But the main one, she said, is that a family suffered, and that no matter how absurd these events seem, they’re personal.
Last Friday at the Old Vic, Ms. Litvinenko eventually sat down to watch her life with Alexander onstage — both the happy times and the tragic ones.
Ms. Litvinenko said she was amazed by the actor MyAnna Buring’s portrayal of her. “MyAnna took everything from me: how she moved, how she talked, how she looked,” she said.
She was equally impressed by Reece Shearsmith’s portrayal of Mr. Putin, she said. His interjections during the play should make people realize how Russia’s president really works, she added: by holding up a pretense of a democracy, although information and the courts are controlled and opposition is stifled.
“I saw people’s reactions, and I think they were understanding what’s happening in Russia now,” Ms. Litvinenko said.
She cried several times, but said there was one moment that had a bigger effect on her than any other. It was a short scene — just a few seconds long, and toward the end — in which Ms. Buring and Tom Brooke, the actor playing Mr. Litvinenko, dance tentatively.
Her voice broke as she spoke, as if she were about to cry again.
Through Oct. 5 at the Old Vic, London; oldvictheater.com.