The third season of “The Deuce” premieres on HBO. And Monday Night Football celebrates 50 years.
THE DEUCE 9 p.m. on HBO; Stream on HBO platforms. After two seasons exploring the rise of the porn industry in New York in the 1970s, the third picks up in the mid 1980s. Things have changed since the characters began their journey from a corrupt and dangerous Times Square but they continue to struggle to break free from the past. In the season premiere, Vincent (played by James Franco) inches toward his estranged wife Andrea, whom he left in Season 1, while his twin brother Frankie (also played Franco) continues to display his self destructive streak despite being married and having children. But it’s not only the past that exerts a gravitational pull. The future also beckons. Candy (Maggie Gyllenhaal), a former street prostitute who became a porn film director, disagrees with Harvey (David Krumholtz), a fellow director, about the changes affecting the industry when they travel together to a convention in Las Vegas.
HOUSTON TEXANS VS. NEW ORLEANS SAINTS 7:15 p.m. on ESPN. Monday Night Football celebrates the beginning of its 50th anniversary season with this interconference clash in New Orleans. After a tough overtime loss to the Los Angeles Rams in the N.F.C. Championship Game last season, the Saints will look to rebound quickly. n recent seasons the Saints have struggled in openers, winning their last in 2013. But with the quarterback Drew Brees, who surpassed Peyton Manning as the all time leading passer in N.F.L. history last season, at the helm, New Orleans fans may enter the game feeling confident.
POV: GRIT 10 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). In 2006 a “mud volcano” erupted in East Java, Indonesia, engulfing more than 10 villages in slimy sediment. And it hasn’t stopped since. This documentary by Cynthia Wade and Sasha Friedlander chronicles the fight to end the flow, clean up the area and hold the drilling company that has been accused of causing the eruption accountable. It focuses on Dian, who was just 6 years old when the initial disaster occurred, as she develops an interest in politics and begins to take on a leadership position in her community.
