The iPhone 11, Apple’s entry-level phone, will start at $700, compared with $750 for the comparable model last year.
Rebranding its priciest iPhones as “Pro” models.
Apple introduces a trio of new iPhones.
Here’s a new version of the Apple Watch.
Apple introduces a new iPad.
The streaming service starts Nov. 1.
The gaming service, Apple Arcade, will be $5 a month.
CUPERTINO, Calif. — Apple’s product launches have long been full of surprises, but rarely has a price cut been among them.
At the same time, Apple’s entry-level phone last year — the iPhone XR, at $750 — became the company’s best-selling device.
The move is a departure from Apple’s previous marketing strategy, which gave the cheapest phone a different label that branded it as the discounted model. (It still started at $750.) The iPhone XR became Apple’s best-selling iPhone, while its more expensive models struggled in some markets. Those lagging sales caused Apple to cut revenue estimates earlier this year.
The iPhone XR also likely outperformed its costlier cousins in part because tech reviewers considered it to be about as good as the flagship iPhone — for 25 percent less. Apple has long been in a bind on pricing and developing its line of iPhones, aiming to make the least expensive devices still worth paying hundreds of dollars for without undercutting the pricier models.
Last year’s iPhone XR had a single lens and was capable of shooting portrait photos of only human subjects. The second lens in the new entry-level iPhone will let you take portrait shots of nonhuman subjects like food, animals and plants.
The updated iPad is unremarkable compared with Apple’s high-end iPad Pros, which include sharper screens and infrared face recognition and work with a more advanced Apple stylus. However, the entry-level iPad is Apple’s best-selling tablet, and its investment in the entry-level model shows the company’s commitment to the category even though its sales have slowed down.
The monthly price makes it cheaper than Disney’s service, which will be $7 a month, and is well below Netflix, which is $13 per month.
The company said its gaming service, Apple Arcade, would be available starting Sept. 19 in more than 150 countries. The service will give users access to more than 100 games that aren’t available elsewhere. The games can be played on iPhones, iPads, Macs and on Apple TV.
