Theater|Can Derren Brown Be Fooled? Yes. Often.
Can Derren Brown Be Fooled? Yes. Often.
As one of the world’s best magicians he’ll fool you, too, even though magic isn’t really his thing.
“Will you take a picture of my severed head?” Derren Brown asked, dropping to his knees and angling himself behind a couple of trick mirrors that vanished him from the neck down.
It was a recent sunny Saturday, and Mr. Brown had been wandering through the Museum of Illusions, an Instagram-friendly gallery housed in a former bank building in the West Village of Manhattan. His live show, “Derren Brown: Secret,” thrilled and flummoxed New Yorkers Off Broadway, two years ago. (Here’s our co-chief theater critic: “enthrallingly baffling.”) It promises to thrill and flummox more of them at Broadway’s Cort Theater, where it opens Sept. 15.
A sensation in his native England, Mr. Brown, 48, practices “psychological illusionism.” What is psychological illusionism? “I totally made that term up,” he said. A mentalist, a magician, a hypnotist (and a portraitist, photographer, best-selling author and television pioneer, it’s annoying), he has made a career of tricking people, sometimes millions of them at once. Would ordinary optical effects trick him? Pretty often.
“Oh, that’s very good,” he said happily, as he watched a museum-goer (O.K., me) clown in an Ames Room, which makes you appear to grow or shrink as you walk from one corner to another. A wall sculpture whose straight rod seemed to curve got to him, too. “It’s nice to be really fooled,” he said.
Not every illusion duped him. A wall card beside a poster of dots warned that, for 5 percent of people, the dots wouldn’t waver. He was among the elect. And a Stroop Effect, which messes with neural processing, didn’t rattle him. Still, he made faces at himself in a true mirror and staggered around a tilted room.  He sauntered into a color-effect room, and his shadows bobbed behind him — magenta, cyan, gold.
Mentalism or mind-reading is a storied form of magic. Depending on your parameters, you can trace it back thousands of years or about 150, when the act popped up in Victorian music halls. From one decade to the next, mentalists have claimed powers derived from mystery cults, from spirits, from E.S.P., from quantum physics. Mr. Brown doesn’t do that.
His standard spiel for his stage shows promises “magic, suggestion, psychology, misdirection and showmanship to achieve the seemingly impossible.” But figuring out which skills produce which effects is seemingly impossible, too.
In “Secret,” which he wrote with Andy Nyman and Andrew O’Connor, also the show’s directors, Mr. Brown attributes some tricks to a split-second analysis of nonverbal communication. Other of his shows swank his skills as a hypnotist. These powers are demonstrable and more or less real. But so is his sleight of hand.
In “Secret,” which is, in many ways, a career best-of, the metaphors explore the way we see the world and the way the world sees us. A study in perspective, it is a reminder, as Mr. Brown says in the show, “to be more open and alive to the complexity and subtlety of what’s real.” Then again, considering the first-act cliffhanger and the jaw-dropper finale, what’s real is fairly fungible.
At the museum, Mr. Brown closed the door on an infinity room, and a world of Derren Browns appeared, each apparently able to read your mind. Each of whom might not want to. Because here’s a funny thing about Mr. Brown. At this point in his career, magic doesn’t interest him particularly. He sees a lot of it as childish, as an excuse to show off. In his stage acts and especially in his television specials, he has been moving toward sequences and effects that transform the participants in some psychological way rather than merely fool them. A decade from now, he might even give that up, he said.
In the meantime, he has “Secret” to unveil and a new television special to prepare and a new stage show to work on, “Showman,” which tries to give as many audience members as possible a cathartic, life-changing experience.
