His books helped restore the reputations of Grant and Eisenhower and return John Marshall to the forefront of the American story.
Jean Edward Smith, a political scientist and renowned biographer whose works helped restore luster to the tarnished reputations of underrated presidents, died on Sept. 1 at his home in Huntington, W.Va. He was 86.
The cause was complications of Parkinson’s disease, his wife, Christine Smith, said. In a long academic career, Dr. Smith had taught at Marshall University in Huntington for 12 years.
His subjects ranged from the relatively obscure, like Lucius D. Clay, the American Army officer who oversaw occupied Germany after World War II, to the most historically consequential, like Franklin D. Roosevelt. Dr. Smith won the Francis Parkman Prize for his book “FDR” (2008), a door-stopper that ran 858 pages. (“Altogether, an exemplary and highly readable work that ably explains why F.D.R. merits continued honor,” Kirkus Reviews said).
He was perhaps best known for biographies of Ulysses S. Grant and Dwight D. Eisenhower, presidents who at times received low approval ratings from historians, and of Chief Justice John Marshall, whose legacy had seemed to have been lost in the flood of attention paid to the nation’s founders.
Dr. Smith’s biography “Grant” (2001) was among those that helped rehabilitate the 18th president’s reputation as an effective chief executive, despite overseeing an administration rife with corruption.
Dr. Smith showed that Grant’s poor reputation as president had been fostered in part by biased graduate students at Columbia University who wrote the first studies of Reconstruction.
Dr. Smith’s biographies hailed the presidencies of Roosevelt and Grant but scorned that of George W. Bush.
Similarly, in “Eisenhower in War and Peace” (2012), Dr. Smith refuted the common perception of Eisenhower as a dullard.
“From the very beginning of his military career, Smith argues persuasively, Eisenhower was a shrewd political operator who concealed his acumen and ambition behind an affable facade,” Wendy Smith wrote in The Los Angeles Times.
His book on Marshall — “John Marshall: Definer of a Nation” (1996) — renewed interest in the longtime chief justice after decades of neglect.
Jean Edward Smith was born on Oct. 13, 1932, in Washington. His father, Jean M. Smith, was a barber at the Capitol on the House side. His mother, Eddyth (Carter) Smith, was a secretary in the Justice Department.
He attended McKinley Technology High School, graduating in 1950 and going on to Princeton, where he majored in political science and English. He was in R.O.T.C. at Princeton, and after graduating in 1954 he served in the Army for seven years.
Stationed in Germany, he met his future wife there, Christine Zinsel. She was in law school and he was a young lieutenant on his way to becoming a captain. They were married in 1959.
In addition to his wife, Dr. Smith is survived by a daughter, Sonja Bauer; a son, Charles; and four grandchildren.
Returning from Germany in 1961, he went on to receive his doctorate in public law and government from Columbia, in 1964. His first book, “The Defense of Berlin” (1963), which recounted the events leading to the building of the Berlin Wall, was published before he began his doctoral studies. In an unusual move, Columbia accepted it as his dissertation. Johns Hopkins University Press plans to republish it later this year.
Dr. Smith began his teaching career at Dartmouth, leaving in 1965 for the University of Toronto, which offered him tenure. He taught there for 35 years and became a Canadian citizen, holding dual citizenship. Over the years he had been a visiting professor at Columbia, Princeton and Georgetown. He joined the Marshall faculty after retiring from Toronto in 1999 and wrote many of his more notable books in West Virginia.
“He was utterly dedicated to his writing,” his wife said. “Not much would interfere with it.” He would work solid for two months, then travel briefly with his wife, and then “it was back to the grindstone,” she said.
She said he had been a highly disciplined writer, rising by dawn and working until the early afternoon. He wrote his books in longhand on yellow legal pads, to be typed up later by a secretary.
His last book, “The Liberation of Paris: How Eisenhower, de Gaulle, and von Choltitz Saved the City of Light,” was published this summer.
