The City Council will weigh in on Thursday on a plan to move inmates into four new jails in New York City neighborhoods.
The governor, the mayor and criminal justice advocates all agree that the Rikers Island jail complex, one of the country’s largest urban prisons, is irretrievably broken, with a long history of violence and abuse against a largely minority inmate population.
But while elected leaders in New York have pledged to close Rikers, a plan embraced by Mayor Bill de Blasio to replace the jail has set off fervent opposition as it enters a critical phase.
The plan calls for shuttering Rikers and moving inmates to four smaller jails in neighborhoods across the city.
But a major sticking point has emerged over the potential size of the Brooklyn jail, which would be among the borough’s tallest buildings, and the location of the Bronx facility, which would be far from the courthouse.
Some criminal justice advocates have gone so far as to oppose any new replacement jails, arguing that they would perpetuate widespread incarceration without addressing the underlying factors that cause people to be arrested and jailed.
For the first time, the City Council will get a chance on Thursday to formally weigh in on the proposal, which would create jails of similar size in four of the city’s five boroughs.
The hearing, which will be held by members of a land-use subcommittee, could be one of the last public forums before the Council decides its fate in mid-October.
Despite opposition over the location of some of the new jails, the overall plan has won the support of several key Council members whose districts will host the new sites. The new jail system is expected to cost around $8.7 billion and take up to a decade to complete.
The City Council speaker, Corey Johnson, whose position could determine the outcome, has not publicly revealed his view of the plan.
The latest effort to close Rikers has been in the works for years, following promises by Mr. de Blasio to reduce the inmate population and to create a smaller and more humane jail system as part of a broader effort to transform the city’s criminal justice system.
The plan cleared a major hurdle on Tuesday, when a majority of the city’s Planning Commission approved the necessary zoning changes to allow for the new facilities.
“The era of mass incarceration didn’t begin in New York City — but it will END here,” Mr. de Blasio wrote on Twitter after the vote on Tuesday.
While the closing of Rikers appears closer to reality than ever before, the proposal has recently encountered the same kind of grass-roots opposition that doomed past efforts.
In the days before the Planning Commission’s vote, some neighborhood groups began mobilizing its members to encourage the City Council to rewrite the final plan.
Over the decades, Rikers Island, a sprawling network of jails on 400 acres on the East River, came to symbolize the country’s practice of mass incarceration and a criminal justice system that critics say is biased against African-Americans and Hispanics.
It gained a notorious reputation for squalid conditions, rival gang wars and brutal force against inmates by correction officers. The officers themselves have long complained of unsafe conditions that have exposed them to attacks.
At its peak, in 1991, Rikers housed an average of more than 21,000 people nightly, during the height of the city’s crack epidemic. The population has dropped to historic lows — 7,290 inmates in July — with the decrease in crime in the city and changes in how quickly cases can be adjudicated.
The improved conditions at Rikers, city leaders have argued, make it an ideal time to overhaul the city’s jail system.
The plan that the City Council will review on Thursday would establish four jails — one each in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan and Queens. Staten Island would not have a jail because residents there have over the years represented a tiny percentage of inmates at Rikers, a city report said.
Each jail would have the same number of beds, 1,150, and provide services for inmates who require medical and mental health treatment. A significant part of the project, however, remains up the air: what the new jails might look like.
The city has released rudimentary sketches of the sites, as well as possible dimensions, but the facilities have not been fully designed. What the city has made public shows that the jails could be significantly larger than the properties they would replace.
The jail in Brooklyn, which would replace the existing Brooklyn Detention Complex in Downtown Brooklyn, could climb to 395 feet. The existing detention center is about 220-feet tall.
In Manhattan, a jail that could be 450-feet tall would replace the much smaller Manhattan Detention Complex on White Street. The jail in Queens, which could be 270 feet tall, would sit on the property that currently houses the decommissioned Queens Detention Complex on 82nd Avenue.
The setup would fix a chief complaint of Rikers — that the island is so isolated that it is challenging for family and legal representatives to visit inmates and for corrections staff members to get to work. The new facilities, except for the one in the Bronx, would also be within a few hundred feet of courthouses.
The location of the Bronx site, on city-owned property that has been a New York Police Department tow pound, has become a flash point. The site is two miles from the Bronx Criminal Court.
“The administration has weaponized the land use process against the Bronx in order to protect their plans to build a new jail on the wrong site,” the Bronx borough president, Ruben Diaz Jr., said in a statement after the Planning Commission’s vote.
The city considered locating the Bronx jail on property near the courthouse, but the site was opposed by the City Council member who represents the area. Councilwoman Diana Ayala, who represents the area with the tow pound, supports the jail center.