When will Alabama stop throwing away people in its shameful prisons?
Ms. Crowder is a public-interest lawyer.
MONTGOMERY, Ala. — Alvin Kennard, a 58-year-old Alabama man who spent most of his life behind bars for a $50 knife-point robbery at a bakery, walked free last Friday. He felt the warm embrace of his family, attended church and ate a home-cooked meal for the first time in 36 years.
The State of Alabama fully intended for Mr. Kennard to die in prison for this crime. He was one of more than 250 people in the state serving life without the possibility of parole for robbery, according to a document provided in a legal proceeding this year by the Alabama Department of Corrections. Many of them have been behind bars since the 1980s.
This year, David Carpenter, a Jefferson County judge, examined a long-shot court pleading Mr. Kennard had submitted, with help from a jailhouse lawyer. Judge Carpenter appointed me to represent Mr. Kennard and look into options for resentencing him.
My first stop was the Donaldson Correctional Facility, the maximum-security prison in Bessemer where my client was incarcerated. Donaldson was familiar territory for me, as I’d spent nearly a decade representing imprisoned people in Alabama and five years before as a journalist writing about the state’s prison system.
Mr. Kennard was quiet that first visit, and barely cracked a smile. He told me that both his parents and his twin brother had died while he was locked up. For several years, Mr. Kennard had been living in what’s known as the Faith Dorm, reserved for prisoners who agree to follow strict rules and participate in religious activities. He felt relatively safe there.
I began researching his case and his options, then returned to the prison a few weeks later. On that visit, Mr. Kennard reported that the day before, hundreds of law enforcement officers had stormed the prison to search for contraband. More than 500 makeshift weapons, as well as drugs and cellphones, were confiscated. Mr. Kennard and his fellow Faith Dorm residents were forced to lie face down with their arms over their heads as officers swept the prison. His shoulders were still sore.
Findings like these buttress Alabama’s reputation for having the worst prisons in the country. There are so many homicides, suicides and overdose deaths that the state had lost track of how many people died in its prisons and could not even provide the Justice Department with accurate numbers, according to the report.
These horrific conditions were the backdrop to my conversation with Mr. Kennard. He knew if he was resentenced to life with parole, a better sentence, he would be transferred to a lower-security prison, which meant housing in an open dorm as opposed to cells. Those can be the most chaotic housing units, where stabbings and homicides have been common. Maybe I could ask the judge to order that he be allowed to stay in Donaldson’s Faith Dorm instead, my client said timidly.
It is both absurd and tragic that the promise of a better sentence meant a 58-year-old man who has not received a prison disciplinary infraction in 15 years was calculating how to stay safe now that the possibility of freedom was before him. And yet, that is what Alabama’s addiction to incarceration and unwillingness to pay for it has wrought.
Repeat offenders are the target. However, it has become increasingly clear that the greatest repeat offender is the state itself.
Back in 1975, a federal judge, Frank M. Johnson, found “massive unconstitutional infirmities which plague Alabama’s prisons.” Since then, there have been class-action lawsuits that ended in federal intervention at the state’s women’s prison, Tutwiler Prison, where inmates were being sexually assaulted by staff members, and at Limestone Correctional Facility, where prisoners with H.I.V. were dying at excessive rates.
In 2017, the state entered into another federal settlement agreement over violent conditions at St. Clair Correctional Facility, following a lawsuit by the Equal Justice Initiative. Most recently, another federal judge, Myron Thompson, ordered improvements in the prison system’s “horrendously inadequate” mental health care.
All along the way, Alabama has shelled out millions of dollars in legal fees to private lawyers to defend itself in these cases.
Unlike the government that incarcerates them, the hundreds of people stuck in these dangerous prisons for crimes committed when they were in their teens and 20s have no lawyers. I was able to represent Mr. Kennard pro bono because my day job is as executive director of the nonprofit Alabama Appleseed Center for Law and Justice.
We are still waiting for Alabama to do the same.
Carla Crowder is executive director of the Alabama Appleseed Center for Law and Justice.