The National Hurricane Center warned of “life-threatening” storm surge along hundreds of miles of the Southeast coast, even before the storm’s high winds arrive.
Storm surge threatens most of the Southeast coast.
A White House map drew attention to Alabama.
Hurricane Dorian left devastation in its wake in the Bahamas.
A man getting his home ready for the storm has died in North Carolina.
Hurricane Dorian Leaves Destruction in Bahamas and Moves Toward U.S.
Now a Category 2 storm, Hurricane Dorian is slowly moving northwest, threatening the U.S. southeast coast, after leaving behind major damage in the Bahamas.
Hurricane Dorian, which caused widespread devastation in the Bahamas, was churning on Wednesday off the Atlantic coast, and residents along hundreds of miles of shoreline were warned of its potential for life-threatening storm surge and dangerous winds.
The hurricane, with winds of 110 miles an hour, was about 130 miles south of Charleston, S.C., and 255 miles southwest of Wilmington, N.C., and moving slowly to the northwest at 8 m.p.h., according to the National Hurricane Center’s advisory at 8 p.m.
A storm surge warning had earlier been extended to Poquoson, Va., including Hampton Roads.
Meteorologists warned residents of shore communities from Daytona Beach, Fla., to Virginia that they faced “a danger of life-threatening inundation from rising water” within the next 36 hours. In some parts of the Carolinas, the storm surge could reach five to eight feet.
The storm’s heavy rains — five to 10 inches along the Carolina coast, with 15 inches possible in some spots — could also cause dangerous flash floods.
Mapping the hurricane’s strength, storm surge and expected path.
Hurricane Dorian is expected to continue moving northward off the Florida and Georgia coasts through Wednesday night, followed by a turn to the north-northeast on Thursday and a turn toward the northeast on Thursday night, the National Hurricane Center said. The storm’s center could be close to the Carolinas from Thursday through Friday morning.
Forecasters expect little change in the storm’s strength. By the time it is predicted to brush by Wilmington, N.C., early on Friday, it will probably still have winds as strong as 90 m.p.h., they said.
The storm is predicted to track close to Charleston by Thursday afternoon. Gov. Henry McMaster has issued a mandatory evacuation for all of Charleston County, which has a population of more than 400,000.
About one-third of the 830,000 people ordered to leave coastal counties in South Carolina have already evacuated, Mr. McMaster said on Tuesday.
Last week the storm was inviting comparisons to Hurricane Andrew, which ripped through the Miami area as a Category 5 monster in 1992, causing widespread damage.
Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida declared a state of emergency last Wednesday afternoon, and advised residents to have seven days’ worth of supplies on hand. There was a run on gasoline and bottled water, and the attorney general’s office was investigating hundreds of complaints of price gouging.
By Friday, Hurricane Dorian had become a Category 4 storm over the Atlantic Ocean with winds of 130 m.p.h., and Mr. Trump approved an emergency declaration for Florida.
But Florida was spared its wrath. Instead it was the Bahamas, parts of which were wiped out over the weekend, that suffered the worst destruction.
When President Trump displayed a large map of Hurricane Dorian’s path in the Oval Office on Wednesday, it was hard to miss a black line that appeared to have been drawn to extend the storm’s possible path into the state of Alabama.
So did Mr. Trump — who frequently uses black Sharpie pens to sign legislation — add the mark to justify his unfounded claim about the dangers faced by residents of the Cotton State?
Or did someone else in his administration clumsily modify the map so that it would appear to back up the president?
Asked about the marking on the map, Mr. Trump told reporters that he did not know how it got there. “I don’t know,” he said on Wednesday while insisting that his assertion about the dangers that Alabama faced had been right all along.
As Hurricane Dorian pulled away from the Bahamas, relief workers, medical personnel, pilots and others gathered at a private terminal of the Nassau airport on Wednesday amid boxes of supplies, anxiously awaiting permission from the government to fly to devastated areas and provide assistance.
But with most of the runways on the Abaco Islands and Grand Bahama — the islands most heavily pummeled by the storm — flooded or covered in sand, it was difficult to deliver help or even assess the damage wrought by the storm. In addition, the government has given priority to helicopter evacuations.
Hurricane Dorian made landfall as a Category 5 storm on Sunday, then lingered, pummeling the northern islands of the Bahamian archipelago for more than three days. At least 20 people have died, government officials said, and the toll was expected to rise.
Aerial images of flattened neighborhoods and a flooded airport give a first look at the large-scale damage there.
Despite the limited access to the islands, pilots have conducted flyovers revealing scenes of absolute devastation. Entire neighborhoods were reduced to unrecognizable fields of rubble, houses were crushed into splinters and boats were tossed into heaps like toys.
The Bahamian prime minister, Hubert Minnis, was able to go on a reconnaissance mission over Abaco on Tuesday afternoon, though storm conditions still prevented flying over Grand Bahama.
“People need mostly food, security and shelter,” Mr. Minnis said in brief comments to reporters when he returned.
An 85-year-old North Carolina man fell off a ladder on Wednesday while he was preparing his home for the storm and died from his injuries, Gov. Roy Cooper announced at a news conference. It was the first reported storm-related fatality in the state.
Mr. Cooper asked residents in areas of the state under evacuation orders to leave. “It is not worth putting your life or the life of first responders at risk,” he said. He and other emergency management officials urged anyone who had not yet finished preparing for the storm to do so immediately. “We will not underestimate the damage this storm can cause,” the governor said at a news conference.
Jacksonville was wary, but the city appears to have been spared the worst.
Jacksonville, tucked into the northeastern corner of Florida where the St. Johns River meets the Atlantic Ocean, suffered flooding downtown during Hurricane Irma two years ago.
Some gauges along the river, which is up to five miles wide in places, showed water levels just below minor flood stage. But the city has been spared any repeat of Hurricane Irma so far.
Tropical-storm-force winds scattered debris across the city’s streets on Wednesday, and there were power losses in the area, affecting about 1,500 customers at 2:30 p.m., according to JEA, the area’s community-owned electric utility company. Officials said that if sustained winds were 40 miles per hour or higher, bridges would close.
And at noon, about one hour before high tide on Jacksonville’s shoreline, a lifeguard saved a woman who had been knocked over and pulled into the current. The sheriff’s office then repeated its warning not to go to the beach or the waterfront. Lifeguards, however, remained on duty.
Shortly after that rescue, Mayor Lenny Curry said on Twitter that others had to be removed from a beach.
Schools in Duval County, which includes Jacksonville, and several surrounding counties were closed through Thursday.
Forecasters are tracking two more Atlantic storms, Fernand and Gabrielle.
Hurricane Dorian is not the only storm that the National Hurricane Center is monitoring. In the Gulf of Mexico, Tropical Storm Fernand is pushing northwest at about 6 miles an hour, toward a likely landfall south of the Rio Grande on Wednesday night.
With sustained winds near 50 m.p.h., Fernand is expected to strike hardest in Mexico, but will also bring gusty winds to South Texas and the lower Texas coast, with rainfall totals of two to four inches through Friday in most areas, according to the forecast.
Far away in the eastern Atlantic is Tropical Storm Gabrielle, the season’s seventh named storm. That one is about 1,300 miles southwest of the Azores and does not appear at this time to pose a threat to any land, the center said.
September is usually the busiest month of the storm season.
Protecting Florida’s older residents has been a priority.
As the outer bands of Hurricane Dorian began lashing the Florida coast on Tuesday, a woman raced to pick up her mother-in-law at a retirement community, where the elevator was about to be shut down. The staff of a nursing home packed up more than 200 residents, as well as the supplies they might need: cases of water, air mattresses and board games. At another center, residents were evacuated in specialty ambulances, rented motor coaches and private vehicles.
Across the state, a scramble was underway to move older Floridians to safer ground as a weakened but still dangerous Hurricane Dorian threatened the state’s Atlantic coast.
The last major Atlantic storm to hit the state was foremost in officials’ minds. When Hurricane Irma came ashore two years ago, a dozen patients died after a nursing home in Hollywood, Fla., lost air-conditioning. The tragedy prompted new regulations and an acknowledgment that evacuation orders were not enough to protect the state’s large older population. No state has more retirees than Florida, where they make up one-fifth of the population, according to the AARP.
A new state law requires backup generators and enough fuel to maintain comfortable temperatures at nursing homes and assisted living centers, a mandate first tested last year, when Hurricane Michael struck the Florida Panhandle. Last week, four nursing home workers were charged in the Hurricane Irma deaths, which were ruled homicides.
Some 190,000 people live in Florida nursing homes and assisted living centers, most of them in the state’s southeastern tip. Patrick Manderfield, a spokesman for the state’s Agency for Health Care Administration, said on Monday that all but 42 of the state’s 3,062 licensed assisted living centers had an on-site generator. Five centers had emergency plans to evacuate “if needed,” he said in an email.
Nursing homes, which tend to be larger and have more beds than assisted living centers, are a different story. Reuters reported on Friday that some nursing homes were still waiting for temporary generators, though a state website suggested that they might have all been supplied by Monday afternoon. The Miami Herald reported last week that nearly 60 percent of the state’s 687 nursing homes did not yet have enough power backup.
Looking for answers about a powerful storm.
As Hurricane Dorian, one of the strongest storms ever recorded in the Atlantic, continues to approach the United States mainland, millions of people who may be in its path are watching — and worrying. We asked readers what they want to know about the storm. Answering those questions is Prof. Adam Sobel, an atmospheric scientist and director of the Initiative on Extreme Weather and Climate at Columbia University.
What makes a hurricane change course?
The motion of hurricanes is determined mainly by what meteorologists call the “steering flow,” or “environmental flow,” meaning the winds on a larger scale, excluding the swirling circulation of the hurricane itself. Think of the storm as a swirl you make in a river with a canoe paddle: It has its own little circulation, but the whole thing drifts with the river current on the larger scale. The environmental flow can vary in both speed and direction at different altitudes; the storm follows the low-level winds most, but the winds higher up also have an influence.
If left to itself, a hurricane would drift slowly toward the North or South Pole, depending on which hemisphere it is in. But the steering flows rarely leave a hurricane to itself. A hurricane turns when it encounters a steering flow that blows in a different direction than the storm was being driven before.
Reporting was contributed by Richard Fausset, Kirk Semple, Rachel Knowles, Frances Robles, Elisabeth Malkin and Adeel Hassan.