Sahar Khan’s blackboard at Columbia University.
A photo survey of the blackboards of mathematicians.
Sahar Khan’s blackboard at Columbia University.Credit...
This is what thought looks like.
Ideas, and ideas about ideas. Suppositions and suspicions about relationships among abstract notions — shape, number, geometry, space — emerging through a fog of chalk dust, preferably of the silky Hagoromo chalk, originally from Japan, now made in South Korea.
In these diagrams, mysteries are being born and solved.
“A mathematician, like a painter or poet, is a maker of patterns,” the British mathematician G.H. Hardy wrote in 1940. Ms. Wynne was drawn to math through her summer neighbors on Cape Cod, Amie Wilkinson and Benson Farb, who both teach at the University of Chicago. She began photographing their blackboards and felt an artistic kinship.
Noga Alon, Princeton University.
In their love of blackboards and chalk, mathematicians are among the last holdouts. In many fields of science and investigation, blackboards have been replaced with whiteboards or slide show presentations. But chalk is cheaper and biodegradable. It smells better than whiteboard markers and is easier to clean up, mathematicians say. It is also more fun to write with.
It happens. In a recent article in Nautilus, the writer and M.I.T. physicist Alan Lightman recalled an occasion at Caltech in the early 1970s when Richard Feynman worked out an equation on Lightman’s blackboard that described how black holes could emit heat and radiation, in contravention to everything that physicists then thought.
Dr. Lightman returned the next morning to copy down the equations, but the board had been wiped clean. A year later, Stephen Hawking worked out a similar calculation, which made him famous.
There is more than one way to think on a blackboard, as Ms. Wynne’s photographs demonstrate. Some mathematicians fill the board with equations, a dissertation’s worth of jumps and transitions encoded in one image, as in the geometric musings of Alex Zhongyi Zhang, a doctoral student at Columbia University.
Others are neat and tidy, like a blackboard that Ms. Wynne photographed among the trees at the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques outside Paris.
Tadashi Tokieda, a professor at Stanford University, made fun of how mathematicians, restricted to black-and-white imagery on blackboards, always make a white (chalk) dot to represent “black” and an empty circle (which is black) to represent “white.” Mathematicians would get the joke, Ms. Wynne said.
Still other blackboards are indecipherable: clouds of mostly erased confusion or frustration. The quest for knowledge does not always end happily.
Most mathematicians, if asked, would say that in their work they are accessing some Platonic world of ideals that exists independently of our own. Some argue that math is a human construct, a product of our own minds, with which scientists model the apparent rules of reality.
Mathematics has worked again and again. Half a century before Einstein described gravity as “curved space” in his general theory of relativity, the equations describing curved space had appeared on the blackboards of mathematicians like Georg Friedrich Bernhard Riemann of Gottingen University in Germany.
If you want to know what the universe might look like to certain discerning minds 50 or 100 years from now, watch these spaces.