Retirement|My Work Life Is Over. What’s Next?
My Work Life Is Over. What’s Next?
Some retirees find themselves without a plan as they look for a new sense of purpose.
When Jeff Hutchinson, 65, retired two years ago after four decades with Dominion Energy in Richmond, Va., he took a gap year to figure out what he wanted to do.
“I was emotionally ready to go,” said Mr. Hutchinson, who has adjusted well to life after work.
His days are full, getting together with former co-workers for lunch and tackling the pile of “when I retire projects” stored in his garage over the years.
And he enjoys helping around the barn with the half-dozen horses he and his wife, Mary Beth Donnelly, tend to, along with keeping the fields and fencing of their 56-acre Beaverdam, Va., farm in shape.
But many retirees do not have a plan. And for those who encounter retirement earlier than expected because of a health crisis or downsizing, facing the new reality can be rocky.
Isolation and loneliness can emerge. “All too often the shift to retirement is viewed narrowly as a vocational one, a move from working to not working,” said Marc Freedman, who leads Encore.org, a nonprofit group that aims to tap the skills and experience of people in midlife and beyond.
Part of the fear stems from a loss of identity when people no longer work, according to Dorian Mintzer, a retirement transition coach. “Often people don’t recognize the role that work has played in their life — the structure it provided, the reason to get up in the morning, self-esteem, community, camaraderie. That’s the emotional piece that catches people unaware,” she said.
Compounding that can be pressure to feel happy. “Some people aren’t prepared that there is some grieving to do, and that’s why they’re feeling sad and depressed when, hey, this is supposed to be the best time of their life,” Ms. Mintzer said.
It took a few years for Phyllis Rhoton, 73, who hired Ms. Mintzer, to realize something was missing. Ten years ago, because of a health issue, she retired without much of a plan from her job as a customer service agent at the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.
“For the first couple of years, I took care of myself. I did a lot of things I couldn’t do when I was working. I traveled and visited friends and family. My mother was ill, and I spent a lot of time taking care of her. Then everyone started dying — my aunt, my brother, my mother. My family was dwindling away,” said Ms. Rhoton, who is single and has no children.
Retiring is a sequence of shifts over time, as Ms. Rhoton has found. Three substantial changes take place, said Ken Dychtwald, founder and chief executive of Age Wave, a consulting and research company.
What he didn’t expect, he said, was the period of wandering around that followed, as he tried to sort out what he wanted to do. Then Mr. Strong and his wife, Patrice, went to a police community forum in Kingston, N.Y., where they now live.
In January, he started a pilot program, The Peaceful Guardians Project. The initiative links Kingston City School District middle-school students with the Kingston Police Department to bridge the gap between local youth and law enforcement. Police officers and young people form teams and work on activities that foster understanding, empathy and trust. The goal is to learn to see a situation through other eyes.
For now, Mr. Strong has decided that his job is to pay attention and keep asking ‘how can I help?, how can I help make things better?’ “I get up every morning to do something new and make a difference,” he said.