President Trump made remarks to the United States Mission to the United Nations on Thursday, the same day a House committee released a declassified version of a complaint.
And then you have Sleepy Joe Biden, who’s dumb as a rock. [laughter] This guy was dumb on his best day and he’s had — not having his best day right now. He’s dumb as a rock — so you have Sleepy Joe and he goes up and his kid, who’s had a lot of problems. He got thrown out of the Navy. A couple of problems. I mean, look, I’m not going to — it’s a problem. That’s a problem. So we won’t get into why and all that. But he got thrown out of the Navy and now this kid goes into Ukraine, walks away with millions of dollars and he becomes a consultant for $50,000 a month. And he doesn’t know anything compared to anybody in this room. O.K., he’s a stiff. He knows nothing. He’s walking away with $50,000. Or as you would say in the old days, $50k a month. Not bad. Would anybody else in this room like like to represent Ukraine just like — [laughter] That’s on top — you got the job — that’s on top of, that’s on top of hundreds of thousands and millions of dollars, but that’s not the best one. The best one was China. This came up. So now he goes to China, and I was with the head of Blackstone, which is the big deal. Steve Schwarzman. I said, “Steve, is that possible?” “No, why? Who got that?” I said, “Biden’s son.” “Ooh.”   You make hundreds of thousands of dollars, and millions of dollars off that. And that’s probably not all they gave him. They gave him plenty more, I’m sure. We might never find out. And then they talk about me and I didn’t do anything. I don’t know if I’m the most innocent person in the world. [laughter] He would be somebody you would pay a lot of money to, but not Biden’s son. So the whistle-blower came out and said nothing — said a couple of people told me he had a conversation with Ukraine. We’re at war.  They’re sick and nobody’s called them out like I do. I don’t understand, people are afraid to call them out. They’re afraid to say that the press is crooked. We have a crooked press. We have a dishonest media. So now they’re devastated, but they’ll always find something. I’m sure there’ll be something they’ll find in this report that will suit their lie. But basically that person never saw the report, never saw the call. Never saw the call, heard something and decided that he or she or whoever the hell it is — sort of like, almost a spy. I want to know who’s the person that gave the whistle-blower, who’s the person who gave the whistle-blower the information because that’s close to a spy. You know what we used to do in the old days when we were smart? Right, with spies and treason, right? We used to handle them a little differently than we do now. [laughter] Now you have guys like little Adam Schiff defending you. [laughter] He says, “pencil neck.” That name stuck. He’s got shirts that are too big, because you can’t buy shirts that small. He was never a coal miner, Joe, let’s put it that way. I don’t think he worked in the mines.
President Trump told staff members at the United States Mission to the United Nations on Thursday that he wants to know who provided information to a whistle-blower about his phone call with the president of Ukraine, saying that whoever did so was “close to a spy” and that “in the old days” spies were dealt with differently.
The comment stunned people in the audience, according to a person briefed on what took place and a partial audio recording of Mr. Trump’s remarks. Mr. Trump made the statement several minutes into his remarks before the group of about 50 mission employees and their families. At the outset, he condemned former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s role in Ukraine at a time when his son Hunter Biden was on the board of a Ukrainian energy company.
Mr. Trump repeatedly referred to the whistle-blower and condemned the news media as “crooked” for reporting on an explosive complaint by the whistle-blower. The president then said the whistle-blower never heard the call in question.
The president’s comments were a broadside against an intelligence whistle-blower law that shields intelligence officials from reprisal — like losing their security clearance or being demoted or fired — as long as they follow a certain process for bringing allegations of wrongdoing to the attention of oversight authorities.
The Democratic chairmen of the House Foreign Affairs, Intelligence, and Oversight and Reform Committees, who are seeking testimony from the whistle-blower, called the president’s remarks “reprehensible witness intimidation.” The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
The whistle-blower’s complaint, which was made public Thursday morning, contained information about the call gathered from multiple United States officials, and described concerns that the president pressured the Ukrainian president to investigate Mr. Biden, who is running for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination, and Mr. Biden’s son.
The complaint filed by an intelligence officer about President Trump’s interactions with the leader of Ukraine.
As Mr. Trump seethed, the president’s re-election campaign was busy raising money off the threat of impeachment as he and the White House tried to turn the tables on the Democrats.
“Nancy’s trying to IMPEACH my father for nothing!” Donald Trump Jr., the president’s son, wrote in a text message about Speaker Nancy Pelosi as he asked supporters to join an Impeachment Defense Team on Mr. Trump’s behalf. He said any donations would be doubled. Another of the president’s sons, Eric, said on Twitter that the online warfare over impeachment had netted his father’s re-election campaign $8.5 million from small-dollar donors over the course of two days.
At the mission, some in the crowd laughed at Mr. Trump’s comment, the person briefed on what took place said. The event was closed to reporters, and during his remarks, the president called the news media “scum” and labeled them crooked. The ambassador to the United Nations, Kelly Knight Craft, was in the room.
Mr. Trump spoke as the acting director of national intelligence was testifying before Congress about the whistle-blower.
At a fund-raiser at Cipriani 42nd Street in Manhattan immediately after the event at the mission, Mr. Trump walked out before the crowd of several hundred donors and said, clutching paper in one of his hands, “This is the call.” He then said it was “the greatest thing” to happen to the Republican Party because it had raised so much money off the controversy.
Aboard Air Force One on the way back to Washington on Thursday afternoon, Mr. Trump grew angry after watching televised news coverage about the whistle-blower, staff members said. Just before landing, Mr. Trump took to Twitter and again said the whistle-blower had “second hand information” and called the inquiry “Another Witch Hunt!” On the tarmac at Joint Base Andrews, Mr. Trump was in no mood to take questions.
Instead, he got off the plane and spoke directly into the news cameras.
“Democrats are going to lose the election and they know it,” Mr. Trump fumed. “That’s why they are doing it.” He added that there should be a way to stop the Democrats in court.
Later, Mr. Trump again appeared in front of reporters, posing in a photo opportunity with several dozen law enforcement officials who chanted “U.S.A.” and gave the president a wooden plaque.
As he took the award and brandished it in the air, the president addressed the officials.
“I’m a big fan,” Mr. Trump told them before heading back inside.