CAMBRIDGE, Mass. — When former State Representative Byron Rushing first looked closely at the Massachusetts state seal, he could not believe his eyes.
With support from Native Americans, Mr. Rushing began a quest to prod the state to change the seal and flag. That was in the 1980s. Yet for decades, they heard mostly opposition.
Now, more voices are calling for change. Mr. Rushing lost his bid for re-election last year, but a bill that he first submitted in 1984 — naming a commission to reconsider the seal — has been introduced by new sponsors.
This time, there are several co-sponsors. In addition, more than a dozen Massachusetts towns have taken up the cause, passing resolutions urging the state to name a commission to discuss alternative designs.
“All of that imagery is traumatizing, particularly to tribal groups,” said State Representative Nika Elugardo, a Boston Democrat and co-sponsor of the bill.
The Massachusetts seal, first designed in 1629, originally depicted a Native American with these words: “Come over and help us.” The seal has been redesigned multiple times, with a mishmash of features from different Indian tribes. During the American Revolution, a sword was introduced. State archives indicate that the sword was intended to symbolize armed resistance to British tyranny. The current version was designed in 1898.
Massachusetts and Mississippi, which incorporates the Confederate battle flag in its state flag, are now the states most often criticized for their flags, said Ted Kaye, one of the country’s foremost flag experts.
Whether the State Legislature will be inclined to change the seal and flag is uncertain. Massachusetts is fiercely proud of its history, which is an important driver in its lucrative tourism industry. Towns pushing to revisit the issue are some of the most liberal in the state.
So far, little opposition has materialized against changing the flag, but it is expected if lawmakers take up the matter. In 2015, when a Boston Globe columnist argued for change, many denounced the idea.
The debate in Massachusetts comes at a time of reckoning over the nation’s history. Much of the focus has been on slavery, reparations for African-Americans and the removal of Confederate monuments.
The treatment of Native Americans is a growing part of the national conversation. In June, Gov. Gavin Newsom of California, a Democrat, issued an executive order apologizing for his state’s “violence, maltreatment and neglect” of Native Americans.
New momentum to re-examine the state seal in Massachusetts is driven partly by that national conversation but also by the state’s central place in the nation’s beginnings, with the landing of the Mayflower at Plymouth, Mass., in 1620.
Next year marks the 400th anniversary of the ship’s arrival. The meaning of that event has undergone significant revisions over time, morphing from a comforting tale of new arrivals and native people peacefully coexisting into one of land grabs, enslavement, rape and genocide.
Since 1970, Thanksgiving has been commemorated in Plymouth by some tribes as a National Day of Mourning to honor ancestors and recognize what they lost with the arrival of the colonists.
Native American tribes in Massachusetts say they hope to use the Mayflower anniversary as a teachable moment to pursue several legislative goals, including replacing the state seal and flag.
William F. Galvin, secretary of the commonwealth, who is also chair of the Massachusetts Historical Commission, said the first task in any discussion about changing the seal should be to establish the intent of its symbolism.
“The 400th anniversary is a good occasion to make sure the history is accurate and complete,” Mr. Galvin, a Democrat, said.
In May, when the City Council in Cambridge discussed a resolution to support the state bill naming a commission to reconsider the flag, several residents testified that the imagery made them feel demeaned and unwelcome.
Shelly Lowe, an enrolled member of the Navajo Nation and executive director of the Harvard University Native American Program, said she was heartbroken when her daughter came to the council chamber for a leadership program and had to look at the state flag, which had a prominent place at the front of the room.
“I don’t want to see us devalued because of an image,” Ms. Lowe testified, fighting back tears.
In an unusual action, the City Council also banished the state flag from its chambers.
“Can we just take it out?” Vice Mayor Jan Devereux said after listening to the emotional testimonials.
State law requires that the flag be displayed in municipal buildings, so it had to go somewhere; the flag that was in the council chamber now stands in the corner of a hallway in City Hall.
Mr. Rushing, the former state representative, who is African-American, said he was surprised by the resistance over many years to his efforts to change the seal. He said he now believed that nothing would change until racism against Native Americans was equated with racism against African-Americans.
