All costs — tuition, books, housing and food — will be covered for those who qualify for aid, adding Cornell to a growing list of institutions trying to ease the way for doctors-to-be.
Doctors can be among the highest-earning professionals in the country, but they are also among those saddled with the most student loans. The average medical student who graduates with debt owes $200,000, with several years of modest pay ahead as a resident or fellow, according to data from the Association of American Medical Colleges.
Concerned that young doctors were being driven by financial pressures to become specialists rather than practice pediatrics or family medicine, some prominent universities have begun using major gifts from donors to relieve students from having to borrow to pay tuition.
On Monday, Cornell University went even further. Its medical school, Weill Cornell Medicine in New York City, announced that all students who qualify for financial aid will get a full ride: All costs will be covered by scholarships, including tuition, room and board, books and other educational expenses.
Doctors as a group are hardly economically disadvantaged. They are more likely to be in the top 1 percent of the nation’s earners than members of any other profession. Those who enter the most lucrative specializations, especially, stand a good chance of being able to pay off their student debts with less difficulty than most other Americans, even though they borrow so much.
Still, the announcement on Monday added Weill-Cornell to a growing list of prominent medical schools that have recently rolled out generous financial aid programs to ease the way for future doctors.
In 2017, Columbia University announced a new endowment that it said would eliminate the need for medical students to take out loans for tuition; the neediest would also have living expenses covered. The David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, offers full rides to about 20 percent of its entering classes, though the awards are based on merit, not need. In August 2018, the New York University School of Medicine said it would cover tuition for all its current and future students.
“The rising cost of higher education has become a major concern for donors committed to expanding access to elite institutions for low-income and first-generation students,” said David Callahan, the author of “The Givers: Money, Power and Philanthropy in a New Gilded Age” and the editor of the website Inside Philanthropy.
Of Weill Cornell’s 373 students, 52 percent qualify for need-based aid. A single year at the school — which sits in one of America’s most expensive ZIP codes, on the Upper East Side of Manhattan — costs more than $90,000, according to Weill Cornell. With need-based grants for the last academic year averaging about $38,000, students often relied on federal loans to bridge the difference. The average debt for a graduate of the program this year was $156,851.
“There’s no question that this financial burden adds to the stress and also physician burnout when they become full physicians and join the work force,” Dr. Choi said. A recent study showed that long hours, disrupted sleep and stress can advance cellular aging in new doctors.
Students learned of the surprise gift on Monday morning at a campus event. September was the natural time for such an announcement, said Jessica M. Bibliowicz, chairman of the Weill Cornell Medicine Board of Overseers.
The program covers all eligible students going forward, but not retroactively, so the incoming class of first-year students stands to benefit the most. Need-based loans that have already been distributed for the current year will be “converted” to scholarship grants in the next few weeks, the school said, once students complete some paperwork.
Neil Kelly, also in his second year, said medical students who were less preoccupied by financial stresses can focus more on caring for patients. “It gives you that ability, moving forward, to not have to worry about the money playing a role in your specialty,” he said.
Mr. Kelly, 32, said his wife was expecting the couple’s second child. “It’s really difficult to make it work in the city on one income, and to have multiple children,” he said.
Financial concerns may deter doctors from practicing in communities where many patients are on Medicaid. Doctors have become scarce in many rural areas, where they often have trouble earning enough to pay off their debts. Some 113 rural hospitals have closed since 2010, according to the National Rural Health Association.
“While medical education remains an excellent investment for students, philanthropic support for medical schools’ financial aid programs can help recruit students from diverse and disadvantaged backgrounds who are more likely to practice in underserved communities,” said Matthew Shick, senior director of government relations for the Association of American Medical Colleges.
Weill Cornell had a scholarship endowment of $150 million before it announced a new $160 million gift on Monday. The school needs about $50 million more in the coming years to ensure that the program continues in perpetuity, Dr. Choi said, adding that he felt “very confident” it would reach that number.
The school said that the gifts came, in large part, from the Starr Foundation as well as Joan and Sanford I. Weill and the Weill Family Foundation. The Weills are the institution’s biggest benefactors.
Discussions over student debt have intensified in recent months as Democratic presidential candidates and prominent citizens have floated ambitious plans to make higher education debt-free. Many have welcomed these plans, but others have pushed back, citing high costs or what they see as bitter unfairness to those who have diligently paid down their student loans.
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont has proposed eliminating all student debt, while Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts wants to wipe out a substantial portion of it. Both are also seeking trillion-dollar plans to make undergraduate programs at public colleges and universities free.