Andrew Kingsley brings us a puzzle. There are rules.
SUNDAY PUZZLE — I’m not letting any cats out of any bags by telling you this puzzle is about bowling, right? That’s the gutter pun in the headline! There’s a bowling ball in the top center nine squares on the paper grid, and there’s supposed to be something in the electronic versions today. The first thing that comes to mind when I think about bowling is Andrew Kingsley, who just got his master's from the University of Pennsylvania this year and already has a teaching job at Riverdale Country School in the Bronx, teaching the art of the duckpin. Just kidding, he’s teaching middle and high school English. When I think about bowling I think of The Big Lebowski, but none of the scenes in that movie are appropriate to mention here.
This is Mr. Kingsley’s Sunday debut, and he’s due — he has had several good, hard weekend grids and some memorable theme puzzles (such as this confection). Today’s grid has two layers of theme, puns and visual, both of which are laid out pretty plainly in the cluing. That didn’t make it easy, though, did it?
The fill today was awfully FUN, I thought, but there were lots of names that weren’t solid for me, including ECKO, ALVY, ANSE, ARES, ANN, DRURY and others. Nothing that we shouldn’t know, though, and now we do. I didn’t fall for too much misdirection — “nada” for ZEST, “amen” for WORD and “legs” for EYES. And there were enough twists, like AMP, TREES, MELT and THE TOP to make things move along apace.
31A: We got some practice with clingy water creatures yesterday, but it’s been ages since this particular gastropod has been in the grid, so it might be worth a mention. LIMPETS are surprisingly different from barnacles, in case you were wondering.
64A: This might be easier than I thought, but I didn’t register this car’s existence until a few years ago when I spotted a Quattroporte in a ridiculous deep racing green that I can’t even describe. I don’t think I could pick a Maserati out of a lineup otherwise. “Quattroporte” sounds a good deal sexier than “four doors,” although I realize that both terms give us two chances to roll our r’s.
93A: I don’t really know SUMNER from “Sumter,” it turns out. Fortunately, car air fresheners can’t be “pity,” or I’d have ruined more than just this entry (see below).
105A: “Bedazzle” has come to evoke sequins because of the “Bedazzler” that we all have in our craft room, but OPART has an effect that “bedazzles,” mesmerizes or confuses you.
92D: I just loved this clue; what can I say, Ophelia is a favorite and the euphemism just struck me as funny. “You’ve really changed, Ophelia,” in so many words, as the poor girl WENT MAD.
There are a couple of things going on today up in this bowling alley. By the way, did you know that they bowled in ancient Egypt?
First of all, you’ve got some puns — six of them in the vertical clues, at 3, 5, 12, 14, 73 and 78-down. Each one employs some sports lingo, but nothing so specialized that only a dedicated kegler would be able to solve. The punny clues, however, were a little slippery.
I knew to look for terms like “strike” and “spare,” but still needed crosses galore. In retrospect, the first example, STRIKE ZONES, and the second, SPLIT DECISIONS, were straight shots, but this puzzle was definitely one that seemed easier in my rearview mirror, with my trophy in the passenger seat.
I did think they were all really funny and rewarded a second glance. In 5D, for example — “Comment when you need a serious comeback at the end of a bowling game?” — the time element was important, but of course I don’t think of bowling as a sport where people rush. You run out of opportunities, though, and therefore have NO TIME TO SPARE, or lose points by missing strikes. 14D didn’t mention driving, which is where the entry phrase is more often seen.
The place where a time element did appear was at 73D, a clue that I found tough: “Pace at which bowlers complete their game?” I figured it had to be “time frame” at first, but got jammed up with CLAIRE at 87A, which had to be right. FRAME RATE requires a little film and video knowledge.
By this time, you’ve presumably made some progress elsewhere in this grid. Maybe you see a pattern in some other down entries, maybe not (I certainly did not). Fortunately, there’s a revealer in the very southeast corner, at 109D, which refers to an additional relevant feature. “Bowlers’ targets” are PINS: Were you, at any previous point, struck by the repeated and meticulously arranged appearance of a little three-letter string? Look for PINT, VAPING, ROPING; PINY, SPIN, PINK; PINOT and PINTA. Mr. Kingsley is UPPING the trick quotient in this game today — hopefully it’s up your alley.
Fun stuff! Did you return your shoes?
I remember leaving Puzzle 5 of A.C.P.T. 2019 feeling bummed that I left so many squares empty. For some reason, I thought I would avenge myself by building my own puzzle, one that wouldn’t be so cruel (although these puns may cause some groaning) and this is what resulted. I hope you won’t need bumpers for this one.
