A. Alvarez, a British poet, critic and essayist who played a pivotal role in bringing the poetry of Ted Hughes and Sylvia Plath to the public, and whose acclaimed book on the World Series of Poker in Las Vegas helped transform high-stakes professional poker from a cult to a televised sport, died on Monday at his home in London. He was 90.
His literary representatives, Aitken Alexander Associates, said the cause was viral pneumonia.
As poetry critic and poetry editor of the London Sunday newspaper The Observer from 1955 to 1965, Mr. Alvarez made it his mission to publish the work of younger poets like Mr. Hughes and Ms. Plath, who were opening up new emotional territory in their verse. Both became close friends of his.
Mr. Alvarez’s enormously influential anthology “The New Poetry,” published in 1962, brought the poetry of Mr. Hughes, Thom Gunn and Geoffrey Hill and the American confessional poets John Berryman and Robert Lowell to a wide audience in Britain. Ms. Plath and Anne Sexton were added to the 1966 edition.
Mr. Alvarez, who sometimes used his first initial and sometimes Al in his byline, drew on his own passion for poker to deliver a behind-the-scenes report for The New Yorker on the 1981 World Series of Poker at Binion’s Horseshoe Casino in Las Vegas. He expanded the article into “The Biggest Game in Town,” published in 1983.
What Tom Wolfe did for the Mercury 7 space program in “The Right Stuff,” Mr. Alvarez did for professional poker. The book introduced readers to Texas Hold ’em, a hitherto obscure poker variant, and elevated top players like Thomas Preston Jr., better known as Amarillo Slim, and Stu Ungar, known as The Kid, to the status of culture heroes.
An instant classic, often called the best book ever written on poker, “The Biggest Game in Town” gave birth to a small industry of books on the subject and conferred celebrity status on Mr. Alvarez in casinos all along the Las Vegas Strip.
Mr. Alvarez’s book on suicide was a surprise best seller in 1972.
Alfred Alvarez was born on Aug. 5, 1929, in London. His father, Bertie, descended from Sephardic Jews who had made their way to London from Spain centuries earlier; he ran several family dress shops, without success.
“Insolvency was the element he swam in,” Mr. Alvarez wrote of his father in his memoir. His mother, Katie (Levy) Alvarez, was a homemaker.
Mr. Alvarez attended the Hall School in Hampstead and the Oundle School in Northamptonshire before entering Corpus Christi College at Oxford, where he earned a degree in English in 1952. He remained at Oxford as a research scholar and tutor, and spent time as a visiting fellow at Princeton and the Rockefeller Foundation.
He began publishing his poems while at Oxford. Immediately after receiving his master’s degree in 1956 he became the poetry critic and poetry editor at The Observer, working under the future Proust translator Terence Kilmartin, who was keen to make contemporary poetry a feature of the newspaper.
“I think I was around at a really important period in English poetry, when Ted, Sylvia, these people were really making a real difference,” Mr. Alvarez told The Daily Telegraph in 2013. Besides the young poets included in his anthology, he also brought attention to the Eastern European poets Zbigniew Herbert and Miroslav Holub.
Mr. Alvarez also served, unhappily, as the drama critic of the British magazine New Statesman for a two-year stint in the late 1950s and turned out several literary studies: “The Shaping Spirit: Studies in Modern English and American Poets” (1958), published in the United States as “Stewards of Excellence”; “The School of Donne” (1961); and “Under Pressure: The Writer in Society: Eastern Europe and the U.S.A.” (1965). Some of his critical essays were collected in “Beyond All This Fiddle: Essays, 1955-67” (1968).
In 1956 he married Ursula Barr, the granddaughter of Frieda Lawrence, the wife of D. H. Lawrence, after a whirlwind courtship. The marriage ended in divorce in 1961. He married Anne Adams, a child psychotherapist, in 1966.
She survives him, along with their daughter, Kate Alvarez Cogan; their son, Luke; and four grandchildren. Another son, Adam, from his first marriage, died in 2016.
Mr. Alvarez eventually found the role of critic and academic confining. Although he continued to write criticism and reviews for a variety of publications, notably The New York Review of Books, he began turning to personal subjects in books and essays.
A suicide attempt in 1960, after the failure of his first marriage, served as the starting point for “The Savage God: A Study of Suicide,” a surprise best seller in 1972 that examined the subject from all sides, with special attention to the suicide of Ms. Plath in 1963, a critical moment in his life because of their close friendship. In the months before her suicide, having separated from Mr. Hughes, she would visit Mr. Alvarez seeking literary advice and solace.
Over the years, as Ms. Plath’s reputation soared with posthumous collections like “Ariel” and her life story became a kind of feminist parable, he often found himself revisiting the event and trying to explain his own role as confidant and critic in the year before her death.
In the 2003 film “Sylvia,” with Gwyneth Paltrow as Ms. Plath and Daniel Craig as Mr. Hughes, the part of Mr. Alvarez was played by Jared Harris.
Mr. Alvarez returned to his first marriage in “Life After Marriage: Scenes From Divorce” (1982), published in the United States with the subtitle “Love in an Age of Divorce.” But he was better known to readers for his books of reportage, several of them originating in The New Yorker.
Mr. Alvarez spent time on an oil well for “Offshore: A North Sea Journey” (1986) and celebrated the exploits of his fellow mountaineer Mo Anthoine in “Feeding the Rat: Profile of a Climber” (1989). The title, a climber’s expression, refers to the need to take risks.
His poems were collected in “Autumn to Autumn, and Selected Poems, 1953-1976” (1978) and “New and Selected Poems” (2002).
