Just because children play alone at recess doesn’t mean they’re lonely.
Now that school’s been in session for a bit, I’m sensing a lot of ambient anxiety from other parents about what’s normal in terms of kids and friendships. A handful of recurring fears are showing up in my group chats, like: My son told me he’s playing alone at recess, does that mean he has no friends? My daughter got excluded from a game of house — is mean girl behavior starting in preschool now?
There’s also the array of emotions that you may feel watching your kid toddle out into the world without you. I can attest to thinking deeply unkind and possibly demented thoughts about someone else’s 4-year-old the first time I saw my older girl get pushed down on the playground. Those protective feelings are a “biological instinct, we’re designed to help our offspring survive,” said Sally Beville Hunter, Ph.D., a clinical assistant professor in the department of child and family studies at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. I didn’t exact revenge on that pushy preschooler, but I understand the urge to get involved when you believe your child is getting emotionally or physically hurt.
I spoke to two child psychologists, a psychotherapist and a school counselor about what is developmentally appropriate for children when it comes to making friends, why playing alone doesn’t necessarily mean anything is amiss and when healthy kid conflict edges into bullying.
What’s happening developmentally: Before kids are around 3, they will mostly be engaging in parallel play — which means they will be doing the same activity next to each other, but not really interacting. Between 3 and 5, kids are just learning how to play together. “They may not yet prefer peers over parents,” Dr. Hunter said, but they should have the desire to play with other kids. Which is to say, don’t fret if your kid doesn’t want after-school play dates just yet — as long as he enjoys socializing with other children at school and in general, he’s on track.
Typically kids will engage in dramatic play at this age (playing family, or animals, or cartoon characters), and rough and tumble play is also to be expected. Sometimes kids just need to hit things with a stick, and as long as they’re not hitting other kids, that’s an expected part of their development.
Before kindergarten, kids are “very egocentric, and mostly worried about themselves,” said Vanessa Green Allen, a school counselor in North Carolina and the author of “The No More Bullying Book for Kids.” They are working on building skills like sharing, waiting their turn and participating in group dynamics.
They don't start to build true empathy — putting themselves in someone else’s shoes — until age 4 or 5. In developmental psychology, it’s called “theory of mind,” and it’s the knowledge that others have different beliefs or thoughts than you do. Kids “have just learned words can be hurtful,” Dr. Hunter said — but it doesn’t occur to them at that age to stay mad at someone who has insulted them. In kindergarten and first grade, children are quick to get offended, and quick to forgive.
Playing alone isn’t always a red flag. All the experts I spoke to said that unless a child tells you she is lonely or feels excluded, playing alone isn’t a problem. “Any preschool director will tell you it’s not uncommon for one kid to be sitting off alone,” said Katie Hurley, a child psychotherapist based in California and the author of “The Happy Kid Handbook.” Because school is very academically focused from the start now, there isn’t much time for quiet space during the day, and it’s good for kids to take the down time they may need. It’s also important to remember that there’s enormous variation in children’s personalities, just as there is for adults. Some kids are introverts and some are extroverts. “Some kids love loud and noisy play, some kids like puzzles and quiet play and digging in the sand alone,” Hurley said.
Some conflict is normal. If your child comes home complaining that a friend was “mean” to him, he may just be venting. It doesn’t necessarily mean there’s a larger problem or that you need to get involved. He’s likely just expressing frustration that recess didn’t go the way he wanted it to — your kid wanted to play kitty family, and the other kid wanted to play doggy family. If you’re getting the garden variety complaint list, just listen and let him process his day without trying to fix it. “You’re their soft landing,” Hurley said.
When to get involved: If your child comes home day after day saying that the same kid is targeting her, either emotionally or physically, it’s time to talk to her teacher. They can give you context that may be more nuanced than what your child is reporting at the end of a long school day, Hurley said.
However, at this age, sometimes kids won’t tell you if something is very wrong, so look out for changes in their behavior: If they’re no longer eating or sleeping well, acting out at home or refusing to go to school, said Lauren Knickerbocker, Ph.D., a child psychologist at N.Y.U. Langone’s Child Study Center, speak to their teacher about what’s happening at school.
If your child is struggling to make friends and is telling you he’s lonely, you need to figure out the root of the issue, Dr. Knickerbocker said. To help build his friendship skills and confidence, schedule play dates where he can get practice sharing and taking turns with parental help around the corner. When you have play dates, “Focus on the positive things they’re doing, rather than focusing on what they’re not doing,” Dr. Knickerbocker said.
Reading your children books about making friends can help, too, said Vanessa Green Allen, the school counselor. Maria Russo, the Times’ children’s books editor, recommends the Elephant and Piggie series from Mo Willems; “Be a Friend” by Salina Yoon, which is inclusive of kids on the autism spectrum; and “Pie Is for Sharing” by Stephanie Parsley Ledyard with illustrations by Jason Chin.
P.S. Thank you to everyone who sent in your kid-inflicted injuries. We have a roundup of your pain here — reading this will make you want to wear a hockey mask around your wee ones.
P.P.S. Forward this email to a friend. Follow us on Instagram @NYTParenting. Join us on Facebook. Find us on Twitter for the latest updates. Read last week’s newsletter about how to have a healthy attitude about kids and weight.
Want More on Kids and Friendship?
I think I have watched this video of two tiny friends running into each other on a city street about 6,000 times, because it is cute overload.
 Mine sure do! Slate has wise suggestions for how to get your kid to share their day with you.
Science Friday has a delightful series of videos about why children create imaginary friends.
The NPR series “Life Kit” has an excellent episode about how to teach kids to be kind — like most other things, kindness is a habit that needs to be continually reinforced.
We were getting tired of the mess and hysteria after our 2- and 4-year-olds kept knocking their cups off the dinner table. So we put foil stickers on the table to remind them where the cups should be placed after taking a drink, and we’ve had far fewer spills!
—Lauren Himmel, Nashville, Tenn.
If you want a chance to get your Tiny Victory published, find us on Instagram @NYTparenting and use the hashtag #tinyvictories or enter your Tiny Victory at the bottom of this page. Include your full name and location. Tiny Victories may be edited for clarity and style. Your name, location and comments may be published, but your contact information will not. By submitting to us, you agree that you have read, understand and accept the Reader Submission Terms in relation to all of the content and other information you send to us.