Real Estate|What Happens When a Landlord Flouts the New Rent Laws?
What Happens When a Landlord Flouts the New Rent Laws?
New York’s new rules are ostensibly beneficial to tenants, but ambiguities in the fine print make some of them difficult to enforce.
Q: I recently applied to rent an apartment in a large Upper Manhattan complex. The management company requires a $95 background-check fee for every adult, employed member of the household. I thought the new rent laws limit background-check fees to $20. How is this fee legal?
A: Before New York State changed its rent laws in June, landlords and their agents could charge prospective tenants large fees for applications, processing and credit checks. The new rules eliminate all fees, except for credit and background checks, which are capped at $20. Even that fee would be waived if a prospective tenant provided a recent credit or background check report.
But the law leaves open some questions. It does not explain, for example, what a landlord should do if more than one adult lives in the household. Is $20 the maximum per tenant or per household? It’s unclear. The law is also silent about what consequences a landlord would face for overcharging tenants.
But how do you push back against a clear overcharge when the law does not prescribe consequences? You could remind the landlord that the new law limits the charge to $20. But the landlord could interpret your inquiry as evidence that you’re a troublesome tenant and not rent the apartment to you.
“The reality is, if the writer wants the apartment, he or she will have to pay the fees,” said Beatrice Lesser, a real estate lawyer and a partner at the Manhattan law firm Gallet Dreyer and Berkey.
You could also report the violation to the New York State Attorney General’s office or your state legislator, in the hopes of getting the law enforced, or your overcharge refunded. Another option: Pay the fee and take the landlord to small claims court to recoup the overcharge later. But again, these steps might antagonize your landlord. If the apartment is market rate, you could end up without a lease renewal at the end of the term, and moving again would cost you more than this initial fee.
