PARIS — Decades ago, banana plantations around Central America sprayed a powerful pesticide with a terrible side effect: It sterilized workers on a mass scale. Thousands of victims have sought compensation ever since from the chemical companies that produced it.
Now, some survivors and their families are suing three big chemical makers in France to recover hundreds of millions of dollars in unpaid damages awarded to them by courts in Nicaragua, where many of the poisonings of banana workers occurred. If successful, the case could set a legal precedent and lead to more lawsuits in France for harm done in other countries by the pesticide Nemagon.
Last decade, Nicaraguan courts ordered a total of $805 million in damages to be paid to hundreds of victims by Dow Chemical, Shell Oil and Occidental Chemical, which has since become OxyChem. The companies refused to pay, saying the courts lacked jurisdiction and had denied them fair trials.
The case now has a new life half a world away in Europe, where the companies have significant assets and 1,245 former workers and relatives are looking to collect the money. While French courts have been open to hearing cases linked to human rights abuses that have occurred elsewhere, this is the first with such a large monetary award at stake. On Tuesday, a French court delivered documents to Dow France provisionally freezing shares worth 99 million euros, or about $110 million, pending a trial scheduled for January at the Paris Trial Court.
Dow Chemical, in a statement, disputed that the freezing had taken place, claiming that the United States-based parent company did not own any capital in Dow France, which is held by other Dow European entities.
The action is a precautionary measure to prevent Dow from moving assets out of France until the trial, said François-Henri Briard, a French lawyer who is part of an international legal team representing the former workers and relatives. A French judge will determine whether court opinions in other countries — in this case, Nicaragua — can be enforced in France and in the European Union.
If the plaintiffs prevail, they will seek to collect part of the $805 million from the Nicaraguan judgments from Dow in France and move to freeze and sell assets owned by Dow, Shell and Occidental in other European countries where they operate. They would cite a European Union rule that allows a court order issued in a member state to be enforced in any of the bloc’s 28 countries.
In such a world, he added, victims should also be allowed to cross borders to enforce payment.
The case caps decades of high-stakes legal maneuvering and litigation that have bounced back and forth between the United States, where the companies are based, and countries in Central America and beyond where the chemicals were used.
A wave of lawsuits by Nicaraguan plantation workers followed in the United States in the 1990s. Dow and Shell — along with the growers Dole Fruit, Del Monte Fruit and Chiquita Brands — blocked the suits on the ground that the United States was not the place to try them because the alleged damage happened in Central America.
Nicaragua passed a law for DBCP victims that required corporate defendants to put up a bond of $100,000 per case, triggering hundreds of lawsuits there last decade. When Nicaraguan courts awarded hundreds of millions in compensation to victims, Dow, Shell and Dole declared that the courts lacked jurisdiction and refused to pay.
In particular, Shell said that the courts lacked jurisdiction because its headquarters were in the United States, and that it had no employees in the country. Dow said the Nicaraguan law for DBCP victims denied it due process, and Dole said the court had never obtained jurisdiction over it.
Those cases recall another widely publicized litigation, over oil-related pollution in Ecuador. In 2014, a federal judge in Manhattan threw out a $19 billion verdict against Chevron after finding that a lawyer had submitted false evidence. The judge did not dispute that pollution occurred in the Ecuadorean Amazon.
Mr. Smith said that the plaintiffs seeking enforcement in France were damaged by the chemicals and that the Nicaraguan Supreme Court had upheld their cases.
Mr. Smith said the case constituted a “multibillion-dollar liability” that had not been disclosed to Dow Chemical’s stockholders or the Securities and Exchange Commission. Dow said in its statement that it was in compliance with all laws and regulations regarding its reporting requirements.
The workers and families suing in France were not part of those agreements, and Mr. Briard said they were ultimately hoping to reach their own settlement.