The Kremlin had a blueprint for upending American politics with tactics honed in Estonia nearly a decade earlier.
Russia’s brazen interference in the 2016 American presidential election shouldn’t have been a total shock. President Vladimir Putin’s government had done it before, almost a decade earlier in tiny Estonia, where Russian operatives provoked political violence and mounted malicious cyberattacks.
In fact, many of the methods Moscow used back in 2007 to disrupt Estonian democracy are eerily similar to tactics Russian operatives used to hack American politics — an effort that intelligence officials and security experts warn is still underway.
“The Weekly” travels to Estonia, where our correspondent Matt Apuzzo pieces together clues hiding in plain sight, and he examines how vulnerable American democracy is to Russian hackers well-practiced in spreading disinformation, exploiting political differences and sowing chaos and mistrust.
Russia’s hacking and propaganda assault took Washington by surprise in 2016. It shouldn’t have. The seeds of that campaign were planted as early as 2007 in Estonia, where Russia practiced using the kinds of cyberweapons, disinformation and social manipulation that it would later unleash on the United States.
Few people paid attention to the Estonia case, and those who did viewed it strictly as a cyberattack. The American government completely missed the significance and potential power of the disinformation component of the attack. The response then, to the extent there was one, was all about securing systems and protecting physical infrastructure from hacking.
The United States may be more vulnerable to an election-year attack than ever before. The biggest vulnerability is the fiercely divided electorate. Russia showed in Estonia, and again in the United States in 2016, that exploiting the biggest divisions — national identity, immigration, race, inequality — causes the most disruption. The more one side loathes the other, the easier they are to manipulate.
Behind-the-scenes commentary from our producer/director.
It was frigid, with lots of snow on the ground, the day we visited the Defense Forces Cemetery in Tallinn, Estonia’s capital. The German, Russian and Estonian inscriptions on the tombstones tell the story of World War II in Estonia, where at different times in the 1940s the military had to fend off the armies of Hitler’s Third Reich and Stalin’s Soviet Union.
Once-state-of-the-art spy tools, circa 1989, are reminiscent of the Cold War, when Estonia was a Soviet satellite under the control of Moscow, and the top floor of the Viru Hotel in Tallinn was a KGB listening station. Now it’s a museum. Marten Kaevats, national digital adviser to the government of Estonia, tells Matt that the Cold War experience is a big reason many Estonians don’t trust Russia.
Matt visits the Memorial to the Victims of Communism in Tallinn with Heli Tiirmaa-Klaar, Estonia’s ambassador-at-large for cyber diplomacy. She has tried to bring international attention to Russian cyberattacks against Estonia, the latest chapter in what many Estonians see as a long history of Russian aggression. Members of Heli’s family were among tens of thousands of Estonians deported to Siberia and killed when the Soviets took over Estonia in the 1940s.
Estonia, which was proud of its reputation as a wired country, was hit by a wave of cyberattacks in 2007 that shut down government, media and banking systems. Estonian officials said at the time they were victims of cyberwarfare emanating from Russia.
The hacking came less than a month after violent outbursts over the decision to remove a Soviet-era war memorial in the Estonian capital, Tallinn. Russian leaders had denounced the decision and encouraged divisions between ethnic Russians and Estonians to boil over.
Similar online tactics, updated for the times to include the wider use of social media, were used to influence the 2016 American presidential election, as outlined by Times investigative reporting and American government assessments, including the Mueller report.
Russian operatives and their copycats are still at it, and the F.B.I. is preparing to counter possible threats against the 2020 U.S. presidential election.
