The whistle-blower’s complaint accuses Trump of using his office to get Ukraine to help his re-election, then covering it up.
The whistle-blower is a C.I.A. officer who was detailed to work at the White House at one point.
Trump attacked the whistle-blower, alluding to punishment for spies, while Republicans largely held the line.
Pelosi accused the White House of covering up the Ukraine matter.
The acting director of national intelligence testified. Speaker Nancy Pelosi accused the White House of a cover-up and President Trump suggested punishing the sources used in a whistle-blower’s complaint against him.
“In the course of my duties, I have received information from multiple U.S. government officials that the President of the United States is using the power of his office to solicit interference from a foreign country in the 2020 U.S. election.” Thus began an explosive criminal complaint drafted by an American intelligence officer and released by the House Intelligence Committee on Thursday.
At the center of the whistle-blower’s complaint is a July call between Mr. Trump and President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine. Mr. Trump brought up American aid to that country — without explicitly mentioning that he had just frozen a military aid package of hundreds of millions of dollars — and then pressed the Ukrainian leader to investigate former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
The man has since returned to the C.I.A., according to three people familiar with his identity. Little else is known about him. His complaint suggested he was an analyst by training and made clear he was steeped in details of American policy toward Europe, demonstrating a sophisticated understanding of Ukrainian politics and at least some knowledge of the law.
The whistle-blower’s expertise will likely add to lawmakers’ confidence about the merits of his complaint, and tamp down allegations that he might have misunderstood what he learned about Mr. Trump.
President Trump made remarks to the United States Mission to the United Nations on Thursday, the same day a House committee released a declassified version of a complaint.
And then you have Sleepy Joe Biden, who’s dumb as a rock. [laughter] This guy was dumb on his best day and he’s had — not having his best day right now. He’s dumb as a rock — so you have Sleepy Joe and he goes up and his kid, who’s had a lot of problems. He got thrown out of the Navy. A couple of problems. I mean, look, I’m not going to — it’s a problem. That’s a problem. So we won’t get into why and all that. But he got thrown out of the Navy and now this kid goes into Ukraine, walks away with millions of dollars and he becomes a consultant for $50,000 a month. And he doesn’t know anything compared to anybody in this room. O.K., he’s a stiff. He knows nothing. He’s walking away with $50,000. Or as you would say in the old days, $50k a month. Not bad. Would anybody else in this room like like to represent Ukraine just like — [laughter] That’s on top — you got the job — that’s on top of, that’s on top of hundreds of thousands and millions of dollars, but that’s not the best one. The best one was China. This came up. So now he goes to China, and I was with the head of Blackstone, which is the big deal. Steve Schwarzman. I said, “Steve, is that possible?” “No, why? Who got that?” I said, “Biden’s son.” “Ooh.”   You make hundreds of thousands of dollars, and millions of dollars off that. And that’s probably not all they gave him. They gave him plenty more, I’m sure. We might never find out. And then they talk about me and I didn’t do anything. I don’t know if I’m the most innocent person in the world. [laughter] He would be somebody you would pay a lot of money to, but not Biden’s son. So the whistle-blower came out and said nothing — said a couple of people told me he had a conversation with Ukraine. We’re at war.  They’re sick and nobody’s called them out like I do. I don’t understand, people are afraid to call them out. They’re afraid to say that the press is crooked. We have a crooked press. We have a dishonest media. So now they’re devastated, but they’ll always find something. I’m sure there’ll be something they’ll find in this report that will suit their lie. But basically that person never saw the report, never saw the call. Never saw the call, heard something and decided that he or she or whoever the hell it is — sort of like, almost a spy. I want to know who’s the person that gave the whistle-blower, who’s the person who gave the whistle-blower the information because that’s close to a spy. You know what we used to do in the old days when we were smart? Right, with spies and treason, right? We used to handle them a little differently than we do now. [laughter] Now you have guys like little Adam Schiff defending you. [laughter] He says, “pencil neck.” That name stuck. He’s got shirts that are too big, because you can’t buy shirts that small. He was never a coal miner, Joe, let’s put it that way. I don’t think he worked in the mines.
Haaland revokes a dozen Trump-era orders on fossil fuels and prioritizes climate change.
The remark stunned the audience, according to a person briefed on what took place, who had notes of the president’s comments. Mr. Trump condemned Mr. Biden’s role in Ukraine at a time when his son Hunter Biden was on the board of a Ukrainian energy company, and said the whistle-blower never heard the call in question.
When he returned from New York, Mr. Trump resumed his diatribe against Democrats. “There should be a way of stopping it, maybe legally through the courts,” he said.
Republicans largely stayed in line behind Mr. Trump. In a statement to Politico, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, dismissed as “laughable” the Democrats’ assertion that Mr. Trump’s behavior in the Ukraine matter should lead to his impeachment.
Representative Kevin McCarthy, the Republican leader, complained that the whistle-blower “has no primary sources,” even though the complaint makes clear that the author spoke to numerous people with direct knowledge of the call.
Some Republicans sounded more cautious. Representative Will Hurd, a moderate Texas Republican who has announced he will not run for re-election, wrote on Twitter that the complaint was “concerning” and needs to be fully investigated.
Joseph Maguire, the acting director of national intelligence, appeared before the House Intelligence Committee to discuss the handling of a whistle-blower complaint against President Trump.
In fact, he told Representative Raja Krishnamoorthi, Democrat of Illinois, that he would not have accepted the post of acting director of national intelligence if he knew of the case.
The White House did not order him to keep the complaint from Congress, he said. His delay was about sorting through possible claims of executive privilege.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi spoke to reporters after new details emerged from a whistle-blower’s complaint against President Trump related to his phone call with Ukraine’s leader.
The complaint states that the White House tried to “lock down” all records of the call, especially the word-for-word transcript. That gave the whistle-blower a reason to believe that they, the White House, understood the gravity of what transpired in that call. The complaint reports a quote “repeated abuse” of an electronic records system designed to store classified, sensitive national security information which the White House used to hide information of a political nature. This is a cover-up. This is a cover-up.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi, echoing the language of Watergate, accused the White House of engaging in “a cover-up” of the Ukraine affair, citing a whistle-blower complaint that said Trump administration officials worked to “lock down” all records of a call between President Trump and Ukraine’s president.
“This is a cover-up,” Ms. Pelosi told reporters at her weekly news conference.
The speaker refused to discuss a timeline for the impeachment inquiry she only embraced this week, but she did indicate that the consensus in the House Democratic Caucus is that the inquiry should concentrate on Ukraine.
“The inquiry and the consensus in our caucus is that our focus now is on this allegation,” she said.
Several Democratic presidential candidates also accused Mr. Trump of attempting to hide his call with Ukraine’s leader after the complaint’s release.
Sheryl Gay Stolberg and Katie Benner contributed reporting from Washington and Maggie Haberman, Katie Glueck and Matt Stevens from New York.