Opinion|‘It’s Sick That We Have to Do This’: Do We Really Need Shooter Drills?
‘It’s Sick That We Have to Do This’: Do We Really Need Shooter Drills?
Schools are trying to find the right way to prepare for carnage in the classroom.
Mr. Bokat-Lindell is a writer in The New York Times Opinion section.
The debate: Do we have to do this? Are active-shooter drills a lifesaving precaution that schools are wise to take, or do they come at too high a psychological cost?
School shootings began to haunt the American psyche more than 20 years ago after two students in Littleton, Colo., entered Columbine High School and killed 13 people in what was, at the time, the deadliest school shooting in the country’s history. Two hundred and thirty-nine school shootings have followed, killing at least 144 people and injuring at least another 302, by The Washington Post’s count, with 2018 registering the worst year yet.
In Columbine’s wake, active-shooter drills have become routine at two-thirds of all public schools, according to a survey by the Government Accountability Office. But it was after the Sandy Hook shooting in 2012, when a gunman killed 20 first graders and seven adults in Connecticut, that the Department of Education changed its shooter response recommendations from sheltering in place to more active measures of fleeing from or even fighting an assailant.
This change created an opportunity for the security industry, as Elizabeth Williamson reported for The Times, which markets active-shooter training services to local schools and law enforcement agencies with increasing frequency. But the tactics and methods vary widely, occasionally to macabre effect: Last year, a Florida high school conducted an unannounced drill that caused some students to suffer asthma attacks and vomit from fear, while others texted their parents goodbye.
We cannot keep waiting around for something to change. Through regular active-shooter drills, schools can equip their students with the skills to react quickly and safely to frightening situations. It might frighten them at first, but they’ll get used to it, just like they’re used to fire drills.
And indeed, there is anecdotal evidence that lockdowns and drills can be effective. Julia Glum reported for Newsweek that the police credited a rapid lockdown during a California school shooting in 2017 with saving dozens of children.
Preparing our children for profoundly unlikely events would be one thing if that preparation had no downside. But in this case, our efforts may exact a high price. … Our children may be relatively safe, but childhood itself is imperiled.
Research also shows that black and Hispanic students worry more about school shootings than whites, and experience them at far higher rates. The defense measures that some schools undertake can exacerbate these discrepancies. Kai Koerber, a black student who survived the Marjorie Stoneman Douglas shooting in Florida, told The Miami Herald that the school’s increased police presence after the attack made him more afraid.
When you’re dealing with something potentially frightening, if you can get ahead of the anxiety, then kids feel more in control. They feel a sense of competence. They know that the teachers have a plan, and the whole thing can make them feel quite safe.
When you have fire drills, you don’t put smoke in the hallways. … You don’t have people panicking. But you practice it often enough so people know what they’re doing.
This seems designed to foster in children a consciousness that is at once hypervigilant and desperate, but also morbid and resigned — in other words, to mold them into perfectly docile citizen-consumers. … And if children reject this position and try to take action, some educational authorities will attempt to discipline their resistance out of them, as in Texas, where one school district has threatened to penalize students who walk out in anti-gun violence actions.
As individual students are called upon to address what is actually a political problem, he writes, security companies and bulletproof backpack makers get to profit from the panic.
The debate over active-shooter drills has justifiably revolved around the well-being of children, threatened where they ought to be nurtured. But the fear of these kinds of attacks is intruding into the daily lives of adults, too, as more and more workplaces follow suit in preparing their employees for the worst.
While Americans continue to weigh how best to adapt to the reality of mass gun violence, it may be easy to lose sight of the essential. At the root of both the critiques and the defenses of active-shooter drills, there lies a shared understanding that seems at once banal to express and imperative to remember: This is the way things are, yes. But it’s not the way they have to be.
Here’s what readers had to say about the last debate: Have we hit peak vape panic?
A number of readers responded that if e-cigarettes really have a legitimate use as a smoking cessation tool, then they should require a doctor’s prescription to purchase. Others pointed out that this would create a scenario in which cigarettes were still available over the counter.
💌Did a friend send you this? Get your own newsletter by signing up here.