Pictures of men who were assaulted in the military reveal a profound sense of trust between Mary F. Calvert and her subjects.
This week, The Times is sharing the stories and photographs of six men who chose to make their suffering visible. The Department of Veterans Affairs has formally recognized each man as a victim of service-connected sexual assault.
“If she did not do this story, then no one would do this story,” said James Estrin, a staff photographer who has worked closely with Ms. Calvert.
Ms. Calvert’s photographs show haunted daily lives. The decaying smile of Paul Lloyd, who, after being assaulted in the Army National Guard, can’t allow a stranger like the dentist to get close. The tortured bathing routine of Ethan Hanson, who, after enduring sexual trauma as a Marine recruit, avoids taking showers.
The work also displays something else: a profound sense of trust between photographer and subject. Ms. Calvert spent several years getting to know these men. She calls them “my guys.” She slept on their couches. She joined them on errands. And she was upfront about her purpose.
“I told them that if you are upset, then we are probably taking pictures,” Ms. Calvert said.
Looking for light bulbs in the grocery store, Mr. Lloyd picked up a candle that smelled like the shampoo he had used in the shower when he was assaulted. A picture shows him crumpled in the aisle, head in his hands.
Flashbacks like that kept Mr. Lloyd up late. So Ms. Calvert set an alarm for the middle of the night and found him buzzing around the house, cleaning. It was hard to keep pace. Then he went up to the bedroom.
In the picture, viewers see Mr. Lloyd standing on the bathroom sink, his wife asleep in the bed nearby.
The article that appears with Ms. Calvert’s photographs was written by Dave Philipps, a correspondent who covers military affairs for The Times. He won a Pulitzer Prize in 2014, while working for The Gazette of Colorado Springs, for his coverage of wounded combat veterans.
Mr. Philipps was born and raised in Colorado Springs and still lives there. It’s a military town; the Air Force Academy and three active military bases are close by. He grew up among service members. They were his neighbors; he was playmates with their children.
He said that he’d long intended to write about the sexual assault of men in the military.
Last spring, Mr. Philipps was shown Ms. Calvert’s photos.
“I thought, ‘Oh my God. This is it,’” he said.
Ms. Calvert introduced him to Mr. Hanson, 29; Mr. Lloyd, 30; Billy Joe Capshaw, 56; Bill Minnix, 64; Heath Phillips, 48; and Jack Williams, 71.
The 2019 Pentagon report indicated that 20,500 active members experienced sexual assault in 2018, an increase from 2016.
“As long as those numbers keep going up, there is something wrong,” Ms. Calvert said.
Mary F. Calvert is on Instagram @maryfcalvert. Her email is |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| 