SAN FRANCISCO — A jury in Oakland, Calif., acquitted one man and could not reach a decision on a second man’s role in a 2016 warehouse blaze that killed 36 people, one of the deadliest structural fires in recent American history.
The fire tore through a late-night party in Oakland’s Fruitvale neighborhood on Dec. 2, 2016, in a building that had been transformed into a ramshackle artist collective known as Ghost Ship.
Many of the building’s residents were living there in violation of zoning laws, and the tragedy highlighted the glaring failures of the city’s leaders to enforce building and fire codes. The inferno also became an emblem of the rising cost of living in the Bay Area, which led so many people to seek shelter in a run-down building.
The two men on trial were Derick Almena, 49, the master tenant and leaseholder, and Max Harris, 29, described by prosecutors as Mr. Almena’s right hand in managing the warehouse, who collected rent from tenants and arranged events. They each were charged with 36 counts of involuntary manslaughter and faced a maximum of 39 years in prison.
Mr. Harris was acquitted, and the jury told Alameda County Superior Court Judge Trina Thompson that they could not reach a verdict on similar charges against Mr. Almena.
Ten jurors favored conviction of Mr. Almena and two were opposed, according to Brian Getz, one of Mr. Almena’s defense lawyers. A hearing will be held next month to discuss a new trial, he said.
The jury’s decision comes after a tortuous deliberation process that began in July, but was interrupted last month when Judge Thompson dismissed three jurors for unspecified misconduct, replacing them with three alternates. The judge then ordered the jury to begin deliberating from scratch. The trial featured three months of testimony.
Many of the residents living in the Ghost Ship warehouse were artists who had jammed the space with flammable items — “fence boards, shingles, window frames, wooden sculptures, tapestries, piano,” according to court documents — that became kindling for the fire. Many of the victims were attending the party on the second floor, and were unable to escape down the staircase.
The fire quickly consumed the building, which was built in 1930 and was once a milk bottling plant, even though there was a fire station less than 200 yards away. A local newspaper, The East Bay Times, won a Pulitzer Prize for its coverage of the fire, which “exposed the city’s failure to take actions that might have prevented it,” according to the prize committee.
In closing arguments, the prosecutor called the warehouse a “death trap,” and dismissed the defense’s claims that arsonists might have been responsible for the blaze. Witnesses had testified that there were no smoke alarms or sprinklers, and that Mr. Almena once laughed off the suggestion that the warehouse was dangerously susceptible to fire.
The grief of family members of the victims, many of whom packed into an overflow room during the proceedings, permeated the trial, with the prosecution reading the names of each of the 36 people who died, and showing final text messages from victims, saying goodbye to loved ones before they perished.
Lawyers for Mr. Almena and Mr. Harris built a defense that cast blame for the fire on the landlord, and on city officials who had visited the property over the years and had never condemned it as a fire hazard. Investigators never determined the exact cause of the fire, but it was widely suspected to have been ignited after an electrical malfunction.
Taking the stand in his own defense, Mr. Almena spoke about being in solitary confinement and gaining 60 pounds while in jail awaiting trial. “I’m just so sad,” he said on the stand, according to the San Francisco Chronicle.
The families of the victims wanted city officials and the landlord to be prosecuted, but at the end of the investigation, only Mr. Almena and Mr. Harris faced criminal charges. The two men were arrested in June 2017.
Last July, prosecutors announced that they had reached a plea deal with Mr. Almena and Mr. Harris, in which the defendants agreed to plead no contest to the involuntary manslaughter charges. Under the deal, Mr. Almena would serve nine years in prison, and Mr. Harris would serve six.
But a month later, after an outcry from families who saw the deal as too lenient, a judge rejected the agreement, setting up the trial, which began in late April.
Diagrams and photographs showing the interior of the building illustrate some of the factors that made the fire so deadly.
In addition to the criminal case, families are continuing to pursue civil litigation against the city and the landlord, Chor Nar Siu Ng, who bought the building in 1988.
After the verdict was announced, defense lawyers criticized what they described as inaction by the Oakland city government to address the conditions at the root of the tragedy: high housing costs and lax inspections of hazardous living conditions.
Mr. Vega, whose brother died in the fire, said after the verdict on Thursday that he was not sure he would attend a second trial of Mr. Almena, if there is one.
