Style|The Memes Are Pouring the White Claw Down Your Throat!
The Memes Are Pouring the White Claw Down Your Throat!
The brand doesn’t care if you’re buying “ironically.” You’re still buying.
Now that the last drops of summer have been shaken from the can, White Claw can be declared the winning beverage of the season.
Its lightning-quick adoption by consumers and the small factory of meme makers, T-shirt designers, content producers (that’s me!) and others that have encircled the drink provide a perfect portrait of brand success in 2019. Get big enough and the public will provide you with free advertising.
Its success mirrors the broader craze for seltzer in America. People want so much White Claw that, on Friday, the brand confirmed it was experiencing a shortage and said it was “working around the clock” to increase supply.
“White Claw is starting to become the Kleenex of spiked seltzer,” wrote Jenna Fanduzzi, 27, who writes blogs about seltzer as a hobby.
White Claw, which is owned by Mark Anthony Brands, the maker of Mike’s Hard Lemonade, has left the work of what it symbolizes, its brand definition, largely to those consumers.
Aside from a few specific splashy appearances — it was a sponsor of the Kentucky Derby this year — White Claw does not aggressively market itself. And when it does, the aesthetic is aggressively bland and minimalist. Also, its drink is unextraordinary.
Like Drake’s video for “Hotline Bling,” which, with its empty background, lent itself perfectly to memes, White Claw’s avoidance of niche marketing — its refusal to market to a specific customer base — left a blank that the content creators of the world have rushed to fill.
A meme of unknown provenance.
Perhaps the most aggressive amateur branding of the Claw came from Trevor Wallace, a 23-year-old comedian. His video lovingly lampooning the drink has been viewed nearly 2.4 million times. (The video is sponsored — not by White Claw but by an online perfume store.) In the video, Mr. Wallace performs as a bro who loves White Claw because he thinks it is for rich people/white people/people who go to private school.
After the success of the video, Mr. Wallace approached the brand, looking to start conversations about a partnership. White Claw had to decline, because of regulations prohibiting the advertising of alcoholic drinks by people under the age of 25.
But Mr. Wallace’s video did important work for White Claw. It gave college-age men who wanted to drink it ironic cover for doing so.
These photos and videos functioned as free advertising, said Emily Hund, who studies Instagram culture at the University of Pennsylvania, leaving little need for the brand to market itself.
Some consumers also profited from the brand’s virality. Dylan Walker, a 20-year-old college student in Georgia and former frat member, was inspired by a meme he saw that paired White Claw with an alien character from the film “Toy Story.” He created a sticker and offered it for sale on Etsy. He has sold about 200 of them, he said.
Mr. Walker, in a phone interview, gave me a crash course in the evolution of a certain kind of contemporary light beverage.
Many others first heard of White Claw through memes. That was the case for Ryan Eubank, a 28-year-old assistant manager at a Panera Bread in Manhattan, Kan. His friend Alan keeps their group of friends well-supplied in memes.
Alan liked La Croix memes. When White Claw emerged, it seemed like a natural next step. Mr. Eubank ended up liking White Claw so much that his partner, Amber Berg, put a picture of it on a phone background she designed that incorporates aspects of their relationship, including other brands like Bose headphones, the manga series “Naruto” and cats.
I asked Ms. Berg and Mr. Eubank whether they were concerned about White Claw’s reputation as a drink for basics. Mr. Eubank clarified that the drinking of White Claw was ironic.
