BEIRUT, Lebanon — The prime minister of Lebanon gave more than $16 million to a South African bikini model who said they had a romantic relationship after they met at a luxury resort in the Seychelles, according to South African court documents obtained by The New York Times.
A looming financial crisis in Lebanon has set off antigovernment protests. This month, Mr. Hariri said the Lebanese government would declare an “economic state of emergency” and push through austerity measures.
Mr. Hariri did not respond to questions sent to his media team about his relationship with the model, Candice van der Merwe, or any gifts to her.
[The day after this article was published, Mr. Hariri said that negative news reports would not interrupt his work.
Since then, the younger Hariri has remained one of Lebanon’s best known political figures. He makes frequent state visits to Paris, Washington and Riyadh and favors pro-Western policies, but heads a power-sharing government that includes Hezbollah, the Lebanese militant group and political party backed by Iran.
His bank transfers to Ms. van der Merwe were made between his two terms as prime minister, but while he was the head of his political party, the Future Movement. He was 43 at the time of the first transfer, in 2013. He was then running family businesses in construction and other domains and living in France and Saudi Arabia.
Ms. van der Merwe was 20 years old. She had appeared in energy drink promotions and swimwear calendars, but her reported annual income had never exceeded $5,400.
In a promotional interview in a skimpy bikini conducted in conjunction with the publication of a swimsuit calendar in 2011, she said her interests included listening to Jack Johnson and Celine Dion, riding Jet Skis and flying helicopters with her father.
Then in May 2013, her assets suddenly soared, thanks to a transfer of $15,299,965 from a Lebanese bank.
“Lady luck, it would seem, suddenly smiled on the applicant,” a South African judge wrote in 2015.
The transfer would likely have remained secret had the large sum not raised suspicions among the South African financial and tax authorities, who investigated and deemed it taxable income.
Ms. van der Merwe insisted the money was a gift, and not taxable according to South African law. In subsequent court cases, she argued the money had been given to her without conditions and identified her benefactor as Mr. Hariri.
“Love you my Saad :),” Ms. van der Merwe wrote in an email to Mr. Hariri in which she provided her bank account details so he could transfer the money, telling him it was so she could buy property.
The money landed in her account shortly afterward.
The New York Times was unable to reach Ms. van der Merwe, but two of her previous lawyers, her current lawyer, and her father, who has represented her in tax court, declined to comment and to make her available for an interview.
“The plaintiff’s relationship with Mr. Hariri was terminated, which resulted in the loss of financial benefits that would have accrued to her from the relationship if it had been allowed to persist without outside interference,” the suit says.