Nikole Hannah-Jones discusses the 1619 Project and how it is reframing the way we look at American history.
The headquarters of The New York Times is in a busy area of Manhattan where the sidewalks are always bustling. But on the Thursday before the Labor Day weekend, there were larger-than-usual crowds in front of our entrance. And they were after copies of one of the most exciting pieces of journalism we’ve produced in a while.
We were handing out 2,000 free copies of our 1619 Project, which has caused quite a sensation in the three weeks since it was published.
As a black man born and educated in the United States, I found that the 1619 Project — comprising a special edition of our Sunday magazine, a section of the newspaper, a kids section, a five-part podcast and a curriculum — opened my eyes to the impact slavery has had in America far beyond what I was taught in school. It was conceived by Nikole Hannah-Jones, a staff writer for the Times Magazine. I sat down with Nikole, who is a friend, to discuss the project and the reaction to it.
The conversation has been edited and condensed for clarity.
Who was the audience you had in mind?
Americans who are not black, so that they could understand this history and ongoing legacy and really reckon with our true identity as a country and who we really are. I wanted to reframe the way that we see this history and the way that we see ourselves.
I also did it specifically for black folks. I think my opening essay is really written to black Americans. We have always been treated as a problem here, made to feel as if we are not full citizens of our country, been made to feel ashamed of the fact that our story here starts with enslavement.
I really wanted us to be liberated of that and to understand the pivotal role that we have played in this country, and to believe, as I argue in the piece, that no one has a greater claim to this flag and this country and patriotism than we do, because we have fought for it the hardest.
You begin your essay by talking about your father, who hoisted an American flag in your front lawn for years when you were a child. You described this as being an embarrassment when you were young, but then you realized “no people has a greater claim to that flag than us” — “us” being black Americans. Is this statement meant to be a patriotic one?
Absolutely — I mean, surprisingly, because I’ve never considered myself a particularly patriotic person. But what I’m arguing is that our founding ideals were great and powerful. Had we in fact built a country based on those founding ideals, then we would have the most amazing country the earth has ever seen.
But black people took those ideals very literally, and have fought to make those ideals real. And because of that, I say that we are — as much as the white founders whom we recognize — that we are the founding fathers of this country.
So yes, it is patriotism, but not that type of blind, performative patriotism that is simply about trying to camouflage the nation’s sins and not trying to fight for the true ideals. But the type of patriotism, I think, that says: If you love your country, you have to fight to make your country the country that it should be.
The project covers a lot of territory, demonstrating how food, traffic, health, culture, music and many other subjects are connected to slavery in America. Is there a particular piece in the project that you feel is especially profound in this regard?
The entire special issue is making an argument, and every essay is just a scope in that argument. So, I wouldn’t call out a particular essay, because I think all of them are necessary.
Two of my favorite aspects of it are the pieces of literary fiction that are throughout the magazine. So much of the issue was just devastating and hard, and about all the ways that this country tried to deprive black Americans of their humanity and their citizenship.
And yet, out of four million enslaved people who are in this country at the end of the Civil War, we have become 40 million descendants. And that is such a powerful testament to the resiliency of our ancestors, our grandparents, our parents. And so, I needed to end on something that showed that we have survived, and we are attempting to thrive.
The four Howard Law School graduates from the pre-eminent historically black law school in the country, tracing their stories back to an enslaved ancestor and connecting that past and present, is probably one of the things that I love most about the ending of the magazine.
Is the reaction all that you had hoped for?
I am completely shocked and overwhelmed by the responses. I did not expect it at all. I profoundly believe that we were creating something important and powerful, and we’re attempting to kind of shake the table on the way that we’ve been taught this history, in the way that we have been taught to think about black Americans and our role, but it’s also an entire project about slavery, the thing that we don’t ever really want to grapple with.
So, no, I had no idea that it would take off like it did. People were driving from store to store looking for copies, people were stealing the magazines out of the paper.
Has this ever happened before at The Times? Has there ever been such a response?
Nikita Stewart, who wrote the opening essay for the special section, and I were talking about it, and what she said was that the last time people can remember this kind of fervor over a printed newspaper work was when Barack Obama won the election and became the first black president.
I’ve heard from so many folks who have said they bought several copies because they wanted to give them out to their family and friends. I’ve never seen that before. It’s the biggest response I’ve ever gotten to anything, and that’s really a testament to two things: It’s a testament to the quality of the work that’s in there. And I think it also speaks to where we are in the country right now, and that people are trying to grapple with how we got here. And this certainly offers a key.
Does any particular piece of criticism or praise stick out to you?
The criticism has been all about the framing, because people can’t actually criticize the facts.
There was some critique that I was centering black people and not spending time on Native and Indigenous people, and I understand it to a degree. I did not want to render Native people invisible, but this was a story about chattel slavery.
But I think it also speaks to how little good, comprehensive, smart, empathetic coverage we have of the two most marginalized groups in America, which are Native people and black people.
In terms of praise, I think there’s two things that have stuck out to me: how many black folks have messaged, written and called me — people I know, to strangers — who said they had never felt more American before, that for the first time they’re proud that we can claim our own country as our own.
Think about that: that we have not felt that we could claim our own country as our own, and that people read my essay and felt that they could. If I had not convinced a single white person that this was important, I’d be happy with that reaction. However, I’ve heard from so many white, Asian and Latino readers who have also said they didn’t know this history and it has changed their understanding of this country.
Why was it important for you to have mainly black contributors for the project?

It also sends what I hope is a message to journalistic institutions, that you can produce the most fantastic, amazing-quality journalism about people who are not always centered and done by people who are not always centered.
In your essay, you say, “Black people have seen the worst of America, yet, somehow, we still believe in its best.” This is a very hopeful sentence. Would you describe this project as hopeful?
I’m going to answer that in two ways. Would I describe myself as hopeful? No. Would I describe the project as hopeful? Yes. Because, again, you don’t do this work if you don’t have hope that this work can have an impact. And you don’t institute a project that says we seek to reframe the way that we see our history, and not hope that that reframing occurs.