NEW ORLEANS — Linda Hamilton laughs the way Courtney Love sings, with great raspy bravado. It would be an intimidating laugh if it didn’t come easily, and if it weren’t so often offered at her own expense.
Take the story Hamilton tells about the time she went to a North Carolina pool hall, shortly after “Terminator 2: Judgment Day” had given her a permanent place in the pop culture pantheon. During the game, Hamilton could feel people noticing her: Was that really the actress who had played waitress-turned-warrior Sarah Connor in the biggest movie of 1991?
After nearly three decades spent trying to shake Sarah Connor’s long shadow, the 62-year-old Hamilton has finally reprised the character for “Terminator: Dark Fate,” due in November. The movie hands Hamilton that most quotable catchphrase, “I’ll be back,” though after all that time away from the “Terminator” franchise, you can’t blame audiences for wondering where she’s been.
The answer can be found in the colorful New Orleans townhouse where she fixed me a cup of Earl Grey tea in early August. “Here you go, baby!” she said, illustrating one of the key differences between her and her character: Linda Hamilton will happily call a stranger “baby” or “honey bunch,” while the closest Sarah Connor comes to granting a nickname is when she uses an expletive as a noun.
Disillusioned, she left the furniture behind and fled Los Angeles, roughing it for a few years on a Virginia farm before moving to New Orleans, a city whose lively spirit she treasures. “I know people here after four years better than I ever knew anyone in Malibu,” she said. The walls of her two-story townhouse are crammed with paintings and portraits; the only way Hamilton would consider taking a new husband, she joked, is if the proposal came from her favorite artist, Kehinde Wiley.
What she hadn’t dreamed of was a sequel. Years later, when Cameron contacted her out of the blue to see if she’d commit to “Terminator 2,” Hamilton had only one request: Instead of playing the damsel in distress again, she wanted Sarah to go crazy. “I wrote it to the hilt based on her directive,” Cameron told me.
Hamilton was still married to the actor Bruce Abbott when Cameron first floated the idea of a “Terminator” sequel; by the time he had returned with a finished script, Hamilton was mothering her newborn son, Dalton, and Abbott had asked for a divorce. It was hardly the ideal time to take on such a demanding action film, yet Hamilton saw it as an opportunity to pour everything she was feeling into Sarah.
Their relationship lasted seven tumultuous years, culminating in a brief marriage from 1997 to 1999.
When it came to the “Terminator” franchise, though, it took Hollywood far longer to learn that lesson.
AFTER “TERMINATOR 2,” different studios tried extending the series without the participation of Hamilton or Cameron: In 2003, “Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines” killed Sarah Connor offscreen and failed to reach the box-office heights of its predecessor, while recent efforts to revive the franchise, including the 2009 “Terminator Salvation” and 2015 “Terminator Genisys,” were ultimately nonstarters.
That’s why Hamilton was surprised two years ago when she received a letter from Cameron, asking her if she’d be willing to play Sarah Connor one more time. After making “Deadpool,” Miller was going to direct a new “Terminator” movie that Cameron would produce, and both men felt that for “Terminator: Dark Fate” to work, the other sequels had to be wiped clean and Hamilton would have to return to her signature role.
Brainstorming alongside Miller and Cameron, Hamilton helped craft a new iteration of Sarah, now a grizzled lone wolf who must team up with a mechanically enhanced female soldier (Davis) to protect another young woman (Natalia Reyes) targeted by Terminators. The alliance of the three women does not come naturally.
“Sarah is a broken being at the beginning of this film,” Hamilton said. “She’s a woman without a country, adrift and full of rage.” To play her, Hamilton had to dig deeper than she ever had before, learn how to fire a rocket launcher, and get back into fighting shape at age 60. “This was 10 times the effort I put into the second one,” she said.
Still, Hamilton wanted to do the bulk of the stunts herself: If she was going to recommit to Sarah Connor after all that time away, trading her peaceful life for one filled with explosions and flashbulbs, she wasn’t going to do it by half-measures. “Linda’s at her best when she has a challenge,” Cameron said.
