Opinion|When Should a President Be Impeached?
When Should a President Be Impeached?
 Democrats may make Trump the third.
Mr. Bokat-Lindell is a writer in The New York Times Opinion section.
This article is part of the Debatable newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it Tuesdays and Thursdays.
What just happened: Having resisted calls for Donald Trump’s impeachment on various charges since she became speaker of the House in January, Nancy Pelosi announced on Tuesday that the House will open a formal impeachment inquiry into the president. The disclosure that he had pressed his Ukrainian counterpart on a call to investigate unsubstantiated claims of corruption against the son of the leading Democratic presidential candidate, Joe Biden, made it almost impossible for Ms. Pelosi to hold out. Reports that the president had frozen almost $400 million in military aid to Ukraine before the call proved decisive.
The debate: When is impeaching the president the right thing to do?
The president’s critics have found numerous justifications for impeachment throughout his tenure, including obstruction of justice during the Mueller investigation, violations of campaign finance laws in the payment of hush money to two women and what seems to be regular defiance of the Constitution’s emoluments clause.
The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, however, had until now been unwilling to make what she saw as a doomed commitment: While a simple majority in the House of Representatives is enough to impeach, convicting and removing the president requires the support of two-thirds of the Senate, now controlled by Republicans who show no signs of defecting.
What is an impeachable offense?
The Constitution specifies two crimes — treason and bribery — for which the president can be impeached, as well as a third, broader category of “other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.” It is generally understood that to the drafters of the Constitution, the word “high” referred not to the severity of a given crime but to the abuse of high office.
A crime that’s not an impeachable offense?
But “not all crimes by federal officials have been seen as impeachable,” write Laurence Tribe, a professor of constitutional law at Harvard, and Joshua Matz, an adjunct professor at Georgetown Law, in their book “To End a Presidency.” So where exactly does the line fall? During Bill Clinton’s impeachment trial, Mr. Tribe argued that his conduct did not rise to the level of an impeachable offense because it related to his private life.
There appeared to be broad consensus in the Senate that some private crimes not involving an abuse of power (e.g., murder for personal reasons) are so outrageous as to constitute grounds for removal, but there was no consensus on where the threshold for outrageousness lies.
An impeachable offense that’s not a crime?
Trump sought to use the extensive powers of his office to get a foreign government to open an investigation that would be damaging to a political rival. … Using the office of the president for personal political benefit comports with both the standard understandings of bribery and the broader category of high crimes and misdemeanors.
Many caution that without an underlying criminal offense, like bribery, impeachment risks becoming a partisan political weapon.
What if impeachment is a dead end?
Impeachment is so divisive to the country that unless there’s something so compelling and overwhelming and bipartisan, I don’t think we should go down that path, because it divides the country. And he’s just not worth it.
But others, invoking the judgment of history, maintain that political considerations shouldn’t enter the calculus. Members of Congress made an oath to support and defend the Constitution, and to look the other way when it’s being violated is to abdicate that responsibility.
I want to see every Republican go on the record and knowingly vote against impeachment of this president, knowing his corruption, having it on the record so that they can have that stain on their careers for the rest of their lives because this is outrageous to protect the amount of lawlessness and corruption coming out of this presidency.
The White House’s principal justification for its current stonewalling strategy for ongoing House investigations would not be relevant in the context of impeachment. … We think it is entirely possible — probable even — that judges would recognize the primacy of impeachment proceedings against the president of the United States and expedite consideration of such cases.
Perhaps the single greatest risk of any impeachment, no matter how justified, is that a minority will view it as a gussied-up coup d’état. … Those citizens might simply walk away from our shared democratic project, concluding that their votes and voices don’t matter. Or they might drift ever more deeply into revolutionary politics, concluding that our democracy is rotten to the core. In the worst of all worst cases, they might even take up arms — especially if the ousted president refuses to depart gracefully and instead terrorizes the polity that rejected him.
One way or the other, if the option of undoing an election is on the table, something has gone very wrong. The paradox of impeachment is that it relies on a legislative body that represents the public to solve a crisis that the public helped set in motion — in some cases, one could argue, with foreknowledge of the potential for disaster.
Do you have a point of view we missed? Email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Please note your name, age and location in your response, which may be included in the next newsletter.
Here’s what readers had to say about the last debate: Should the presidency have an age limit?
Victor, a surgeon from New Hampshire, commented that the airline pilot profession has a mandatory retirement age. “You can’t tell me that it’s less taxing to be president than to be a pilot or surgeon,” he wrote.
💌Did a friend send you this? Get your own newsletter by signing up here.