So far, since beginning in April, he has climbed 11 of them, sometimes reaching the top of mighty peaks like K2 and Broad Peak in the span of a weekend, something that took previous generations of mountaineers months, if not years, to accomplish.
The fastest all 14 have been climbed is eight years. So few believed Nims, 36, when he announced Project Possible. Yet it has already stirred pride in the Nepali climbing community and made a dramatic statement about achieving independent mountaineering goals.
And then there is that photograph, which he sees as a blessing (it helped motivate regulatory changes on climbing Everest) and a curse (it has often been used without credit or compensation).
Your Everest traffic jam photograph — it’s a striking and important image. Please discuss.
Do you think guide services or other climbers wish you hadn’t taken it?
Did any media outlets have permission or rights to use the image?
Your team has several notable climbers like Mingma David Sherpa, Gesman Tamang, Geljen Sherpa, Saney Sherpa and Lakpa Dendi Sherpa, whom we see on your Instagram feed. What’s the secret?
Why did you leave the United Kingdom’s special forces — specifically the U.K. Royal Navy’s elite Special Boat Service — and give up on your full military pension to pursue the project?
Have you turned around or backed off any summits so far?
Please describe your fitness and endurance at altitude in a way normal folks may relate to.
Would our conversation be different if you were from Austria or California and had just climbed 11 8,000-meter peaks?
Considering how you spent the month of July, climbing all five 8,000-meter peaks of Pakistan on foot, I can understand the disappointment.
Your team is trying to practice self-reliance on your climbs, and you’re also using all kinds of different tactics. Please explain.
Your team is using supplemental oxygen, which some critics online have suggested diminishes your project somehow. Thoughts?
“The only people who might say this are probably those mountaineers who think they’re cool and I’m just blowing everything out of the park.
Last one: Are you concerned about the effects of prolonged exposure to high altitude?
