MANILA — The International Criminal Court said on Thursday that it was opening a preliminary investigation into accusations that President Rodrigo Duterte and other Philippine officials had committed crimes against humanity in the course of the government’s deadly crackdown on drugs.
Harry Roque, a spokesman for the Philippine president, said that the government’s crackdown was a “legitimate police operation” and that the president welcomed The Hague-based tribunal’s decision.
“He is sick and tired of being accused of the commission of crimes against humanity,” Mr. Roque told reporters in Manila.
In a 77-page complaint filed to the tribunal in April, a Filipino lawyer accused Mr. Duterte and 11 other officials of mass murder and crimes against humanity. He called Mr. Duterte the “mastermind” of a campaign of extrajudicial killings that dated to the late 1980s, when he became mayor of the southern city of Davao, and that greatly escalated after he became president.
The lawyer, Jude Josue Sabio, represented two men who said they had been assassins for Mr. Duterte in Davao.
Mr. Duterte, who has bragged about personally killing criminals as mayor of Davao, won the presidency promising to fill Manila Bay with the bodies of drug addicts. After taking office, he urged the police to kill drug suspects and promised to protect officers from prosecution. Thousands of Filipinos have been killed by the police, in what the authorities said were shootouts, or by unidentified gunmen.
Last year, after an outcry over the killings of three teenagers by police officers, Mr. Duterte suspended the police operations and put the antidrug campaign in the hands of the Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency. But he put the police back in charge in December. Last week, the police said that 46 people suspected of using or selling drugs had been killed by the police since then.
That brought the police’s official death toll from the campaign to over 4,000, a number much lower than the estimated 12,000 deaths reported by various international and local rights groups.
The tribunal can take cases only if a country’s own judicial system is unable or unwilling to pursue them, a condition that Mr. Roque said did not apply to the Philippines. “We view, of course, this decision of the prosecutor as a waste of the court’s time and resources,” he said.