Good morning. Craig Claiborne’s recipe for beef stroganoff (above) is on the menu for dinner tonight. It is a delicious meal when served over buttered noodles with parsley and maybe especially so if you make like some of your fellow Cooking subscribers and add a smidgen of smoked paprika to the sour cream that coats the meat.
Heading in a very different direction indeed, you might try this Florence Fabricant recipe for baked fish with potatoes, peppers and olives, which she picked up, in classic Fabricant style, from the kitchen of the hotel La Mamounia in Marrakesh. I like that with white rice. But you may prefer couscous.
Taking yet another tack, this time toward a meatless meal, you could cook Melissa Clark’s recipe for a shredded tofu and shiitake stir-fry. I like that with white rice as well. You could absolutely make it with brown.
Other recipes to consider tonight and in coming days: this terrific meatloaf recipe from the late designer Bill Blass. It’s comfort food for the 740 Park set. Take a look, as well, at the hummus “tehina” that Michael Solomonov serves at Zahav in Philadelphia. And consider the chicken tagine that I caught emerging from the kitchens of Boulud Sud, Daniel Boulud’s excellent canteen across the street from Lincoln Center.
You should make Alison Roman’s recipe for ginger-molasses cookies sometime soon. And maybe a sour-cream coffee cake. Are you making your own yogurt yet, as the moms and dads of bohemian Brooklyn used to do back in the 1970s in their Salton machines, and as their children do now in the Instant Pot? That’d be good to do this week as well!
And, as always, please reach out to us for help if you run into problems with the cooking or the technology. We are at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Now, do read Gustavo Arellano in The New Yorker, on the Syrian baker who is bringing a famous Middle Eastern ice cream to California.
Then take a look at CJ Lotz in Garden & Gun, writing about a new king cake for Mardi Gras, this one made of biscuits.
And nothing to do with jackfruit or sauté pans, but you’ll definitely want to read this excellent tale from John Ruddy in The Day, of New London, Conn. It’s about the Blizzard of 1978 and how it played out for two young men trying to get home to Noank from their jobs on Fishers Island, 40 years ago this week. Nautical! See you on Friday.