In the over three decades he hosted the children’s television show “Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood,” Fred Rogers conveyed virtue and kindness with his signature zippered cardigans and puppet friends.
Next month, the United States Postal Service will immortalize Mr. Rogers, who died of cancer in 2003, alongside cultural and political icons such as Elvis, Big Bird and former presidents, when it introduces a Forever postage stamp with his portrait.
He will be depicted wearing — no surprise here — a sweater, and cuddling up to a puppet, King Friday XIII.
Every year, the Postal Service receives about 40,000 suggestions for people or topics to feature on its stamps. The list is whittled down to about two dozen choices, and a citizens’ committee makes the final selections.
The stamp featuring Mr. Rogers will have a print run of about 15 million. It will be unveiled on March 23 at WQED, the Pittsburgh studio where his show was filmed, the Postal Service announced.
William J. Gicker Jr., the manager of stamp development at the Postal Service, said the “warm and engaging” way Mr. Rogers communicated made him an appropriate choice.
The postage stamp is the latest cultural emblem of the enduring appeal of Mr. Rogers and his show, which is marking the 50th anniversary of its American premiere. Last month, TriStar Pictures announced that Tom Hanks would play Mr. Rogers in the biopic “You Are My Friend,” about his friendship with a journalist.
His persona resonated off screen as well, such as when he testified before a Senate subcommittee to push for public broadcasting funds. In 1997, he moved an entire Emmy Awards audience full of celebrities to silence, and some to tears, when he instructed them to think of someone they owed gratitude.
Fans have even created a “Church of Rogers” forum on Reddit to share the love online.
“I am becoming the person Mr. Rogers would want me to be,” one fan wrote.
Having Mr. Rogers’s face on a stamp that enables slow, thoughtful communication is a fitting parallel of his approach to life.
Patience was one of the themes of his show, which aired its last new episode in 2001 but is still broadcast on PBS. Children were encouraged to embrace it, an undertaking they saw modeled in Mr. McFeely, who was the neighborhood’s equivalent of a mailman.
Mr. McFeely, whose catchphrase was “Speedy Delivery,” would arrive at Mr. Rogers’s house in a battery-operated wagon, in a kayak or on a tricycle. He would often deliver films of himself doing chores, like raking leaves, at high speed, but over time he learned to slow down enough to exchange pleasantries with Mr. Rogers.
David A. Newell, who played the character for 33 years, said he was initially employed as a prop coordinator on the show and portrayed the delivery man on the side.
Mr. Rogers, who was born in Latrobe, Pa., on March 20, 1928, started working in the television industry after he graduated from college. He also became a Presbyterian minister. “Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood” began airing in Pittsburgh in 1966 and was broadcast nationally starting in 1968.
It came as close to a reality show as you could get for an audience of toddlers.
He visited a recycling center, explored how a restaurant operates, and took viewers with him on a trip to the doctor. He threw himself into moonwalking, and slipped around on the ice with Peggy Fleming. When he accidentally buttoned his sweater incorrectly, or a zipper got jammed, he turned it into a teaching moment.
Very few subjects were off-limits on the show — he addressed death, anger, violence and parental divorce.
