New York Fashion Week officially kicks off on Feb. 8, and along with the usual chatter about the shows comes the showy chatter among industry folk: that under-the-radar label, the luxe sneaker drop, the splashy debut. Here are a few things you’ll want to know to fit into the conversation — whether you’re a bona fide fashion weeker or just wouldn’t mind masquerading as one.
In between shows, some industry insiders will surely be dashing to Greene Street in SoHo, where Louis Vuitton has temporarily set up shop. On Feb. 8, the pop-up will not only introduce the luxury label’s spring 2018 women’s Archlight sneakers (giving New Yorkers a chance to shop them first), but also carry a version that’s exclusive to the shop: all-black clompers, as befits a notoriously color-shy New Yorker.
Louis Vuitton Archlight canvas and leather sneakers, $1,090 at Louis Vuitton pop-up, 122 Greene Street, through March 10.
Since its soft debut at the Chateau Marmont in Los Angeles in November — the event was hosted by Jaime King and Kate Bosworth — Land of Distraction has been steadily building buzz. Easy to see why: Its first collection, introduced online last week, expertly mines vintage work wear and classic Western style to create effortlessly cool ensembles suited to either coast. Which is just as well, since the label is making its New York Fashion Week debut this week.
Land of Distraction rayon-spandex blend striped pants, $325; oversize cotton snap hoodie, $375; and high-waist corduroy flares, $350; at landofdistraction.com.
Despite the many illusions fashion people may hold about themselves, they are, at the end of the day, not all that different than nonfashion people. As in, they talk about the weather. And when it’s freezing, they complain about it. The difference is, they dress to combat the cold in as flashy a puffer as they can find.
Ienki Ienki tech fabric down puffer, $1,230 at Barneys New York, barneys.com.
“I think it’s time for a new perspective on glamour in America,” LaQuan Smith said as he prepped for his New York Fashion Week show. Mr. Smith, who has charmed the likes of Kim Kardashian West and Rihanna with his sophisticated, figure-hugging designs, has presented fashion week collections, but this season he has decided to go all out with a runway show. Who knows? Maybe one of his superstar clients will be sitting in the front row.
LaQuan Smith PVC dress, $350 at laquansmith.com.
Wear it. That seems to be fashion’s strategy of late. Case in point: Aurora James of Brother Vellies and the team from the Women’s March have rounded up a roster of cool labels, including Clare V., Ryan Roche, Chromat, Heron Preston and Rachel Comey, to design a capsule collection, released this week, that benefits the march and Planned Parenthood. Clare V.’s cotton bandanna, for one, gets the message across succinctly and stylishly.
