For the coming season, embrace trip-inducing tie-dye and graphic Hawaiian shirts. Or take a mellower approach with Dieter Rams-inspired clothing and sleek travel bags made of practical nylon.
Tie-dye has long been associated with hippies and counterculture. And lately, fashion designers seemed to have caught a whiff. In January, the British designer Alex Mullins featured the psychedelic print on boxy suits and long T-shirts. The buzzed-about Russian designer Gosha Rubchinskiy created an oversize tie-dyed T-shirt that features an image of an alien playing with a soccer ball. And the young and obscure street wear brand Cactus Plant Flea Market sells vintage-style T-shirts that are hand-printed and embroidered with offbeat typography and graphics. To stoke demand, the shirts are available only at surprise drops at stores like Dover Street Market.
Gosha Rubchinskiy T-shirt, $85, at Dover Street Market stores worldwide. Cactus Plant Flea Market, $100 to $120, when available, at cactusplantfleamarket.bigcartel.com.
Hang 10, Louis!
Louis Vuitton’s latest men’s wear collection is all about pukka shells and Hawaiian shirts. So what better way to spread the word than a cross-country road trip aboard a retro Volkswagen van, decked out with tropical graphics? The van made stops in Miami, Los Angeles and Honolulu, and a pop-up shop will be open in Midtown Manhattan through March 15, to showcase the floral print shirts and color-blocked carryalls. And yes, there are even Vuitton-branded surfboards.
Louis Vuitton Spring/Summer 2018 Pop-Up, 655 Madison Avenue.
Remember those Prada’s black nylon bags from the 1990s? They’re back. For its fall/winter 2018 collection, the Italian fashion brand offered a full array. But no need to wait until September to get one; this handsome carryall with leather detailing is available now. Nylon duffels are showing up elsewhere, too, including: a navy version by Raf Simons at Calvin Klein.
Prada bag, $1,790, at Prada.com. Calvin Klein 205W39NYC bag, $450, at calvinklein.com.
13 Bonaparte, available at 13bonaparte.com and at Printemps Haussmann through April 25.
Like Dieter Rams, Alex Crane, a designer from Brooklyn, believes that it’s important to design as little as possible. “The simpler the product, the more refined and versatile,” said Mr. Crane, who has been reimagining work wear since 2016. That means comfortable clothing for both work and leisure. Take the Shadows Blanket shirt. It looks like a run-of-the-mill collared dress shirt, but it is made of a Japanese cotton knit that feels as soft as a favorite sweatshirt. “We spend most of our time working, so we want to make the most of it,” he said.
Alex Crane Shadows Blanket shirt, $145, at alexcrane.co.