When Merlijn and Sils, Dutch boys who are 11 and 10, meet Afghan and Syrian youths while visiting a refugee camp in Greece, the children seem to have nothing in common. But using cellphone translation apps and a knowledge of English words, they begin to connect — over childhood games, a snowball fight, their mutual curiosity. By the time the Dutch leave — the boys’ mothers are camp volunteers — the two groups have forged a surprisingly trusting and tender bond.
Sound more like a movie than real life? This story is both, unfolding in Kim Brand’s “Hello Salaam,” a Dutch documentary short in the New York International Children’s Film Festival, which arrives on Friday with Masaaki Yuasa’s exuberant anime feature “Lu Over the Wall” and continues through March 18 in six venues, with more than 100 works from over 30 countries. A festival for ages 3 through 18 that isn’t afraid to challenge its audience, it offers 15 features, nine shorts programs and its first virtual reality mini-fest.
“The core nature of the festival is about this kind of wonderful chaos,” Maria-Christina Villaseñor, its programming director, explained in an interview. “There’s definitely very calculated curating and programming, but it’s also bringing so many different kinds of storytelling and image-making together.” The aim is diversity, not only in films but also among their makers: About half this year are female.
“It’s the second year we’re finding these real strong works by women that are kind of leveling the playing field,” Ms. Villaseñor said.
But the festival has always celebrated girls. Long before #MeToo, it began offering “Girls’ POV,” a shorts program exploring the female preteen and teenage perspectives. This year, it’s added “Boys Beyond Boundaries,” whose short films feature not only the children of “Hello Salaam,” but also a boy who furtively cross-dresses and one who’s the only male entrant in a baton-twirling contest.
The 21-year-old festival has also expanded with “Friends & Neighbors,” a shorts program initiated in 2017, with films this year from the Festival Internacional de Cine de Morelia, in Mexico.
“We thought it would be interesting to work with a festival that doesn’t focus on kids’ programming,” Ms. Villaseñor said, but that yielded distinctive animation. The program is likely to attract a reliable festival demographic: grown-ups, particularly animation fans, who attend without children.
One new element for all generations is VR Jr. — Experiences, which the organizers insisted be cinematic. The five virtual-reality titles here include two derived from children’s books: Christine Cattano’s “Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them,” based on the J. K. Rowling wizarding work that’s already been made into a movie, and Pete Billington’s “Wolves in the Walls,” the first episode in an adaptation of a Neil Gaiman best seller.
“In video games, you’re cast as the main character,” Mr. Billington said in a telephone interview.  The solution was to cast the viewer as the imaginary friend of Lucy, the “Wolves” protagonist. That friend can then discover the critical clue Lucy needs to prove the wolves’ presence. But if the viewer doesn’t participate, the story still continues. “That felt very ‘not game’ and more movie,” Mr. Billington said.
Although the VR experiences are sold out, a VR talk isn’t. At that presentation, Mr. Billington and two other filmmakers will explore the technology, using images and short films.
While adapting beloved children’s classics wasn’t consciously a festival theme, it also appears elsewhere. The centerpiece, “A Series of Unfortunate Events: Season 2, The Austere Academy,” previews the continuation of Netflix’s series based on Lemony Snicket’s best sellers about the three beleaguered Baudelaire siblings. Another future Netflix series, “Hilda,” is inspired by the British author Luke Pearson’s graphic novels featuring an intrepid blue-haired girl, while Xuan Liang and Chun Zhang’s “Big Fish & Begonia” draws on dramatic Chinese mythology. The festival also offers three screenings of “White Fang,” the Oscar-winning director Alexandre Espigares’s animated film of Jack London’s 1906 novel about a heroic half-wolf, half-dog.
But if the festival has an overarching theme, it’s what its promotional materials describe as “Find Your Story.” “We want kids to see onscreen that there are so many different ways to tackle problems or to behave or to be, and they get to pick,” Ms. Guralnick said.
This thread surfaces strikingly in “Liyana,” an uplifting but sometimes unsettling blend of live-action documentary and animated fiction from the married American directors Aaron and Amanda Kopp. Set in Swaziland, where Mr. Kopp grew up, “Liyana” features five children inventing a story. It intersperses scenes from their lives at an orphanage with Shofela Coker’s lush animation illustrating the adventures of their made-up heroine, Liyana, who triumphs over traumas the children have faced as well: physical abuse, robbery, the deaths of parents from AIDS.
Such works illustrate a paradox at the heart of this enterprise: Sometimes you need to go to a children’s film festival to see something truly grown-up.