Organizing your neighbors with a plan in case the worst happens is no simple feat. It’s difficult enough for most of us to plan for our own families, much less a dozen in our building or on our block. So how do you do it?
We spoke to Mitch Stripling, the assistant commissioner of Agency Preparedness and Response for the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene and the co-host of “Dukes of Hazards: The Emergency Management Podcast,” about the best ways to get everyone in your area aware and prepared for the types of disasters that are most likely to impact your community.
It may seem like an impossible task, but reaching out to strangers in your community and persuading them that you should help one another in case of an emergency really isn’t as difficult as it might seem. After all, it’s something we naturally do, Mr. Stripling explained.
You probably already know that you should keep supplies and an emergency kit on hand for the most common types of emergencies your community may face, but those kits are designed to be helpful only for the first hours or days — ideally just long enough for you to get help or for help to get to you. Even if you have a sizable stockpile of supplies, you’re going to need help from other people sooner rather than later. Mr. Stripling said that most search and rescue after a disaster is done by people in their communities, long before professionals arrive.
Before you go knocking on doors however, make a plan — not about how you’ll persuade your neighbors exactly, but what you’ll actually ask of them.
Instead of going door-to-door to rally neighbors, you’ll find more success if you piggyback on existing institutions to organize people in times of need, Mr. Stripling said.
“Disaster research shows that tight-knit communities with strong, locally driven organizations respond better in disaster situations,” he said. “That means that any work you do to build community, from strengthening a P.T.A. to starting a local business that serves as a community hub, will naturally help your neighborhood be better prepared.
In short, don’t reinvent the wheel. There’s little need to build something you’ll then have to persuade people to come to when you could get involved with a local P.T.A., sports team, church, book club or neighborhood watch. Mr. Stripling even suggested getting involved with a local coffee shop, day care, or just a group of friends you get drinks with periodically if you can’t find a community group to join.
Once you have a group of interested people and a venue to get everyone talking, it’s time to start thinking about what your community’s plan will include. That said, don’t get caught up in the specifics. The point is to get people aware of the possible disasters your community will face, and get them ready and willing to help and take care of one another in a crisis.
1. Make sure everyone has more than one way to reach one another. Cellphone numbers are great, but remember that in an emergency, cellular networks will probably be overloaded. If you have a signal but can’t place a mobile call, text messages and walkie-talkie apps use far less mobile data and are more likely to get through. In every case, however, old-fashioned landlines are ideal, since they can be used without power.
Mr. Stripling also suggested that getting into amateur or HAM radio is helpful, especially for times when traditional communication networks are down. Finally, don’t forget old-fashioned rendezvous points. If you have no communications at all, it’s critical to have a spot everyone knows to meet up just to make sure everyone is safe.
2. Learn about the hazards and most likely disasters in your area. Not every region is prone to the same types of disasters. If you live on the coast, make sure you talk about plans for coastal storms and flooding. If you live in the Midwest, make sure you’re all on the same page about tornadoes and catastrophic storms. Western state residents may want to talk about mudslides and wildfires. Everyone should probably discuss things like terrorism or other man-made disasters. In every case, people respond better in an emergency if they’ve talked about possible threats before they occur.
Ideally, everyone in your community will be willing to pitch in with their own unique skills, abilities and perspectives to help everyone stay safe and protected. Additionally, while everyone should pool resources in a way that makes sense, you should all be willing to back one another up, even if it doesn’t seem like a particular role is your best fit. If the neighbor responsible for kid pickup is out of town when a blizzard hits, someone else should be ready to step in. Best of all, the closer and more tight knit you are before a disaster, the more you’ll be willing to cover the gaps when one happens.
Most of us are taught that in an emergency, first responders like police officers, emergency medical personnel and firefighters will be the first ones to get there and help victims. In reality, bystanders and neighbors are usually first — and in the best position to help save lives — especially after a disaster significant enough that it may take time for those emergency workers to arrive.
Mr. Stripling suggested reading the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s “Until Help Arrives” program and sharing it with your community group. Similarly, he pointed to the New York City Health Department’s Bystander Training Course as another useful resource even for people who don’t live in New York.
Keep in mind that most disasters are much worse for people who are already the most at risk. For example, elderly neighbors, people who live alone, or people with disabilities that make evacuation difficult. Make sure people in your group know who in the area may need a helping hand if disaster strikes, and check in on them or be ready to help them evacuate. Mr. Stripling also noted that this extends beyond storms, earthquakes or catastrophic events. Consider that extreme heat waves or cold snaps claim more lives every year than many other “traditional” disasters, and plan to take care of one another accordingly.
