Late Tuesday, Mr. Netanyahu’s situation became even graver, as one of those arrested — a top government official who reported directly to Mr. Netanyahu on the Bezeq affair — reached an agreement with prosecutors to become a government witness.
The Labor Party chairman, Avi Gabbay, called on Mr. Netanyahu’s coalition partners to quit the government. “The Netanyahu era is over,” he wrote in a message to Labor members, urging them to prepare for early elections.
By Wednesday morning, the first hairline crack in Mr. Netanyahu’s coalition had become visible, as a fellow member of Likud, Oren Hazan, called on Mr. Netanyahu to step aside. It was unclear whether other lawmakers would follow: Mr. Hazan is better known for headline-grabbing stunts than for influencing his fellow lawmakers.
Israel’s enemies have begun seizing on Mr. Netanyahu’s legal predicament: In Munich on Sunday, the Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, pointedly alluded to Israel’s “domestic corruption” problem in accusing Mr. Netanyahu of “aggression” to distract attention from his political troubles.
Yet, Mr. Netanyahu’s right-wing coalition appears solidly behind him. On Tuesday morning, even as reports were first surfacing about the allegations of an attempt to bribe a judge, the prime minister’s coalition allies were loudly denouncing the police commissioner as biased and unprofessional, while accusing him of leaking like a sieve about the various Netanyahu-related inquiries.
On Sunday, the police arrested Mr. Hefetz; Shlomo Filber, who was director general of the Communications Ministry and reported directly to Mr. Netanyahu; Mr. Elovitch; his wife, Iris; his son, Or, who was a director of both Bezeq and Yes, the cable TV company; Stella Handler, Bezeq’s chief executive; and Amikam Shorer, the company’s business development manager.
Indeed, Mr. Filber agreed late Tuesday to become a state witness, according to a person briefed on the case, and his testimony was deemed valuable enough for him to avoid the threat of prison — an ominous development for Mr. Netanyahu.
