Asia Pacific|Door Opens for Women to Run for Office. But Will They Be Allowed In?
Door Opens for Women to Run for Office. But Will They Be Allowed In?
When the country goes to the polls on Saturday, a quarter of the 56,000 candidates will be women. In the process of running, many have faced abuse that includes sexual assault, intimidation and character assassination. Religious leaders have openly urged their congregations not to vote for women. But for Ms. Hettiarachchi and other political activists, there is no going back.
Ms. Hettiarachchi, 49, runs a horticulture export business and volunteers at Mothers and Daughters of Lanka, a coalition of women’s organizations. But the work that has driven her to put off surgery for a dangerous leak of cerebrospinal fluid has been helping 11 candidates, mostly around the Kotte suburb of Colombo, the Sri Lankan capital.
Only half of them belong to her United National Party. The rest are all independent candidates, joined with Ms. Hettiarachchi in the cause of seeing more female leaders in a society where some developmental indicators have been improving but where opportunity for women has changed little.
The lead-up to the vote has confirmed some of Ms. Hettiarachchi’s concerns. The female candidates are confronting not only the society’s conservative beliefs, but also deeply entrenched structures of their own parties that often set them up for failure. And widespread abusive behavior against the new candidates has been chilling — though some activists have credited the authorities with being more alert and responsive than usual, possibly preventing outright violence in some cases.
“I think the backlash is manifesting in many different ways — from parties not taking the quota too seriously, and therefore not giving sufficient nominations to women at the ward level, to some political leaders telling voters not to vote for women and some Muslim religious leaders trying to make a theological argument against women coming into politics,” Ms. Kodikara said.
Mr. Sirisena broke with the governing party, and won on a campaign of rising above party politics, rooting out corruption in his predecessor’s clique, reining in the military and decentralizing power to address the grievances of minority groups.
Alan Keenan, the Sri Lanka project director for the International Crisis Group, said how Mr. Sirisena’s wing of the party does in the local votes would determine whether he refocused on his promised reforms or embraced Mr. Rajapaksa again. That would be likely to undermine Mr. Sirisena’s reform agenda further.
Much of the struggle for the women who are running in the weekend’s elections has been against their own internal party structures.
The last time Harshani Sandaruwani ran for the local council in Kotte, in 2011, she missed out by 24 votes. When she wanted to seek a seat again this year, with Ms. Hettiarachchi’s help, the local party organizer — an influential post that decides who will represent the party, and is almost always filled by men — would not allow her. The prime minister, who is also her party leader, intervened to let her run. But the party assigned her to a neighborhood where she doesn’t live. Since neither she nor her immediate family members are registered there, not even they can vote for her.
When Ms. Sandaruwani called him out for corruption and challenged him to a public debate, Mayor Ranawaka, 47, responded to her challenge by going to the men around her. First, he offered to debate a senior male member of Ms. Sandaruwani’s party. When she pointed out that she was the candidate, not her male colleague, he called her brother with a veiled threat, she said.
When Mr. Ranawaka was asked whether he threatened Ms. Sandaruwani, he denied it, saying he didn’t even know her except from a few campaign posters.
