Through May 28; mfa.org.
Two of the many untimely deaths of 1918 were those of the Austrian artists Gustav Klimt and Egon Schiele. Klimt, who died of a stroke, was middle-aged and successful, while Schiele, felled at 28 by the influenza pandemic, along with his pregnant wife, was on the threshold of a brilliant career.
Klimt made drawings chiefly as studies for painting, marking out elegant shapes with a sinuously confident but simple line, while Schiele drew with the intensity of a diamond-cutter. Both men elongated the figure, but in Klimt’s case, this resulted in a kind of elfin romanticism, while Schiele’s knobbly portraits can look like prefigurations of heroin chic.
Feb. 26; mylifetime.com.
In its first season, “UnReal,” the savagely soapy Lifetime drama about the making of a reality dating show — with the producer-wizards, Quinn (Constance Zimmer) and Rachel (Shiri Appleby), behind the screen — managed to be a fan favorite and a critical darling. Smart yet fanciful, it enticed a “Bachelor”-enamored audience dying to know how the sausage was made, and earned the network its first Peabody Award.
Then, in Season 2, the series blew its cred by casting its first African-American suitor on “Everlasting,” the show within the show, while weaving a Black Lives Matter story line that struck some viewers as exploitative.
March 2-3; msg.com.
If there’s one truth to be gleaned from the Grateful Dead’s long, strange trip through American music, it’s that the story is never over. Nearly 23 years after Jerry Garcia’s death, the band’s psychedelic quest continues to resonate through numerous younger acts. And three years after the Dead’s remaining members played a series of farewell shows in Chicago, two of them — the bassist and singer Phil Lesh and the guitarist and singer Bob Weir — are putting aside their differences for a short springtime jaunt.
The Bobby & Phil tour, as it’s called, begins with two nights at Radio City Music Hall (March 2 and 3), followed by stops in Boston and Chicago later in the month. Mr. Weir and Mr. Lesh will perform hits from the Dead’s catalog (“Box of Rain” and “Sugar Magnolia” are likely bets) in back-to-back acoustic and electric sets.
March 1-23; metopera.org.
Few recent Metropolitan Opera productions have been as widely acclaimed as Patrice Chéreau’s staging of Richard Strauss’s “Elektra,” which had its house debut in 2016. The great French director, who tragically passed away in 2013, imbued Strauss’s atomically seething score with a cool and subdued brutality.
A door opens, a mother (Sarah Adler) collapses and a father (Lior Ashkenazi) stands by in shocked inertia as soldiers tend to the woman. The cause of her despair is quickly revealed: their son, Jonathan (Yonatan Shiray), has been killed serving his country in the Israeli army. And arrangements for his funeral must be made.
Then in “Foxtrot” — Samuel Maoz’s elegy on grief, patriotism and what he called Israeli society’s “collective trauma” — a sort of miracle occurs: Jonathan is alive after all and guarding a remote checkpoint with three other young soldiers. There, the grinding boredom is interrupted by the occasional meandering camel, and the worst thing about the assignment is the shipping container they live in, which is sinking into the mud.
Through March 18; pipelinetheatre.org.
What with scrambling for food and clutching at survival, the squabbling 19th-century explorers in Jaclyn Backhaus’s “Men on Boats” rarely have time to burst into song. This large-cast comic history — in which, notably, none of the men are portrayed by men — put its author on the map when it became an Off Broadway hit in 2016.
More melodious creatures people Ms. Backhaus’s new show, “Folk Wandering,” a musical collage that pieces together moments from the American past: the early 1900s, when a brainy girl from an immigrant family sets writerly dreams aside to work in a factory; the Great Depression, when a widow and her young daughter take up robbery in the desert; and the 1950s, when a young man coasting on good looks and charm finally pushes his girlfriend too far.
Feb. 27-March 3, joyce.org.
Is it a dance or a scientific experiment? In the case of Wayne McGregor’s “Autobiography,” both are at play. The British choreographer and director, known for his frenetic, highly physical works, has long been drawn to the scientific world. In the U.S. premiere of “Autobiography,” he places his own body and life under the microscope.
For the dance, scientists sequenced Mr. McGregor’s individual genome, which was then converted to an algorithm that is used as a structure for the work’s 23 sections. (They change order from one performance to the next.) Here, he views his body as an archive.
