WASHINGTON — The Trump administration took another swipe at the Affordable Care Act on Tuesday, proposing new rules that would make it much easier for consumers to buy less expensive health insurance policies that do not comply with coverage requirements of the law.
Under current rules, such “short-term, limited-duration insurance” cannot last for more than three months. Under the proposal, the limit would be 364 days.
The move carries out an executive order by President Trump, who said the change would benefit consumers because “short-term, limited-duration insurance is exempt from the onerous and expensive insurance mandates and regulations” in the Affordable Care Act.
Alex M. Azar II, the new secretary of health and human services, said the proposed rules would provide additional options to people who could not afford to pay current insurance premiums.
Short-term policies are intended for people who are between jobs or need temporary coverage for other reasons. They are generally cheaper than insurance that meets the law’s requirements, but they offer significantly less protection to consumers.
Insurers often deny short-term policies to people with pre-existing conditions and can charge higher premiums because of such conditions. Short-term policies do not have to provide the “essential health benefits” that are required by the Affordable Care Act. They may, for example, omit coverage of maternity care, mental health care or addiction treatment. Short-term policies may impose limits on the amount the insurer will pay, but they do not have to cap the patient’s out-of-pocket costs.
In addition, people who buy short-term medical coverage are not eligible for the subsidies provided to low- and middle-income people who buy insurance through the marketplaces set up under the Affordable Care Act.
Democrats denounced the proposal as another attempt by Mr. Trump to sabotage the Affordable Care Act. Republicans called it a potential lifeline for victims of the law who have been priced out of the market.
Some health policy experts say that if large numbers of healthy people buy short-term coverage, it could drive up premiums for those who remain in Affordable Care Act plans.
And if those consumers develop chronic conditions, it said, they could “face financial hardship” until they enroll in more comprehensive plans that comply with the 2010 law.
Some insurers worry that consumers will be confused and may see short-term policies as a substitute for major medical coverage.
“Expanded use of short-term policies could further fragment the individual market, which would lead to higher premiums for many consumers, particularly those with pre-existing conditions,” said Kristine Grow, a spokeswoman for America’s Health Insurance Plans, a trade group for insurers.
Seema Verma, the administrator of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said that “we don’t think there’s any validity” to concerns that the proposed rules would destabilize insurance markets.
The administration estimates that short-term plans may cost about one-third as much as unsubsidized comprehensive coverage.
The Trump administration predicted that issuers of short-term insurance would experience “an increase in premium revenues and profits” because they could set prices to reflect the risk that an individual consumer would have high medical costs.
“Today’s action represents an important promise kept by the president,” Mr. Azar said Tuesday.
But Mike Kreidler, the state insurance commissioner in Washington State, said short-term medical plans posed risks for consumers.
Short-term insurance had long been defined, by states and the federal government, as coverage lasting less than 12 months. But the Obama administration changed that in late 2016, after concluding that some insurers were abusing short-term plans and keeping healthier consumers out of the Affordable Care Act marketplaces.
Trump administration officials said that short-term insurance policies had become increasingly important because premiums more than doubled, on average, from 2013 to 2017 for health plans on the federal insurance exchange.