WASHINGTON — It’s been a year, but the air is still frigid between the education secretary, Betsy DeVos, and the leaders of the nation’s teacher unions.
Randi Weingarten, the longtime president of the American Federation of Teachers, and Lily Eskelsen García, the president of the National Education Association, were left out in the cold on Thursday as they tried to deliver 80,000 failing “report cards” to Ms. DeVos from educators across the country.
The union leaders found locked doors as they tried to enter the Department of Education building to offer their assessment of Ms. DeVos’s first year on the job.
Ms. Weingarten said the department had been asked for an appointment and knew that the group of about 100 protesters was coming. The department said guards had barred the group because it did not have an appointment.
Among the educators’ chief concerns, Ms. Eskelsen García said, is Ms. DeVos’s education budget, which calls for $9 billion in cuts, and the department’s rollback of protections for disabled students.
In a video posted by the American Federation of Teachers, the crowd arrived at the Education Department with boxes in hand — the one Ms. Weingarten was holding had a report card with a large red “F” scrawled across it — and tried several locked doors.
Liz Hill, a spokeswoman for the department, dismissed the protest as theatrics.
“It’s unfortunate that instead of working to have productive dialogue, the unions decided it was important to pull teachers out of the classroom for a two-hour political publicity stunt — for which they shot their own footage to send to media outlets,” Ms. Hill said.
Despite a strained relationship, Ms. DeVos and Ms. Weingarten had a short meeting of the minds in the spring, when they toured schools together in Van Wert, Ohio.
Ms. Eskelsen García said the only communication she had had with Ms. DeVos was when she sent her a letter and received a voice mail message in return.
Ms. DeVos is the only cabinet secretary whose security detail includes United States marshals, and she has reportedly received more threats than other education secretaries. She has been met with protests in her travels around the country, and last February, she was nearly knocked down when she was blocked from entering a school in Washington by a handful of protesters.
The group that gathered on Thursday debated leaving the boxes of report cards outside the department, but Ms. Eskelsen García expressed concern that doing so would be seen as a bomb threat. Union officials said they would try again to deliver the boxes.