CREMA, Italy — The mother of a childhood friend of mine, now in her 90s, still lives in our small hometown, Crema, near Milan. A few months ago, she started to tell us about a young, charming American actor named Tim who would pick her up in the mornings to have coffee in the piazza.
My friend was worried and a little embarrassed. “My mother has a vivid imagination,” he told us. She resented that. “I’m not making things up!” she snapped.
She was right. Tim turned out to be Timothée Chalamet, the 22-year-old star of “Call Me by Your Name” and an Oscar nominee for best actor. The movie has been nominated in three other categories, too, including best picture.
And it was filmed in and around Crema, where its director, Luca Guadagnino — originally from Palermo, Sicily — came to live a few years ago. The cast and crew set up camp here and stayed for some time. Mr. Chalamet rented an apartment in the building where my friend’s mother lived, and they all took delight that her name, Mafalda, now resounds across the movie; Mr. Guadagnino kept a character by that name — a hard-working housemaid — from the book that inspired the film.  But she feels vindicated.
“Call Me by Your Name,” adapted for the screen by James Ivory from a 2007 novel by André Aciman, is set in the summer of 1983. Young Elio — played by the New-York-born Mr. Chalamet — is visiting his upper-class, academic parents (Michael Stuhlbarg and Amira Casar) in the northern Italian countryside. His dad, an archaeologist, invites an American graduate student named Oliver (Armie Hammer) to work with him for a few weeks. Elio is at first unimpressed by their guest. But soon enough he finds Oliver attractive, and things start to happen.
The movie tells a tender love story, and the two main characters are convincing (Elio’s family less so). But the real star is Crema. Mr. Guadagnino discovered a dreamlike quality in my hometown — in the cobbled squares, the narrow alleys, the stunning summer light, the unexpected shade. And in the surrounding countryside: the winding lanes, the spring water, the deep green of the old trees and the luscious gardens of the mansions, rich in charm and poor in maintenance. And the young women swaying on their bicycles, fading into the horizon.
I grew up among all this. I’ve traveled the world and now work in Milan, but I’ve always lived here, where I was born — just 100 yards from the palazzo where Mr. Guadagnino set up home. The house where I grew up and still live is down the road. My wife’s family home is across the street. The piazza where the two main characters have their life-changing one-to-one is right under my office window. I can see the site now, as I’m writing.
Mr. Guadagnino and I have never met. But I congratulate him. He has seen Crema with a newcomer’s fresh eye, and he succeeds in passing it on to his audience. A few years ago, the director Paolo Sorrentino, from Naples, did the same with Rome, and the result, “The Great Beauty,” went on to win the Oscar for best foreign-language film in 2014. No Roman director could have done it. You need to be surprised to surprise others.
It’s happening again with “Call Me by Your Name,” and that’s a good thing. It will bring many visitors to lovely Crema, which has never been on the tourist trail.
Founded in the sixth century, the town was destroyed by the Germans in the 12th century and conquered by the Venetians in the 15th century. Crema was a proud part of the Republic of Venice for three and a half centuries. The marble lions of Mark the Evangelist, Venice’s patron saint, still grace the town hall and the Torrazzo, the main gate leading into the Piazza del Duomo.
And now, thanks to this movie, many foreigners will discover that Italy is not one gigantic Tuscany, a soft drug peddled in predictable packages, such as hills in the sunset, olive groves, lemon trees and white wine. Crema has none of that. Our land is flat; we grow wheat and corn, not olives; and our wine comes in bottles from Piedmont or Veneto. In Crema you will not bump into an American on every street corner. In Cortona, you do. Sorry, Frances Mayes — there are too many foreigners under the Tuscan sun.
Crema offers the right mix of mild unpredictability and sensory reassurance. Every spring and summer we have friends stay, and they are all enchanted. You may think I’m being too romantic, or even biased. But I do believe that a town like ours represents the stunning, ordinary charm of Italy better than those world-famous cities. Rome, Venice and Florence are unique and breathtaking, but overwhelming. 
We know the pleasures of pausing and observation in my country. We don’t look at people, we see them. And we seduce our visitors gently.
A half-century on, those assessments still ring true. Last summer, when an English friend, enjoying her aperitivo under our huge magnolia tree, asked me to sum up Italy in a sentence, I said, “Italy can have you fuming and purring in the space of 100 meters or the course of 10 minutes.” “Call Me by Your Name” may or may not end up as best picture, but it will convince you that I’m right.