Ah, steak and chocolate, the indulgent mainstays of Valentine’s Day dinners. And exactly the kind of extravagances that observers of Lent, which also starts on Wednesday with Ash Wednesday, are asked to avoid.
The confluence of the events — occurring for the first time since 1945 — has created a dilemma for Roman Catholics and followers of other Christian denominations who observe Ash Wednesday. How can one simultaneously mark a solemn day when foreheads are tapped with a symbol of mortality as a call to humility and repentance, while celebrating one that glorifies the kisses and champagne of romantic love?
Around the country, Roman Catholic bishops have been issuing reminders to parishioners that the holy obligations of Ash Wednesday still apply. They include abstaining from meat and fasting — which Catholics define as eating one normal meal and two small meals that don’t add up to the normal meal in quantity.
Cardinal Timothy M. Dolan, the archbishop of New York, took a similarly somber approach, despite his reputation as perhaps the most jovial of American bishops.
“Ash Wednesday has precedence, and the coincidence of St. Valentine’s Day would not lift for us the duty of fasting and self-denial,” he wrote in a blog post on Monday.
“St. Valentine willingly bows to this Sacred Heart, for which even he lovingly gave his life 18 centuries ago,” Cardinal Dolan wrote, in a reference to the martyrdom of St. Valentine in the third century.
He called for celebrations in line with the day’s spirit. “Why don’t we do an act of charity for somebody else? Why don’t we do an act of penance for one another as a sign of our love?” he told reporters Monday.
Last year, when St. Patrick’s Day fell on a Lenten Friday, when Catholics are asked to abstain from eating meat, Cardinal Dolan was a voice of leniency. Like at least 80 other bishops around the country, he issued a dispensation to permit New York Catholics to eat corned beef and cabbage, the traditional Irish dish.
Ash Wednesday is considered a holier day than a regular Friday in Lent, so no bishops have issued a dispensation this time. Still, it’s possible to find a more liberal outlook among the region’s clergy.
Just across the Hudson River, for example, Cardinal Joseph W. Tobin, the archbishop of Newark, said he sees no harm in marking both days at once.
The reason, Cardinal Tobin explained, is found in the Ash Wednesday Gospel reading from the Book of Matthew. Joy and religious obligation can, and in fact should, coexist.
The Gospel reads in part: “When you fast, do not look gloomy like the hypocrites. They neglect their appearance, so that they may appear to others to be fasting.
“You can be happy and enjoy the day, and you certainly shouldn’t be dour, because then all the attention is on you, on your discomfort,” said Cardinal Tobin, who is known for his pastoral approach.
That doesn’t mean Catholics should give fasting short shrift, he added. Not only is it required, but it links believers to a worldwide community, and to the experience of those who don’t have enough to eat.
Given this, it might not come as a surprise that Cardinal Tobin also doesn’t see a conflict between celebrating Easter and April Fool’s on the same day — within reason. That’s the next rare coincidence coming up on this year’s calendar, on April 1.
