In a year when an aggressive strain of influenza has gripped the nation, the sweet gum holds out its fruit-laden limbs with its own humble contribution to humanity. The infertile seeds found in each of the sweet gum’s compound seed capsules are a naturally occurring source of shikimic acid, one of the main ingredients in the manufacture of Tamiflu. The internet is full of homegrown techniques to extract this valuable chemical from the tree’s seeds.
Generally considered a southern tree, the sweet gum (Liquidambar styraciflua) reaches the northernmost limits of its natural range along the coast not far north of New York City. Humans have transplanted this species extensively, so it can now be found growing as a street tree or even in any number of botanic gardens well outside its original range. But in New York City, the sweet gum is a fairly common sight, growing best where there is rich, loamy soil with good moisture.
Where conditions suit it, the tree can grow to mighty dimensions: nearly 75 feet tall with a spreading canopy. The sweet gum resembles a maple tree, and in the summer, the star-shaped leaves and sturdy trunk are impressive, if easily overlooked. It is only in winter, after the tree’s greenery has been shed, that the sweet gum’s finer points can truly be appreciated.
At this time of year, sweet gums stand out. The tree’s dark grayish brown twigs bear unusual, corky ridges that lend the tree a peculiar angularity. Additionally, the sweet gum’s spiky “gum balls” hang conspicuously from the tree’s smaller branches, sometimes all winter. These compound seed capsules are often confused with the seed heads of the American sycamore, or its London plane-tree hybrid, but the two are only superficially similar. The seed heads of the sycamore disintegrate as their seeds are dispersed; the sweet gum seed capsule, on the other hand, has a woody structure, and the gum balls are quite persistent. They can often be found in great numbers at the bases of the trees’ trunks, as well as along walking paths where they amuse or annoy dogs and their walkers, runners, picnickers and bike riders alike.
The sweet gum grows in a long list of states, thinning to a more patchy distribution as it spreads southward into Mexico and Central America. For a New World tree, it is interesting to note its Old World connections. The first Westerners to describe the plant were Spanish conquistadors who recorded its uses by Montezuma and the formidable Aztec empire in the 16th century. Chief among them, the sweet gum’s fragrant resin was used to flavor a pipe full of an unfamiliar plant called tobacco.
This resin is still in use today, occasionally flavoring tobacco, but it is also used as a mild antiseptic and as a treatment for sores. The tree itself is also an important lumber crop in the American South, but because its wood is not strong, it is generally used in combination with other woods as a veneer or in the making of plywood.
Older gum trees are not uncommon in the thick, rich-soiled woodlands of several parks in New York City. Among these, Wolfe’s Pond and Blue Heron parks on Staten Island are among the best. Just watch where you walk.