FRIDAY PUZZLE — Well, this was a tough one for me. How about you?
David Steinberg returns with a grid that contains a lot of interesting stuff, with the clues going up to 11.
I’m going to stick to the clues that involve wordplay today, because there was a lot in this puzzle that requires general (and not so general) knowledge, which you either know or you don’t. Don’t even get me started on how long I was stuck at the crossing of NEMEAN and AMBIT.
5A: “What Iran and Iraq do” seems like the kind of clue that might be talking about international relations, but it’s simpler than that. Their borders touch, so they ABUT.
16A: Ouch! “Primitive kind of poker?” is not talking about the card game, it’s talking about something you would actually poke someone with. And that’s a SPEAR.
24A: He’s not wrong. The AFLAC company’s logo does contain a bill, if you count the beak of the duck.
57A: Aww, adopt, don’t shop. “Part of a pound?” is not looking for a coin or a weight measurement, but a STRAY.
9D: If you haven’t seen this before, get to know your “We’re pretending this is about age, but it really isn’t” cluing trick. “One who’s 60-something?” is tricky when worded this way, because it sounds as if the clue is referring to a person who is a sexagenarian, but we’re not even close. Today, we’re supposed to be thinking about someone who is a D STUDENT, because that grade is equivalent to a score in the 60s.
10D: Hand up if you wrote in VEGAN. Me too. But it typically wouldn’t be the correct answer, not only because APHIDs eat plants, but also because we have that clue over at 30A that uses the word “vegan” for SOY (“Vegan protein source”). In general, dupes are avoided, even between clues and entries. Unless the editors decide not to, in which case I am wrong.
32D: NO DEAR. Never heard of it. The resident South African agrees.
35D: This is very clever, in my opinion. At first I thought that “Its ribs stick out” was going to be cringe-worthy, but having the entry CORDUROY in there made me laugh.
This is the second of two themelesses accepted in 2014 that I “revitalized” a few months ago (the first was published Dec. 29, 2017).
Not as much zip in this one as I’d strive to include nowadays, but I like the overall smoothness. It’s like a YOGURT SMOOTHIE, with just a couple of raspberries that didn’t defrost mixed in (I’m looking at you, AGENA and ONE NO).
I’d say the highlight of the puzzle is the clues. My favorite David Steinberg “original” is “Like privates, often” for PIXELATED.