A two-month investigation into the conduct of Peter Martins, the former chief of New York City Ballet and its school, did not corroborate any allegations of sexual harassment or physical abuse that several former dancers and others made against him this winter, according to a statement on Thursday.
The mixed signals — that there was no verifiable abuse, yet new policies were needed — infuriated some former dancers who had accused Mr. Martins of misconduct. Yet there were also bound to be frustrations among supporters of Mr. Martins, who retired last month under the pressure of the allegations, even though he professed his innocence and the investigation wasn’t complete. Some said they wished he still led the ballet or want to hold a tribute honoring him.
Mr. Martins, in a statement provided by his lawyer, said he was “gratified for the conclusions” of the investigation, conducted by an outside counsel, Barbara Hoey; her report will not be publicly released.
The investigation, which was initiated by the company and its School of American Ballet, was denounced Thursday by two former dancers who had come forward with accusations. They said Ms. Hoey, who interviewed them, had seemed sharply skeptical of their accounts of abuse. One of the dancers, Kelly Cass Boal, said she believed that the investigation was a whitewash meant to protect management and Mr. Martins.
“Everybody covers for him,” Ms. Boal said.
Charles W. Scharf, the chairman of the ballet, defended the thoroughness of the investigation, which included interviews with 77 current and former dancers and others.
The inquiry was prompted by an anonymous letter sent in early December to the company and school that accused Mr. Martins of sexual harassment.
In the wake of the letter’s allegation — the specifics were never released — several former dancers came forward with reports of physical and verbal abuse by Mr. Martins. Other former dancers described a culture of fear about speaking up, retribution for whistle-blowers and enabling by the board and management.
Mr. Ostrovsky said the outcome only confirmed his misgivings after meeting with the investigator, Ms. Hoey, the management lawyer. “She wasn’t blatantly discrediting me, but it felt like she was suggesting that maybe I didn’t experience that,” Mr. Ostrovsky said.
“They’re going to make it look pretty,” said Ms. Boal, who is married to Peter Boal, artistic director of Pacific Northwest Ballet in Seattle and director of its school.
Many of those who say they were mistreated by Mr. Martins have remarked on the lack of any public statement or apology from the board in response to their accusations regarding Mr. Martins. In particular, several have expressed being disappointed by the public silence from Sarah Jessica Parker, the vice chairwoman of the board, who has been vocal about the Time’s Up movement in Hollywood.
A number of current dancers, as well as some current and former board members, have remained loyal to Mr. Martins and continue to regret his departure.
Earle Mack, a former trustee, whose wife, Carol D. Mack, continues to serve on the board, said in an interview before the investigation’s conclusion that the board “acted prematurely” in letting Mr. Martins go.
It remains unclear when a successor to Mr. Martins will be named; Mr. Scharf said the ballet had only begun the search process.
A team of dancers is leading the company in the interim: Justin Peck, Rebecca Krohn, Jonathan Stafford and Craig Hall. Because Mr. Martins had been in charge for more than 30 years, Mr. Scharf said, the ballet has an opportunity to examine the role anew, including whether it should be held by just one person and whether that person should head both the company and the school.
The company has also hired an independent outside vendor to handle employee complaints anonymously and instituted a system for anonymous reporting of inappropriate conduct.
Nevertheless, there remains concern among people outside the ballet that, without changes in governance, the culture won’t change. In 1992, Mr. Martins was charged with assaulting his wife, Darci Kistler, then a principal dancer at City Ballet. The misdemeanor charge was later dropped. Shortly before he retired, Mr. Martins was charged with driving while intoxicated in Westchester County. In a previous incident, in 2011, he pleaded guilty to driving while intoxicated.
“If all these people who are responsible for the behavior of Peter Martins are still there, certain things will still happen,” Mr. Ostrovsky said.