One of the big issues for Democrats this year is health care. But the race to succeed Gov. Jerry Brown is showing what a divisive issue that is as Democrats chart the party’s future. It’s not just about Obamacare versus Trumpcare.
Four Democratic candidates for governor demonstrated that Thursday night before an audience of hundreds gathered in San Diego for a state party convention that will test how divided California Democrats are heading into critical midyear elections.
Talk of single-payer health care at the debate — sponsored by the San Diego Democratic Party — drew some of the biggest cheers of the night.
The idea has met a decidedly frosty reception from Mr. Brown and some legislative leaders, who say it would be hugely expensive. No one has explained exactly how the cost might be covered. And two of the candidates — Antonio R. Villaraigosa, the former mayor of Los Angeles, and John Chiang, the state treasurer — are skeptical.
A satellite view shows what census enumerators may miss from the sidewalk: Many single-family homes have detached garages or buildings out back.
Ice hockey may not be a hugely popular sport among kids growing up in sunny Southern California.
But Cayla Barnes has four older brothers who played roller hockey as children. And, as she explained to The Times’s Matthew Futterman just before the start of the Winter Olympics, that sport “is big” in her hometown, Eastvale.
That is how Ms. Barnes, a 19-year-old from Riverside County started her journey toward the Olympic gold medal she and her American teammates won Thursday when they defeated Canada, 3-2.
Ms. Barnes, the team’s youngest member, had not been born when the American women last took home gold in 1998. During her lifetime, the United States lost to Canada three times in gold medal games.
And indeed, she is not your typical defender. She stands barely more than five feet tall. But she’s quick, skillful and a perfect fit in the Americans’ new system, which requires players with many of her strengths.
Ms. Barnes was a late addition to the 2018 Olympic squad — she has said she was surprised to have even made this team — and a previous Times article speculated that because she was not well known to Canada, she could give the team a pivotal edge.
As it turned out, Thursday’s contest could hardly have been closer — it required a shootout, which also went into overtime, to decide.
