CHARLESTON, W.Va. — Public schoolteachers walked out of classrooms across the state on Thursday, protesting pay raises that they called too stingy.
Despite warnings that the walkout was illegal, thousands of teachers and support staff members converged at the Capitol in Charleston, seeking to pressure lawmakers who are still considering other proposals to help them financially. It was their first statewide strike since 1990 in West Virginia, where teacher pay ranks 48th in the nation.
Chants of “Do your job so I can do mine” reverberated throughout the Capitol halls, along with other slogans including “55 strong” — a reference to the state’s 55 counties.
On Wednesday night Gov. Jim Justice signed a 2 percent raise next year for teachers, followed by 1 percent raises the next two years. But teachers said the increases were not enough. They also criticized projected increases in health insurance costs.
“You have all these state employees out here who are furious,” said Melanie Pinkerman, a counselor at Huntington High School as she held up a protest sign mocking the governor outside the House of Delegates chambers.
The average salary for teachers in West Virginia is $45,622 a year, well below the national average of $58,353. When the teachers last struck statewide, in 1990, their pay ranked 49th in the nation.
Health insurance costs also remained a big sticking point. The Public Employees Insurance Agency, a state entity that administers health care programs for public workers, including teachers, has agreed to freeze health insurance premiums and rates for the next fiscal year for teachers and other workers. The House passed legislation to transfer $29 million from the rainy day fund to freeze the rates, a move that awaits State Senate action.
Ted Cheatham, director of that agency, has warned that $50 million to $70 million a year would be needed to keep the program functioning as it currently does.
After a 90-minute debate on Thursday, the House unanimously passed a bill to dedicate the first 20 percent of any general revenue surplus toward stabilizing the Public Employees Insurance Agency.
Teachers, however, are worried that the solution being proposed is only temporary and may fall short of filling the gap.
The walkout is expected to continue on Friday, though many said they were willing to continue striking next week if necessary.