Paul Andrew has long been fashion’s favorite shoe designer. On Saturday, however, he will become something else, as his first women’s wear collection for Salvatore Ferragamo is unveiled.
Mr. Andrew has had a starry ascent: He began his career working at Calvin Klein and Alexander McQueen before introducing his footwear brand in 2012; has made runway shoes for Diane von Furstenberg, Donna Karan and Vera Wang; and, in 2014, was the first shoe designer to win the CFDA/Vogue Fashion Fund award. But, until now, he has had no professional experience designing clothes.
Several accessory gurus have been appointed in recent years to top ready-to-wear slots, including Alessandro Michele at Gucci, Maria Grazia Chiuri at Dior, Pierpaolo Piccioli at Valentino and Stuart Vevers at Coach, though Mr. Andrews will be the first pure footwear designer in recent years to try his hand at a full collection.
The show will tell. In the meantime, here are three things you need to know about Mr. Andrews, straight from the man himself.
1. He’s British, but divides his time between Florence, Italy, and New York.
PAUL ANDREW I have lived full time in New York since 2000, but when I got the job designing women’s footwear for Ferragamo in 2016 I started spending one week per month in Florence. Since taking on the creative director role last October, the ratio of where I spend my time has reversed; I am now in Italy for roughly three weeks of every four. When I am in New York, I have an apartment in TriBeCa, but when I am in Florence I live in the Portrait Hotel, which is owned by Ferragamo and just next to the River Arno. I have the same beautiful room. I leave all my stuff there. I am not sure I could cope with the upkeep of a new property, given where I am in my life. I am a pescatarian, so Fuor d’Acqua in Florence has become like my canteen; I am there twice a week. When I am in New York, I love Il Buco and Locanda Verde. I find it funny: I spend so much time in Italy, yet when I am away from the place I still gravitate towards Italian cooking!
2. He always wanted to design clothes.
P.A. I studied both ready-to-wear and footwear design while at Berkshire College of Art and Design, and when I was younger always dreamed that I would end up designing clothes. But when I won an award for my shoes at London Graduate Fashion Week in 1999, I went down another path. For a long time, ready-to-wear just didn’t cross my mind, but when this opportunity arose I knew I had to jump at it. What I have found is that my Ferragamo woman dresses from the ground up: from toe to head. The shoes have definitely been dictating the proportions of the coats, skirts and pants of this first collection.
3. He doesn’t want to give too much away ahead of the show, but offered some hints.
P.A. I started in the archives, looking at many of the clients Mr. Ferragamo originally designed for, like Katharine Hepburn, and with house codes, like use of leather and silk prints. Then I experimented a great deal with color combinations and created a palette of over 30 rich shades, like papal blue, juniper and panna cotta — names picked by me. I also started small, redesigning all the hardware and zippers across all of our lines to make sure they were consistent. Lastly, we decided to show men’s and women’s ready-to-wear together for the first time; I have been working very closely with Guillaume Meilland (the men’s wear director at Ferragamo), even exchanging silhouettes, colors and fabrics, to ensure that we have a singular voice. Before, the house of Ferragamo spoke different languages. The fashion industry is so crowded these days that you really have to make the offerings of a brand cohesive in order to stand out from the crowd. It’s been a huge job, but I wouldn’t have it any other way.