Olympics|Olympic Cross-Country Skiers Eat 8,000 Calories a Day. It’s Exhausting.
Olympic Cross-Country Skiers Eat 8,000 Calories a Day. It’s Exhausting.
PYEONGCHANG, South Korea — For the cross-country skier Martin Moeller, the biggest challenge of his sport is not the freezing cold, the intense training or the grueling toll of competition. It’s eating. And eating. And eating again.
Few sports ask as much of the human body as cross-country skiing, which engages virtually every muscle group — legs, arms, abdominals, back — for hours at a time. One of the enduring images of the long-distance cross-country events is the sight of athletes collapsing at the finish line.
That scene will no doubt repeat itself on this final weekend of the Pyeongchang Olympics as the men and women compete in their respective long-distance events — 50 kilometers for the men and 30 for the women.
Skiers can train four to five hours a day at their peak, covering 60 kilometers or more and pushing their bodies to the limit. As a result, cross-country skiers, on average, also have the biggest fueling demands of any Olympic athletes — winter or summer. While other sports certainly have their big eaters (Michael Phelps was famous for his enormous meals, which were not typical for most swimmers), scientists say the effort to stay in calorie balance is most daunting for cross-country skiers.
A typical elite cross-country skier will burn about 30 calories a minute during training — by comparison, a 155-pound person on an elliptical machine burns about 11 calories a minute.
What does it take to consume 8,000 calories — the equivalent of about 20 plates of lasagna or 40 scoops of ice cream — every day?
For cross-country skiers, who often have slim builds and limited stomach capacity, it means eating several times a day, and often planning their schedules around their constant meals. Many have tricks to help them fuel — they eat mashed foods, high-calorie bars, calorie-laden sports drinks; they carry backpacks full of beef jerky and almonds, and they always take dessert.
Patterson, who is 5-foot-9 and about 132 pounds, estimates she takes in up to 3,500 calories a day depending on her training level. Fueling starts with a breakfast of two eggs fried in butter topped with melted Vermont Cheddar, plus two pieces of toast with jam and no guilt. “It’s a good combination of the nutrients that I need to get through the training,” she said.
After morning training she quickly eats about 300 calories in snacks — beef jerky, almonds, a few Fig Newtons and maybe an orange. She eats lunch when she gets home. A big salad with maple-mustard dressing, a grilled cheese sandwich or quesadillas, followed by a cookie or a bowl of Ben and Jerry’s milk and cookies ice cream. After a few hours rest, it’s time to start thinking about eating again for her afternoon training.
Dr. Ola Ronsen, chief medical officer for the Norwegian Ski Federation, said that on many days the athletes simply cannot eat enough. Research has shown some may fall as much as 1,000 calories short of their body’s daily needs. As a result, it is important that they keep up the same eating routine on their days off to make up the deficit.
This summer, Moeller adjusted his diet to eliminate sugar and focus on only so-called “healthful’ foods. “I lost a little weight but I was not skiing faster — I was skiing slower,” he said.
Susie Parker-Simmons, a senior nutritionist for the United States Olympic Committee, says that meeting the calorie demands of the sport can be especially challenging for women, who can lose their menstrual cycle and bone mineral density if their eating falls behind. “It’s just so hard to get that amount of calories in,” she said. During a team event in Switzerland, she worked with the athletes to help them fuel, recommending that they take in calorie-dense foods right after training like sports drinks and gels, Clif bars, smoothies and peanut butter and jelly sandwiches.
The Swedish cross-country skier Daniel Rickardsson, 35, who won Bronze in the 15-kilometer event in Sochi in 2014 and who will compete in the grueling 50 kilometer on Saturday, said that fuel is a constant need. During a race, which can last a few hours, he needs to consume about 100 grams of carbohydrates every 15 to 20 minutes. A crew member hands him a high-concentrate sports drink at regular intervals on the course.
