In the 1950s and ’60s, when the Southern states remained committed to racial segregation, many of us marched and spoke out against this blight on our democracy. But marching wasn’t enough to end this abuse of African-Americans. Nor were court orders sufficient to overcome this national embarrassment.
As the Kennedys and Lyndon B. Johnson understood, substantial change would come only with congressional action — not simply through marches and sermons, however essential they may have been, but by changing the laws of the land.
The young people who are protesting today are the advanced wave of what must come next: gun control legislation that takes weapons meant for battlefields out of our schools, off the streets and away from disturbed individuals with no respect for human lives. And the way to achieve these legislative advances is through the ballot box.
Every reasonable voter in this country should make a candidate’s position on gun control a test of his or her ballot.
The writer is the historian and author of presidential biographies.
President Trump advocates arming some teachers with guns. When the SWAT teams enter the building, how will they know whom to shoot? I foresee a lot of innocent teachers losing their lives simply because they have a gun in their hands.
But this is what bothers me even more: Will future teacher hirings be based on whether or not a person is willing to carry a firearm instead of on teaching ability?
If so, it will not be long before we have a militia instructing our children instead of people who truly care about education and carry with them the tools to inspire and teach our next generation.
Once again our children will be the losers and the National Rifle Association the winner.
EAST MORICHES, N.Y.
It was a relief to see Joel Myrick, a gun owner, former assistant principal and the subject of your article, speak out against arming school staff members.
Research shows that the presence of a gun makes a tense situation more likely to be deadly. I have been teaching high school for 17 years; we have no shortage of tense situations.
The risk of an unintentional shooting is unacceptably high, and my students are extremely uneasy with the notion that their teachers could be carrying loaded weapons.
Training civilians to have both the skill and the judgment to shoot an intruder is unreasonable. Can we ask a teacher to make the split-second decision to shoot and kill another person, possibly a student he has known for years? My colleagues and I did not enter education for this.
Arming school staff members is not the solution to this problem, and I applaud Mr. Myrick for saying so. Common-sense gun laws are what we need.
The writer is a teacher-leader at Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America.
As a psychiatrist practicing for many decades, I have long understood the problems that stop mental health professionals from effectively preventing angry, hating young men from using automatic weapons to murder large numbers of young people whom they both envy and hate.
Dr. Barnhorst has described her experience as an emergency psychiatrist so clearly that anyone who reads her article should be able to comprehend why reliance upon psychiatrists and other mental health workers to prevent future occurrence of mass murders is unrealistic.
As she demonstrates, it may be easy as a psychiatrist to hospitalize and treat a delusional patient experiencing command hallucinations, but this isn’t the case with the kind of raging young man intent on revenge against those he blames for his outsider misery.
Dr. Barnhorst’s article is an example of a psychiatrist successfully educating the public and her colleagues in psychiatry about the limitations of concentrating on mental illness as the cause of mass murders.
The writer is an associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School.
Re “Dubious Theories on Shooting in Florida Find an Audience” (news article, Feb. 21): As pediatricians, who devote our careers to taking care of children, we are appalled by the conspiracy theories, vitriol and slander being directed at the teenage student survivors of the shooting in Parkland, Fla.
These adolescents are grieving the loss of their friends; they have witnessed violence that will stay with them the rest of their lives; and they are now respectfully raising their voices to seek change after a tragedy. We stand in support of them.
As pediatricians who have responded to crisis events, including mass casualty events in schools, we know firsthand that these children need and deserve to feel safe, and to trust that those they rely on are here to help them recover.
The audacity of some prominent figures in the media and politics to instead further attack these children with baseless accusations is unconscionable. Since the adults are not modeling good behavior, we turn to the students who are.
Dr. Kraft is president of the American Academy of Pediatrics. Dr. Schonfeld is a member of the academy’s Disaster Preparedness Advisory Council and director of the National Center for School Crisis and Bereavement, University of Southern California, Los Angeles.