A hotel that moves with the seasons, logo tees on the runway — and more.
What is a hotel for? For most of history, it did only what it had to: provide a home when you were away from yours. Then, in the last century, a hotel became a place meant not just for shelter, but a destination; a place that embraced its not-homeness by being better than your home could ever be.
Although 700,000 Heures will be the first impermanent hotel, it finds its origins in a dining and hospitality culture that has become ever more attracted to the ephemeral, the rootless and the rare. The past decade or so has seen a proliferation of pop-up restaurants and shops — Teyssier made his own contribution to this trend in the form of a pop-up hotel in Paraty, in southern Brazil, which operated for six months in 2014 before shutting down. At the same time, there’s been an embrace of what might be called subscription-based hospitality: In London, there’s Carousel, a restaurant with a constantly rotating series of guest chefs and a set menu each night for which tickets must be purchased in advance, or the membership-based Soho House, which now has 18 locations worldwide. Teyssier’s company speaks to a certain kind of traveler’s desire for both novelty and consistency — the location might be different, but the mood must always feel familiar.
The artist Andy Coolquitt is always searching through Austin, Tex.’s thrift stores and abandoned lots for eye-catching flotsam, which he then fashions into haute Minimalist sculptures: lamps made of odd loops of metal pipe, or a series of Snuggies, which, stretched across a frame, resemble Blinky Palermo’s fuzzy color fields, but with sleeves. “There’s not a lot of focus on craft, technique or finish fetish,” says the 53-year-old artist, who studied at U.C.L.A. and the University of Texas at Austin. Rather, his aim is to poke fun at the imposed distinction between art and life by highlighting an object’s strange journey from useful tool to used-up trash to a thing of value defined by uselessness (art). He even lives inside his longest-running piece — a multi-building compound in the center of town that, over the course of two decades, he’s filled with work and fellow artists. “Instead of making art about domesticity, I figured I’d just make a house,” he says.
From left: Comme des Garçons Shirt Boys, $275, |||PHONE_NUMBER||| . Martine Rose, about $215, matchesfashion.com. Valentino, $250, valentino.com. Versace, $395, versace.com. J.W. Anderson, $225, j-w-anderson.com.
