Gymnasts say that Larry Nassar is far from a “one-man problem.” Here are the stories of three coaches accused of sexually abusing young gymnasts for years.
“I started gymnastics in 1976. I loved it. And I had a certain aptitude for it. I was a national team member for eight years. And I was a national champion in 1986. I think it’s dangerous to assume that we have a one guy problem with Nassar and that with him gone, the sport is now safe, and these girls are now safe.” More than 250 women have come forward to say they were sexually abused by former U.S.A. Gymnastics doctor Larry Nassar. The scandal has highlighted what many gymnasts say is a culture of abuse within U.S.A.G. “The standard and the expectation if you want to win is an environment that is rife with physical and emotional abuse. And I think this creates the conditions where sexual abuse can occur.” U.S.A. Gymnastics has complaint files on 54 coaches from 1996 to 2006, according to documents obtained by The Indianapolis Star. For decades, U.S.A.G. empowered itself to investigate complaints before deciding whether to contact law enforcement. Former U.S.A.G. president Steve Penny once said in a deposition: “To the best of my knowledge, there is no duty to report if you are a third party to some allegation.”  Here’s how U.S.A. Gymnastics handled their cases. Don Peters led the U.S. women’s team to a record breaking eight medals at the 1984 Olympics. “The head coach of the American women’s team is Don Peters, one of the most respected men in gymnastics.” In 2011, three gymnasts told The Orange County Register that Peters had sex with them when they were teenagers in the ‘80s. Peters was banned for life by U.S.A. Gymnastics two months after the report was published. He was also removed from the Sports Hall of Fame. Marvin Sharpe was the U.S.A. Gymnastics 2010 coach of the year. U.S.A.G. got a detailed account of abuse involving Sharp in 2011, but it wasn’t until a 14-year-old came forward in 2015 that the federation contacted police. Sharpe was arrested in August 2015 and committed suicide in his jail cell one month later. Stephen Infante was a popular coach in New England gymnastics.  After an internal investigation U.S.A. Gymnastics barred Infante for life, but the organization didn’t go to the police, and Infante continued coaching girls at gymnastics summer camps. Infante was charged with raping one of his former athletes a decade later and was convicted in 2010. Last year, a nonprofit called the U.S. Center for SafeSport was put in charge of preventing and handling abuse in Olympic sports, and in the wake of the Nassar scandal the entire U.S.A. Gymnastics board has been forced to resign. Many athletes and victims of abuse say these actions are too little, too late. And some wonder if it’s truly enough to transform a culture that failed to protect its young women.
Among them was Emma Ann Miller.
By the summer of 2015, Emma Ann, the only child of a single mother, was both a competitive dancer and just another Michigan kid immersed in the joys and dramas of middle school life. She got braces, with baby blue rubber bands that matched her eyes. She began receiving Snapchat attention from boys.
And once a month, she went to Suite 420 in a six-story office building close to Michigan State University in East Lansing, where her solicitous doctor, who encouraged everyone to just call him Larry, molested her.
According to her lawyer, Emma Ann had about a dozen sessions with Dr. Nassar between the summers of 2015 and 2016. The pain of the procedures increased, and her self-confidence plummeted.
The young girl paused.
“I think I’ve blocked out a lot of what he did to me,” she said finally.
Only three years ago, Dr. Nassar was a popular doctor among the athletes he treated for U.S.A. Gymnastics, known for being goofy but maybe a bit too attentive. His treatments, which gymnastics officials believed were at the cutting edge, were also in demand at Michigan State, where he worked, as well as at Holt High School, and at a gymnastics academy called Twistars.
Issues had cropped up: a parent raising concerns about his behavior at Twistars; a female athlete or two at Michigan State complaining to no avail about inappropriate exams. In 2014, a university investigation of another complaint cleared Dr. Nassar of misconduct, but he was now required to have a third person present when treatment involved sensitive areas of the body — and to wear gloves.
Still, the doctor was trusted enough to conduct his procedures — including one called “intravaginal adjustment” — without supervision when treating the country’s best gymnasts at the Karolyi ranch, the exclusive and secluded national team training camp, about 60 miles north of Houston. Gymnasts of international caliber, like Ms. Nichols, of suburban Minneapolis, would spend a week each month at the ranch, under the exacting supervision of the revered coach Martha Karolyi.
But at the ranch in late spring of 2015, Ms. Nichols’s personal coach, Sarah Jantzi, overheard the 17-year-old girl talking with another elite gymnast, Aly Raisman, about Dr. Nassar’s invasive and inappropriate techniques. The alarming information was quickly shared with the girls’ parents and, by June 17, with officials at U.S.A. Gymnastics.
U.S.A. Gymnastics eventually retained what it called “an experienced female investigator” — a specialist in workplace harassment. After completing her interviews, the investigator recommended on Friday, July 24, that Dr. Nassar be reported to law enforcement.
Ms. Nichols and Ms. Raisman competed the next day at the U.S. Classic in Chicago. Gina Nichols said that she saw Mr. Penny at the event and that he told her: We’re working on this. Keep it quiet.
On Monday, July 27, gymnastics officials contacted the F.B.I. in Indianapolis, where U.S.A. Gymnastics has its headquarters. The next day, its chairman, Paul Parilla, and its president, Mr. Penny, met with F.B.I. agents who, they later said, assured them they had come to the right place. Forty-one days had passed since U.S.A. Gymnastics first received the report of the sexual abuse of one of its charges.
At this moment, F.B.I. agents in Indianapolis were also immersed in the child-exploitation case of Jared Fogle, the longtime pitchman on Subway television ads. Mr. Fogle was arrested that summer on federal charges of sexual exploitation of a child and distribution of child pornography, and later sentenced to nearly 16 years in prison.
The gymnastics officials provided the agents with contact information for three gymnasts: Ms. Nichols, Ms. Raisman and someone emerging as the central complainant: McKayla Maroney, then 19, a retired Olympic gold medalist who by the summer of 2015 had become a minor celebrity, struggling in public to find her next purpose in life — a struggle she has since indicated was related to serious emotional issues stemming from the abuse.
W. Jay Abbott, who at the time was the special agent in charge of the F.B.I. bureau in Indianapolis, said on Thursday that while he did not watch the videos, he vividly remembered the reactions of colleagues who had.
All the while, Dr. Nassar continued his uncommon treatment techniques on young patients.
She competed in a dance competition in Las Vegas, where she performed to a song from “Legally Blonde,” and won a trophy that was two and a half feet tall — about half her height. She spent time at a sleep-away Bible camp, where she went kayaking, horseback riding and zip-lining, and had water balloon fights.
But then there were those monthly visits to the office of Dr. Nassar — doctor to “all of these super-high-up Olympians” — who had treated her mother for years for injuries related to a car accident. Given that Emma Ann had known him her entire life, he was almost like family, an intimacy reflected in the half-dozen photographs of her that he displayed in his treatment room.
In the summer of 2015, the treatments hurt even more. She had tried wearing three pairs of underpants or especially tight shorts — anything to keep Dr. Nassar’s fingers from probing her. Now that she was older, she began lying that she was having her period.
At some point, Emma Ann told her mother that she preferred not to be alone with Dr. Nassar. That did not end it. She said he continued to abuse her while positioning himself so that her mother couldn’t see what he was doing. He would grope the girl beneath a white towel meant to convey propriety, all the while chatting with her mother, a kindergarten teacher.
How’s your class going?
Emma Ann now knows that she was not alone. The growing number of other girls who say they were being molested between the summers of 2015 and 2016 includes Alexis Alvarado, 19, who began seeing Dr. Nassar in 2010 for a stress fracture in her back. He began that treatment by massaging her legs, but then his hands crept up until, she said, his fingers were inside her. She was 12.
The monthly appointments continued through the summer of 2015 and into the next year. So did her shame, and dread.
The same was true for Hannah Morrow, of Naperville, Ill., who will turn 18 on Tuesday. Several times a year, starting when she was 11 or 12, she took the four-hour car ride to see Dr. Nassar, looping around the bottom coast of Lake Michigan. At some point, she started listening to playlists she compiled to help keep her mind off what was about to be done to her.
As with Emma Ann Miller, Hannah also began wearing tighter pants and underwear that covered more of her buttocks, in the unrealized hope that it would dissuade him. She struggled to reconcile his outsize reputation with what he was doing.
In late July or early August, F.B.I. agents asked Ms. Maroney to travel to Indianapolis from her home in California to discuss the allegation, according to her lawyer, John Manly, but she declined. It is unclear why an agent did not travel to see her in person. As a result, the first substantive interview of an alleged victim in a child-molestation case was conducted by telephone.
Meanwhile, Ms. Nichols and Ms. Raisman continued their gymnastics pursuits — both competed at the P & G Championships in Indianapolis — but they still had received no word from any law enforcement official about the allegations now lodged with the F.B.I.
Some of the delay appears to have been related to questions concerning federal-versus-state jurisdiction, as well as jurisdiction within the F.B.I. itself. Although the Indianapolis bureau had received the information, the alleged sexual abuse by Dr. Nassar had taken place in Texas, at the Karolyi ranch, and in Michigan, where he lived and worked. And Ms. Maroney lived in California.
Mr. Abbott said that his agents conducted some interviews, but he declined to say with whom. He also said written reports were sent within weeks to F.B.I. offices in Michigan and Los Angeles.
U.S.A. Gymnastics officials said that around this time they were told that pertinent interviews had been completed and that the case had been transferred to another jurisdiction. Indeed, on Sept. 12, Ms. Maroney was directed by U.S.A. Gymnastics to contact the F.B.I. East Lansing office.
According to Mr. Manly, the retired gymnast’s mother, Erin Maroney, “called repeatedly,” but received no follow-up response.
Two weeks later, on Sept. 27, Dr. Nassar announced on Facebook that he was retiring from the women’s national team staff, notwithstanding a note he had posted in late June saying he would remain with the team through the summer of 2016.
In April 2016, Ms. Raisman shared a gold medal with the national team at the Pacific Rim Championships in Seattle, while Ms. Nichols damaged a knee during training, underwent surgery, and was out for several weeks — a reminder of the physical toll of the sport. Meanwhile, neither she nor her parents heard anything about the federal investigation that U.S.A. Gymnastics had instructed them to remain silent about.
The Raisman family was similarly frustrated. According to a person close to the family, Ms. Raisman and her mother, Lynn, repeatedly reached out to Mr. Penny to find out about the status of the federal investigation, only to be told that an F.B.I. agent would be getting in touch with them.
Finally, the absence of information about the federal investigation — and the increasing concern of the victims and their families — prompted Mr. Penny and Mr. Parilla, the U.S.A. Gymnastics officials, to visit the F.B.I.’s Los Angeles bureau in early May. Mr. Parilla lives in Southern California, as does Ms. Maroney, and Mr. Penny stopped in Los Angeles while returning from an overseas trip.
Through a lawyer and a spokeswoman, Mr. Parilla and Mr. Penny declined to be interviewed for this article.
The visit appears to have jump-started the federal investigation into Dr. Nassar. Agents asked for more information, including a list of the members of the national women’s gymnastics team. And on May 17, the F.B.I. finally interviewed Ms. Maroney in person.
It had been 294 days since the F.B.I. was first notified of accusations against Dr. Nassar.
It was a stressful time: Her daughter was preparing for the Olympic trials. But several days later, the gymnast went to a suburban Minneapolis building, not far from her home, to meet Mr. Hess, who had flown in from Los Angeles.
In addition, a person close to the Raisman family said that the F.B.I. also contacted Ms. Raisman in the summer of 2016. While Mr. Manly — who represents Ms. Raisman, Ms. Nichols and Ms. Maroney — applauded the diligence of Mr. Hess, he expressed amazement that so little had been done for so long.
“Given who these women were, all competing for their country, and given that these assaults had occurred in different states and countries, there was an obvious need to have a multilayered, multijurisdictional investigation,” Mr. Manly said.
That August, in Rio de Janeiro, Ms. Raisman had an Olympics for the ages, demonstrating poise and leadership as she won three medals, including gold. But Ms. Nichols, returning from her knee injury, was ultimately not invited to join the Olympic team — even as an alternate.
Meanwhile, Emma Ann Miller continued to keep her treatment appointments with Dr. Nassar. But the abuse had worsened, and she no longer felt like the bubbly teenager she had been only a year before.  She’d cry if she received an A-minus on a paper or test, thinking it was evidence of her stupidity.
“I didn’t even want to order a drink at Starbucks because I was so scared I’d mess it up,” Emma Ann said.
On Sept. 12, 2016, The Indianapolis Star published an in-depth investigation detailing allegations that Dr. Nassar had repeatedly molested two gymnasts when they were young. One woman had filed a criminal complaint with the police in Michigan. The other, initially described only as an Olympic medalist, had filed a lawsuit against the doctor and U.S.A. Gymnastics in California. Neither was involved in the F.B.I. inquiry.
Suddenly, the Nassar case took on urgency. As other girls and women began calling the Michigan State University Police to file complaints, their numbers eventually growing into the dozens, their abuser did what he could to mask his behavior, including throwing hard drives containing more than 37,000 images and videos of child pornography into the trash for pickup in the morning.
But trash pickup in his neighborhood was late that day, allowing a police officer to find the horrifying material while executing a search warrant on behalf of the university police.
By the close of 2016, Dr. Nassar was in custody. By the close of 2017, he had been convicted of myriad state charges, as well as federal child pornography charges, based in large part on that state search warrant. Given that he has been sentenced to nearly two centuries in prison, Dr. Nassar will likely die there.
In recent weeks, a communal catharsis has played out, as dozens and dozens of empowered victims or their proxies have confronted the doctor at sentencing hearings. The angry but resolute words of Aly Raisman and McKayla Maroney and Maggie Nichols have echoed in the courtrooms of Michigan.
So, too, have the words of the lesser-known accusers, those girls and young women who report they were abused in the year after allegations were first presented to the F.B.I. in Indianapolis: the likes of Alexis Alvarado and Hannah Morrow — and Emma Ann Miller, who in November turned 15.