U.S.|Many Say He’s the Least Qualified Lawyer Ever to Lead a Guantánamo Case. He Agrees.
GUANTÁNAMO BAY, Cuba — For years, an expert legal team defended one of the most high-profile accused terrorists in a death penalty case at the military tribunals here. But a courtroom dispute involving classified snooping prompted nearly all of the team to abruptly quit this fall, leaving only a 39-year-old former SEAL turned lawyer with just six years’ experience, and none with a capital case.
No lawyer with so little experience has ever led a case before the tribunal, and in fact, regulations prohibit it. That the Nashiri case is going forward at all has led many to question whether the tribunals can offer a fair trial, and has cast a harsh light on the already troubled military system, which so far has produced no convictions at trial, despite years of effort.
President Trump has doubled down on Guantánamo, signing an order last week to keep the prison open and vowing in his State of the Union address to send more prisoners to the island. But the tribunals at Guantánamo have repeatedly sputtered, dragging out for more than a decade cases that were originally envisioned to be so speedy that they were set in temporary buildings and tents.
As further evidence of the system’s dysfunction, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis fired the top official overseeing the tribunals, Harvey Rishikof, as well as his chief of staff on Monday. A Pentagon spokesman said the change in leadership, which was first reported by The Miami Herald, would not affect continuing cases.
The Nashiri case began in 2011 and is still churning through pretrial hearings. So are the trials for those accused of being Sept. 11 collaborators. The judge for the Nashiri case has said he would like to begin picking a military jury by December, which puts the schedule of the case in doubt.
In death penalty cases, the military tribunal rules require so-called learned counsel who have tried capital cases before. The team’s former lead counsel had tried 38. Lieutenant Piette has tried none. But the judge in the case has decided to move forward with only the lieutenant — a move that has alarmed a number of legal scholars.
The dispute that prompted the resignations of the rest of Lieutenant Piette’s team started this summer when the defense learned that conversations with their client — conversations that are typically strictly confidential — were likely being monitored by the government.
The defense team searched the detention block room at Guantánamo where they met with Mr. Nashiri and spotted something that to them confirmed government monitoring. The original lead defense attorney, Richard Kammen, said in an interview that what he found was classified, so he was barred from disclosing it, even to his client. He objected to the court, but the judge in the case ruled this fall that the client had only limited rights to confidentiality. Mr. Kammen quit the case in protest, saying it was ethically impossible to stay. Two assisting lawyers followed.
The judge, Air Force Col. Vance Spath, ordered the defense back to court in October. When they refused, he ordered a Marine general in charge of the defense to force them back. The general also refused, and was confined in a trailer next to the razor wire-ringed court in November for contempt. At the most recent hearings in late January, Judge Spath was still trying to compel the lawyers to appear, so far without success.
In a federal court, appointing a new experienced lawyer would be straightforward, but Guantánamo is no federal court. Few lawyers qualified to take death penalty cases have both the requisite top secret security clearance and the willingness to work with the special military tribunal rules created by Congress in 2009 for Guantánamo, said Navy Cmdr. Brian Mizer, who in the past has represented multiple detainees at the tribunals.
Mr. Mizer and others said it could take at least a year for a new lawyer to be appointed and get caught up on the case.
Experienced counsel in a case like Mr. Nashiri’s is critical, Commander Mizer said, because the thicket of charges stemming from a series of attacks is complicated further by evidence gathered through years of torture at C.I.A. black sites.
But after Mr. Kammen left, Judge Spath ruled that learned counsel were required only “to the extent practicable,” and pushed forward with pretrial hearings with just the lieutenant at the helm.
Lieutenant Piette, who grew up in Texas and Wisconsin, said he was not easily swayed by long odds. He enlisted in the Navy right after high school in 1997, inspired by his grandfather, who had been a decorated commando during World War II. Despite limited swimming skills and no experience with weapons, he soon graduated from the notoriously punishing SEAL selection course in a year when nearly 90 percent of the class dropped out.
He was assigned to a cold-weather warfare team and deployed to Kosovo.
After the U.S.S. Cole and the World Trade Center were attacked, he thought the team would be sent to hunt terrorists. Instead he was deployed again to Eastern Europe. He finished his enlistment without seeing combat. With a young family at home and a growing frustration at the lack of action, he left the Navy at the end of 2003.
For years after, he said, he was dogged by regret. SEAL teams began deploying to Iraq and Afghanistan. Three friends were killed in combat. Men he knew shot Osama bin Laden, he said. He worried he had fumbled his chance to make a difference.
That changed at Georgetown University’s law school, where he started his degree program thinking he would become a prosecutor, but in his final year found the criminal defense clinic.
Raised Roman Catholic, he described representing destitute, often mentally ill clients as the moment he really understood the teachings of Jesus.
After graduating in 2012, he spent five years as a Navy lawyer, working criminal cases at Naval Station Norfolk in Virginia. Last April he was hired to work on the Nashiri case. He had barely started when his whole team quit.
In January, the judge repeatedly fumed at the missing defense team, calling it a strategic tactic intended to undermine the trial.
“Never have I seen such open and notorious rejection of orders from a court,” the judge told the court.
Lieutenant Piette stood before him, respectful but unwavering. As a SEAL member, he said later, he was used to being yelled at.
During hearings over several days in January, the prosecution called witnesses and moved to introduce photos and bags of blast fragments from the attack, which killed 17 sailors. Lieutenant Piette sat silently, spinning his pen in seeming frustration, but passed up dozens of chances to object and cross-examine.
Though he wanted to argue at length, challenging the very idea that evidence could be admitted without a jury present, he said he knew it would be unethical to even try, and could sink the case. He hoped his refusal to participate would preserve an issue for appeal. Whether it will upend the trial or be a mere footnote in the tribunals will likely not be known for years.
Mr. Kammen said discussions with Lieutenant Piette about staying were “complicated” and he was not convinced his most junior lawyer did the right thing.
