ATHENA FILM FESTIVAL at Barnard College (through Feb. 25). Named for the goddess of wisdom, this weekend-long film festival is devoted to movies in which women are the driving narrative force. The lineup features several films from the past year, including “Lady Bird” and “Patti Cake$” (both Friday); “Bombshell: The Hedy Lamarr Story” (Saturday), which remembers the actress’s contribution to a communication system during World War II; and the New York premiere of “I Am Not a Witch” (Saturday), which won praise last spring at Directors’ Fortnight, a festival that runs parallel to the main Cannes Film Festival slate.
‘PHANTOM THREAD’ WITH LIVE SCORE at BAM Howard Gilman Opera House (Feb. 24-25). Purists beware. All Radiohead fans, do not miss? The latest entry in Paul Thomas Anderson’s gallery of impossible men (“Punch-Drunk Love,” “There Will Be Blood” and “The Master”), starring Daniel Day-Lewis as an intransigent fashion designer and Vicky Krieps as the muse who finally gets him to bend, will screen with Jonny Greenwood’s Oscar-nominated score performed live by the Wordless Music Orchestra and members of the London Contemporary Orchestra, which played a similar event across the pond last month. Your ears will be dazzled, your eyes maybe less so. Note that for technical reasons, the movie will screen in HDCAM, which has a lower resolution than conventional digital projection.
‘SEE IT BIG! BEST CINEMATOGRAPHY IN BLACK AND WHITE AND COLOR’ at the Museum of the Moving Image (Feb. 24-March 11). Given the degree to which digital postproduction has blurred the line between cinematography and special effects, it may be time for the Academy to create a new Oscar. Call it Best Visual Design? Such a move wouldn’t be unprecedented. For years, the Academy gave two cinematography Oscars, one for black-and-white and one for color. This series puts some of the winners head-to-head: The Technicolor “Gone With the Wind” and the black-and-white “Wuthering Heights,” which both won in 1940, each screen on Saturday and Sunday. “Black Narcissus” and “Great Expectations,” the winners in 1948, show the following weekend.
