A Minneapolis couple team up to grow a successful business and start a family but without much time left for their marriage, the relationship crumbles.
For Barbara Shaterian, 51, and Steven Horton, 48, starting a bakery meant 90-hour workweeks for him and full-time care of the family for her. Under the strain, their partnership failed despite the success of their bakery.
Barbara was born in St. Louis, and her childhood was spent moving often throughout the Midwest. She was raised by her mother, an academic, and didn’t meet her father until she was 18. Her parents never had a relationship, though she now is close to both of them.
Steven was born in Las Vegas, and his parents divorced when he was 2. Both parents remarried, his father five times total. Steven bounced between his parents’ homes and an East Coast boarding school. College took him to Minnesota.
In 1996 both worked as bakers in Minneapolis. After 10-hour shifts together they spent nights talking on the phone. She had married and was in middle of a friendly divorce because her first husband didn’t want to have children.
“Steve seemed relationship oriented, and I wanted a serious boyfriend who had his career figured out,” she said.
What did they like about each other?
Steven was committed to the family but hesitant about marriage. “My whole life had been witnessing failed marriages, but I saw how important it was to Barbara and that it would be easier for the family if we were legally wed,” he said.
Where did they live after marrying?
They had bought a small house in Minneapolis before they had children. In September 2001, they put that house up for sale, hoping to buy a larger one for their growing family and use some proceeds to start their own bakery. But they lost money on the sale and instead moved into a duplex owned by her mother, who also lived there.
In 2004 they started their bakery. Her mother helped with the children, which enabled both to work long hours. Steven started work at 1 a.m. and worked 12- to 14-hour days.
“It was literally like one day off a year,” Barbara said.
“We hadn’t stockpiled happy memories to fall back on when times were tough,” she added.
In late 2011, they bought a house. Away from her mother’s home, life was easier, but in 2012 he read her journal and discovered she wanted to split up. It was a violation of her privacy, he knew, but it was jarring. He didn’t talk about it for months, instead retreating into silence and anger. She noticed the change and the silence, as did their employees.
When they finally talked in 2012, he suggested divorce. She said no. Both had come from broken homes, and neither, deep down, wanted to divorce.
Did they try to work on things? Try therapy?
They tried twice, though neither thought it was helpful. At that time, Steven thought therapy meant something was wrong with him.
What then pushed them apart?
For a year they hardly talked. He moved into the basement and they explained to their girls, who were 14 and 12, that their father needed more sleep. A few months later, they admitted to a separation.
Barbara began seeing a therapist. “With time, I was able to shed the notion of staying together for the sake of the children or the bakery,” she said.
The final break?
For several years, they functioned as a family, with him living in the basement.
The divorce came through in 2014. In 2015, he moved into an apartment and by then was dating one of their employees at the bakery. Some employees took “sides” in their breakup, though neither of them wanted that.
“I think they felt we were mom and dad,” she said.
Did they feel stigmatized?
She did not. He did.
They are still tied financially. They used a mediator to make their financial agreements, which were amicable. When they went to court for the final divorce, they drove together.
In 2015 they decided to sell the bakery, though Barbara continued working with the new owners. He took a year off and then started a venture in wholesale baking and milling flour.
Now living in her own condominium, she receives child support until their younger daughter graduates from high school this year. Both say she is not good with money. “I never worried about what is mine and what was hers, it was always about the girls,” he said.
How did their children react?
They were upset at first, but both came around, Barbara said, when they saw their parents happier apart. “But I think if they had their way, we’d still be married,” she said.
Should they have divorced sooner?
“In hindsight we were both unhappy and were not addressing it,” Steven said.
What did they do to start over?
She continued therapy and started taking art classes. “I reclaimed a bit of who I was before I was baker,” she said.
Are their new lives better?
She started dating but found the same issues in a new relationship as in her marriage. Steven was supportive of that relationship and during that breakup.
Would they have done anything differently in the split?
Living together after they split gave them financial stability and showed their children how dedicated they were as parents, they said.
Looking back, what advice would they offer?
Both say they should have made time for each other. “If you want a family, you have to spend time with the family,” he said.
They see each other once a month but text and talk often. “Steve is almost like a brother, he is family,” she said.
Advice for others divorcing?
