Nino showing her house, which burnt down during the 2008 Russian-Georgian war. Her family cannot afford to rebuild it. Zardiaantkari village. 2017.
Imagine waking up and realizing that you are now living in a different country.
But you never moved.
Such is the case for people living in Tskhinvali, or South Ossetia, a region recognized by the United States and NATO as Georgian territory but a Russian stronghold for the last 30 years. A truce was ostensibly called in 2008, but as the photographer Tako Robakidze discovered, ask any Georgian in the area and they will insist the conflict never really ended.
One day, Data Vanishvili found his house on occupied territory, where he lives now in poverty. He is not allowed to cross the fence and has no access to his pension. Village of Bobnevi, 2017.
Along the border, agriculture is the main source of income for families.
Locals celebrating the day of the Archangel in the village of Berushieti. 2017.
The Republic of South Ossetia is a self-proclaimed breakaway state backed and controlled by Moscow. The mountainous region declared independence from Georgia in 1990, but it wasn’t until Russia invaded in August 2008 and recognized South Ossetia’s statehood that tensions began to rise, leading to a five-day war between Russia and Georgia.
Despite the truce, Russian-backed forces continue to encroach on Georgian territory. Just last week, the United States condemned a deal for a joint military force the Russians made with the separatists in South Ossetia. The de facto border is recognized only by Russia and three other countries.
Since 2008, more than 300,000 Georgians have been displaced from their homes. In 2011, Russia fortified the borders, putting fences and barbed wire across wide swaths of the region. Now, Georgians cannot come within 200 meters of the border or risk being kidnapped, detained and fined.
Marina was a school teacher in the village of Kemerti, which is now an occupied territory. 2017.
Almost all of the water tanks are on occupied territory.
A woman at her destroyed house in the village of Zardiaantkari.
Agriculture is an economic pillar for the region, and most local people support their families through livestock, fruits and vegetables. But the fields have dried out. And when water is available, the valve is controlled by Russians.
Mari's family had to flee from its homeland and is now living at the Karaleti I.D.P. Settlement.
Peach trees in the village of Adzvi. 2017.
Nino preparing supper for herself and her two brothers. They did not want to leave their parents' house and stayed in the village of Khurvaleti, where Nino teaches English and her brothers look after the land and livestock.
Ms. Robakidze is working on an accompanying documentary for her project, and shared excerpts from her interviews with the villagers.
A woman cleaning beans in the village of Gugutiantkari.
Galina Kelekhsaeva, whose heritage is Ossetian, with her husband, whose heritage is Georgian. They live in an I.D.P. settlement in the village of Shavshvebi.
In another interview, an 80-year-old man describes living in Georgia his entire life only to find one day his house has ended up in occupied territory.
Georgians and Russians in the region once had good relationships, celebrating holidays together and having mixed families. Now they find small joys in any kind of celebration or holiday.
Nodar was collecting timber in the forest near the occupation line, and spent four days in detention in the Tskhinvali.
A Russian military base in the village of Akhmaji.
Some are afraid to let children out alone after it gets dark.
Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Tako Robakidze is on Instagram. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.