The 25-year-old actor is among a new wave of British actors, many from African backgrounds, who are shaking up the movie industry.
LONDON — John Boyega, 25, arrived at the sleek photo studio in the Camden section of London like a movie star: over an hour late; with an entourage of four including a stylist, groomer and groomer’s assistant; and dressed head to toe in designer clothes.
And he brought jokes.
“I think this is the official look of humility,” he said of his conservative outfit, which included a brown suede Ermenegildo Zegna Couture jacket, black Ksubi denim pants, a white Brioni sweater, a white Versace shirt and dark tan Chelsea boots by Christian Louboutin.
“This is how I’m going to dress when I’m 50 years old — as a dad,” he said, as he posed for a portrait on a gray winter Sunday.
But Mr. Boyega has become a sought-after figure on the style circuit. He sits in the front row at collections for Burberry, which has dressed him for many public appearances, and he was leaving the next day to attend a Moncler presentation to kick off Milan Fashion Week. It’s a schedule that befits his new status in Hollywood, and beyond.
Since his 2015 debut as Finn, a major new character in “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” this cheeky Londoner has used his charm and talent to become a global celebrity. In addition to his work in “Star Wars,” he has played serious roles in films including “Detroit” (earning him a comparison to “a young Sidney Poitier” in The Washington Post), and in the theater, at London’s Old Vic.
Now, he is at the forefront of what he describes as a “movement” of young British actors, many from African backgrounds, who are becoming household names. 
Mr. Boyega seemed pleased by the description, and reiterated that the two are “best friends,” a shtick he often uses in interviews, spawning countless memes and news articles about their “Star Wars bromance,” as Mashable put it.
Mr. Ford politely debunked the hype around the friendship (“I hardly know the man,” he said, wryly), but he did manage to impart a few lessons in A-list attitude. During a publicity shoot involving both men and Daisy Ridley, who portrays the film’s heroine, the photographer asked Mr. Boyega to step to the side so Mr. Ford could have the center position.
“Harrison was just like, ‘See that, kid? I’m the star,’” said Mr. Boyega, doing an impression of Mr. Ford that sounded like the gravelly voice-overs heard in Hollywood trailers. “And I said to him, ‘Yeah, mate, you ain’t going to be the star when you get stabbed by Kylo Ren,’” referring to the villain who kills off his character, Han Solo, with a light saber.
So, did Mr. Ford feel that he was passing the “Star Wars” baton to Mr. Boyega with his departure from the series?
Mr. Boyega’s parents are Nigerian immigrants, and he grew up in Peckham, a modest neighborhood of South London. His father is a Pentecostal minister, and Mr. Boyega remains religious.
The name of his production company, UpperRoom, has a double meaning: It is a reference to the location of his childhood bedroom (“Where I planned long-term goals, where I got dumped. That’s where I became king. That’s where I became slave. Everything”) and intended in a biblical sense, as a place where people come together in unity.
And has the future Mrs. Boyega turned up yet?
“Nah, still waiting,” he said, in between mugging for the camera at the Annroy photo studio.
As an aspiring thespian, he would wait outside the stage door of the Royal Court Theater to ask the actor Daniel Kaluuya (an Oscar nominee for his role in “Get Out”) for advice. And at London’s Identity School of Acting, Mr. Boyega trained with Letitia Wright (a star of “Black Panther”).
From there, it was only a few years before he was running lines with Lupita Nyong’o, whom he met on the set of “Star Wars.” She got a dose of his comic relief up front.
Nonetheless, Ms. Nyong’o declared herself charmed. “I was impressed by his honesty, even in jest, and I knew we would be good friends at that point,” she said.
Underneath all the chumminess, it is not lost on Mr. Boyega that he is part of a new wave of British black actors receiving respect and acclaim in the industry.
Even Mr. Ford, once he had had time to think about it, came around to the notion that Mr. Boyega may represent the future. “If he is the new replacement for Han Solo, he’s brought a uniqueness to it,” he said.
As the photo shoot was wrapping up, Mr. Boyega remembered that he had been in that studio before. Indeed, a coffee-table book nearby contained a picture of him from 2013 that had been taken there.
“You look so young,” said his groomer, Natalie Abizadeh.
His entourage gathered around the book for a long moment, until Mr. Boyega wrinkled his nose and ran a censorious finger along the image of his untidy hairline. “I couldn’t afford a haircut,” he said.