FROM THE PRELINGER ARCHIVES at the Museum of the Moving Image (Feb. 10-11). A collector of thousands of educational, industrial and commercial films, the archivist Rick Prelinger is acutely attuned to the ways that such forgotten movies can illuminate urban history. Since 2006, he has curated a series of programs — under the label “Lost Landscapes” — that bring together footage from particular cities. This weekend, the museum presents two encore showings of “Lost Landscapes of New York” (Saturday and Sunday), a screening of which sold out at New York University in November. “As this human pageant unfolds, you see a city that has at times been obscured, including by Hollywood, politicians, developers and captains of industry,” Manohla Dargis wrote of the compilation in The New York Times. A Detroit edition of the series, called “Yesterday and Tomorrow in Detroit,” screens on Saturday.
INGMAR BERGMAN CENTENNIAL RETROSPECTIVE at Film Forum (through March 15). This year, the Swedish director Ingmar Bergman would have turned 100, far older than the wistful professor (Victor Sjostrom) at the center of his great “Wild Strawberries” (Saturday, Sunday, Tuesday and March 15). Has his stock risen or fallen? “The hard fact is, Mr. Bergman isn’t being taught in film courses or debated by film buffs with the same intensity as Alfred Hitchcock, Orson Welles and Jean-Luc Godard,” the critic Jonathan Rosenbaum wrote in The New York Times shortly after the filmmaker’s death, prompting pushback from Roger Ebert and the film scholar David Bordwell. It may be time for a fresh appraisal: Film Forum’s screenings of more than 40 of Mr. Bergman’s features over the next five weeks reveal him to be capable of surrealist brilliance (“Persona,” Feb. 23-24, March 1 and 13), unfathomable bleakness (“Cries and Whispers,” March 3, 5, 6 and 13) and even the occasional divertissement (“Smiles of a Summer Night,” Wednesday, Feb. 20 and March 15).
‘SCHOOL DAZE’ at BAM Rose Cinemas (Feb. 11). Celebrating its 30th anniversary, Spike Lee’s second feature, his first to be distributed by a Hollywood studio, represented a big leap in budget and ambition from his 1986 indie hit “She’s Gotta Have It.” Starring Laurence Fishburne, Giancarlo Esposito and Mr. Lee himself as a hapless fraternity pledge, this splashy, politically charged comedy-musical charts the divisions at an all-black college, and is said to be inspired by the director’s own experiences at Morehouse College in Atlanta. The filmmaker will introduce both screenings, at 7 and 10 p.m. They’re sold out, but the theater will have standby lines.
VALENTINE’S AT METROGRAPH at the Metrograph (Feb. 11-14) and VALENTINE’S DAY MASSACRE 2018 at Anthology Film Archives (Feb. 14-18). This year’s Valentine’s Day options include something for everyone. The Metrograph places the kinky eroticism of Nagisa Oshima’s 1965 “Pleasures of the Flesh” (Monday and Wednesday) alongside Howard Hawks’s 1941 screwball comedy “Ball of Fire” (Tuesday and Wednesday) and Rouben Mamoulian’s 1932 musical “Love Me Tonight” (Wednesday). Elsewhere, the annual program at Anthology Film Archives takes a more cynical view of love, with Albert Brooks’s on-again, off-again courtship story “Modern Romance” (Wednesday and Feb. 16 and 18) and two magnificent comedies directed by Elaine May, “A New Leaf” (Thursday and Feb. 17-18) and “The Heartbreak Kid” (Thursday and Feb. 17). By coincidence, “The Heartbreak Kid” will also screen at the Metrograph on Thursday.
