Judy Chicago was on her way to meet a friend in the Village when she first read Robert Hughes’s review of her work “The Dinner Party” in Time magazine. “I walked into the restaurant, put my head down on the bar and cried,” she says.
During a talk at the Brooklyn Museum with the sociologist and writer Sarah Thornton in January, Ms. Chicago called Mr. Kramer “one of the most vicious, vitriolic critics,” adding that he was responsible for a description of her work that lasted for decades: “vaginas on plates,” as she put it.
“So for 20 years ‘The Dinner Party,’ which is a symbolic history of women in western civilization, was described in The Times over and over and over as ‘vaginas on plates,’” Ms. Chicago said.
This endured until 2002, when Elizabeth Sackler acquired the piece and donated it to the Brooklyn Museum. Soon preparations were being made for its permanent housing. “And I, of course, was really nervous about what kind of reception there would be,” Ms. Chicago said.
To her surprise, the reception in 2002 was very different. The Times art critic Roberta Smith gave “The Dinner Party” a commendatory review, repositioning its standing in the art world. “It’s almost as much a part of American culture as Norman Rockwell, Walt Disney, W.P.A. murals and the AIDS quilt,” she wrote.
“I couldn’t believe my eyes,” Ms. Chicago said in an interview with The Times when asked about her reaction to Ms. Smith’s 2002 write-up.
For her part, Ms. Smith says she “didn’t set out to correct” any previous receptions of Ms. Chicago’s work, including Mr. Kramer’s. “The thing that I’m most conscious of is wanting people to have an interesting experience when they take my word that they should go see something,” she says.
Ms. Smith describes her process of writing art criticism as one involving a complicated relationship between her own personal reactions, interests and opinions, her and her editors’ satisfaction with her writing, and a tangential awareness of the power and authority she wields as an art critic for The Times, a role she began in 1986. “At The Times I felt like I was being handed — I hate to use this metaphor — but that I was being handed this really big kind of gun, and that if I weren’t careful I would take people out. And so I got kind of careful for a while,” Ms. Smith said, adding that eventually, her caution subsided. In its place, she says, was the sense that choosing to write about a show, whether positively or negatively for The Times, meant it would get noticed.
How much does a Times art review matter for an artist? Some, like Yayoi Kusama for instance, get noticed whether they’re in The Times or not — and there are hundreds of thousands of posts about her art on Instagram to prove it.
As for Ms. Chicago, she said that despite the art media’s early disparagement of her work, her way of overcoming the disappointment was to go into her studio and continue making art. She found a supportive community in Southern California’s Ferus boys, notably the American artist and sculptor Billy Al Bengston, from whom she said she learned quite a bit.
