The general sentiment: Did the company really just use Dr. King’s words about the value of service to sell trucks?
The commercial showed scenes of people helping others while Dr. King extolled the virtues of service. At the end, the phrase “Built to Serve” was shown on the screen, along with the Ram logo.
The response put Ram in a position that advertisers dread — misfiring with a commercial in the Super Bowl, which sells 30 seconds of airtime for upward of $5 million and is watched by more than 100 million people.
Adding to the disconnect, the sermon in question, delivered exactly 50 years ago, touched on the danger of overspending on items like cars and discussed why people “are so often taken by advertisers.” That was not lost on the ad’s detractors.
Companies continue to use the Super Bowl platform to promote humanitarian causes either initiated or supported by their brands. It’s a type of marketing that promotes feelings over facts.
It’s almost formulaic. It starts with the emotional music: Then the text: The message: “I was diagnosed with pediatric cancer when I was 14 years old.” “Millions of people in the developing world walk up to six hours every day for water.” Then the grand finale: the brand. Companies continue to use the Super Bowl platform to promote humanitarian causes either initiated or supported by their brands. It’s a type of marketing that promotes feelings over facts. The ads are light on product details and heavy on emotion. “You helped save my child’s life and the life of so many children.” “So I’d like to say thank you. Except I would like to say it in person.” “Can I hug you?” And so there’s Hyundai, a South Korean car maker that has decided to donate a portion of sales to childhood cancer research. Stella Artois donated $3.13 to water.org for every limited edition chalice sold. Are these companies aiming for philanthropy or profits? The average cost of a 30-second ad during the Super Bowl was more than $5 million this year. And that doesn’t count the expenses tied to making and promoting it, like the star power. Critics argue that if companies really cared they’d donate money directly to the cause instead of a $5 million ad promoting it.
The King Center said on Twitter that neither the organization nor the Rev. Bernice King, one of Dr. King’s daughters, is responsible for approving his “words or imagery for use in merchandise, entertainment (movies, music, artwork, etc) or advertisement.” It said that included the Super Bowl commercial.
Ram approached Dr. King’s estate about using his voice in the commercial, said Eric D. Tidwell, the managing director of Intellectual Properties Management, the licenser of the estate.
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles U.S., which owns Ram, said in a statement that it was honored to work with the group to celebrate Dr. King’s words about the value of service.
“We worked closely with the representatives of the Martin Luther King Jr. estate to receive the necessary approvals, and estate representatives were a very important part of the creative process every step of the way,” the company said.
“The intent was right but maybe the timing was wrong,” she said.