PARIS — The Paris Opera usually invites only journalists to the news conferences where it unveils its coming plans. But last month, as it announced a boldly ambitious 2018-19 season, the company brought in 200 people under the age of 28 to the event at the Palais Garnier here.
This was not just for show. It was a dramatic way of highlighting the Paris Opera’s extraordinary success in attracting younger audiences. According to the company, it had 95,000 audience members younger than 28 last season — more than 10 percent of tickets sold and 30,000 more than just two years before.
The company, which celebrates its 350th birthday next year, is an unlikely contradiction to the worldwide trend of an aging audience at operas. The average age of an audience member in Paris is 45 — 48 for the opera, 43 for the ballet — compared with 58 at the Metropolitan Opera and 54 at the Staatsoper in Berlin. The largest segment of the Houston Grand Opera’s audience is between 65 and 72.
When Stéphane Lissner was appointed as the Paris Opera’s general director in 2014, he set about implementing measures focused on fostering younger attendance.
Building on two existing programs that gave discounts to young ticket buyers and bringing in new sources of individual donations, foundation funds and corporate sponsorship, Mr. Lissner established preview performances for people younger than 28. The tickets to these cost 10 euros and now account for 30,000 seats each season.
Mr. Lissner said that 56 percent of people attending these previews, financed by the BNP Paribas Foundation, were first-time operagoers. On top of this, four performances each year, with inexpensive tickets, are designed for families new to the opera.
Last year Thibaud Freund, 27, and his wife, Léa Sowinski, 26, went to the opera and ballet — Paris unites the two in a single organization — five times, two of which were under-28 preview performances. They said that the company’s discount programs allowed them to attend more than they otherwise could.
In 2015, the company, with funding from Swarovski and individual donors, began producing edgy short films and marketing them online as the “3e Scène”; the name refers to the digital space as a “third stage” in addition to Paris’s other two, the 19th-century Palais Garnier and the newer Opéra Bastille. About 50 films have been produced so far, and they have been viewed nearly 3 million times.
He joins Ivo van Hove, Romeo Castellucci and Krzysztof Warlikowski, to name just a few of a vibrant slate of directors. The company’s 2018-19 season is part of a long-term focus on theatricality.
As part of the celebrations of its 350th anniversary and the efforts to expand its audience, the Paris Opera has formed its first partnerships with other major French cultural institutions, including the Musée d’Orsay, the Pompidou Center and the National Library of France. The exhibition “Degas à l’Opéra” will open at the Musée d’Orsay in September 2019 and travel to the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
Paris is not the only success story: 39 percent of those booking tickets at the Royal Opera in London are now 40 or younger. But the challenge worldwide grows ever starker as companies attempt to secure audiences who are approaching opera — if they approach it at all — with ever less familiarity.
That is why Mr. Schulz, who begins his tenure in April, plans to introduce an Opernkinderorchester (Opera Children’s Orchestra) in cooperation with music schools across Berlin. The first concert will take place on the company’s main stage next year. He also plans to create a so-called opera reporter program for teenagers, who will be taken behind the scenes of rehearsals and performances and be allowed to report on them.
“Of course we are hoping to spark their passion for opera and for them to become advocates within their peer group,” Mr. Schulz said.
Mr. Lissner said he was happy that in Emmanuel Macron, France now has a young president who is a confirmed classical music lover — not always the case with his recent predecessors. Mr. Macron, who received a diploma in piano studies, has spoken in interviews of his admiration for Rossini, Bach and Schumann (though he has yet to attend the Paris Opera during his presidency).
