More than any other genres, I think, science fiction and fantasy are in constant conversation with their past, present and future. Entering those worlds as a child meant growing into an awareness of how deeply they depend on a kind of exchange between readers and writers — almost inevitably, new works of science fiction and fantasy inherit a sense of engagement, whether it shows up as homage, critique or collaboration. Three recent books of short fiction, each of them fantastically hybrid, join the conversation and demonstrate just how overt its dynamics can be.
Del and Sofia Samatar are siblings, and MONSTER PORTRAITS (Rose Metal, paper, $14.95) is a dialogue between Del’s art and Sofia’s words that is equal parts exploration, investigation and meditation about monsters and monstrosity. From the title I expected something like a bestiary, where the text would build fictions out of the art to pen (as it were) the creatures into a mythology — but this book is nothing so simple or straightforward; it is, if anything, an anti-bestiary, organized around the systems that produce bestiaries. Most of the portraits describe an author’s encounters with the creatures depicted, encounters that spark real-world musings on race and diaspora, framing the often contradictory ways in which we represent, consume or reject monstrosity. It’s a book of discomfort, of itching beneath the skin — which dovetails beautifully with the fact that Del Samatar works as a tattoo artist, and that many of the images in this book are easily imagined inked onto bodies.
His art is gorgeous, whether thick and dense (“The Knight of the Beak”), spare and clear (“The Perfect Traveler”), or pale and unfinished (the “Notebook” entries). Some reward long gazes, while others seem to reflect questions back at the viewer, questions only partially answered by the text.
Sofia Samatar’s writing has dazzled me for years, and it does so in this book as well, dancing a difficult line between her novels (“A Stranger in Olondria,” “The Winged Histories”) and her nonfiction (“Skin Feeling,” “Writing Queerly: Three Snapshots”). In her novels, she builds tremendously detailed fantasy worlds; in her nonfiction, she curates a magpie’s nest of fragments — critical theory, song lyrics, personal anecdotes — into insightful ensembles.
“Monster Portraits” resists review and anticipates and complicates any attempt at an adjective. I reached for “mesmerizing,” and found that the publisher’s ad copy contained it. I tried “magnificent,” and imagined the text raising a cool eyebrow at unseemly hyperbole. Finally I turned to other languages: In French one says of a moving work that it puts la vague à l’âme, a wave on the soul, and if a wave sank sharp salt teeth into one’s heart this phrase might be accurate here. Every sentence that doesn’t cut is a handle wielding the blade of the rest. Reading this was like wandering out of a dream and into an awareness of something with claws sitting on my chest.
Offering a more traditional, but no less impressive, relationship between art and prose, THE WEIGHT OF WORDS (Subterranean, $40) is a stunningly produced anthology of original fiction inspired by the work of Dave McKean, a British artist perhaps best known for his album covers (Counting Crows’ “This Desert Life”) and frequent collaborations with Neil Gaiman (“The Sandman,” “Coraline,” “The Wolves in the Walls” and “The Day I Swapped My Dad for Two Goldfish,” to name a few). Edited by McKean and William Schafer, the stories — by Gaiman, Alastair Reynolds, Maria Dahvana Headley, Catherynne M. Valente, Caitlin R. Kiernan, M. John Harrison, Joe R. Lansdale, Joe Hill and Iain Sinclair — are each bookended by McKean’s instantly recognizable mixed-media surrealism. The anthology also includes a short comic and piece of prose fiction by McKean.
Many anthologies are organized around a stated theme, but few are organized around a mood; what most impressed me about “The Weight of Words” was its sustained core of loneliness, memory and loss across extraordinarily different styles of storytelling, from the sinuous far-future elegance of Reynolds’s “Belladonna Nights” to the sharp, fragmented opacity of Sinclair’s “Broken Face.” Every piece felt steeped in the sepia tones of McKean’s unsettling art even if it seemed to make only the most glancing contact with the image’s contents: Valente’s “No One Dies in Nowhere,” for instance, opens next to a pencil-sketched image of a bird-headed person in a long thick scarf and coat, but spins from it an affecting story of afterlives that’s C. S. Lewis’s “The Great Divorce” dressed in hard-boiled noir by way of “The Pilgrim’s Progress.” Other stories are more visibly interpretations of and responses to the art. A violin cradling a naked woman beneath a tree growing out of its curves leads to Headley’s “The Orange Tree,” a story about an 11th-century female golem with a stringed instrument in her belly who resists her creator’s abusive programming; Kiernan’s “Objects in the Mirror” — a story of doubleness and doppelgängers partially written as a screenplay set in a therapist’s office — is preceded by an image of a stylized head containing a person cringing from the eyepiece of a telescope, as if afraid to be seen.
The caliber of fiction here is genuinely remarkable. I fully expected the stories by Valente and Headley, whose writing I’ve long loved, would be among my favorites, and they were, but Hill’s “All I Care About Is You” and McKean’s “The Language of Birds” — the first fiction I’ve read by either — shocked and moved me in equal measure. In Hill’s gut-punchingly perfect story, a girl struggling to adjust to her family’s reversal of fortune finds a robotic friend who will be her devotee for a single paid hour, while McKean’s experimentally displayed story — the sepia from his images bleeding into, over and through the text in places — speaks to the anguish of losing the “sweet wine golden flow” of childhood perception, potential and possibility. The anthology is more than worth it for these four stories alone.
Jo Walton’s STARLINGS (Tachyon, paper, $15.95) — her first collection of short fiction, rounded out by poetry and a play — represents a different kind of conversation piece, one that shows an author in conversation with her work. Most of its contents are reprints, having appeared in magazines, anthologies or on Walton’s website; others have been available only behind the author’s walled Patreon garden.
An odd start — but what emerges from the collection is not Jo Walton, writer, but Jo Walton, conversationalist. The whole volume is an entertaining discussion with its author that equals, if not exceeds, the fiction and poetry and drama in the book.
Walton follows each story with a brief afterword elaborating on some combination of its origins and publication history, often debating whether the work is, in fact, a story. I often disagreed with Walton’s assessment of her own work: I wanted to argue with her that “Three Twilight Tales” is, in fact, good short fiction and not a poem, or that some of what she calls opening chapters to unwritten novels are very accomplished short stories as well. Eventually I found myself reading the stories less to see what happened and more to see what she had to say about them.
“Starlings” is valuable, too, as a potted history of genre communities on the internet. Walton often refers to Livejournal — many of the poems in the book first appeared there — and small online magazines like Eric Marin’s Lone Star Stories, which was deeply beloved during its five years of operation from 2004 to 2009, citing them as catalysts and curators of her work and conversations.
Of the poems, the standouts for me were “Starlings” and “Sleepless in New Orleans”; of the stories, “Three Twilight Tales,” “Turnover” and “A Burden Shared.” The play, “Three Shouts on a Hill,” is emblematic of the entire collection: The narrative dissolves into a conversation about narrative, with a sort of grumpy impatience that manages the surprising trick of also being generous and kind.