In their annual update for the Gates Foundation, they say that they remain optimistic about the world’s progress, but that President Trump’s policies could hurt their efforts.
KIRKLAND, Wash. — For the past year, Bill and Melinda Gates have received the same question repeatedly while jetting around the world: How is President Trump affecting their work as two of the world’s top philanthropists?
The president has rattled it in several ways, they answer. His policies have shaken up the field of family planning, they say, and his derogatory comments about African countries and Haiti have caused disbelief among people they work with outside the United States.
“Those disparaging comments don’t belong in any public discourse,” Ms. Gates said in a recent joint interview with her husband, the co-founder of Microsoft and one of the richest people in the world.
Mr. and Ms. Gates are badgered about Mr. Trump so often that they made the topic part of the annual letter they published early Tuesday, a digest the couple releases about the philanthropic activities of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Believed to be the largest in the world, the foundation gave away more than $41 billion from its inception in 2000 through the end of 2016, now spending $4 billion to $5 billion a year to combat malaria, reduce poverty and improve education.
This is the 10th annual letter the Gateses have published, which they’re marking by answering 10 “tough questions” they frequently get. In addition to Mr. Trump, they address topics like why they team up with corporations and whether they’re imposing their values on other cultures.
The first Gates letter was inspired by the annual update the billionaire investor Warren E. Buffett writes to shareholders of his holding company, Berkshire Hathaway. In 2006, Mr. Buffett, a longtime friend of the couple’s, pledged the majority of his fortune to the Gates Foundation, where he is a trustee. In philanthropic circles, the annual Gates letter is read as avidly for tidbits about giving trends as Mr. Buffett’s letter is by investors.
“There have been some interesting tip-offs about where they’re heading or their perspectives on things,” said David Callahan, the founder and editor of Inside Philanthropy, a news site about charitable giving.
While the mood in many parts of the world seems to have darkened, Mr. and Ms. Gates say in their letter that they remain militantly optimistic about global progress.
They expanded on some of those themes and fielded questions about other topics in the recent interview. It was held at bgC3, a company that oversees many of Mr. Gates’s independent projects, including for-profit investments in clean energy.
Through her own private company, Pivotal Ventures, Ms. Gates has advocated for greater participation by women in STEM fields and other gender equity issues. Pivotal recently helped fund Aspect Ventures, the largest venture capital firm led by women. Not long ago, she moved Pivotal to its own private office near her husband’s.
As one of the founders of the modern tech industry, Mr. Gates is often looked to for technical answers. For instance, while running for president, Mr. Trump floated the idea of asking Mr. Gates to help close “that internet up in some way” to curb communications by terrorists online.
“The whole tech world should look at these criticisms, look at these effects, you know, try to make sure that without giving up what’s good about that, that we can reduce some of it,” he said.
When asked if the national reckoning over sexual harassment had affected her investments through Pivotal, Ms. Gates said that it hadn’t so far, but that it had encouraged her to use her voice to encourage more women to speak out.
Ms. Gates has made family planning a focus of her work with the foundation. She said the Trump administration’s decision last year to expand a ban prohibiting American aid to any health organizations that provide or discuss abortion in family planning had caused “chaos” in the field — forcing them to stall their work as they figured out how to adhere to the rules.
And in their annual letter, Ms. Gates, 53, is blunt in her view of the way Mr. Trump communicates.
“I wish our president would treat people, and especially women, with more respect when he speaks and tweets,” she writes.
Mr. Gates, 62, said he was particularly worried about Mr. Trump’s threats to cut foreign aid, which the Gates Foundation considers critical in the global battle against disease and poverty. He said that he was reassured that Congress had so far resisted the president’s demands to cut aid and that he and his wife had increased their visits to Republican members of Congress to stress the importance of maintaining the aid budget.
Ms. Gates said they tended to avoid hashing out their disagreements in front of bigger groups at the foundation, saving them for private discussions, which they have on walks.
“Having a little bit of grist in the system is actually a good thing,” she said.