What Happens When Athletes Do the Sportswriting?
Earlier this month, just before the N.B.A. trade deadline, the Cleveland Cavaliers offloaded their point guard, Isaiah Thomas, to the Los Angeles Lakers. It was the second time that Thomas had been traded in the last six months, and it suggested that he was destined for a career as a journeyman scorer, plodding from team to team. Things looked very different for Thomas as recently as last summer. Back then, he was the star gunner for the Boston Celtics, and he was becoming something of a folk hero in the city. But then in August, the organization abruptly traded him to the Cavs for Kyrie Irving. At the time of the first trade, Thomas was just months off a colossal playoff run in which he played through major dental surgery, a hip labral tear and the loss of his younger sister, Chyna, in a car accident. In the days after her death, Thomas suited up against the Bulls: He had Chyna’s name written on his sneakers and fat tears pooled in his eyes. And then, as he’d done for years, Thomas — the shortest man in the N.B.A. — scored bunches of points with an intricate, endless string of feints, jabs and soft, soft jumpers.
Boston’s callousness shocked people. ESPN broke news with details of back-room negotiations. The Boston Globe celebrated Thomas’s bond to the city. FiveThirtyEight quantified the trade’s impact on the Celtics’ win-share probabilities. Barstool Sports posted a meme implying the Cavs’ J.R. Smith — a man known to enjoy life — would be too high to notice his team had swapped starting guards. It was an onslaught of facts, justifications, adjusted advanced-analytics projections and bits. But no amount of coverage could ever fully account for such an unexpected transaction.
Then, in early September, in a first-person essay for a website called The Players’ Tribune, Thomas filled in the gaps: How he wanted to hang up on the Celtics general manager, Danny Ainge; how he broke the news to his two young sons; how, after some time, he forced himself to accept that his Boston ascendancy was done. Sports fans had long ago ceased to expect access to the intimate concerns of superstar players: They were too famous, too rich, too big. But here was access not just to the life of a star but also to the star’s internal monologue. The Celtics front office had revealed that they saw Thomas as a mere asset — fungible, mobile, dispensable — and he responded by demonstrating his singularity. “When I say this hurts, man, just know that it isn’t because of anything anyone else did,” Thomas wrote. “It’s only because of something I did. I fell in love with Boston.” Reading it, I damn near cried.
Thomas’s article, more than any other in the site’s history, underscored the elemental purpose of The Players’ Tribune. Founded in October 2014 by the former Yankee shortstop Derek Jeter, along with the sports-marketing executive Jaymee Messler, the company’s principle was that pro athletes were in dire need of an outlet in which to express themselves. Here, the athletes would be writing their own stories.
The Players’ Tribune originally gave athletes newsroom titles: David Ortiz, the jolly Red Sox slugger, was editor at large; Matt Harvey, the Mets hurler, was New York City bureau chief. On Twitter, jokes about Kobe Bryant — the editorial director! — flourished. Just imagine him screaming in the face of a middle reliever about a missing nut graf. For sports media, it was a way to grin in the face of the prickly existential fear they’d lived with ever since social media forever changed their industry. Twitter and Instagram had already conditioned athletes to communicate with the public directly. Might they, the middlemen and middlewomen, one day be cut out altogether? Wouldn’t athletes simply tell the same tales of humdrum perseverance that they do in Gatorade commercials? Didn’t good writing still require good writers?
Three years on, The Players’ Tribune has become a regular source of breaking news: Kevin Durant announced his league-upheaving move to Golden State in July 2016 with an essayistic memo, which then become a recurring format. In November 2015, Kobe Bryant announced his retirement via 11 stanzas of spare, Japanese-style poetry, which, unfortunately, did not. And confessional pieces like Thomas’s, written by N.H.L. also-rans and Brazilian soccer stars alike, have regularly gone viral.
At its helm is Jeter, who spent 20 years in New York saying nothing to the press. He is an athlete famed, almost revered, for blankness. But the fact that he played in that Yankees spotlight for as long as he did and mostly avoided off-the-field notoriety suggests that Jeter might possess some hidden guile. After all, The Players’ Tribune represents the first truly new wrinkle in sportswriting in a decade. But what is it, exactly? It’s not fair to call it P.R. The access it provides is genuine.  Perhaps The Players’ Tribune can be best understood as an effort by athletes to seize that most precious contemporary commodity — the narrative.
As recently as the early 1980s, the walls between pro athletes and the sportswriters who covered them were permeable. Local newspaper reporters would travel with the team, dine with the team and sometimes have one too many cold domestics with the team. These people were, essentially, co-workers. By the ’90s, money, and the instincts for self-preservation that money engenders, had created a system of formalized control that holds to this day. Technically, there is access galore: before and after practice, before and after pregame warm-ups, before and after the game itself. But locker-room interviews are notoriously fruitless. Gary Hoenig, a 71-year-old ex-newspaperman and the founding editor of ESPN the Magazine, who now works for The Players’ Tribune as an editor, told me, “I don’t think showering and standing there half-naked with a mic in your face is a great way to relate what your actual life is like.” And yet beat reporters trudge dutifully on, Bics in hand, and regularly do great work in unpromising situations.
But as meaningful access withered alongside print media, a new generation of sportswriters decided they would just stay in their living rooms and take their shots from there. The columnist Bill Simmons and the blog Deadspin pushed back against the hidebound conventions of sportswriting, the former with a hyperpersonal style defined by homerism, looseness and joy, the latter by happily pointing out all the ways we were being lied to. (I worked for Simmons at ESPN’s Grantland for four years.) Take, for example, their coverage of Jeter. Simmons and the baseball writers at Grantland assailed this purportedly unassailable figure, running geeky statistical analysis to prove that, despite his five Gold Gloves, he was actually a miserable defensive player. Deadspin, originally a Gawker affiliate, delighted in unearthing Jeter’s foibles. Once, it published a post suggesting he liked to watch his own highlights, in the nude, while shouting, over and over, “Yeah Jeets!” That this was based on an unverified rumor sourced from Reddit didn’t really matter. Deadspin was unconvinced that anyone, let alone a baseball player, should be uncomplicatedly revered. For millions of young fans, that mentality — that mainstream sports media presents a facile master narrative that is to be warred with at all times — became a defining principle.
And then there’s ESPN, which hovers above the whole system, Death Star-like, doing everything from dry game recaps to experiential multimedia packages to breaking-news pieces to talk shows that have come to define the way we shout about sports to websites like Grantland, which existed, to some extent, to question all of this. During his time at the network, the commentator Skip Bayless was well known for insisting that LeBron James was not, in fact, very good at basketball but was, rather, somewhat bad at basketball. And he never broke character. For the thinking sports fan, this was ESPN’s great tragedy: The network wanted it all, every last nook, and so it coupled its ambitious, unparalleled coverage with shameless, soul-crushing shouting.
For years, no one has dared to imagine a way to win back access. But The Players’ Tribune did, by completely redefining it. The site gives its subjects final approval of their own coverage. Normally, this would be a journalistic sin, were it not for an elegant and cynical workaround: giving the subject the byline. The model has precedent in the form of the ghostwritten as-told-to sports memoir, which has bred some stone-cold classics: “I Am Zlatan,” the Swedish soccer star Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s prickly and strange 2011 autobiography, is one of the best things I’ve ever read. (As a boy, Ibrahimovic celebrates personal milestones by stealing bicycles.) But being a bona fide literary achievement doesn’t mean it’s not brand management.
Levick was happy to tell me, in the classic manner of the disrupter, about how his company was about to upend an angry, worn-out industry. Sitting bolt upright, eyes locked onto mine, gesticulating with purpose, he pointed to the large flat-screen TV behind us: therein lay the enemy. “I have ESPN on all day long, and I get where these athletes are coming from,” he said. “These guys are the best in the world at what they do, and they can’t catch a break! They’re getting beaten up all day. Mark Zuckerberg doesn’t get beaten up like that.” His point was this: All that unnecessary negativity that ESPN’s TV shows churn out is ultimately a boon to the bottom line of The Players’ Tribune because that negativity is persuading athletes to share their proprietary, much-desired content with The Players’ Tribune.
Sean Conboy is an intense, handsome, wide-eyed true believer who wears all black. At 31, he is the executive editor of The Players’ Tribune, which means he’s the chief ghostwriter, responsible for many of the articles that have gone viral. He has a desk somewhere, I assume, but whenever I caught him at the office, he and his laptop were itinerant. The first time I saw him, he was on a couch near a Pop-A-Shot basketball hoop, plotting a coming business trip to Madrid. The next time we sat entombed together in a fishbowl meeting room that at least felt, and may indeed have been, soundproof.
Sometimes, the athletes “come in hot” with a draft or even just a long text message; other times, the athletes first want to talk through a difficult experience. When the former N.H.L. goalie Corey Hirsch wrote about the undiagnosed obsessive-compulsive disorder that nearly pushed him to drive his car off a cliff, he spoke with Conboy five or six times. (Hockey has been the source of a number of The Players’ Tribune’s best stories, churning out compelling characters at a rate incommensurate with its place in the culture at large: The former Bruins enforcer Shawn Thornton once provided an anecdote about his Parkinson’s-afflicted grandmother trying to talk him into letting her slug some booze out of the Stanley Cup.) Hirsch first revealed his story without being sure he would actually go through with publishing it. He was nervous about how his family would perceive it; and he nearly pulled it. That risk is part of the process at The Players’ Tribune: Whether it’s video or print, athletes have final cut and can kill a whole project. But Hirsch went through with it, and his article has been read more than a million times.
But most don’t. In fact, the process, as Conboy described it to me, was oddly familiar. For the Waiters story, Conboy and his subject went out for cheese steaks in Philly, then later did a two-hour interview. “Profile writing, it’s not easy,” he said, picking his words carefully. “You’re not getting two hours anymore hardly anywhere.” But Conboy could. Effectively, The Players’ Tribune has found a way to simulate the access of olden times by putting control in the hands of the wealthy and attractive subjects. In a way, Conboy did profile Waiters. He just didn’t receive the byline.
Can this really be a going concern? That our obsessive sports media is missing heretofore untold, profound personal truths about our heroes? For all its peaks, on any given day reading The Players’ Tribune, you might just run into a variation of “Hey [Insert City] — we’re gonna give it our all this year.” Neither the site itself nor its social media has become a real destination. According to comScore, the site gets a respectable 3.4 million unique views a month; its Twitter account has just over half a million followers. A lot of its content is, frankly, repetitive and predictable. The pieces that succeed effectively float away from The Players’ Tribune and into the national conversation.
The first time I saw Jeter at The Players’ Tribune, he appeared, fists pounding on the door, at a corner office where I had been chatting with Jon Sakoda, an early-stage investor. Laid on a low piece of cabinetry was a massive, glitzy championship belt given to the Players’ Tribune president, Jaymee Messler, by her pal Stephanie McMahon, daughter of the W.W.E. chief executive Vince McMahon. Jeter and Sakoda spent a few minutes admiring it. “You’re getting one next!” Jeter promised Sakoda. Then he briefly ambled off to find help in figuring out why Uber wasn’t working on his new phone. It was another sunny day in the well-lit Manhattan offices of a celebrity-backed, moneyed start-up with ambitions far beyond its page views.
Jeter spends most of his time in Miami, where he’s the chief executive of the Marlins, and doesn’t have his own full-time office here. We met later in a vacant office, under a wall of perfectly arrayed framed memories: photos from charity parties, past Jeter press coverage, Bryant’s poem. In person, Jeter looked good — in his bluejeans and dark gray henley, the picture of casual bro chic. But there were moments that remind you that he has been around awhile. He rolled out a rotator cuff, slowly; he smashed a fist into a spike of pain on his lower thigh. His rookie season was 1996. He dated Mariah Carey! For the better part of the first half of his career, the worst-case scenario was a Page Six write-up on what Meatpacking District club he was at last night.
What did I know about Derek Jeter? Not much and certainly nothing new after this brief encounter. I left the interview feeling as though, intentionally or not, he’d made a good case for access journalism’s uselessness. We already live among the distorting effects of Twitter and Instagram, the uncanny and calculated sense of intimacy that social-media platforms provide. Now we have a model that simulates objective journalism, supposedly written by the people who were once subject to that journalism’s scrutiny.
Projecting The Players’ Tribune model forward, we can imagine a world in which athletes simply don’t need to talk to reporters, in an echo of what feels like the unstoppable atomization of all news and information. Politicians, TV showrunners, labor-union leaders: theoretically The Players’ Tribune platform is replicable for any public professional. In the future, perhaps, every last person will get to broadcast his or her own particular worldview, free of objectivity, on a bespoke, partisan media organ, with slick photography and design. And it will be up to us to decide what version of the truth we want to believe.