Ryuhei Matsuda, center left, and Masami Nagasawa portray a couple in “Before We Vanish,” directed by Kiyoshi Kurosawa.Credit...Super Ltd.
When will they ever learn? The aliens, I mean, who can’t seem to resist the impulse to invade Earth and wipe out humanity. “Before We Vanish,” Kiyoshi Kurosawa’s witty science-fiction chin-scratcher — less a horror movie than a series of musings on potentially horrifying ideas — addresses the question literally. It concerns a reconnaissance squad of space travelers sent to do fieldwork in our ways and habits, with particular emphasis on our mental concepts.
There is a long and rich tradition of debate in philosophy and cognitive science about the nature of those entities, which the three main aliens resolve with impressive practical acumen. For them, to acquire a concept is to steal it from the person who explained it, a theft that is consummated by a brisk tap on the forehead. The victim crumples to the ground (there are some variations on this procedure) and then resumes life missing a key piece of mental furniture.
The result is not always terrifying. A manipulative, sexually-harassing boss, robbed of “work,” capers across the desktops of his office, laughing and tossing paper airplanes. A young man who has lived for a long time as an anxious shut-in loses “home” and finds himself free to explore the world and embrace political causes. It almost seems as if the aliens do their unwitting hosts a favor. The catch is that they plan to exterminate us and take over the planet.
It’s not always easy to know whom to root for. The first invader we encounter (Yuri Tsunematsu) has taken the form of a uniformed schoolgirl, whose bloody introduction evokes, teasingly and somewhat misleadingly, the iconography of classic Japanese horror. She is joined by a young man (also an alien, played by Mahiro Takasugi) who has latched onto a cynical journalist (not an alien, played by Hiroki Hasegawa) who serves as a guide. Alien etiquette apparently discourages harvesting your guide’s concepts, and the two are refreshingly forthright about their identities and intentions. Not that anyone believes them, at least at first.
Meanwhile, Narumi (Masami Nagasawa) is dealing with a mysterious change in her husband, Shinji (Ryuhei Matsuda), whose body has been taken over by one of the extraterrestrials. Their marriage was unhappy before, and now it passes through an even rougher patch on the way to a charming and not altogether surprising transformation. Once he learns enough to stop stumbling around in a semi-stupor, Shinji turns out to be an improvement over his earlier self. He’s open-minded. He pays attention. He listens to his wife.
So the real question, as it tends to be in dystopian science fiction, is whether we will learn, or whether it’s too late for us to recover the value of the concepts that define us. Mr. Kurosawa, a prolific and skilled genre master, spins this parable with a light, nimble touch, punctuating heavy passages of exposition with punchy, modest action sequences and snatches of incongruously bouncy music. There is a decided air of pastiche — a predigital, low-budget, ’80s feel — and the right measure of sincerity to remind you why the concept of the alien-invasion movie is one that matters to the species.