SAN SALVADOR — Last week, President Trump torpedoed an immigration deal put forward by a bipartisan group of senators. The Senate responded by rejecting his own, harsher plan. By the end of the week, the immigration debate seemed deadlocked between the fate of the Dreamers and the fate of the wall.
But one thing is clear: Any plan that purports to make America safer by making it harder for immigrants to obtain legal status and increasing deportations will actually do the opposite.
These proposals, embraced by Mr. Trump, are the same decades-old policies that helped transform Mr. Trump’s archenemy, Mara Salvatrucha 13, or MS-13, from a gang of a few hundred Salvadorans into the barbaric international crime organization that it is today, with over 100,000 members across Central America and the United States.
When dealing with the gang, Washington has operated under the assumption that fewer undocumented Central Americans will lead to less gang violence on the streets of the United States. Since the late 1980s, deportation has been its primary method for fighting MS-13.
From 1989 to 1993, the United States deported some 4,000 members of different gangs from Southern California back to El Salvador. Perhaps it’s not surprising that three decades later the number of gang members in El Salvador is approaching 60,000.
President Barack Obama earned himself the nickname “Deporter in Chief” by deporting an average of 74 Salvadorans a day during 2014. Mr. Trump deported the same number during his first year in the White House.
Deporting gang members, however, seems to have actually helped stimulate MS-13’s growth in the United States. There are now around 10,000 members in 40 states.
Gang members who are deported to El Salvador simply regroup in the heart of the criminal organization and then many head back to the United States, where they operate in “clicas,” or subgroups, like the Sailors Locos Salvatrucha and Teclas Locos Salvatrucha in Maryland. All Washington is doing is handing MS-13 recruits who know how to navigate the United States.
But the biggest problem with the focus on deportation is that it distracts from the efforts that would really make a difference.
Long Island, where prosecutors say two girls were beaten to death by MS-13 members in 2016, is one of the many places where the gang has expanded. The police have been fighting the gang there since 2007, but MS-13 continues to murder and grow more powerful because the authorities have failed to attack the organization at its roots.
The people accused of killing those girls were not hardened murderers with tattoos, members of a “cartel,” as Mr. Trump described the gang in 2017. They were teenagers. They were also part of the gang’s hard-core American ground forces: young immigrants, either with or without papers, lost and lonely in a new and violent world, where they have responded to the first institution that has lent them a hand — MS-13, not the United States government.
To say that the gangs “win over” these young people is misleading, because it implies that the American government is doing something to compete with them, which it is not. The United States is not fighting for these boys.
Americans keep talking about deportation but focus comparatively little on how budget cuts in education serve to feed gang recruiting activity, as Howard Koenig, the superintendent of public schools in Central Islip on Long Island, recently pointed out.
Americans also keep talking about the wall President Trump wants to build, but few people have acknowledged that “the government’s total failure to establish an efficient process and meaningful oversight of the placement” of unaccompanied minors has led to the MS-13 crisis, as Senator Charles Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said last June. Many of these children come from dysfunctional families, with parents who barely have time or money to take care of them; the government essentially releases them to the streets. Of the more than 240,000 unaccompanied minors detained at the border since 2012, only 56 were suspected of having connections to MS-13 when they arrived. If they made those connections after entering the United States, the United States is to blame.
Mr. Trump will continue to use his favorite word for MS-13 gang members: “animals.” And few people will focus on the fact that at high schools like Uniondale, home to two of Long Island’s MS-13 clicas, there are only three social workers for over 2,000 students. One of those social workers, Sergio Argueta, told me that many of these students are recent arrivals still lost in their new surroundings. He works to help at-risk youth in Long Island through an organization called Strong.
Last June, a teenager at Uniondale who was a “chequeo,” the lowest rung on the MS-13 ladder, told me why he joined the group. “You feel lost,” he said, when reflecting on his arrival at the school. He said that everyone had been after him: the police, because being young and Salvadoran made him a potential MS-13 member; the black gangs, because he looked like a Latino gang member; the Latino gangs — including MS-13 — because he wasn’t then a member. He did not join a cartel for money, or a gang because he was an “animal.” He joined MS-13 out of frustration, loneliness and the need for protection.
It was for those same reasons that a few young men, aimless death-metal fans on the run from a civil war in their home country, planted in Southern California’s troubled suburbs the earliest seeds of Mara Salvatrucha.
The years have gone by and American presidents keep announcing the same plan. With Mr. Trump in the White House and the Republicans controlling Congress, it does not appear that things will be any different. Even the Treasury Department has tried to crack down on MS-13; it is the only gang that it has levied sanctions against. And yet, after almost 40 years in the United States, everything seems to suggest that this criminal organization has much to look forward to.