Arthur J. Robinson — or Mr. Okra, as pretty much everyone called him — who rolled each day through the streets of New Orleans in a loudly painted pickup-truck-cum-fruit-stand singing his sales pitch like the roving food vendors once common in the city, died on Thursday at his home there. He was 74.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter Sergio Robinson, who had in recent years taken to driving the route when her father’s health waned.
Over tinny loudspeakers you would hear that he had cantaloupe, greens, squash and “the mango,” and soon the truck would come into view, a polychrome, mobile oasis in even the driest of food deserts.
Children, regular customers and selfie-snapping tourists would flock to him — the customers to buy watermelon, or maybe a few ears of corn. Mr. Robinson, built like Santa Claus and with an impish sense of humor, would hand over the produce in a plastic bag, snap the cash proceeds into a binder clip and be on his way.
He was a direct heir to a street-peddling tradition in New Orleans. Well before delivery apps purportedly disrupted the grocery business, people sat at their front stoops and bought from the Waffle Man, the Peanut Man, the Banana Man, the Hot Stuffed Crab Lady or the Ha Ha Man, an ice cream vendor so called for his singsong jingle.
He resumed his deliveries, giving away the produce on his first trip around the recovering city free of charge.
Arthur James Robinson was born in New Orleans on June 8, 1943, the youngest of 14 children. His father, Nathan Robinson, known as Okra Man, delivered fruits and vegetables by wheelbarrow and horse and buggy.
Arthur was, naturally, “Lil’ Okra” for a time. But after dropping out of school, he moved into other lines of work, running a gas station, traveling as part of the merchant marine and repairing the tires of 18-wheelers. Still, on Sunday afternoons he would bring groceries to some of the elderly people he knew, Ms. Robinson said.
“Then it turned out to be everybody in the neighborhood got used to coming to him,” she said.
So, some three decades ago, he affixed a metal roof over the bed of his truck and started making the rounds, on his way to becoming a local celebrity.
When the truck he was using in 2009 broke down, the owner of a local Ford dealership offered a replacement at a steep discount, and Mr. Robinson’s fans and customers raised the money to pay for it. Dr. Bob painted it again.
Besides her, his survivors include six sons and another daughter as well as “a bunch of grandchildren,” Ms. Robinson said.
The contours of his daily route changed little, and while Mr. Robinson always talked of how much he loved New Orleans, he was, like many of its most celebrated figures, wary of how much the city had changed.
