Opinion|Billy Graham, the Last Nonpartisan Evangelical?
Billy Graham, the Last Nonpartisan Evangelical?
It’s difficult to overstate the influence of the Rev. Billy Graham — who died at 99 in his Montreat, N.C., home on Wednesday — on American public life, and indeed the world, over the past century. It’s estimated that the globe-trotting preacher shared the Christian message with 215 million people in more than 185 countries, an effort that resulted in millions of conversions. Life magazine once listed him as one of the 100 most important Americans of the 20th century, and a Ladies’ Home Journal survey once ranked him as a top figure in “achievements in religion” — second only to God.
But Mr. Graham’s legacy stretches beyond his public influence to his personal integrity. He wasn’t a huckster, which is why you’d be hard pressed to find anyone who would speak ill of the man even before his passing.
But perhaps most relevant to our current moment, Mr. Graham found a way to exert influence in the public square while remaining nonpartisan. He met with every president from Harry Truman to Barack Obama. He read the Bible with Dwight Eisenhower and prayed with Gerald Ford, and is credited with the spiritual rebirth of George W. Bush.
As a student of American Christianity, I’ve always been fascinated by Mr. Graham’s ability to engage the public square without losing sight of himself or his calling. Which is why I asked him about these experiences during a visit to his Montreat home seven years ago almost to the day.
The cabin is tucked away on a country mountain road and impossible to find without GPS. The famous front porch was just how I’d imagined it, adorned with worn wooden rockers and aging flowerpots. Upon arrival, Mr. Graham’s aide instructed me to speak loud and talk slowly.
Mr. Graham sat in a small living room with a stacked-stone fireplace. His daughter Virginia Graham Tchividjian, known as Gigi, was also there. I approached to shake his hand, but his kind eyes greeted us before his fingers could.
“It’s such an honor to meet you,” I said.
A young woman dressed in scrubs brought a tray of ice tea as we circled Mr. Graham. I asked him questions about ministry, death, his wife and his experiences with presidents. Eisenhower was the most spiritual president, he said, but he felt closest to Reagan, who still showed up in his dreams from time to time.
After listening to stories for almost an hour, I worked up the nerve to ask my most important question.
Mr. Graham gathered his breath, his eyes searching the ceiling for the right answer.
It was a staggering admission and one that, looking back, I can’t imagine coming from the many preachers and religious opportunists who now elbow their way to our current president’s side. Mr. Graham never sought out presidents or those with political power, and he refused many of the requests they made of him throughout the years.
His criticism of the religious right for its narrow agenda and raw thirst for power seemed harsh then, but observers of the partisanship among evangelical leaders today might call them prophetic.
Any reflection on Mr. Graham’s legacy would not be complete without mention of his flaws. He was a man, not a god, and made many mistakes — even in wielding public influence.
After a 1950 meeting with President Truman, Mr. Graham knelt on the White House lawn at the request of the press corps. He later admitted regretting this public display. But one of his greatest regrets was his close friendship with President Richard Nixon, a consummate politician who used his relationship with the preacher as political leverage. He later realized his mistake, avoiding Washington and the White House altogether.
His daughter chimed in with a story of her own. She recounted an event in 1998 during Bill Clinton’s impeachment scandal when most conservative Christians were doing all they could to unseat him. Around this time, Mr. Graham had been invited to attend a dinner for everyone who had been on the cover of Time magazine, and he took Ms. Tchividjian with him.
Today, when Mr. Graham passed from this life into the next, we lost perhaps the last true evangelical statesman. Filling the space he vacated is a new crop of religious leaders who would do well to live as Mr. Graham did — resisting the pull of partisanship, standing courageously in the middle; speaking with love and mutual respect for those who claim other parties; clinging to the Gospel, but not in a way that marginalizes listeners based on their political affiliations.
America’s preacher has left us, and we need him now more than ever.