Steve Wynn is the name and face of Wynn Resorts.
With his smiling face and flamboyant personality, he became one of the avatars of Las Vegas and even a part of pop culture, as an inspiration for the casino owner portrayed by Andy Garcia in the trilogy of “Ocean’s” films.
In general, when companies wrap a brand around a personality, whether the founder or a celebrity, there’s a risk, Mr. Friederichsen said. When that person does something that draws negative attention, he added, the brand needs to address it quickly and directly, offer up a remedy and communicate it to shareholders and consumers.
It is a predicament that companies connected with well-known figures as varied as Martha Stewart and Harvey Weinstein have faced. When the celebrity chef Paula Deen became embroiled in controversy over racial comments she had made, she stumbled, he said.
Ms. Deen wound up losing endorsements and TV show contracts.
The repercussions for the Wynn brand could cut far deeper and last far longer than they have for other companies that have faced harassment allegations in recent months, such as NBC, which fired Matt Lauer, and Fox, which let Bill O’Reilly go.
Wynn Resorts relies heavily on corporate and group bookings for its revenue. And many big-name brands may be reluctant to book Wynn hotels, at least for the foreseeable future, to avoid getting caught up in the controversy.
“If I was PepsiCo, I would stay away right now,” said John Blank, chief equity strategist at Zacks Investment Research.
But industry experts believe this is temporary, perhaps something the company can get past in a few months.
“His decision to resign reduces the risk of brand tarnishing,” said Dan Wasiolek, senior equity analyst at Morningstar.
Still, branding experts say it’s critical that the company’s new leadership speak out loudly and soon against sexual misconduct.
“I see a huge opportunity for Wynn Resorts to now take a leadership role in this entire controversy by getting out in front of this and championing women’s rights and championing equality that is sorely needed in Las Vegas,” Mr. Friederichsen said.
Experts suggested that protests against the brand could be muted because the company is largely selling Las Vegas, where marketing often focuses on a party atmosphere.
Still, the allegations have resulted in multiple shareholder lawsuits and at least four separate investigations into Mr. Wynn and the Wynn Resorts operations.
“If you find that it was not only occurring with Steve Wynn but on level after level of his organization, then I think it could be devastating to the brand,” Mr. Perlut said. He added that the company would then likely need to be sold or change its name.
