February is typically the dreariest month on the American sporting calendar, with football wrapping up, baseball still dormant and basketball and hockey grinding through their regular seasons. So this is a great month for the Winter Olympics to arrive, filling our TV screens with hours and hours of skating, skiing and, yes, even curling.
Glenn Howerton took a leave of absence from “It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia” to star in this dark, strange sitcom, playing an accomplished academic who’s forced to take a job as a high school teacher. Created in part by the quirky “Saturday Night Live” writer-filmmaker Mike O’Brien, “A.P. Bio” also stars Patton Oswalt, as the school’s principal, who stands in the way of the new teacher’s plan to turn the most gifted students into his minions in a mission of revenge. The series started airing Thursday, but the first episode is already streaming on Hulu, and the first three are on NBC.com.
The comedians Phoebe Robinson and Jessica Williams adapt their popular podcast and live stage show to television, in four one-hour episodes that tackle topics relevant to the hosts’ experiences as young, black New Yorkers. Robinson and Williams will share screen time with some of their friends and favorite comics, along with high-profile guests including Sarah Jessica Parker, Jon Stewart and Tituss Burgess from “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt.” The hybrid of talk show and stand-up showcase looks to offer fresh, funny insights into modern life in a diverse metropolis.
If the recent “Blade Runner” sequel didn’t satisfy your thirst for futuristic detective tales, this adaptation of the novelist Richard Morgan’s 2002 cyberpunk classic should do the trick. Joel Kinnanman (“The Killing”) plays Morgan’s gruff, tough action hero Takeshi Kovacs, a mercenary whose consciousness was stored away for hundreds of years before being slipped into a new human “sleeve” and employed to solve a murder. The series combines stunning science-fiction imagery with a traditional film noir plot, putting both in service of disturbing speculation on how humanity might evolve — and in some cases become more depraved — in the centuries ahead.
The documentarian Matthew Heineman has shown an uncanny ability to gain access to hard-to-reach people and places, from the militias on the American-Mexican border in “Cartel Land” to the Syrian citizen activists in “City of Ghosts.” For Heineman’s new five-part series “The Trade,” he tackles the reality of America’s opioid crisis by embedding with the people profiting from the problem — including the criminals and the cops — while also spending time with the users and their families, who’ve seen their lives torn apart by addiction.
The TV audience has fragmented so much over the past several decades that pretty much the only broadcast Americans still watch en masse is the Super Bowl … even if much of that audience will be tuning in this year for the commercials and the Justin Timberlake halftime show. A week later, NBC will begin broadcasting the Winter Olympics from Pyeongchang, South Korea, and while Olympic viewership lagged for the most recent Games, in Rio, NBC should still dominate the prime-time ratings from the Feb. 9 through 25 — starting with an opening ceremony that should feature the kind of awe-inspiring pageantry even the sports-averse can enjoy.
A new roster of lifestyle experts replaces the groundbreaking “Fab Five” of Bravo’s original “Queer Eye for the Straight Guy,” a series which, back in the early 2000s, helped diversify programming and establish the vibrancy of gay culture on television. The Netflix revival will venture beyond the New York home of the original, taking the panel’s tips on how to dress, cook and behave to the rest of America.
The writer and producer Alan Ball (“Six Feet Under,” “True Blood”) returns to HBO with a new series that arrives shrouded in mystery. Described as a family drama set in Portland, Ore., “Here and Now” stars Tim Robbins and Holly Hunter as an upper-middle-class married couple who raises multiracial adopted children alongside their biological offspring. The show also contains some supernatural elements, with a character who begins experiencing visions. Regardless of whether “Here and Now” is ultimately filed under fantasy, melodrama or something else entirely, expect it to express Ball’s usual fascination with dysfunctional relationships, and how they connect to our communal search for deeper meaning.
Veena Sud, who created “The Killing,” is back with another gritty crime story combined with a moody study of urban life, this time based on the Russian movie “The Major.” Regina King stars in this series as a Jersey City mom whose son is accidentally run over and killed by a police officer, exacerbating tensions between law enforcement and local black residents. The aftermath of the accident draws the private lives of several local citizens out into the open, exposing the fragility of a society riven with conflict.
Not to be confused with Yahoo! Screen’s dearly missed science-fiction sitcom “Other Space,” the wry animated genre parody “Final Space” has the popular YouTube vlogger Olan Rodgers voicing both an astronaut named Gary and his cute-but-destructive pal, Mooncake. Conan O’Brien’s production company developed the series, which also features the voices of the geek TV favorites David Tennant (“Doctor Who”), Gina Torres (“Firefly”), Steven Yeun (“The Walking Dead”) and John DiMaggio (“Futurama”), in a story about interstellar adventurers investigating the outer limits of the universe.
The subversive ’80s movie “How to Beat the High Cost of Living” gets an update in writer Jenna Bans’s “Good Girls.” This cockeyed crime drama follows some desperate suburbanites who pull a heist at their local market. In familiar “Breaking Bad” fashion, what starts out as a desperate quick-fix becomes more complicated when the mob gets involved. The core cast includes Christina Hendricks, Mae Whitman and Retta, which should make it a lot easier to root for these antiheroines to succeed.
The prolific documentary filmmaker Alex Gibney and the Oscar-nominated screenwriter Dan Futterman assemble top-shelf character actors — including Michael Stuhlbarg, Bill Camp, Peter Sarsgaard, Jeff Daniels, and Tahar Rahim — for this dramatization of Lawrence Wright’s Pulitzer-winning book, “The Looming Tower: Al Qaeda and the Road to 9/11.” Set mostly in the late 1990s, the ten-part series will look at how the turf wars between the F.B.I. and the C.I.A. left the United States scandalously unprepared for the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Also of interest: “Talk Show: The Game Show” (truTV, Feb. 1), “Absentia” (Amazon, Feb. 2), “Coach Snoop” (Netflix, Feb. 2), “Strike Back” (Cinemax, Feb. 2), “Channel Zero: Butcher’s Block” (Syfy, Feb. 7), “Homeland” (Showtime, Feb. 11), “Our Cartoon President” (Showtime, Feb. 11), “This Close” (Sundance Now, Feb. 14), “Everything Sucks!” (Netflix, Feb. 16), “Mozart in the Jungle” (Amazon, Feb. 16), “The Joel McHale Show with Joel McHale” (Netflix, Feb. 18), “Marseille” (Netflix, Feb. 23), “Ugly Delicious” (Netflix, Feb. 23), “Notes from the Field” (HBO, Feb. 24), “Ash vs. Evil Dead” (Starz, Feb. 25), “iZombie” (the CW, Feb. 26), “Living Biblically” (CBS, Feb. 26), “McMafia” (AMC, Feb. 26), “UnREAL” (Lifetime, Feb. 26), “The Voice” (NBC, Feb. 26) and “Unsolved: The Murders of Tupac and The Notorious B.I.G.” (USA, Feb. 27).