President Trump on Friday praised Rob Porter, the White House staff secretary who resigned on Wednesday amid spousal abuse allegations. Trump said that Porter did a “very good job at the White House”.
Well, we wish him well. He worked very hard. I found out about it recently and I was surprised by it. But we certainly wish him well. It’s a — obviously, tough time for him. He did a very good job when he was in the White House. And we hope he has a wonderful career. And hopefully he will have a great career ahead of him. But it was very sad when we heard about it. And certainly he’s also very sad. Now, he also — as you probably know — he says he’s innocent. And I think you have to remember that. He said very strongly yesterday that he’s innocent. So, you’ll have to talk to him about that. But we absolutely wish him well. He did a very good job while he was at the White House.
WASHINGTON — John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff, told officials in the West Wing on Friday that he was willing to step down over his handling of allegations of spousal abuse against Rob Porter, the staff secretary who resigned in disgrace this week over the accusations, according to two officials aware of the discussions.
The officials emphasized that they did not consider a resignation imminent, and that Mr. Kelly — a retired four-star Marine general who early in his tenure often used a threat of quitting as a way to temper President Trump’s behavior — had made no formal offer. In comments to reporters at the White House on Friday, Mr. Kelly said he had not offered to resign.
But his suggestion in private that he would be willing to step down if the president wanted him to reflected the degree to which the scandal surrounding Mr. Porter has engulfed the White House, touching off a bitter round of recriminations that could result in a shake-up at the highest levels.
Two West Wing advisers and a third person painted a picture of a White House staff rived and confused, with fingers pointed in all directions and the president privately expressing dissatisfaction with Mr. Kelly.
Some complained that Donald F. McGahn II, the White House counsel, who learned last January that Mr. Porter was concerned about potentially damaging accusations from two ex-wives, had not been forthcoming enough about what he knew. Others faulted Hope Hicks, the communications director, who had been romantically involved with Mr. Porter, for soliciting statements of support for him when the accusations became public.
And many, including the president himself, have turned their ire on Mr. Kelly for vouching for Mr. Porter’s character and falsely asserting that he had moved aggressively to oust him once his misdeeds were discovered.
The glowing praise of a staff member accused of serial violence against women was in line with the president’s own denials of sexual impropriety despite accusations from more than a dozen women and his habit of accepting claims of innocence from men facing similar allegations. Among them was Roy S. Moore, the former Republican Senate candidate in Alabama, who is accused of molesting teenage girls.
But later in the day, the White House dealt far more aggressively with another allegation of abuse. A spokesman confirmed that a second White House staff member, David Sorensen, a speechwriter, had resigned over allegations by his former wife that he had abused her during their marriage. The spokesman said that officials confronted Mr. Sorenson on Thursday night when they learned of the accusations and that he had denied them.
Mr. Sorensen’s resignation, first reported by The Washington Post, came as a new timeline emerged indicating that top officials knew much earlier than previously disclosed that Mr. Porter faced accusations of violence against women.
Shortly after Mr. Trump’s inauguration, Mr. McGahn, the White House counsel, first learned from Mr. Porter himself that there could be allegations against him, according to two people briefed on the situation. Mr. McGahn’s knowledge of the accusations in January was first reported by The Washington Post.
Mr. Porter told him about the possible allegations because he was concerned that what he characterized as false charges from aggrieved women who were out to destroy him could derail his F.B.I. background check, according to one of the two people briefed on the matter.
Six months later, the F.B.I. told Mr. McGahn that accusations of domestic abuse had indeed surfaced in Mr. Porter’s background check. Mr. McGahn opted at that time to let the F.B.I. complete its investigation into any incidents. Mr. Porter assured Mr. McGahn, another person briefed on the matter said, that the accusations from the former wives were lies.
The emerging timeline illustrates the degree to which Mr. Porter, a clean-cut and ambitious former Rhodes scholar and Harvard Law School-educated lawyer, concealed troublesome episodes from his past that would normally be considered disqualifying for a senior White House aide.
Lawyers in the counsel’s office believed that the bureau — with its vast investigative powers — was best positioned to look into the accusations, the two people briefed on the matter said, and that it was not their job to investigate conduct that took place long before an official began working in the administration.
That represents a sharp break with past practice, in which White House counsels undertook elaborate vetting of senior advisers before they were hired — and looked into any serious allegations that surfaced thereafter.
In November, the White House heard back from the F.B.I. Senior White House officials, including Mr. Kelly, Joe Hagin, the deputy chief of staff, and Mr. McGahn received word from the bureau that the allegations were credible and that Mr. Porter was not likely to pass his background check.
But while Mr. McGahn privately informed Mr. Porter and encouraged him to consider moving on, according to one of the two people briefed, no action was taken to immediately terminate him. Rather, Mr. McGahn requested that the F.B.I. complete its investigation and come back to the White House with a final recommendation, a process that could take months.
On Friday, several White House aides described confusion among the staff about why Mr. Kelly and others had initially rallied to defend Mr. Porter, and some suggested that Mr. Kelly had tried to cover up what he knew. Others insisted that while he was aware of the broad strokes of accusations against Mr. Porter, and while he could have made more of an effort to learn more, he trusted the staff secretary’s denials.
Mr. Kelly began telling people at the White House on Thursday that he had learned the details of Mr. Porter’s situation only “40 minutes before he threw him out” two days earlier, before pictures of Mr. Porter’s bruised ex-wife began circulating.
But on Wednesday afternoon, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, and other aides had maintained to reporters that the White House fully backed Mr. Porter, who they said was leaving of his own accord. She issued a statement saying that both the president and Mr. Kelly had “full confidence” in his performance.
As the meeting broke up, Ms. Hicks loudly complained about what had transpired, using an expletive, a person briefed on the meeting said.
The infighting unfolded amid signs of a brewing shake-up in the West Wing.
The president has now sounded out several people as possible replacements for Mr. Kelly. Those possible replacements include Mick Mulvaney, the budget director; Representative Kevin McCarthy of California; and Gary D. Cohn, Mr. Trump’s top economic adviser. He has also returned to a notion he has raised privately in the past, telling people he would like Thomas J. Barrack Jr., a close friend and confidant, to take the job.
Mr. Kelly is not ready to explicitly offer a resignation, according to a person familiar with his thinking. But people close to Mr. Trump said the president had begun the process of making the job so unpleasant for Mr. Kelly that it might hasten his departure, the same sort of ritual humiliation to which he subjected Reince Priebus, his first chief of staff, before his departure in July.
Despite his warm words on Friday, two advisers said, Mr. Trump was livid when he learned of the allegations against Mr. Porter, and referred to his disgraced former aide in one phone call as “bad garbage.” He also expressed his frustration with both Mr. Kelly and Ms. Hicks.
On Friday evening, the White House announced new posts for 31 officials, including elevating to acting staff secretary Derek Lyons, another Harvard Law School-educated lawyer, who formerly worked on Capitol Hill and had been Mr. Porter’s No. 2. Also included on the list was the departure of Jim Carroll, a lawyer in the counsel’s office who had only recently been designated to be Mr. Kelly’s deputy, but will now become acting director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy.