Despite repeated attempts by conservative lawmakers to kill it — and a 2016 campaign-trail vow by Donald J. Trump that “no family will have to pay the death tax” because “we will repeal it” — the estate tax remains a surprisingly resilient part of the United States tax code.
The tax law passed by Congress in December certainly keeps it alive — on more generous terms. Instead of taxing any amount above $5.49 million per person at a rate of 40 percent, the new law raises that exemption to $10 million, which, when indexed for inflation, allows individuals to pass on $11.2 million and couples to transfer twice that amount without paying a penny of tax.
But leaving the estate tax in place means America’s richest families now face the prospect of scurrying to tax lawyers to revise older estate plans, and may need to do so again before the end of 2025. The new exemption is on the books for only eight years, and if Congress doesn’t change the law again, estates could face tax bills after 2026 for moves made under the new, temporary limits.
Despite these complications, what’s clear is that even though Congress didn’t kill the estate tax, the new limits come close.
According to IRS figures, 12,411 estates filed Form 706, United States Estate (and Generation-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return, for 2016. Of those filers, fewer than half — 5,219 estates — owed anything, paying $18.3 billion on assets of $108 billion, for an effective tax rate of 17 percent. Even among estates valued at more than $50 million, 133 managed to avoid paying any estate tax.
If the new exemption had been in place that year, it would have trimmed those estate-tax bills by an amount between $2.3 billion and $6.2 billion. No more than 2,204 estates would have exceeded the individual $10 million baseline exemption in 2016. And under the new $20 million baseline exclusion for married filers, the tax would have hit just 911 estates.
Besides the generous exemption, the estate tax always has provided another big benefit to inheritors: Those assets are passed on at their market value at the time of death. This allows stocks, real estate and other holdings that may have appreciated to be sold with no tax ever paid on those gains.
That’s the prime reason that anyone with an estate valued between the old and new exemption limits needs to consider rewriting his or her plans to bring the maximum amount of assets back into the estate. The problem is that one vehicle that’s often used is an irrevocable trust, which, as the name implies, isn’t easily reversed.
Another time bomb in older estate plans could lurk in trusts that move assets out of the estate to future generations, called generation-skipping transfers. These transfers are taxed in coordination with the estate tax and gift tax and count toward the estate tax exemption amount. Often, those trusts use a formula that automatically removes the maximum exemption amount from the estate and places that money in the trust, said Melissa Langa, managing partner of Bove & Langa in Boston.
An added sting for families forced to rewrite their estate plans (a process that can cost between $2,000 and $10,000) is that unless the work is a business expense, they can’t deduct that cost. The new tax law eliminated the allowance for tax preparation fees.
But it’s the sunset provision of the new law that creates the most potential problems, according to estate planners, many of whom are unimpressed with the hasty, late-December tax-law rewrite.
Mr. Spica pointed out that the estate of a spouse who died under the older, lower exemption would benefit if the surviving spouse died between now and the end of 2025. Estates of any amount pass untaxed to a spouse and are taxed only after the surviving spouse dies. So even if the first spouse died when the estate exemption was $11 million for a couple, that estate enjoys a $22 million exemption — but only if the surviving spouse dies before Dec. 31, 2025.
Meanwhile, someone who dies today under the $22 million exemption could see that allowance cut in half if the surviving spouse passes away in 2026, when the exemption drops back to the earlier limit.
“You’ll get half the benefit if the second spouse dies outside this new regime,” Mr. Spica said.
Another issue Congress left hanging concerns how to handle gift taxes after the higher exemption expires. Because the tax on large gifts works in concert with the estate tax, the estate of someone who gives away more than the lower exemption could be hit with a “claw back” tax bill for several million dollars when the law reverts to the lower limit, said James Blase of Blase & Associates in St. Louis.
The one place where estate-tax certainty does exist is within the very wealthiest families, who continue to face a 40 percent maximum tax rate on their estates.
