Sports|Unified Korean Hockey Team Finishes Winless. So Why All the Cheering?
Unified Korean Hockey Team Finishes Winless. So Why All the Cheering?
GANGNEUNG, South Korea — It was never just about winning or losing.
But in the end, there were only losses, at least on the ice.
The unified Korean women’s hockey team — the only team at the Olympics to feature athletes from both North and South Korea — skated onto the ice for the last time at Kwandong Hockey Center here Tuesday, losing, 6-1, to Sweden and closing out its Olympic run without winning a single matchup.
At least there was a positive note Tuesday for a team that had shouldered a heavy symbolic weight at the highly politicized Games. In the first period, a South Korean player, Han Soojin, scored a goal, the team’s second in Olympic play.
To the coach, Sarah Murray, who was tearful after the last buzzer sounded, the score was beside the point.
The stands, mostly filled with organized groups of students and local government workers, waved a sea of flags bearing the map of the unified Korean Peninsula, the one inherently political emblem permitted at the Games.
And despite the conspicuous absence of the North Korean cheerleaders, who had inspired intense fascination at previous games, the South Korean fans kept up buoyant chants of “Be strong!” and “Win, Korea, Win!” throughout the matchup.
Once the two Koreas decided to combine rosters, the team, made up not only of players from North and South Korea but teammates who had naturalized as South Korean citizens to play on the team, embodied hopes that cooperation at the Games might help soothe tensions on the peninsula. A standoff over the North’s nuclear program has stoked fears of war.
At the beginning, it was a tough pill to swallow for South Korean team members who had played together since 2013 and were suddenly forced to integrate a dozen additional players less than a month before the Games began.
Murray acknowledged that merging the two sides, dealing with language barriers and trying to retrofit game plans for new team members was difficult.
As they skated around the rink to salute the fans, the theme song from the 1988 Seoul Olympics, “Hand in Hand,” boomed throughout the arena.
Even without any wins, some spectators saw the team as having scored a small diplomatic victory.
According to polls in South Korea, support for the unified team, which was decidedly mixed before the Games, rose over the course of the week in which the women played together.
“They lost the games, but I think what we need to focus on is the small steps of peacemaking and the mutual understanding of each other,” said Jay Song, a senior lecturer at the Asia Institute of the University of Melbourne in Australia.
Some of the players expressed that optimism.
In another news conference after Korea’s game against Japan, Griffin looked slightly weary of multiple questions about her North Korean teammates.
Skeptics said that the North Korean delegation at the Olympics amounted to nothing more than a political charade.
“They are trying to do their own diplomatic act with the other athletes,” Baek added.
The North Koreans have said very little during their Olympic stint. At Tuesday’s game, about 10 North Korean officials, wearing red-and-white track suits with “DPRKorea” emblazoned on the back, sat in a row high up in the arena.
“No interviews,” she said.
Some spectators said they believed that the North Koreans had simply hijacked South Korea’s hardworking women’s hockey team.
During a visit to the presidential palace the day after the opening ceremony, Kim Yo-jong, Kim Jong-un’s sister, presented an invitation to Moon Jae-in, South Korea’s president, to visit Pyongyang for a summit meeting.
But on Tuesday, the South Korean government reiterated its plans to conduct postponed military exercises with the United States at some point after the Games end, a move that could undermine any Olympic détente.
Whatever the diplomatic fallout, some players had bittersweet feelings about saying farewell to their North Korean teammates.
