She doesn’t remember what went wrong exactly — “everything’s the end of the world at 9,” she said — but it was enough to make her quit.
After a couple of months, her mother intervened: She took her to see a performance of “Romeo and Juliet” featuring the delicate, passionate Romanian ballerina, Alina Cojocaru.
It was Juliet — both the part and Ms. Cojocaru — that convinced Ms. Woodward, now a 24-year-old soloist at New York City Ballet, to take another stab at ballet. And now the role is hers. On Feb. 21, Ms. Woodward will make her debut as Juliet in Peter Martins’s production of “Romeo + Juliet” opposite Taylor Stanley.
This has been a standout season for Ms. Woodward, who has made alluring debuts in George Balanchine’s “Apollo,” as Calliope; and as the shivering, fetching lead in the “Winter” section of Jerome Robbins’s “The Four Seasons.” But “Romeo + Juliet” — because it is a full-length ballet and requires such emotional layers — is another matter entirely.
Ms. Woodward possesses the requisite emotional breadth and more. Trained by Yuri Grigoriev, who danced with the Stanislavsky Ballet in Moscow, she has the precision of classical ballet and the speed and attack of George Balanchine’s neoclassical tradition. Her footwork and turns aren’t just properly placed, they sparkle with fluid musicality. It’s lovely to watch because it’s so natural.
Mr. Martins, who retired under pressure last month as ballet master in chief of City Ballet after allegations of sexual harassment and abuse, chose Ms. Woodward as Juliet before he left. Kathleen Tracey, a former company member turned ballet master, has coached Ms. Woodward in several roles including this one. She said she has come to realize how right Mr. Martins was to pick Ms. Woodward.
Ms. Woodward has a particular mix of good cheer and glamour that comes partly from her upbringing. She was born in Paris, where she lived until she was 3 1/2 with her French filmmaker father and her mother, a dancer from South Africa who performed with the choreographer Roland Petit among others.
Her parents, who met on a dance-film set, relocated to Philadelphia, where Ms. Woodward’s brother was born. But when they split up — Ms. Woodward was 7 — her father returned to Paris. Until she was 15, she lived in Los Angeles with her mother and brother.
Ms. Woodward, who lives in the West Village with her rescue dog, Luna, may have been partly raised in America, but she’s not exactly an American girl. Her gracious manners have a European ease, and her spirit and frequent smile bring to mind the French ballerina Violette Verdy, who danced with City Ballet from 1958 to 1977. All of that shows up in her performances.
And if the ballet world can seem small and closed in — the work it takes to thrive in it requires total focus — Ms. Woodward dances like she knows that the real world is a big place. Her time at the Bolshoi Ballet Academy helped her realize that. “It’s about being able to adapt wherever you are,” she said.
