271 pp. Simon & Schuster. $26.
Despite its title, “Asymmetry” comprises two seemingly unrelated sections of equal length, appended by a slim and quietly shocking coda. Halliday’s prose is clean and lean, almost reportorial in the style of W. G. Sebald, and like the murmurings of a shy person at a cocktail party, often comic only in single clauses. It’s a first novel that reads like the work of an author who has published many books over many years.
The first section — “Folly” — is the story of a love affair. Written in the third person, it narrates the meeting, courtship and deepening intimacy between Alice, a book editor and aspiring writer in her mid-20s, and Ezra Blazer, a brilliant, geriatric novelist who is partly modeled on Philip Roth.
Together, Alice and Ezra watch baseball games on TV, eat appetizers purchased at Upper West Side delicatessens, hone inside jokes, attend concerts, read side by side and have sex. In many ways, Ezra, who has everything he could want besides a Nobel Prize, is Alice’s tutor — instructing her on whom to read (Primo Levi, Hannah Arendt), how to think (unsentimentally) and where to buy a proper winter coat (Searle on Madison Avenue). But Alice is early in her career and herself talented, which gives her an underrated sort of power, the prospective and untested kind. It might not have a name, but any young woman who has it or has seen it harnessed knows it’s real.
An otherwise traditional narrative of their romance is interrupted every few pages by modernist intrusions of text. A passage from “Tropic of Cancer,” one of the books that Ezra has bought for Alice, is presented, italicized and unsourced. So is part of a news article about the invasion of Iraq, and the phrase “CALLER ID BLOCKED,” and abortion clinic literature. In a novel that is ultimately about writing itself, it’s a clever device that allows for a realistic depiction of what it means to be a person who considers reading an emotionally instructive and intellectually legitimate form of lived experience.
The first-person second section — “Madness” — belongs to Amar Jaafari, a funny and morally serious Iraqi-American economist who is being detained at Heathrow in 2008. “Madness” switches between a present-tense account of “Mr. Jaafari’s” interrogation, and “Amar’s” memories of his childhood spent first in Baghdad — “a place in which you could not forget about politics for one minute, never mind the time it takes to eat a meal or read a poem or make love” — and then in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
Throughout Amar’s account, tiny details from Alice’s story echo dimly though, enough to seem like coincidence: offhand descriptions of purple clothing, the music of Janacek, the vague phonetic qualities of Amar’s own name. Only in the short third section — not even 30 pages — do we begin to understand how their stories fit together.
The book ends with the transcription of “Desert Island Discs,” a BBC radio program in which cultural figures select their favorite pieces of music, which are played on air between interview segments. The guest is Ezra Blazer, and the year is 2011. He tells charming boyhood anecdotes, flirts with the host, and at the end of a convoluted answer to a question about depression exposes the secret logic of “Asymmetry.” The reveal is both astonishing and retrospectively inevitable.
