LONDON — No one polarizes opinion over Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union quite like Boris Johnson, the flamboyant foreign secretary, who in 2016 helped persuade Britons to quit a bloc that he once accused of trying to unify the continent just as Napoleon and Hitler tried to do.
So why, exactly, would Mr. Johnson try to woo the large minority who voted to remain?
A second vote would bring “another year of wrangling and turmoil and feuding in which the whole country would lose,” he argued in a speech that skirted around the tough economic questions about withdrawal that have split a bitterly divided British cabinet.
Many who wished to remain in the European Union see it as exactly such a gesture — a blend of nationalism and nostalgia — and analysts rated his prospects of winning them over as close to zero.
It would not be the first time. Last year he caused a stir before the Conservative Party’s annual conference by publishing a lengthy essay on his Brexit vision. More recently, he made headlines with calls for higher health spending, perhaps seeking to justify his widely debunked claim that quitting the European Union would free up around $500 million a week for the National Health Service.
But more recently — and plausibly — he admitted his ambitions, likening his approach to becoming leader to grabbing a football if it “came loose from the back of the scrum,” a term from Rugby football akin to a fumble in American football.
In 2016 that ball slipped, agonizingly, from his grasp after the Brexit referendum, when Mr. Johnson was abandoned by key allies and forced to withdraw from the contest to replace the former prime minister, David Cameron, who quit after the plebiscite. Theresa May went on to take the crown.
But Mr. Johnson may be sensing another moment of opportunity, as Mrs. May struggles to control her cabinet amid calls from some of her own lawmakers for her to step aside.
Brexit has caught her in an unforgiving political vise. A “soft”, departure, protecting business by retaining close economic ties to the bloc, is being opposed by Brexit enthusiasts in the cabinet, including Mr. Johnson.
But a “hard Brexit,” or clean break, of the type such right-wing and Brexit supporters favor, could be rejected by Parliament, plunging Mrs. May’s government into a terminal crisis.
That conundrum has paralyzed decision making in London, leaving Mrs. May looking weak, unable to tell European Union negotiators (or the British public) what future relationship she wants with the bloc.
Mr. Johnson’s was the first in a series of speeches by ministers — including one by Mrs. May scheduled for Saturday — designed to fill that vacuum. But if this speech is any indication, the British public and European negotiators may be disappointed.
Some believe that Mr. Johnson is looking for a pretext to quit the cabinet over Brexit and cause a leadership crisis, and on Wednesday he avoided a reporter’s question about whether he would stay in the government if he should lose the internal debate over the terms of withdrawal.
These are nervous times for Mr. Johnson. He has been weakened by his performance as foreign secretary, which has been criticized as accident-prone and lightweight.
Meanwhile, he has encountered unexpected competition for the Brexit spotlight in the form of Jacob Rees-Mogg, a caricature patrician with impeccable manners, a socially conservative philosophy and hard-line pro-Brexit views.
If there is a contest to succeed Mrs. May, the top two contenders will be chosen by Conservative lawmakers, but the final choice is up to party members, now thought to number around 80,000 people.
Among these activists, hard-line Brexit supporters, mainly from an older age category, are thought to be overrepresented. They seem to be warming to Mr. Rees-Mogg, who has transformed himself from a political curiosity to a front-runner for the leadership, finishing above Mr. Johnson in some surveys of party members.
Mr. Rees-Mogg’s rise was accelerated last month when Mrs. May’s botched cabinet reshuffle inadvertently opened a vacancy for him to lead the European Research Group — a gathering of hard Brexit lawmakers — giving him a platform unencumbered by any need to toe the government line. His brand of direct, upper-class speaking has given him celebrity status and won him a set of followers now nicknamed the Mogglodytes.
“He is on your TV, he is on your Instagram feed, he is at the Cambridge Union,” wrote one newspaper columnist, referring to the ancient university’s debating society, and joking that it was only a matter of time before Mr. Rees-Mogg was helping draw the numbers on the National Lottery.
Mr. Johnson’s allies put the best gloss on the rise of Mr. Rees-Mogg, suggesting that his more extreme views (he opposes abortion even in the case of rape, for example) allow Mr. Johnson the political space to promote himself as a more generally acceptable Brexit supporter.
Mr. Bale believes that this new competition has unnerved Mr. Johnson, but also notes that the foreign secretary once wrote a book about Winston Churchill, who was regarded as something of a maverick before he came to power.
