For the latest news in the wake of the Florida school shooting, read Wednesday’s coverage.
CORAL SPRINGS, Fla. — Driven by rage and grief over one of the deadliest school shootings in modern American history, students from across the country were taking action in hopes of pushing their lawmakers to rethink their positions on gun control, even as the Florida State House rejected a move on Tuesday to consider a bill that would ban assault rifles.
From California to Florida, teenagers walked out of classes, stopped traffic and made stirring speeches calling out their elders for inaction.
Students from Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., where 17 people were killed last week, traveled on Tuesday to Tallahassee, the state capital, to call for an assault weapons ban. The direct appeal to the Legislature follows protests outside schools, social media appeals and national television appearances.
• Assault rifles have become a particular target of the latest gun-control campaign. The police say the suspect in last week’s massacre, Nikolas Cruz, was able to kill 17 people in just six minutes by wielding a semiautomatic weapon, an AR-15 rifle.
• President Trump on Tuesday ordered the Justice Department to propose regulations to ban so-called bump stocks, which can convert a semiautomatic gun into an automatic weapon like the one used last year in the Las Vegas shooting. Read more on how they work.
• A Washington Post/ABC News opinion poll released on Tuesday showed that 77 percent of Americans believe the Republican-controlled Congress is not doing enough to prevent mass shootings, with 62 percent saying President Trump has not done enough. On Monday, the White House indicated that Mr. Trump was open to supporting a bipartisan effort to revise federal background checks for prospective gun buyers.
• The actor George Clooney and his wife, Amal, said Tuesday that they would donate $500,000 to a nationwide protest against gun violence planned for next month by the Stoneman Douglas High students. The announcement inspired similar gifts from other big-name Hollywood figures, including the producer Jeffrey Katzenberg and his wife, Marilyn, Oprah Winfrey, and Steven Spielberg and his wife, Kate Capshaw.
• As of Monday, two survivors of the shooting remained hospitalized in fair condition at Broward Health North, and two others remained in fair condition at Broward Health Medical Center in Fort Lauderdale.
• The Florida shooting has renewed attention on state laws that allow a judge to take away weapons from people who are deemed dangerous, known as “red flag” laws. Some governors have shown a willingness to change their mind on gun restrictions, but other simply dug in on their stances.
• In Florida, an AR-15 is easier to buy than a handgun. Read more on how the AR-15 became one of the weapons of choice for mass killers, and the research that tries to explain the high rate of mass shootings in the United States.
• Sign up for the Morning Briefing for news and a daily look at what you need to know to begin your day.
The Florida House rejects a motion to take up a bill banning assault rifles.
State Representative Kionne McGhee, a Democrat from Miami, asked for an unusual procedural move to consider his legislation, which had been filed earlier in the session but was never scheduled for a hearing.
“The shooting in Parkland demands extraordinary action,” Mr. McGhee said Tuesday on the House floor, as a different group of Stoneman Douglas High students, who had previously arrived, peered down from the gallery.
The motion failed, 36 to 71, in a vote along party lines. At least one student burst into tears, Mr. McGhee said. One girl covered her mouth in despair, as a woman patted her arm to comfort her. The episode lasted 2 minutes and 38 seconds.
“The one fear we have is that nothing will change,” he added.
A similar proposal filed last year in the wake of the Pulse nightclub shooting in Orlando also went nowhere.
Republican leaders in the Legislature have said they would consider more modest proposals, including raising the minimum age to buy assault rifles, before the session ends in March. The Miami Herald reported that legislators in both the Florida House and Senate were also drafting legislation to limit access to semiautomatic rifles, after years of reluctance. That plan would bar people under 21 from possession of an assault rifle, and would require buyers to wait three days before purchasing any kind of rifle.
In session later on Tuesday, the House did approve a resolution declaring pornography a public health risk. Representative Carlos Guillermo Smith, a Democrat from Orlando, questioned why the pornography proposal was given priority. Implicit in his question was why the assault weapons ban was not.
“Has anyone ever been killed as a result of the health implications of pornography?” he asked.
Our reporter rode with students as they traveled to Tallahassee.
Buoyed by viral tweets and media interviews, several Stoneman Douglas High students who survived the attack have been vocal about wanting change since the shooting. Their message: We’ve been there. Listen to us.
At first, the students gained notice for their raw, emotional reactions in the immediate aftermath of the shooting. The emotion hasn’t receded, but efforts to channel their grief into legislative change — like 18-year-old Emma González’s appeal for gun laws — have been widely praised.
On Tuesday, teenagers from the school, gripping pillows and sleeping bags and carrying doughnuts and candy, packed a grocery store parking lot in Coral Springs, Fla., to begin the more than 400-mile journey to Tallahassee.
Their goal: convincing lawmakers to pass a slate of gun control bills in a state that has been among the friendliest to firearm owners in the nation.
Many had come straight from the funeral of one of the dead. They hugged their parents goodbye and loaded backpacks into the bellies of three buses. Dozens climbed aboard.
The students felt they had the “best voices to listen to right now,” along with other survivors of shootings, and that Twitter had allowed them to reach more people than they would have thought possible, she said.
“We have stuff to say, and we won’t be silenced after a matter of days, or even weeks,” she said.
By the seventh hour of the trip, students on the bus had become aware of Mr. Clooney’s donation and the supportive remarks made by other celebrities.
But as they strategized in the back of the bus, some worried that Mr. Clooney’s star power and liberal activism would swallow their voices and push conservatives away.
“The minute they don’t see our faces anymore, and they just see the Hollywood elite, they’re going to stop taking it seriously,” said Chris Grady, 18, a senior with a mop of curly hair.
Mr. Grady said he had enlisted in the Army a few months back, but that the attack at his school had made him think hard about whether that was the path he wanted to take.
Finally, around 10 p.m., the three buses of students from Stoneman Douglas High rolled into the parking lot of a Tallahassee high school. They had arrived.
A crowd of people from Leon High had gathered in front of the red brick building to support and cheer the Stoneman Douglas group.
In the morning, the students will break into groups and meet with some 70 elected officials. Gov. Rick Scott is expected to give them two hours.
Mallory Muller, a Stoneman Douglas High student, hugged a teddy bear to her chest.
Students elsewhere in Florida march in a spontaneous show of support.
Before marching south toward Stoneman Douglas High, dozens of students from West Boca Raton High School first gathered in the courtyard of their school for a peaceful protest — 17 minutes of silence for the 17 victims — but then someone opened a door and walked out, and others followed, a videotape of the scene aired by WPTV showed.
As the students walked south on U.S. Highway 441, sheriff’s deputies lined the road to direct traffic and keep them safe, but did not interfere. The distance between the two schools is about 10 miles.
The march from Boca Raton surprised Broward County officials, who said they had heard nothing about the protest. Todd DeAngelis, a spokesman for the city of Parkland, said the authorities abruptly assembled an escort by law enforcement and organized water stations on a day when the temperature was in the low 80s.
Hundreds of mourners, including military, honored a J.R.O.T.C. member at his funeral.
In a rare honor, the United States Military Academy offered the member, Peter Wang, 15, the realization of a lifelong dream: admission to West Point, posthumously. The academy said it was extending the offer in recognition of his “heroic actions” during the shooting.
Mr. Wang was last seen holding a door open at Stoneman Douglas High so that others could escape, Ernie Rospierski, a teacher who survived, told CBS News.
Relatives of Mr. Wang, a cadet in the school’s Junior Reserve Officers’ Training Corps program, described him as modest and not interested in status, but eager to serve and help others.
At his funeral on Tuesday, the military mourners acknowledged him as one of them. They came in echoes of the uniform that he had once proudly worn: Marine and Navy dress blues, high school R.O.T.C. members in their dress uniforms, others wearing camouflage fatigues. Veterans were in attendance, as well.
Lying in an open coffin in the small chapel at Kraeer Funeral Home and Cremation Center in Coral Springs, with a military honor guard at either end, Mr. Wang wore his uniform. A line of mourners stretched out of the chapel, with scores more waiting under a tent outside.
Mr. Wang was one of three Junior R.O.T.C. cadets who were killed in the shooting; the others were Martin Duque, 14, and Alaina Petty, also 14.
The shooting suspect, Mr. Cruz, had also been a member of his school’s Army Junior R.O.T.C., and had “excelled” in air rifle marksmanship contests with other schools in the area in a program that was supported by a grant from the National Rifle Association Foundation, according to The Associated Press. He was wearing his maroon Junior R.O.T.C. emblem polo shirt when he was arrested after the shooting, The A.P. reported.
Protests ripple out across the nation.
At rallies across the country on Monday and Tuesday, students made pleas for gun control and declared that while they might not be old enough to vote, they were old enough to change society.
A crowd of students stood on the steps of the squat, red brick public library in Toms River, N.J., on Monday, a school holiday, to express their solidarity with the fallen Parkland students and teachers.
In Chicago, students from the South Side, where gun violence has been a problem, began organizing to demand gun control legislation.
In Battle Creek, Mich., dozens of students walked out of Harper Creek High School on Tuesday to protest gun violence in schools.
And in Bakersfield, Calif., about a dozen students and 80 adults joined a protest on Monday. “Listening to how worried my mother was dropping me off Friday morning after the shooting was one of the worst things I’ve had to listen to in a while,” Lucy Brown, a member of the Bakersfield High School Young Democrats Club who helped organize the protests, told bakersfield.com.
Some states are considering ‘red flag’ laws.
The Florida shooting has renewed attention on state laws that allow a judge to remove weapons from people deemed dangerous, known as “red flag” laws. The measures are frequently supported by Democrats, but opposed by many Republicans and gun rights advocates.
State Representative Arthur O’Neill, a Republican from Connecticut, one of only five states to have such laws, has said he would write to legislative leaders in other states to urge them to adopt similar laws. “Unfortunately, this law is not as widely known as it should be,” Mr. O’Neill said last week in a statement.
In Pennsylvania, State Senator Daylin Leach on Tuesday announced that he was proposing red flag legislation.
Similar bills have been proposed this year in other states, including Hawaii and Illinois. The N.R.A. has often spoken against red flag legislation, saying the judges’ orders can infringe on a person’s Second Amendment rights when no crime has been committed.
Governors in Vermont and Ohio have signaled a shift toward tighter controls.
In Vermont, a progressive but rural state with largely permissive gun laws, Gov. Phil Scott, a Republican, initially told reporters the state’s gun laws did not need to be updated after the Florida shooting, according to news reports. But Mr. Scott changed his tone a day later, after the authorities accused an 18-year-old student of planning an attack at his school in Fair Haven, Vt.
In Ohio, Gov. John Kasich, a Republican who has previously touted support from the N.R.A., made an impassioned plea for Congress to consider restrictions on assault weapons.
In Kentucky, Gov. Matt Bevin, a Republican, repeated a position he took in late January after a 15-year-old shot and killed two fellow students at a high school in Benton, Ky. Mr. Bevin suggested in an interview with The Cincinnati Enquirer that it was violent video games and culture, rather than guns, that should be restricted.
In Rhode Island, Gina Raimondo, the Democratic governor, reiterated calls for stronger state and federal measures.
“We need to outlaw military-style assault weapons like our neighbors have in Massachusetts and Connecticut,” Ms. Raimondo told The Providence Journal, also calling for a ban on high-capacity magazines.
And in Idaho, according to The Statesman, Gov. C.L. Otter, a Republican, suggested there was little more the state could do to prevent school shootings. “I think we’ve done what we can do,” he said.