257 pp. St. Martin’s Press. $24.99.
Pick a social justice campaign from the last few years — Black Lives Matter, #MeToo or Fight for $15 — and notice that behind it stand black women, whose physical and emotional labor helped lay roots and build movements now largely considered socially acceptable or “woke.” Not too long ago these individuals could expect only obscurity and misattribution, but the United States is having a moment that includes the rehabilitation of black women’s public image. Nevertheless, the conditions of this uplift are murky, and at times depend on generalizations — like “mules of the world” and “Black Girl Magic” — that have eerie historical parallels and leave little room for growth.
“When They Call You a Terrorist,” by Patrisse Khan-Cullors, a co-founder of Black Lives Matter, written with asha bandele, a former features editor at Essence, abandons such abstractions for details — at times one wishes there were even more — to help readers understand what it means to be a black woman in the United States today.
Part 2 introduces Khan-Cullors the organizer and activist. Titled “Black Lives Matter,” these chapters outline her partnership with Alicia Garza and Opal Tometi, the other founders of the network. After the acquittal of George Zimmerman, the neighborhood watch volunteer who fatally shot Trayvon Martin in 2012, Khan-Cullors logged onto Facebook and responded to a post Garza had written. Her message, “#BlackLivesMatter,” catalyzed the now international movement against police violence and racism. But while the title of this section (and the subtitle of the book) promises an insider account, the details of their partnership are sparse, mostly concentrated at the end of one chapter. While Khan-Cullors outlines the reasons for some of Black Lives Matter’s tactics, particularly its emphasis on inclusivity and a decentralized organization, readers won’t find Situation Room-style play-by-plays here.
In “When and Where I Enter,” an influential history of black female activists in the United States, Paula Giddings, a professor of Africana studies at Smith College, wonders about those women — from Anna Julia Cooper to Ida B. Wells and Mary Church Terrell — who gave up much of their lives to fighting for justice and liberation. “Who are we when no one yearns for us, or when we are in full possession of our sexuality? Who are we when we are not someone’s mother, or daughter, or sister, or aunt, or church elder, or first black woman to be this or that?” she writes. “When They Call You a Terrorist” is the beginning of an answer to these questions. While its importance will not be in doubt, for the significance of Black Lives Matter cannot be overstated, the book’s necessity comes from its other subject. “I am Patrisse Marie Khan-Cullors Brignac,” its author writes in her introduction. And indeed, between the moments spent serving everyone else, the rest of the book — chronicling her evolving sexual identity, her radical redefinition of love, her relationships and eventually the birth of her child — uncovers just who she is.