Opinion|Is Devin Nunes Obstructing Justice?
As public scrutiny exposes deep flaws in the memo from the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, Devin Nunes, about alleged F.B.I. surveillance abuses, the committee’s Republicans are increasingly downplaying its significance. Mr. Nunes’s colleagues are right to seek some distance from this caper — not to mention other similar memos he has hinted at releasing. That’s because by writing and releasing the memo, the chairman may just have landed himself, and his staff members, in the middle of Robert Mueller’s obstruction of justice investigation.
This risk emerged when Repesentative Mike Quigley, a Democrat on the committee, asked Mr. Nunes whether he or his staff coordinated the memo with the White House. Mr. Nunes said he had not — but refused to answer the same question about his staff. Facing a second round of questions on this issue during a committee meeting last week, Mr. Nunes again demurred, except to read a narrow statement that the White House was not involved in the actual drafting.
Endeavoring to stop an investigation, if done with corrupt intent, may constitute obstruction of justice. Plotting to assist such action may be conspiracy to obstruct justice.
Normally, what is called “speech or debate” immunity would provide a strong bulwark against any such liability for Mr. Nunes or his staff. The Constitution provides that senators and representatives “shall not be questioned in any other Place” for “any Speech or Debate in either House,” immunizing members of Congress from criminal prosecution and civil lawsuits that concern the legislative process. The Supreme Court has explained that this immunity extends to legislative acts that are an “integral part of the deliberative and communicative processes by which Members participate in committee and House proceedings.” The court also has made clear that the clause covers not just members of Congress but also their staff, and that oversight activity may come under its ambit.
In this case, however, Mr. Nunes and company may have ranged so far afield that those protections no longer apply. Under the clause, mere peripheral connection to legislative acts cannot serve as a fig leaf to shield criminal conduct. Mr. Nunes would do well to remember what befell Senator Daniel Brewster of Maryland: In 1972 the Supreme Court declined to afford him speech or debate immunity in a bribery prosecution, pointing out that the alleged crime turned on acceptance of payment, not the ultimate voting act promised in return.
If a member or staff employee of the House Intelligence Committee engaged with the White House to stifle the special counsel inquiry, it would be difficult to see how such collaboration would be considered “essential to the deliberations” of the committee or the House. That would look a lot more like orchestrating than legislating. By contrast, constructive committee fact-finding with the agencies that were the subject of the Nunes memo — the F.B.I. and the Department of Justice — could well have headed off the distortions and omissions that have been identified upon the memo’s release. Mr. Nunes and his Republican colleagues refused even to accept a committee briefing on the memo from either agency.
This is not to suggest that piercing speech or debate immunity would be easy. Depending on the facts, the special counsel may determine that untangling which actions were protected and which were not is prohibitively challenging. But given the extraordinary nature of the circumstances here, no one should take the normal legislative immunity for granted.
That will be even more true if the Nunes memo serves as part of the pretext for Mr. Trump firing Mr. Rosenstein. Mr. Trump is already under obstruction investigation for firing the former F.B.I. director, James Comey, after Mr. Comey refused to pledge loyalty. Mr. Rosenstein rebuffed a similar demand. If he is terminated, that would be dispositive evidence of Mr. Trump’s pattern of obstruction of justice, and Mr. Nunes and his team will have helped make it possible. Whether or not all of that happens, if the House leadership cares about credible executive branch oversight they should demand from Mr. Nunes a thorough and prompt public response to Representative Quigley’s questions: What did Mr. Nunes’s office do, and when did they do it?