On the morning of Oct. 11, a week after The New York Times exposed Harvey Weinstein’s systematic harassment and assault of women in Hollywood, a 28-year-old writer, Moira Donegan, created a Google spreadsheet before heading to her job as an assistant editor at The New Republic. The purpose of the anonymous document was to name names, specifically, the names of men in the media industry described by female colleagues as sexists, sexual harassers and rapists.
The spreadsheet, which captured the ideals of what would soon grow into the #metoo movement, had almost immediate real-world effects. It caused prominent men to lose their jobs and disrupted the lives of lesser-known journalists. Four months after it was created, it remains a subject of intense debate.
Women in the industry started to share the link to the document, which allowed them to view and edit it anonymously. That day, while Ms. Donegan was at work, she noticed flurries of activity. By the time she arrived at a friend’s apartment that night for a planned dinner, she was in a panic.
“I was a wreck,” she said.
Still, she hesitated when her friend suggested she take the document down.
“I felt really conflicted, because I could see what was going on that spreadsheet was incredibly valuable to the people who were using it,” Ms. Donegan said.
She finally decided to take the document down about 12 hours after she had created it, but only after getting a text message that BuzzFeed was planning to post an article about it.
By then, the list had grown to include the names of more than 70 men, along with thumbnail descriptions of their alleged misconduct. The names of 14 men accused of “physical sexual violence by multiple women” were highlighted in red, to distinguish them from men who were said to have committed lesser offenses like flirting aggressively or sending inappropriate direct messages to women on Twitter.
Although the spreadsheet was no longer live, it was not gone. Recipients had downloaded it in the form of PDFs or had taken screenshots of it, and it lived on through forwarded emails.
Moira Donegan started the online spreadsheet of men in the media industry accused of sexual harassment. She spoke with The Times about why she created it and what her life has been like since.
This was something that was online for less than 24 hours, and it has dominated my life for three months. “There’s this online spreadsheet of men in media.” “What they’re accused of doing, who they work for.” “It’s unverified, anonymous …” “It does raise these questions …” “Smearing someone …” I actively tried to avoid this. I’m a very private person. “How do they get their reputation back?” I did not want this kind of attention to be on me. I did not want to be a person who was sitting down with The New York Times. “Are you a little nervous right now?” Yeah! I created a Google spreadsheet called “Shitty Media Men” that could be shared and anonymously edited. The idea was that women could use it to name somebody who had behaved badly towards them, whether through sexual assault, or rape, or harassment. I shared it with some women colleagues and friends in my industry whom I knew had stories. And then from there, they sent it to people they knew had stories, and they sent it to people they knew had stories. And by the time I was forced to take it down, which is about 12 hours after I created it, there were more than 70 men named, and 14 had their names highlighted in red to denote that there were more than one woman who were accusing that particular person of violent physical assault. Some of the incidents that were described there gave me nightmares. Some of them were really very violent. When I was watching the spreadsheet fill up, it became clear to me that a problem I had already understood as widespread was, in fact, much, much broader. I didn’t really know what to do. I was overwhelmed. I was terrified. “What was your biggest fear about your name becoming known?” There is a long history of violence against women, and it’s particularly acute for women who speak out against misogyny and sexism. There are things like, I used to, like a lot of New Yorkers, just walk around with headphones in all the time. And I can’t do that anymore because I have to be more aware of my surroundings and who might see me or be following me. If you are accepting this as just the way things are, then you’re sort of accepting that you’re going to be treated badly, and your colleagues are going to be treated badly.  And I didn’t want to accept that anymore. So I decided to make a first attempt at trying something else. Listen, I made the decision to create this spreadsheet, so its flaws are my fault.  The document that I made was designed to be private, but it very quickly went viral. I want to emphasize, though, that I don’t even know who saw it, or who had it, added to it. Those women are anonymous to me as well. But at the same time, I could see that what was going on on this spreadsheet was also this act of real solidarity and community among the women who work in this industry to attempt to keep one another safe. So much of the conversation after the spreadsheet was made public was about the methodology of the spreadsheet and sort of the tactics that anonymous women were using to try and keep each other safe. People were more worried about a hypothetical man whose reputation might be damaged than real women who were really raped. “It’s not a hypothetical man, right? There were men who were named on this who had to suffer repercussions in their real life.” Some companies decided to conduct investigations. Not all, but some of them did result in men leaving their jobs or being fired because they were found to have committed wrongdoing. I think it’s their responsibility that they acted that way. Harassment, assault, rape. These things don’t happen like the weather. You know, they don’t happen by accident. They happen because people make a choice to do that to someone else. There are a lot of conversations to be had about sex. We’re not done talking about sex. “Hey hey, ho ho, sexual violence has got to go.” There’s #MeToo in 2017, 2018. In 2014, there was #YesAllWomen. And in 1991, there was “I believe Anita.” “I thought he respected my work and that he trusted my judgment.” So it can feel like we’ve been defeated, right? Because if anybody had listened to us the first time we wouldn’t have to say it again. But I think that every time we get a little louder, and we get a little closer to making the changes that actually need to be made. What I think is next is a lot of hard work for us all.
Believers in the spreadsheet’s mission kicked off months of “media men”-related debate on social media by attacking Ms. Shafrir for writing an article that, in their view, was not sufficiently supportive of women working in journalism. She countered with a message on Twitter that accused the list’s makers of having deleted the name of someone who had behaved inappropriately toward her. “How is that solidarity?” Ms. Shafrir wrote.
But media organizations like BuzzFeed, Mother Jones, The New York Times and Riverhead Books — each of which had more than one current or former employee named on the list — started investigations soon after becoming aware of it.
The GQ political correspondent Rupert Myers was the first man identified on the list to lose his job, about a week after the spreadsheet went live. Five days later, Leon Wieseltier, the former literary editor at The New Republic, apologized for his “offenses against some of my colleagues in the past,” and a new magazine he was editing under the auspices of the Emerson Collective, an organization run by Laurene Powell Jobs, was canceled. Soon afterward, the list claimed another high-ranking New Republic figure, the magazine’s president and publisher, Hamilton Fish, who resigned on Nov. 3.
The list was still having an impact in late December, when BuzzFeed fired Adrian Carrasquillo, a White House correspondent, and the National Geographic did the same with the photojournalist Patrick Witty (who has also worked for The Times).
Mr. Witty, in a written statement, denied the accusations against him, although he acknowledged that he might have acted inappropriately. “I am saddened to think that I in any way have contributed to or reinforced the imbalance of power between men and women in my industry,” he said.
The rest of those named on the list who lost jobs declined to comment.
Some of the men whose names appeared on the document but did not end up suspended or fired said the list had nonetheless affected their professional and personal lives.
Ms. Donegan said she was not aware of any false accusations and believed that the document’s disclaimer was sufficient in expressing reasonable doubt.
On the surface, the list did not to raise any legal issues, according to David A. Schulz, a First Amendment lawyer who is a lecturer at Yale Law School and has represented The Times. Ms. Donegan, he said, “has a right to collect information and organize it in a useful way.” Those who contributed to the document would be at risk only if someone named on the list sued for libel, he added.
“The question is if there is specific information that shouldn’t be in there and is false, in which case there may be liability against certain people for certain things,” Mr. Schulz said.
As the list gave rise to a steady stream of essays and social-media arguments, Ms. Donegan was lying low, worried, she said, that she would be identified as the document’s creator on someone else’s terms. She tried to distract herself by working on writing projects, including an essay detailing why she had started the list in the first place.
As part of a pre-emptive Twitter campaign against the Harper’s article, the writer Roxane Gay argued that the public identification of those behind the list “would risk these women’s lives.” Others expressed a fear that the list’s creator could be a target for “doxxing”: having her personal information, like her address, maliciously publicized online without her consent.
Ms. Donegan kept working on the essay in which she would reveal herself as the document’s creator.
New York magazine’s The Cut published her essay on Jan. 10. In it, Ms. Donegan wrote that she was proud of her work, while acknowledging the flaws pointed out by critics of the list.
Ms. Donegan said that before going public, she had taken steps to protect her own digital security as well her family’s. She declined to comment on whether any of the men on the list had contacted her.
After months of debate, Ms. Donegan has not wavered. “What it was motivated by was a desire to make the world a little more fair and to even the playing field for women who are especially vulnerable,” she said.
Like so many big ideas, Ms. Donegan’s spreadsheet has given way to sequels. An anonymously created email list called CanLit Janitors started circulating in October to alert women in the Canadian literary community to male writers and editors who were said to have behaved inappropriately. And an anonymous spreadsheet called TV Writers Salary began making the online rounds in January with the aim of exposing the differences in pay between men and women in the television business.