Step aside, Quentin Tarantino and Martin McDonagh, and all you other macho purveyors of mutilation and mayhem with a smile. A snarly new master of high-octane carnage has risen into view. And she — yes, she — is putting her own audacious stamp on that most venerable of pop genres, the old-as-time tale in which getting even comes accessorized with flames, screams and buckets of blood.
The title of the gratifying, lurid new play by Aleshea Harris, which opened on Sunday night at the newly renovated Soho Rep Theater, is “Is God Is.” And while that might sound a tad ontological for fans of pulp fictions with high body counts, rest assured that the God invoked here is definitely one of vengeance.
By the way, God is a human being — female, in case you were assuming otherwise. What’s more, she is alive and unwell on this cruel, stinking planet, shedding her burned flesh in a hospital bed where she has lain for nigh on two decades.
And God has a mission for her girls: to seek out and kill the man who did this to her. Or, as she puts it, “Make your Daddy dead. Dead. Dead. All the way dead.” In other words, she ain’t kiddin’.
Neither is Ms. Harris, or not entirely. Directed with imaginative economy by Taibi Magar (who oversaw the similarly and splendidly transgressive “Underground Railroad Game”), “Is God Is” may be pitched in a key of absurd exaggeration. Not for nothing is the curtain raiser a loop from a horror-themed “Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!” cartoon (the one with the mummy), shown on a staticky TV set.
But this production also implicitly asks us to consider the roots, futility and inevitability of cyclical violence, and to question ourselves for wallowing so happily in the stories that traffic in it. The winner of the 2016 Relentless Award from the American Playwriting Foundation, “Is God Is” is descended from a long and heady list of cultural ancestors.
The Old Testament, Greek tragedy, Jacobean revenge plays, Roger Corman exploitation flicks and, most pointedly, Sergio Leone’s “Man With No Name” westerns — these are all invoked directly or indirectly before the play arrives at its gruesome climax.
And Ms. Harris isn’t just throwing diverse source material into one of those postmodern mix-masters that so many young playwrights seem to come equipped with these days. No allusive echo is merely random in this play, written in a vernacular epic style that brings to mind both Tarell Alvin McCraney and Sam Shepard.
The play wears its learning lightly, though. Its masterstroke is newly contextualizing ages-old themes and motifs into a thoroughly contemporary, divided African-American landscape. That every character is black doesn’t mean that there’s solidarity between the play’s haves and have-nots or, for that matter, within a single family.
Resentment festers so deeply in the people portrayed here that they’re all going to wind up alone. That may even include the symbiotic sisters at the play’s center.
Racine and Anaia open the play downstage center, in glaring light, positioned in a way that invites — no, dares — us to stare at them. They bear hideous scars, which, in Anaia’s case, cover much of her face.
The infernal plot machinery is set in motion when they receive a letter. Their mother is alive, in a rest home in the “Dirty South,” and she wants to see them before she dies. What follows unfolds in a series of chapters signaled by titles (including “Before God,” “The Weapon,” “In the Valley”) that pop up — against hokey cinematic backdrops — on that battered television above the stage.
The twins wind up in the hills of California, where they encounter a fat-cat lawyer (Michael Genet) and a well-heeled but uneasy suburban family, which includes a perfectly groomed, miserable mother (Nehassaiu deGannes) and her teenage boys (Caleb Eberhardt and Anthony Cason). What do you know? They’re twins, too!
You don’t need to ask, “Who is the father?” Identified only as the Man (a perfect, laconic Teagle F. Bougere), this unholy father shows up late, whistling, his face concealed by a black cowboy hat. And so the reckoning is at hand.
Not every element of this play is equally satisfying. The satire of bourgeois affluence can seem glib and overextended. But the relationship of the sisters, and the shifting power between them, is expertly drawn and embodied.
Ms. Hughes’s Racine is an insolent, lip-smacking extrovert, to whom violence comes almost naturally; Ms. Fuller’s slowly blooming Anaia mostly keeps her eyes lowered and her voice at a self-erasing mumble. Of course, you have to watch out for those quiet ones.
The production has been designed with gritty wit and verve by a team that includes Montana Levi Blanco (costumes), Matthew Richards (lighting) and Jeremy Toussaint-Baptiste (sound). Then there is Adam Rigg’s set, which at first suggests a simple, grimy institutional corridor.
But as anyone knows who’s familiar with earlier Soho Rep productions — including “Blasted” and “An Octoroon” — seemingly simple sets have a way of surprising their audiences here. It feels most appropriate that for this vital company’s return to its comfortably restored home, “Is God Is” sees fit to bring down the house — literally — once again.