Double-edged, too, in their association with life and death: The stork-shaped pair from your grandmother’s sewing basket pays tribute to the role scissors played in childbirth. The midwife, passing the time with embroidery while she waited for a baby, would snip threads with blades that would later clamp the umbilical cord.
In Ms. Collenette’s collection are 18th-century stork scissors that open to reveal a baby in a nutshell. The stork itself stands on a turtle: a symbol of fertility. At the other end of the human journey came Atropos, one of the Three Fates of Greek mythology, who cut the thread of life with her shears.
During the final days of installation, Ms. Collenette, who is an associate curator of the museum, sat at the counter of a local coffee shop. From her workbag, she pulled a pair of blackened tailor’s shears weighing close to five pounds and as long as a forearm. They have the iron solidity of a piece of street hardware, worn smooth with use.
“The Secret Life of Scissors” blends display styles of the 19th-century hardware store, puppet theater and a cabinet of curiosities. Scissors appear as both tools and characters, alongside storybooks, film stills and details of their making.
For a postulant monk or nun there is a pair of hairdressing scissors that closes in the shape of the cross, a gift before their hair was ceremonially cut when they were received as a novice. “Without scissors, man is uncivilized — almost bestial, unkempt,” Ms. Collenette said, citing the title character in Heinrich Hoffmann’s sinister book of verse “Der Struwwelpeter.” Shock-headed Peter, “with his nasty hair and hands,” is a cautionary totem for any child who resists the cutting of locks or fingernails.
There were likely good foundations for such violent associations. Women fallen on hard times used their sewing skills to support themselves. Visiting disreputable and perhaps even dangerous neighborhoods, the scissors they carried “became a means of protection,” Ms. Collenette said. At the Grand Bazaar in Istanbul, she acquired calligraphy scissors that close into a single pointed blade, at once elegant and lethal.
In Sheffield, for centuries the center of British scissors making, the contemporary cutler and corset maker Grace Horne makes scissors both classic and fanciful, among them a set of murderous blades in tribute to this double role. Her Twisted Seamstress scissors snick shut into a businesslike dagger, with the sensually curved pivot between blades and handle encased in corset-stitched leather.
Sheffield is still home to Ernest Wright & Son, scissors makers dating to the 19th century. A short film by the late photographer Shaun Bloodworth shows the painstaking role of the Wright company’s “putter togetherer” of scissors as he goes through the long process of adjustment and refinement that ensures blades snip straight and true.
“The Secret Life of Scissors” is on display at the Fashion and Textile Museum in London, Feb. 9 to May 6.