So away he goes, down to America’s most potent metaphor, its 2,000-mile partisan fault line. His mother recedes to the story’s margins, returning now and then to prick his conscience, to tell him to mind his soul.
“The Line Becomes a River,” Cantú’s account of four years as a border cop in Arizona, New Mexico and Texas, arrives at a dire moment. The national head is spinning with fever visions of brown-skinned alien rapists and beheaders and terror gangs, and of a mythical wall that the president says will protect “us” from “them.” The very idea of an American “us” that includes the foreign-born seems lost to a distant time, to a less terrified country that some of us are struggling to remember.
As Cantú tells us what he learned, he bolsters his point — that it’s hard to comprehend the border from books. This one challenges the reader to find the meaning, or some sense, in its loosely strung episodes, fragmentary encounters with border crossers and agents, clippings from books Cantú has read and the surreal dreams that haunt his fretful nights.
Cantú finds out that border agents are not so much college boys like him, but former cops and soldiers, migrants from cold climates and crappy jobs. Some new arrivals have no idea what’s going on at the border, but all are primed at the academy for narco warfare, with lurid PowerPoints of people killed by Mexican cartels: heads in an ice chest, bodies stacked in a cattle truck.
This is what you’re up against, this is what’s coming, the instructor says.
Except it isn’t. The job is often boring, chasing footprints, staring at monitors, shuffling paper. “You don’t want to bring in any bodies with your dope if you can help it,” Cantú is told. “Suspects mean you have a smuggling case on your hands, and that’s a hell of a lot of paperwork.” The aliens we encounter are not narco bosses and murderous kidnappers but their victims: bewildered, disoriented, helpless migrants. Some are dead. They don’t fit the terror profile.
A weeping woman tells the agents arresting her that it’s her 23rd birthday. She wants to be like Selena, and sings “Bidi Bidi Bom Bom” on her way to detention. A man found in the fetal position has been drinking his urine for four days. 
Each migrant has a wrenching story, but to agents these are just “wets,” or “POWs,” “plain old wets.” Salvadorans are “el sals.” “Quitters” are just that. Cantú finds two of them huddling in a church, a man and a woman. They had been lost for days, surviving on filthy water from cattle tanks. She is six months pregnant. Cantú gives them water bottles and asks their names, which he soon forgets.
In case you think compassion is the rule, Cantú makes a confession.
Robbing migrants of water in 115-degree Sonoran heat to save them sounds like exquisitely tortured rationalizing. Recent news accounts and videos of agents destroying water caches suggest that Cantú’s account is accurate, though the Border Patrol has also said it does not condone life-threatening vandalism. So whose logic governs? Who is lying, who has gone rogue — Cantú and his buddies, or the agency itself?
They sound like poorly trained men with not enough to do. Yet this is a glancing admission, slipped passively into the narrative without elaboration. Cantú recounts moments of tender connection with frightened, injured border crossers. But he seems unwilling to look too closely at his complicity in despicable behavior, leaving a reader to worry about the fate of that close-up quest for enlightenment he told his mother he was after.
We surmise early on that Cantú, his psyche under strain, is not long for the job. He loses sleep, he grinds his teeth, he has bad dreams about wolves.
Then the book shifts abruptly. Cantú leaves the agency. Now he’s a barista and studying for a master’s degree. But here, finally, he takes us deep into a border story — that of his new friend José, 30 years in the United States, nabbed by the Border Patrol after returning from Mexico, where he had gone to see his dying mother. The last third of the book, as José and his family desperately fight his deportation, with Cantú’s considerable help, makes a useful contribution to the literature of today’s border. It lays bare, in damning light, the casual brutality of the system, how unjust laws and private prisons and a militarized border have shattered families and mocked America’s myths about itself.
“We mostly arrested the little people,” Cantú tells José. “Smugglers, scouts, mules, coyotes. But mostly I arrested migrants, I confessed. People looking for a better life.” He should have listened to his mother.