The Learning Network|How Do You Think Technology Affects Dating?
How Do You Think Technology Affects Dating?
Dating apps may have killed the college dating scene. Because it’s so easy to swipe left or right on a seemingly endless pile of potential partners, it’s become harder to actually meet anyone. As students, we are told over and over that college is a time for us to expand our social groups, to meet new people and grow into adults. But the indecisiveness that is built into dating app culture can stunt us — we’re trapped in an endless cycle of swipes! Commitment, already a scary concept to many, becomes even more difficult with the false illusion that the dating possibilities are endless.
In high school I had always wanted to date but struggled to believe anyone would want to date me. When I got to college those fears were compounded by a feeling of trepidation that if I tried to date someone and we broke up, it would be hard to see them around campus. A friend encouraged me to download Coffee Meets Bagel, which was described as a dating app for people who are easily overwhelmed.
I got a date and she suggested we get ice cream, even though it was snowing outside. It was old-school romantic in a way I hadn’t expected. She looked beautiful with snowflakes falling on her hair and her cheeks red from the cold.
Though college is often depicted as a place of sexual exploration, and dating apps seem to encourage passing from one relationship to another, my generation defies that. A study in the journal Child Development found that 18-year-olds today are less likely to have dated than 15-year-olds in the 1990s. The good news is, even if we’re dating later, it’s no less magical to stand in the snow with someone you like, as the world seems to stop.
— What have your experiences — or those of your friends and peers — with technology and dating been like?
— How do you think technology — like apps, Netflix, social media and texting — affects dating and relationships? In your opinion, does it improve or worsen romantic interactions? How so?
— What lessons have you learned from dating? Is there any advice you can take from these college students’ stories?
— If you could date in a different time period, would you? If so, what era would it be and why? If not, why not?
