Theater|How Much Magic Can ‘Harry Potter and the Cursed Child’ Make on Broadway?
The theater that will house the play has been rebuilt in the hope that it will run for many, many years. So why is J.K. Rowling worried?
LONDON — Joanne Kathleen Rowling looked slightly tense. She had just completed a television segment, alongside her collaborators on “Harry Potter and the Cursed Child,” the eighth — and the only theatrical — installment in her celebrated wizarding saga, which begins previews March 16 at the Lyric Theater on Broadway. Now she had another interview to do.
Ms. Rowling is famously private. And crazily famous. Her Harry Potter novels have sold over 500 million copies worldwide since the first was published in 1997, spawning an empire that now encompasses movies, the spinoff “Fantastic Beasts” films, Harry Potter Wizarding World theme parks, and detective novels (written under a pseudonym) which have been made into a television series.
Like much else she touches, her first theatrical venture has been a smash in London. It earned rave reviews and sold-out houses, going on to win in a record-breaking nine categories at last year’s Olivier Awards, the British equivalent of the Tonys.
And yet Ms. Rowling, who started out as a struggling single mother, writing her first Harry Potter novel in Edinburgh cafes, seemed — despite an armor of smart wrap dress and high heels — determined to take absolutely nothing for granted.
Secrecy about the story line, collectively developed by Ms. Rowling, Mr. Thorne and Mr. Tiffany, fed a growing obsession with what the play would reveal about Harry and Company, and a #keepthesecret campaign encouraged a clublike camaraderie among the preview audiences.
Although seven original cast members are coming with the show — including Jamie Parker as Harry, Noma Dumezweni as Hermione, Sam Clemmett as Albus, and Anthony Boyle as Scorpius — none is a marquee name.
One other thing: “Harry Potter and the Cursed Child,” which officially opens on April 22, has a running time of 5 hours and 15 minutes, and is staged in two parts (either seen on one day or on different nights).
Will the magic apparate across the ocean? A circus was hurried out the door to help make sure.
The play begins where the books end. We are at King’s Cross station as Harry, married to Ginny Weasley and a father of three, sees his middle child, Albus, off to Hogwarts.
The ensuing story encompasses Harry’s difficult relationship with Albus, who develops an intense friendship with Scorpius Malfoy (the son of Harry’s school-era enemy, Draco Malfoy), and it suggests that the weight of the past is a continual influence on the present.
Their proposition was different. They suggested extending the story and creating a new work, which intrigued Ms. Rowling.
Just as Ms. Rowling has meticulously controlled her public appearances, she has also maintained a tight lock on the Potterverse empire.
Her willingness to put her characters in other hands is surprising, but Ms. Rowling said she had loved the entire process of cocreating “Cursed Child,” and hadn’t been prepared for the “emotional punch” the play delivered when she saw its final version.
She and her collaborators are also proud to have brought new audiences to the West End. Mr. Callender said that market research in the first year of the London production showed that 60 percent of ticket buyers were first-time theatergoers, and that 15 percent had subsequently bought tickets for other shows.
How to stage a Harry Potter tale without the benefit of the whiz-bang special effects movies can deploy? Mr. Tiffany approached the assignment with one guiding principle.
Mr. Thorne predicted that even those loyal fans who’ve digested the best-selling script will be in for a surprise. 
Although the play will essentially remain the same on Broadway, the creative team is not taking anything for granted.
Ms. Rowling laughed: “Never leave a possibility unexploited,” she said.
Mr. Callender and Ms. Friedman decided on the Lyric after looking at numerous Broadway theaters, all keen to lure the potential Potter gold mine.
Mr. Callender said they had realized it was important that viewers kept the same seats for both parts of the play, and recognized their seatmates. 
He added that although they could have made the house smaller, they were committed to making 20 percent of the seats available at an accessible $40 or less per part.
Ms. Friedman pointed out that the majority of the fan base was the generation that had grown up reading Harry Potter, and was now between 25 and 35.
After years of peace in the Potterverse, “Cursed Child” deals with the forces of darkness and authoritarian power rising — themes that might be read as echoes of real-world events, in both Europe and the United States.
What in Mr. Thorne’s writing had surprised her? Ms. Rowling pointed to the way he had imagined the character of Scorpius Malfoy.
The last Harry Potter novel came out in 2007, the final film in 2011. At one point it looked like that would be that. But with “Cursed Child” and the “Fantastic Beasts” films, the Potterverse lives.
Asked whether she ever worried about her fans’ reactions to extending a universe they treasure, Ms. Rowling sat up straighter.
