When I announced I was moving to Paris to live with a man I’d met in the Bahamas four weeks earlier, no one who knew me was surprised.
They had no shortage of opinions — “You barely know him,” “You barely know French,” “You know they don’t have Krispy Kreme in Paris, right?” — but shock was not the underpinning emotion fueling most of them.
My dropping everything to move thousands of miles away into the arms of someone whose middle name I didn’t know wasn’t terribly uncharacteristic. Not that I’d done that before, but I did tend to throw myself into exciting new endeavors with a somewhat, ahem, aggressive speed and unwavering confidence. And in my early 20s, that certainly included romances with near-strangers.
But according to the New York City-based sex therapist Stephen Snyder, the author of the forthcoming “Love Worth Making,” that desire to jump into new romances headfirst is only natural.
Within two months of moving to Paris my relationship had gone from explosive to smoldering pile of ashes, but the impulses that took me — and those same impulses that can drive any of us to rush into getting too serious too soon — are normal, Dr. Snyder said.
Exercising restraint and applying sensible structure to something that feels great requires using the logical parts of our brain to override the pleasure-seeking parts of our brain. But it’s possible, and you can still fully embrace a promising romantic partner without letting the fire in your heart burn your life down.
Advocating for your needs is often difficult, but it’s made even more so when those needs conflict with your short-term wants. Whether it’s a roommate who liberally “borrows” your almond milk or a boss who emails urgent requests at all hours, most of us have at least one relationship that would be infinitely healthier with clear, mutually constructive boundaries.
Experts call this differentiation: “Having a strong enough sense of self that you can properly balance the inevitable tension between the I and the we in a relationship,” Dr. Snyder said.
The takeaway is this: If you don’t know what you need and how to ask for it, it almost doesn’t matter what else you do right in a relationship. That lack of clarity can often lead to disappointment when you’re newly in love, but that doesn’t always signal impending disaster.

For some, having sex early on can facilitate a sense of closeness that eases the process of getting to know someone. For others, it’s a step that is best left for later stages of a relationship.
But wherever you fall, the point is this: Whatever feels right for you and your new partner is the approach you should pursue, experts said.
A big part of deciding when you have sex with someone is about managing your expectations for what will happen to the relationship as a result of breaking ground on physical intimacy, according to Megan Fleming, a sex and relationship therapist and clinical instructor of psychology in psychiatry at Weill Cornell Medical College.
Still, this is a personal decision that comes down to the particular relationship you have, and open, earnest communication is the best approach to figure out what will fit the relationship.
It’s easy to tell yourself, “I’m going to take things slow this time,” but things get hazy when you’re moonstruck and want your partner to know everything about you right now. 
“This is a period of intense expansion, and so it’s only natural to want to know and be known,” said Ian Kerner, a psychotherapist and sex counselor in New York City.
The key is to reveal parts of yourself and your history over time as they become contextually relevant. Wait for natural segues in the course of having normal exchanges, rather than dumping information about yourself in order to fast-track the other person’s understanding of you.
One of the core problems with monologuing is that you risk inventing (even if accidentally) an idealized version of yourself, creating a high — but fictional — bar you’ll fail to clear over and over for the rest of the relationship.
On the other end of the spectrum, if you’re dating someone who doesn’t make you want to share everything, that can be its own red flag.
In any new relationship there is a constant balance of figuring out how much to integrate this person into your life, and at what pace that intertwining should occur.
The first stage, he said, is often that “intense desire for togetherness and a sense of mutual self-expansion” — or, as we all probably better know it, that honeymoon phase we feel when we’re smitten. Stage two is when the pendulum swings back and we assert our individuality a bit more. And stage three is, hopefully, when the previous two stages meet in the middle and a genuine, healthy integration happens.
That balance will be unique for every relationship, but holding onto some of your alone time, friend time, work time and time for everything else will mean you won’t have to fight to get back that time later.
Dr. Kerner added that it can be helpful to think of your new relationship as a Venn diagram.
Assuming that great sex inherently equals the potential for great love or that love always indicates long-term compatibility is setting yourself up for endless, and unnecessary, disappointment. Sometimes these things exist in tandem; they often stand alone.
Don’t “assume that the sudden, shocking thrill of new intimacy means you’re meant to be together for life,” Dr. Snyder said.
Holding that somewhat contradictory idea isn’t easy for a love-addled brain: knowing that disappointments are coming, but trying to see them as positive, trust-building moments. It can feel unnatural to assign work to something you’re presently experiencing as pleasure.
But doing so could mean the difference between building a partnership that’s fortified to last and one that’s built on a foundation of explosive-yet-fleeting feelings. Rushing in might be human nature, but only fools fail to evolve.