After documenting life in impoverished communities in Mexico, the United States, and her home country, Spain, Anna Bosch needed a break from misery.
She found it in Beirut, Lebanon.
She sought out a less obvious story: How do Beirut’s elite live in a country that’s constantly on the brink of collapse?
Those shopworn themes are nowhere to be found in Ms. Bosch’s latest book, “Bubble Beirut,” which was published with the help of a grant from Spain’s CaixaForum.
Much to her surprise, Ms. Bosch, 35, easily gained access to some of Lebanon’s most prominent families. During her first trip, she was introduced to Viviane Edde, a socialite who writes for a Lebanese lifestyle magazine. Ms. Edde invited Ms. Bosch and a friend to two lavish parties, one of which was a publicity event for an upscale lingerie boutique.
"We were shocked,” Ms. Bosch said. “Now I’m used to the parties of Lebanon because I’ve been to many.” But that first, unexpected glimpse of Beirut’s social scene — “women with short skirts showing their breasts” — exceeded her expectations.
Ms. Bosch visited the capital nine times over the course of five years to immerse herself in the city‘s social bubble. Eventually, she learned which names to include as she began to shoot more than the parties. She was welcomed into the mansion of Roger Edde, a property developer, business tycoon and high-profile politician; the private palace of Yvonne Sursock Cochrane, the only daughter of the Lebanese aristocrat Alfred Bey Sursock and his Italian wife, Donna Maria Theresa; and the firm of the fashion designer Rani Zakhem, to name a few.
To show a more nuanced view of Lebanon, a nation smaller than Connecticut, Ms. Bosch sought out influential Muslim and Druze families after she realized early on that all of her contacts were Christian. And she made sure to maintain relationships with her subjects over the years.
By deliberately excluding the aspects of Beirut that make international headlines — its ongoing trash crisis, relatively large refugee population and violent clashes — Ms. Bosch conveys an insider’s point of view. For better or worse, her subjects seem to live on with no qualms about the country’s shortcomings.
They often repeated the phrase, “We don’t know what’s going to happen tomorrow so let’s live for today and have fun,” Ms. Bosch said.
What is omitted from the project is just as relevant as what is captured. The images of towering private residences and bejeweled socialites dancing away speak volumes about Lebanon’s vast income gap. The income of the nation’s top 2 percent equals that of the bottom 60 percent, according to a joint report by Lebanon’s Ministry of Finance and the United Nations Development Programme.
Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Anna Bosch is on Instagram. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.