Jordan Roth, a prominent Broadway theater owner and producer, appearing in his new video series, which opened with a raunchy attack on President Trump.
Broadway has made no secret of its displeasure with the Trump administration. There was the “Hamilton” incident, when the cast of the hit musical addressed Vice President-elect Mike Pence from the stage. There are the jokes slipped into shows (a recent revival of “Miss Saigon” added a “Make America Great Again” gag). There are the implicit critiques (“1984”) and the explicit (Michael Moore’s “The Terms of My Surrender”).
Now comes something different — and more freighted.

Mr. Roth said the series, called “The Birds and the BS,” is intended to address the cultural coarsening that has accompanied the Trump era, reminding adults of the courtesies they learned as children, but using pungent language to attract attention, both to the videos and the broader issue.
“We need a kids’ show for us, to remind ourselves of these basic human decencies in the complicated adult world that we now swim in, and if we can do that with a laugh and a catchy tune and a little bit of shock, then we might actually watch it, and then think about it,” he said.
Mr. Roth, whose company, Jujamcyn Theaters, owns five of the 41 Broadway theaters, has not been shy about his opposition to the Trump administration — he is a longtime Democratic donor who co-produced a Broadway fund-raiser for Hillary Clinton’s campaign.
But his decision to create a web series with a first episode that jabs pointedly at the president is striking because of Mr. Roth’s history with Mr. Trump. Mr. Roth’s father, Steven, a prominent real estate magnate in New York City, has been politically and financially allied with Mr. Trump.
“Yes, he was at my wedding, but when it became clear what his politics were, and what his priorities were, and what his administration would do to things I hold dear — that was the change,” Jordan Roth said.
Steven Roth did not respond to an email seeking comment on his son’s video.
Daryl Roth — Steven’s wife and Jordan’s mother — is a prominent Broadway producer who has gravitated toward progressive plays that often call attention to challenges facing women and gay people. She attended the Trump inauguration with her husband and has avoided publicly taking sides on the administration.
“If we can take our frustration and confusion and dismay and fear and create with it, that’s what we need to do,” he said.
The video, which includes off-color language, features an animated character voiced by Billy Porter, an actor who won a Tony Award for his role in “Kinky Boots” (a show produced by Ms. Roth and housed in a theater owned by Jordan Roth). Mr. Porter’s animated avatar, shown alongside a sketch of Mr. Trump, says “even though they say he has tiny hands, they’re actually making fun of something else,” as an arrow points to the Trump image’s crotch.
But the animated Billy Porter then says there are better ways to criticize the president.
In an interview, Mr. Porter said he agreed to participate as an expression of his opposition.
Mr. Porter has also made his own video, reinterpreting the Rodgers and Hammerstein standard “I’m Gonna Wash That Man Right Outta My Hair” as a form of opposition to the Trump administration. He said the tone of the videos is in keeping with the tone of the moment.
