There’s an uncanny sight at the New Museum these days: a ghost in a machine.
This labyrinth of dance and words, called “Co-natural,” is the brainchild of Alexandra Pirici, an acclaimed Romanian choreographer and artist who is exploring the relationship between inanimate bodies and real ones.
For “Co-natural,” which runs through April 15 and is performed during museum hours, Ms. Pirici has turned the loftlike gallery space into a landscape that performers share with a hologram of another dancer — remember our ghost? — to showcase a disembodied presence. The performance-exhibition also considers how bodies are connected to symbols and images from history. There are visual references throughout to the black power salute of a fist in the air and to Confederate statues and monuments.
“I was very quickly caught by how she evokes history,” Helga Christoffersen, an assistant curator at New Museum, said of Ms. Pirici. “This is not just a choreographer who is sequencing a dynamic set of movements. She is thinking about evoking presence across time.” Ms. Christoffersen, who programmed “Co-natural,” noted that the museum has a continuing history of looking at how performance is seen in context with visual art.
Ms. Pirici fits the space. She is more than a visual artist creating performance work; she is a choreographer creating art that considers history and the way bodies are affected over time. This may sound complicated, but “Co-natural” — with its steady, undulating pace and purposeful timing — is a visceral experience.
Boxes, you get the feeling, aren’t really Ms. Pirici’s thing. She started as a ballet dancer, beginning her training in the fourth grade in her native Bucharest, Romania. Starting in the ninth grade, she attended the Vienna State Opera Ballet School on scholarship. It was, she said, a conservative country and her time there overlapped with the rise of extreme right.
The school was also conservative, yet it made traditions outside of ballet available to its students, from contemporary dance and flamenco to jazz. “Slowly I just started to understand that I didn’t want to close my world and continue with classical ballet,” she said.
Ms. Pirici returned to Bucharest and eventually discovered the National Dance Center, an institution for contemporary dance and performance. She began showing work there and experimenting. “I was looking for ways to move out of this situation where people come and sit down and look at something,” she said.
In 2011, she began placing live bodies in relation to public monuments. This series of what she called “sculptural actions” featured minimal movement and gestures, and that method has seeped into “Co-natural” when the performers enact poses from sculptures, including those of Lenin, Christopher Columbus and Robert E. Lee.
In Bucharest, she began the actions as a form of protest. While the dance center was struggling from a lack of funding, she said, a bronze sculpture, costing around 2 million euros (or around $2.5 million), was being installed nearby.
And there are advantages. “The biological body wants toilet breaks,” she said, “it gets tired, it decays.” A hologram, though, makes no demands.
In “Co-natural,” the hologram, shown throughout the day on one-hour loops, exists in relationship to the dancers, who perform for four hours at a time. (They do need bathroom breaks.) As the performance develops, dancers accumulate gradually and then disperse so that in the final hour only one remains.
At times, the dancers also perform on a light-box platform that reminds Ms. Pirici of a laboratory table — she likes its science-fiction vibe. One aspect she highlights is choreography for the hands, which was inspired by the movement of factory workers.
