NRATV, the organization’s online video channel, has become a little-noticed but vital forum for the dissemination of some of the most strident pro-gun messaging in politics.
The National Rifle Association’s online video channel has a wide range of programming, and that’s the point.
WASHINGTON — Whenever there is a mass shooting, the National Rifle Association has a well-rehearsed response: Say very little until the inevitable discussion about gun control cools down.
But as the leaders of the country’s most influential gun advocacy group kept quiet after the school shooting last week in Parkland, Fla., that claimed 17 lives, a furious debate played out on NRATV, the organization’s online video channel.
Its hosts spoke chillingly of leftist plots to confiscate weapons, media conspiracies to brainwash Americans into supporting gun control and a “deep state” campaign to undermine President Trump.
Critics of the N.R.A. say that they have observed a shift in the organization’s tone since Mr. Trump was elected that is much more pugilistic, and that NRATV is where the most outrageous commentary occurs. This change, they say, seems to reflect the fact that like many organizations on the right, the N.R.A. believes it has to guard against complacency among its members with a friendly president in the White House.
The channel has become a little-noticed but vital forum for the dissemination of some of the most strident pro-gun messaging in politics today, with hosts and guests who are closely allied with Mr. Trump. Few news media operations seem as in sync with the political sensibilities of the Trump era.
They attack the enemies he attacks, condemning the news media as “dishonest” and “failing.” They have questioned the credibility of the F.BI., whose failure to act on tips about the suspect in the Florida shooting has intensified criticism from conservatives seeking to discredit the bureau — this week, Dana Loesch, an N.R.A. spokeswoman, encouraged mass demonstrations outside F.B.I. offices.
And they often side with Mr. Trump in divisive cultural disputes — some of which have potent racial undercurrents — like his feuding with Black Lives Matter activists and the professional football players who knelt during the national anthem.
With broadcast television-quality production and three dozen original series, NRATV has the ability to reach millions of people through the channels that distribute it like Apple TV, Roku and Amazon Fire TV. And it has significant resources at its disposal as part of the N.R.A.’s far-reaching “membership support” program. In recent years, that operation alone spent $35.5 million, according to its most recent publicly available tax filing.
But it is just the newest piece of a larger news media operation inside the N.R.A. that receives little attention compared with the group’s political and lobbying activity. The organization produces at least seven print and online magazines that have a combined circulation of more than 11 million, according to the N.R.A. Its biggest social media channels on Facebook and Twitter count about 8.7 million followers. On YouTube, five N.R.A.-controlled channels have shared videos that have received nearly 102 million views.
Andrew Arulanandam, a spokesman for the N.R.A., declined to discuss the media effort, the size of its online audience or its programming in the wake of the Parkland shooting. As a matter of policy, he said, the N.R.A. does not discuss proprietary matters.
NRATV is a budding business for the organization, which has brokered sponsorship arrangements with gun makers like Kimber, Mossberg and Ruger to feature their firearms on its programs. Its series cover a range of topics and interests intended to appeal to gun owners of all kinds, like “Armed and Fabulous,” which profiles rifle-slinging women; “Frontlines,” a newsmagazine hosted by Oliver North; and “Under Wild Skies,” which follows hunters in pursuit of big-game trophies.
But politics and provocation are NRATV’s specialty. It has singled out news outlets and attacked individual journalists like Don Lemon of CNN, who was targeted in an ad that accused the anchor and his network of smearing Mr. Trump and colluding with Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign. In one video released this month, Ms. Loesch, a former Tea Party activist and Breitbart editor, pretended she was about to burn a copy of The New York Times.
Stories that circulate throughout right-wing news media often find their way to NRATV, which has devoted numerous segments to portraying anti-Trump demonstrators as paid shills, violent extremists and evangelists for Shariah law in the United States.
Its guests and hosts are not shy of trading in racially charged language and imagery. A promo for a program called “Noir” featuring a Navy SEAL member named Dom Raso opens with a dramatization of a foiled robbery. A black man wielding a knife grabs and forces a white woman to the ground as an armed bystander reaches for his handgun and rushes to her defense.
After Mr. Trump’s inauguration last year, an NRATV correspondent, Chuck Holton, tweeted that it was time to “get busy scrubbing Obama’s mocacchino stain off of America!” — an apparent reference to the color of President Barack Obama’s skin.
The N.R.A.’s practice is to keep a low profile after mass shootings, as it did after the massacres in Newtown, Conn., and at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Fla. But it was always quietly talking to its members, first by email and later on NRATV, said Danny Barefoot, a partner at Anvil Strategies, an ad agency and communications company that has worked with gun control groups.
NRATV can galvanize members in the wake of a shooting in part because the N.R.A. has coached its followers to believe that the organization is the only credible source for news and information on any gun issue or controversy.
NRATV’s slogan — “America’s Most Patriotic Team on a Mission to Take Back The Truth” — reinforces a sense of mistrust in traditional news media, as do its hosts. In the days after the Parkland shooting, Mr. Stinchfield and Ms. Loesch, two of the channel’s most prominent faces, were relentless in their attacks on the news media.
Some of his more recent antics have included taking a sledgehammer to a television set as clips from MSNBC, CNN and ABC play onscreen, and inviting North Korea to launch a nuclear weapon on Sacramento, where the California state legislature has approved numerous gun control measures opposed by the N.R.A.
Mr. Stinchfield went on to question the competence and motivation of the F.B.I. “It is time the F.B.I. got back to the business of keeping Americans safe, instead of being so focused on political vendettas,” he said. He then turned the microphone over to Mr. Holton, who saw a slippery slope in new gun regulations and identified a new culprit in the proliferation of school shootings: the news media.
