Good morning on this chilly Thursday.
When New York Fashion Week kicks off today, the catwalks of Manhattan will be filled with fabulously unaffordable outfits.
But you can own some of this fabulosity for a pittance — maybe not the outfits, but the fabric they’re made of.
All it takes is a subway ride to the last stop on the F, up four flights of warehouse stairs, past the noisy production lines of the Hanky Panky lingerie factory to the unglamorous showroom of Fabscrap in Jamaica, Queens.
There, you’ll find designer silk faille, delicate corded lace appliqués, fire-red duchess satin, midnight wash denim, and whole hides of leather in tobacco, charcoal or cobalt — for as little as $5 a pound.
Fabscrap, founded in 2015, is a nonprofit that recycles discarded fabric from designers like Marc Jacobs, Oscar de la Renta and Eileen Fisher. It’s part of a movement to make the fashion industry more sustainable.
When we visited this week, volunteers picked fabric from garbage bags piled 12 feet high.
Cotton, wool and spandex are separated, and smaller scraps are sent out to be made into fire blankets, insulation and car-door lining. The good pieces are meticulously organized by color and neatly folded in Fabscrap’s retail space.
Last year Fabscrap collected 68,000 pounds of fabric — enough to fill 13,600 shopping bags or create an equal number of head-to-toe looks.
Ms. Schreiber, 29, a former senior manager at the city sanitation department and self-described “trash nerd,” founded the nonprofit after noticing that New York’s clothing recycling program didn’t accept fabric.
She started driving a U-Haul van around Midtown picking up 50-pound bags of fabric from designers. “I got to know a lot of the freight elevator operators in the garment district,” she said.
She was often told, “You work like a man.” She took it as a compliment.
Ms. Schreiber’s goal is to one day collect scraps from clothing producers, which generate a lot more waste than designers. “That’s where you have the potential to make a real impact,” she said.
But for now, she’s looking to expand her network of over 600 volunteers, who get free fabric and an important lesson.
Yesterday’s slush is but a memory.
It will be sunny and dry, but temperatures might not get above freezing.
Wrap a fabric scrap around your neck: The wind could make it feel like 15 on your commute.
• Islanders at Sabres, 7 p.m. (MSG+2). Devils host Flames, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Knicks at Raptors, 7:30 p.m. (MSG).

Our public libraries are working with organizations like AARP, Ariva, Food Bank, MMCC and the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance program to offer free filing help — and prevent you from overtipping Uncle Sam.
You have two extra days to file this year: The deadline is April 17. But why procrastinate? Those envelopes with Important Tax Documents Enclosed should have all landed by now. Don’t wait till you lose them.
• The Todt Hill-Westerleigh Library in Staten Island beginning at 11 a.m.
• The Riverside Library near Lincoln Center from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.
• The Chatham Square Library in Lower Manhattan from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m.
• And freelancers will get special attention at the Science, Industry and Business Library in Midtown from 6 to 7:30 p.m.
A full listing of more than 200 library tax-preparation events can be found here.
