GANGNEUNG, South Korea — The number of confirmed cases of norovirus at the Winter Games has risen to 86 from 32 in just two days as Olympic officials struggle to track the source of the outbreak on the eve of the opening ceremony.
Hong Jeong-ik from South Korea’s Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Thursday that the new cases included staff members of the Pyeongchang Olympics Organizing Committee, venue personnel and even cafeteria workers — a sign that the highly contagious virus had spread beyond the security personnel who were the first to test positive.
Mr. Hong said that because more were still undergoing tests, the number of confirmed cases was likely to rise.
After the outbreak was announced on Tuesday, 1,200 security workers were sequestered in their rooms. Mr. Hong said that as of Thursday, more than 1,100 people — including some nonsecurity staff — were still in quarantine.
Most of those 1,100, he said, had tested negative for the virus, which causes vomiting and diarrhea, and were expected to return to duty on Thursday afternoon. To make up for the shortfall in security staffing, the government deployed 900 military personnel.
The investigation into the outbreak was initially focused on a youth training center in the Pyeongchang area, where many of the sickened security guards were staying. But the most recent update indicates that the virus may be traveling quickly across other Olympic areas.
No athletes are known to have come down with the virus.
The Games begin Friday and run through Feb. 25.
Norovirus, which is also known as “cruise ship virus” or “winter vomiting flu,” is typically spread through close contact with infected people or through contaminated food, water or surfaces. While the illness does not require specific medical treatment, officials are nevertheless appealing to the public to wash hands thoroughly, eat only cooked food and boil water before drinking.
The last-minute norovirus outbreak has been an additional headache for security officials, who have been keen to reassure people about the safety of the Games, which are taking place just 50 miles from the heavily fortified North Korean border.