Travel|The 52 Places Traveler: Chattanooga Is Changing. But Its Charms Remain.
The 52 Places Traveler: Chattanooga Is Changing. But Its Charms Remain.
Despite some transformative growing pains, the city may well be one of the most pleasant and livable ones in the United States.
What I found over a five-day stay may well be one of the most pleasant and livable cities in America. (That is, once the freezing late-January winds that threatened to blow my car off the road had died down. “I wish you were here in the summer! You’re missing everything!” was a refrain I heard about 15 times a day.) Because Chattanooga is nestled into the ridge-and-valley portion of the Appalachian Mountains and oriented around the Tennessee River, the outdoors — in particular hang gliding, mountain biking, hiking, rock climbing, paddle boarding and kayaking — seem to be a way of life. Locals joke that Chacos, those hiking sandals that strap to your feet, are the city’s official shoe. In winter, people just wear them with socks. I, of course, bought a pair.
A 15-minute drive from downtown, for example, will take you to the top of Lookout Mountain, and its wonderful free park, Sunset Rock, rich in Civil War history. Hikes in the area lead past rifle pits where Confederate soldiers tracked the movement of Union troops on the ground, and then sent out word via communications stations on nearby Signal Mountain. Now, students from the University of Tennessee and canoodling couples of all sexual orientations come nightly to sit on cliffs and watch the Tennessee River Valley turn shades of red and pink.
My first hotel, The Dwell, is the city’s only boutique offering and an Art Deco gem. Seija Ojanpera, the owner, spent four months combing vintage shops, Etsy and eBay to find its period-authentic décor, which, along with the colorful patterned wallpaper, is different in every room. “I think it’s important for Chattanooga to have interesting places to go that don’t feel like airport lounges,” she told me. The breakfast room and bar often contain more locals than visitors. I also stayed in the town’s new Westin (nice enough, but didn’t blow me away) and the Choo Choo Hotel, which is far from luxurious, but worth it just because the check-in desk is in the train’s old terminal waiting room, and the rooms are in actual Pullman train cars. Those not in need of lodging can have a similar experience in the newly opened American Draft, the country’s first pour-your-own-beer bar in a refurbished train car.
Most striking, though, is the city’s civic life. A phrase that comes up constantly is “The Chattanooga Way”: a reference to a cooperative get-it-done spirit that includes infusions of private foundation money making revitalization possible. Public art is impressive and everywhere, from the Sculpture Fields at Montague Park to “The Blue Trees,” an ecologically themed installation consisting of rows of trees that the artist Konstantin Dimopoulos has painted a non-harmful ultramarine blue to bring attention to deforestation. Upon my arrival, Farron Kilburn, who studies inequities in nursing at the University of Tennessee, invited me to a potluck at her home in the city’s hip North Shore. There, I met a chunk of the city’s diverse sector of artists and community activists including Josiah Golson, who just published an illustrated poetry book called “The Souls of Free Folk” (partly inspired by W.E.B. DuBois), and Rondell Crier, an artist and youth mentor, who moved to Chatt from New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, and has never felt compelled to move back.
The next night, I joined them for a big group dinner at Taconooga, one of the city’s many Mexican restaurants. (The Guatemalan population is also significant and growing.) During the day, one particularly helpful local, Stephanie Hays — a self-described “boomerang” who has lived in China and India and moved back because she loves the city — treated me to one of the free walking tours she gives in her spare time. I came knowing no one and felt like I’d left with a friend group.
“They should’ve left it like it is instead of building all these houses, destroying everything, keeping people from fishing down here,” Mr. Stoudemire said. “They just done messed this world up.” Still, he said, “I’ve been here all my life, ain’t going nowhere till the man take me.” Elsewhere downtown, one high-tech building stands across from a once-grand hotel that’s been turned into government housing.
A Chilean nonprofit worker I met at the potluck, Daniela Peterson, said that she spent her first year in Chatt riding the bus to work, “and people acted like I was a prostitute, because there’s no one else who’s waiting on the corner.” (In a 2012 Brookings Institute study, the city ranked lowest in the country in access to public transportation.) There are also certain spots of the booming Southside area where the stench from a Pilgrim’s Pride chicken-processing plant on Market Street is downright offensive. As a city in mid-transformation, Chattanooga seems to be going through its awkward phase, somewhere between trying out vegetarianism and applying for college.
Every time I go to a new place, I play a game where I ask myself if I could live there rather than New York City. The answer is usually no, but Chattanooga surprised me. For all its contradictions, every day I was there, I liked the city more: the views, the people, the phenomenal coffee shops — even the internet, which proved to be life-changing (in 40 minutes I uploaded 1,000 photos that had been stuck in my queue for days).
Jada Yuan will be traveling to each and every place on this year’s 52 Places to Go list. Her next dispatch will be from Montgomery, Ala. Follow her on Instagram @alphajada.