In 2016, the opioid epidemic claimed 1,374 lives in New York City. That’s roughly four drug overdose deaths each day. One death every seven hours.
It’s a harrowing statistic that continues to soar, and New York City officials are floating an idea that so far has not been tried in the United States: sanctioned locations where drug users can shoot up under the supervision of medical staff ready to revive them if they overdose.
They are called safe injection facilities, and the city has been eyeing them for more than a year, despite potential federal opposition.
In 2016, the City Council allocated $100,000 for the city health department to study the feasibility of the facilities, which already exist in Canada and Europe. Mayor Bill de Blasio hinted in late January that the report would soon be released.
At community meetings and among officials, the mere idea of the sites has generated a heated debate over their legality and their potential effect on the neighborhoods where they might be located.
Opponents of the idea fear that crime and drug use would increase and that the sites would attract drug dealers. Others say the government should not act to encourage drug use. Advocates argue that if addicts are going to inject themselves, they might as well do it in a safe environment where they can be saved if they overdose and possibly be connected with drug treatment services.
Supporters point to Vancouver’s safe injection facility, the first in North America, to highlight the positive effects. Fatal overdoses dropped by 35 percent in the neighborhood surrounding the site in the two years after it opened in 2003. Although activists say not a single person has died there, the city is still struggling with a spiraling increase in fentanyl-related deaths.
In New York, proponents of the idea insist the sites would keep dirty needles from littering the streets by keeping injections indoors. They say the facilities do not increase crime and drug use and reduce risk behaviors associated with hepatitis C and H.I.V. infection.
A bill introduced in the State Assembly by Assemblywoman Linda B. Rosenthal, a Democrat of Manhattan, would help implement safe injection sites by providing immunity to the owners and workers and the drug users who walk in. The bill is still in committee and would likely face an uphill battle in the Republican-controlled State Senate.
The New York Police Department has not taken a position on the issue but is discussing it with the Department of Health.
The first safe injection facility opened in Switzerland in 1988. There are now more than 100 sites in more than 60 cities throughout the world, according to the Drug Policy Alliance. Recently, the idea of safe injection facilities has found a foothold in several cities nationwide dealing with skyrocketing overdose deaths.
San Francisco officials said two privately funded sites could open this summer. Philadelphia announced in January that it would begin a process to implement a site. In Seattle, council members appropriated $1.3 million to study and possibly implement the idea. The mayor of Ithaca, in the Finger Lakes region, proposed the idea in 2016.
Those cities, however, might end up clashing with the federal government.
The Department of Justice said in December that a proposed safe injection site in Vermont would violate federal law.
“It is a crime, not only to use illicit narcotics, but to manage and maintain sites on which such drugs are used and distributed,” the U.S. Attorney’s Office warned in a statement. “Rather than encourage and normalize heroin injection by affording a purportedly legal setting for use, the government must help addicts stop using.” Vermont has backed off the plan for now.
On Tuesday night, dozens of residents in Harlem sat in the pews of a Presbyterian church for a discussion on safe injection sites organized by the Mount Morris Park Community Improvement Association.
For more than an hour, residents bombarded a panel of elected officials, drug policy activists and police with technical questions about the idea. Later, neighbors took to the microphone, expressing their support or concerns.
Others were not as enthusiastic.
