Climate|7 Billion People, One Planet. Can Everyone’s Needs Be Met?
This week: The one country that comes close to balancing sustainability and quality of life. Also, a study says Tuvalu isn’t shrinking after all. And we’re here to spoil your Valentine’s Day.
Providing for 7 billion. Or not.
Can we provide good lives for the seven billion people on Earth without wrecking the planet?
Daniel O’Neill of the University of Leeds and colleagues asked this enormous question in a recent paper in the journal Nature Sustainability and on an accompanying website.
Their answer is uncomfortable. After looking at data on quality of life and use of resources from some 150 countries, they found that no nation currently meets the basic needs of its citizens in a sustainable way. The nations of the world either don’t provide the basics of a good life or they do it at excessive cost in resources, or they fail at both.
To Dr. O’Neill, an economist, this was something of a surprise. “When we started, we kind of thought, ‘surely, out of 150 different countries, there will be some shining star’” with a high quality of life and moderate resource use. “We really didn’t find that,” he said, pointing only to Vietnam as coming close to meeting both measures.
The United States, on the other hand, provides a relatively high quality of life but fails on every measure of sustainability in the study. For example, it emits 21.2 metric tons of carbon dioxide per person per year, while the study’s sustainability threshold is 1.6 metric tons.
He did not say, however, that these findings doom humanity to poverty or environmental ruin. “It doesn’t tell us what’s theoretically possible,” he said, noting that the study only projects the results of continuing with business as usual.
A new study shows that the Pacific island nation of Tuvalu, long considered all but doomed by rising sea levels, has grown slightly since the 1970s.
At first glance, the findings, published in the journal Nature Communications, appear to challenge the conventional wisdom that low-lying nations might one day disappear into the sea. But the lead author, Paul S. Kench, a coastal geomorphologist (the study of how the earth’s surface is formed and changed) at the University of Auckland in New Zealand, said simply that the effects of climate change on islands can be complicated.
His team’s research found that Tuvalu’s land area, spread out among nine low-lying coral atolls and 101 reef islands, grew by 182 acres since 1971. That’s about twice the size of Vatican City.
The reason? Islands are dynamic ecosystems, he said, which means that changing wave patterns and sediment dumped by storms might be offsetting the erosion caused by rising seas. Some of Tuvalu’s islands grew, and some shrank, but averaged together they gained overall.
Similar things could happen with other island nations, Dr. Kench said, depending on the nature of the sand and other ecosystem dynamics.
Island leaders have not embraced the findings. “It is poor science, and irresponsible, to average out these changes and conclude that sea level rise is not a problem for Tuvalu,” said Dr. Ian Fry, Tuvalu’s chief climate change negotiator at the United Nations, in an email.
Climate-change doubters have embraced the report. Rush Limbaugh, the conservative radio host, cited the research as “more evidence climate change is fake,” and the right-wing news outlet Breitbart News decried “hysterical fake news” about the threat of rising seas.
Dr. Kench said the deniers are misinterpreting his findings. “It’s an unfortunate outcome of the work,” he said.
Love is in the air, and chocolate on lovers’ minds — but it’s becoming increasingly clear that the Valentine’s Day staple’s fate is intertwined with the effects of climate change.
Cacao thrives in a narrow band around the Equator, and only under specific conditions — high humidity, abundant rain and fairly constant temperatures. And in Ivory Coast and Ghana, which together produce over half of the world’s chocolate, higher temperatures are expected to sharply reduce areas suitable for cultivation. One study predicted that, given current temperature trends, as much as 90 percent of the cacao-growing regions examined would become less suitable for the crop by 2050.
At the same time, chocolate is a contributor to climate change. The chocolate industry has been a primary driver behind illegal deforestation in Africa’s cacao-growing regions, the environmental advocacy group Mighty Earth said in a report last year.
Roses are also, well, a bit thorny. According to the Society of American Florists, some 250 million roses are produced for Valentine’s Day and, by one estimate, producing 100 million roses generates around 9,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide. That’s not exactly a major contributor to the world’s carbon emissions, but it does outrank Tuvalu, which generates 7,000 metric tons a year.
Most of the flowers are grown in greenhouses outside of Bogotá, Colombia, partly because it’s too cold in much of the United States to grow flowers in February. Once flowers are cut they have to be refrigerated and flown to the United States, a process that gives the fragrant blooms their carbon footprint. Producing flowers locally wouldn’t necessarily be better because they would have to be grown in energy-intensive hot houses.
It’s also estimated that for flowers grown in developing countries, 20 percent of the chemicals used are banned or untested in the United States. And some of these chemicals, like methyl bromide, a fumigant, are also greenhouse gases and deplete the ozone layer.
So if you are single this year, or forgot a gift for your sweetie, you can at least find consolation in being a little bit greener this Valentine’s Day.