For her extraordinarily detailed costumes, Ruth E. Carter studied the garments of the Maasai and other African tribes. A 3-D printer was also important.
How do you outfit an African queen? For Ruth E. Carter, the costume designer for “Black Panther,” it involved a Zulu hat and a 3-D printer.
In her 30 years in film, Ms. Carter has made her career putting images of African-American history and contemporary culture onscreen, from Spike Lee’s canon to “Selma” and the recent remake of “Roots.” For the Marvel blockbuster “Black Panther,” she got to envision a futuristic African alternate reality — made up of diverse tribes and untouched by colonizers.
To imagine the fictional African nation of Wakanda, without the influence of the Dutch, the British and other colonizers, Ms. Carter borrowed from indigenous people across the continent. During six months of preproduction, she had shoppers scouring the globe for authentic African designs, like the traditional stacked neck rings worn by the Ndebele women of South Africa. Textiles were sourced to Ghana, but many African fabrics are now printed in Holland; Ms. Carter rejected those. “I wanted to create the fabrics, and I wanted them to feel very superhero-like,” she said.
The costume designer Ruth E. Carter has made a career of bringing black history to life in movies like “Amistad” and “Malcolm X.” But in “Black Panther” she draws on traditional African influences to look toward the future.
Costume designer Ruth E. Carter has made her career showcasing black history and culture onscreen. But with her latest movie, “Black Panther,” she’s looking to an African future. In the film, the fictional country of Wakanda is derided as a third-world backwater by outsiders, but it’s actually a secretly advanced, high-tech society. Although it looks futuristic, elements of African history can be seen everywhere. Carter got inspiration from the Turkana and Maasai cultures when designing the outfits for the Dora Milaje, a group of female warriors led by Danai Gurira as Okoye. Carter used this African mask as the basis for a battle costume worn by Winston Duke as M’Baku, and her designs for Lupita Nyong’o’s character, Nakia, are partially influenced by the Surma populations of Ethiopia. “The thing about Ruth is that she’s very understated. She doesn’t lead with all her experience. She just leads with a curiosity for the thing she’s doing right there and then.” “Ruth would bring me in and she would have, like, a vision board of, like, different inspirations. And she would really fit— She would really fit clothes to myself, And she would bring different colors and different flavors to it. And Shuri’s, like, love and light, and it was really, like, bright, maybe all white, or maybe orange, or anything that can really bring out her personality.” “She has everything you want in a collaborator. She’s experienced, but, you know, she’s still youthful and energetic, still curious and open to trying new things. “Black Panther” broke multiple box office records the world over during its opening weekend, easily becoming the top-grossing film of all time by a black director and featuring a largely black cast. And with that, Ruth Carter’s costumes now also have a place in the history books.
There was a strict color palette, drafted by Mr. Coogler: Chadwick Boseman, who plays T’Challa, the Wakanda royal who is also the Black Panther, wears black; Danai Gurira, as the warrior Okoye, and her band of female fighters, the Dora Milaje, are in vibrant red; and Lupita Nyong’o, as the spy Nakia, part of the river tribe, is in shades of green. (Black, red and green are also the colors of the Pan-African flag.) For Mr. Coogler, blue “represented the police and authority.” She dressed Michael B. Jordan, as Black Panther’s rival, Erik Killmonger, in it.
She also leaned on a visual bible created by Hannah Beachler, the production designer, which laid out the districts and culture of Wakanda. The merchant tribe is inspired by the Tuareg, ethnic Berbers of the Sahara, Ms. Carter said. The mining tribe resembles the Himba of Namibia, known for their red ocher body paint and leather headpieces. And for the artsy Step Town district, she scoured looks from an Afropunk festival in Atlanta, where “Black Panther” was shot.
Ms. Carter said this was not the most complex production she’d ever done; “Malcolm X,” set across several eras, was even more involved. But the chance to explore Afrofuturism with “Black Panther” was meaningful to her. “It is the reason why we have a sense of pride as African-Americans,” she said.
The movie “connects everything that I’ve done about slavery and about how Africans came to this country, and what happened to their culture,” she said.
Here, she discusses the inspiration and design of several looks from the film.
The hat was the model for Ms. Bassett’s crown, which was 3-D-printed, with help from the designer Julia Körner, who specializes in wearable plastics. A rounded shoulder mantle, with a bit of African lace, was also 3-D printed. It took six months, Ms. Carter said, to get the design right.
The costuming for Nakia, played by Ms. Nyong’o, made the broadest leaps, Ms. Carter said. The spy’s river tribe was based partly on the Suri of Ethiopia, so her traditional look was made of shells, beads and leaves.
In their red and gold outfits, these spear-fighting women are the elite warriors of Wakanda. The front of the costume is beaded “in the same tradition that you see throughout Africa — the Turkana, the Maasai,” Ms. Carter said. “The overall garment has a texture as well, the same kind of striations and sacred geometry” as the Black Panther suit. The leather harnesses that cross the bodice were made by craftsmen in South Africa so that they appear to be hand-stitched, and the imposing color was chosen to make eight actresses look as bold as 80, she said.
