1 hr. and 20 min.
Eve Ensler has a word she wants you to get comfortable with.
Her remarkably successful play “The Vagina Monologues,” first seen Off Off Broadway in 1996 and then pretty much all over the world except where it was banned, helped normalize the frank discussion of women’s sexuality (and anatomy) onstage. It also fostered and financed a project called V-Day, which has raised tens of millions of dollars for antiviolence organizations.
In May 2010, just as she was about to attend the opening of City of Joy, a sanctuary she helped to found for rape victims in Congo, Ms. Ensler received a diagnosis of uterine cancer. “In the Body of the World,” directed by Diane Paulus, is a troubling record of her attempt to survive that illness, in part by understanding its meaning. Had she somehow poisoned herself, as humans every day poison the earth? (The recent BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico was on her mind.) Could the disease growing inside her be an expression of the global disease of violence done to women by men?
This is grim stuff, but you will recognize from earlier works Ms. Ensler’s palliative strategies. With her Scarsdale honk and Louise Brooks bob, she still presents herself as your wacky activist bohemian aunt, the kind who tried to “unionize all the unpopular girls” in high school. She bubbles with psychological insight and empathy for anyone in distress.
And, as always, she laces her tales with humor, gallows or otherwise. Rochester, Minn., where she undergoes treatment at the Mayo Clinic, is called Tumor Town; her encounter there with Cindy the “fart deliverer” is destined to be a comic audition piece for decades.
But unlike “The Vagina Monologues” and a later play, “The Good Body,” which were told in the voices of many different women, “In the Body of the World” is all Ms. Ensler all the time. For 80 minutes, she impersonates no one else, except in passing.
The result is a story that’s less about connecting to people than to ideas, some of them fairly airy. Whether the play’s intensely autobiographical self-focus will come off as liberating or oversharing depends, in part, on how open you are to the meanings of those connections. I was often troubled by them.
One cannot but honor Ms. Ensler’s devotion to facing and improving the world. She has arguably done as much practical good as any playwright now working. And it’s understandable that in telling a story that takes place in her own body an activist would want to connect it to something beyond that small space.
But aside from painting disease as a kind of moral rebuke — an idea that many people with cancer, and their loved ones, will find distasteful — “In the Body of the World” seems to flow in the wrong direction. Rather than using Ms. Ensler’s illness to illuminate the world’s, it too often borrows from the world’s suffering in an effort to legitimize her own.
Still, I could do without the tribute to every nurse and friend and assistant who helped her through the ordeal; these namechecks make it sound as if she is giving an acceptance speech at an awards show for winning cancer. Seeing Ms. Ensler so obviously invigorated is happy ending enough.
Until then, Ms. Paulus — who staged the play’s 2016 premiere at the American Repertory Theater — keeps the production spare, with little more than a divan, a chair, some projections (by Finn Ross) and sound effects (by M. L. Dogg and Sam Lerner) to support the monologue. All the more lovely, then, is the scenic coup prepared by the designer Myung Hee Cho, which leaves the audience with a vision of what it can mean not merely to survive but to flourish.
The play itself, though, still ails; like most one-person shows, it needed a second opinion.