Because marriage is an ever-evolving experience, we constantly shift, change, love harder, love less and, in some cases, start over. In It’s No Secret, The Times highlights couples who share thoughts about commitment and what they have learned about themselves and each other along the way.
Who Laurie Goldbas, 64, and David Knoebel, 68.
Occupations The couple own Gib’s Farm in Catawissa Pa.
Their Marriage 41 years, 9 months and counting.
The couple married May 9, 1976 in the living room of the bride’s parents in Utica, N.Y. “We designed our own invites, which her mother didn’t like, so they went to our friends. Formal ones that her parents did went to theirs,” Mr. Knoebel said. “We had 100 people, who we invited in stages since everyone couldn’t fit into the living room at once. People came from 1-2 p.m., 2-3 p.m. and 3-4 p.m. Her mom was a big entertainer.” The couple have two daughters in their late 30s, both of whom are married and have children.
In 1973, love was found on Greene and Grand Streets, in Manhattan, on the ground floor of a rundown factory that housed movie sets. Laurie Goldbas, then 20, and David Knoebel, then 24, each rented an 8-by-10-square-foot room.
Two months later they moved into a raw space with a leaky roof and made it livable. To earn money Mrs. Knoebel drove a cab and later a horse-drawn carriage, while Mr. Knoebel worked in construction.
Mrs. Knoebel: I wasn’t ready to get married, but things happened, and life had other plans. I proposed, and David said yes. Many times I thought this isn’t working. But I was blessed with two beautiful girls. They kept me together.
Marriage is hard. I’m the difficult one in the relationship. I was always running to get to some other place. I thought I’d never measure up to my own expectations. I set the bar too high, but David loved me. He had faith in me. That was very liberating and I felt stronger.
I learned you can be still. That it’s O.K. to depend on someone. That when David praised me I should realize it’s not to flatter me, he really means it. I learned to see what David saw in me, and that helped a lot. He’s very generous and devoted and selfless. He’s a wonderful father. His love and security keep me here. I’d be lost without him.
My life began with David. It took a long time to realize that. I’ve learned a lot about myself by being with him. When I come home and he’s not there, I have an empty feeling. I’m attached. I realized I needed the structure of the marriage, and to be recognized as part of a couple. We complement each other and have achieved a balance because we are so different. I’ve learned you can’t run away from things. I didn’t want to be conventional, but it helped me in the outside world to say I have a husband and a family. Our love is really deep. It’s carried over into our children and their spouses and their kids.
Mr. Knoebel: I was 26 when we got married. She was 22. These were the Joni Mitchell years. We don’t need a piece of paper. Marriage was not the goal. We were going to live together and prosper. Then the parents got involved and both gave the same advice: Get married.
We didn’t exchange rings at the ceremony, or for the first 15 years. Our daughters bought us them. It’s the only piece of jewelry I can bring myself to wear. It’s a symbol of commitment and I’m shy of symbols that reflect society at large. Laurie is the same. That I can wear this ring and feel that way about it, makes it all that more significant. We both wear them. It’s a connection to each other.
We were two hardheaded people learning to cooperate, and that was a learning process. Stepping back was hard to learn, but I did. She challenged me. I learned I wasn’t the one to make all the decisions. Even now I have to stop and remind myself I’m not the only one here. I also had to let her be her. She thrives on big projects; I don’t. I’m a solo worker so I learned to lend a hand and get involved. I don’t want to be left behind. I learned I want to share what she’s doing. I learned that it’s fun to work with a partner I love. I found I could do both.
She’s a fascinating woman. Her kindness, her willingness to go the extra mile, with me and with others, are things I love. I’m never sure what’s going to come out of her mouth, but it’s usually something I’m glad to hear. I was not lonely before I met her, but I discovered how great a partnership could be. I didn’t feel incomplete before I met her, but I did feel more complete, and that feeling has continued through the years.