The team behind “Black Panther,” the film featuring the first black superhero to appear in mainstream comics, is facing allegations by a British-Liberian artist that her work was used without permission in Kendrick Lamar’s just-released music video for “All the Stars,” a song from the movie’s soundtrack.
On Saturday, Christopher Robinson, a lawyer for the artist Lina Iris Viktor, sent a letter to Mr. Lamar’s mentor and label head, Anthony Tiffith at Top Dawg Entertainment, alleging a copyright violation of the 24-karat gold, patterned artworks in her series of paintings “Constellations.” Ms. Viktor had been contacted twice by the film’s creators for permission to feature her work, the letter says, but she decided not to participate.
“Black Panther,” which will be released on Feb. 16 and is already shaping up to be a cultural phenomenon, is an American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name, produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures .
Mr. Lamar, Mr. Tiffith and Disney declined to comment. The music video director Dave Meyers, who oversaw “All the Stars” along with Mr. Lamar and his creative partner Dave Free (known together as “the little homies”), did not respond to requests to comment.
After this story’s publication, the people involved in making the film said they played no role in the creation of the video.
In December 2017, the letter continues, Mariane Ibrahim-Abdi Lenhardt of the Seattle-based Mariane Ibrahim Gallery, which represents Ms. Viktor, was again contacted about the movie by the public relations firm DDA, on behalf of Marvel and Disney. The firm was asking several artists to create work inspired by the Black Panther character for use in promoting the film, including a video, social media and events around the premiere.
The Armory Show installation continues Ms. Viktor’s exhibition at the Amar Gallery in London last year, “Black Exodus: Act I — Materia Prima,” which explored narratives around race and the African diaspora. A solo show of her work will also be presented in October at the New Orleans Museum of Art.
Mr. Lamar, who last month won five Grammys for his latest album, “DAMN.,” was handpicked by the “Black Panther” director Ryan Coogler to produce and curate the official soundtrack, which includes music from and inspired by the film. The album was released Friday, and features songs by an all-star lineup of hip-hop and R&B acts including Mr. Lamar, SZA, Future, the Weeknd and Travis Scott. “All the Stars,” the lead single from the soundtrack by Mr. Lamar and SZA, currently sits at No. 54 on the Billboard Hot 100, and its music video was played more than 9 million times on YouTube in its first four days.
