GRAZ, Austria — One summer day in 1965, a small car stopped on Vienna’s central Heldenplatz or “Heroes’ Square.” Out climbed a slender man of average height, his suited figure covered from head to toe in white paint.
A black line ran up his body, as if splitting him in two. But his grinning face gave an air of mischief as he walked with a spring in his step right in front of the balcony of the Hofburg imperial palace, where, in 1938, Hitler was greeted by cheering crowds after the Third Reich’s annexation of Austria.
The man was Günter Brus, known for his artistic “actions,” which were sometimes irreverent and sometimes violently confronting. In the 1960s and ’70s, these artistic performances challenged deeply conservative social attitudes and a culture of forgetting in postwar Austria.
In time, Mr. Brus came to be admired as a boundary-pushing artist. He would trade his paintbrush for a razor blade and turn it against his body to explore the limits of expression. And the Austrian state would come to regard him as a notorious troublemaker.
But on that day in 1965, to Mr. Brus’s disappointment, “Absolutely nothing happened,” he said in a recent interview at his home in city of Graz, in the south of Austria. Passers-by were largely unfazed, although a police officer apprehended the living painting, fined Mr. Brus for disturbing the peace and ushered him into a taxi.
Now, more than a half-century later, Mr. Brus’s 80th birthday is being celebrated in Vienna with the exhibition “Unrest After the Storm” at the Belvedere 21 museum, and artists and curators say Mr. Brus’s work has taken on renewed significance after Austria’s recent right-wing turn. The show opened this month and runs through Aug. 12.
“Unrest After the Storm” brings together works from across Mr. Brus’s eclectic output. These include early “informal” paintings reminiscent of Jackson Pollock; drawings; illustrated poetry; costume design; and footage and photographs of his shocking actions.
It is for his actions that Mr. Brus is best known: carefully orchestrated performances involving naked bodies, self-harm, and the use of bodily fluids like excrement, blood and tears, to explore taboo themes like birth and sexuality. But they are not the main focus of this exhibition. Records of them are shown in dialogue with drawings, paintings and poems which further explore the limits of the body.
Along with other artists like Otto Muehl and Hermann Nitsch, Mr. Brus formed a group that became known as the Vienna Actionists. Together, they put away the canvas and made their bodies a part of their art.
“Austria was not a police state but close enough,” Mr. Brus said, sitting at a long wooden table facing snow-covered hills through large bay windows. Postwar Austria was a traditional society, strongly influenced by the church and governed by strict rules. Mr. Brus recalled being fined as a young man for walking on a patch of grass.
As Mr. Brus’s notoriety grew, so did the anger some members of the public felt toward him. He and his wife both received death threats, and there was a petition to take away their child.
“The aim was to break taboos,” Mr. Brus said of his actions. “My art doesn’t just stink in the physical space but smells in the souls of the people,” he said.
Mr. Brus’s work was not only taboo-breaking, it was also political. Today, many in the art world here are similarly engaged. Last year, riding the wave of a backlash against Europe’s treatment of the migration crisis, the far-right Freedom Party again took up key posts in Austria’s government, following a break of over a decade.
“I feel this political consciousness in his work,” said Harald Krejci, curator of the exhibition. He said that he had selected several works for their political content. One is titled “Average Austrians and Austrians-by-Choice Demand a Ministry of Re-engagement in National Socialist Activities and Excuses,” and features these words written on the Austrian flag. Mr. Brus made this work in 2000, after the Freedom Party achieved a record share of the vote in an election.
In 1968, as student protests swept Western Europe, the Vienna Actionists were invited to stage an action in a lecture hall at the University of Vienna. “Art and Revolution” involved Mr. Brus cutting himself, urinating, defecating and masturbating while singing Austria’s national anthem, in an outrageous effort to show the facts of life with no filters. As a result of the performance, Mr. Brus was prosecuted for the crime of “degrading symbols of the state” and fled with his family to exile in West Berlin.
“In Berlin we found an open and tolerant, liberal society and my wife didn’t even know what the police looked like for the first two years,” Mr. Brus said.
Ms. Brus said she was often asked how she endured being part of her husband’s actions, like “Transfusion,” in which Mr. Brus, naked, painted his wife’s body in a space littered with nails and other sharp objects, before engaging in what appeared to be a sex act, while she sat, still and impassive.
“In our partnership, in our common work, this was never a question,” Ms. Brus said. “In our work we were Comrades, friends, and it was a very natural relationship,” Mr. Brus added immediately.
Eva Badura-Triska, curator of several past exhibitions on Vienna Actionists at Mumok, Vienna’s museum of modern art, said that when you looked at Mr. Brus’s art “you are facing the truth.” She added that watching a work like “Zerreissprobe” was “not a pleasure,” in the same way it was not a pleasure to watch the bloody experience of birth, or to see somebody dying or defecating.
