When the whirlwind of the Winter Olympics spins to a close this weekend, the host city, Pyeongchang, South Korea, will settle down to a life beyond aerial flips, halfpipe pretzels and metronomic North Korean cheerleaders. The place will become, once again, a quiet spot where very few children live — its population a disproportionately elderly one, dependent on an imperiled social-security system. Pyeongchang played a happy Olympic host, but its everyday economic reality highlights an existential threat shadowing South Korea. It’s not (or not only) the North Korean missiles and nuclear weapons arrayed across the border just 50 miles away. The more intractable danger is a demographic time bomb already starting to detonate across South Korea and all over East Asia.
Japan, with its shrinking population, has long been the region’s pace setter for demographic doom. But South Korea’s fertility rate has plummeted to one of the lowest in the world, barely more than one child per woman. Throw in rising life expectancy, and South Korea is now aging faster than any other advanced economy on Earth. Between 1975 and 2015, its median age soared to 41.2 from just 19.6. In Gangwon, the potato-growing province that encompasses Pyeongchang, the median age is expected to pass 60 by 2045. (The median age in the United States, now 37.9, is predicted to creep up to 42 by 2045.) Thousands of South Korean schools have already been abandoned for lack of students.
The economic fallout of this demographic shift could be devastating. After transforming itself from a poor, war-ravaged agricultural society into a manufacturing giant in just a few decades, South Korea now faces one peril of prosperity: a labor shortage that will be a drag on both the economy and the pension system for its aging residents. Like the rest of East Asia, Seoul has tried to increase birthrates, offering child care bonuses, fertility treatments, even gifts of beef for families with newborns. Some of its efforts, though, come across as little more than pressuring women to marry and reproduce. In one instance, the government published (and then retracted) an online “birth map” that showed, in shades of pink, the number of women of childbearing age by city and region.
Most of the migrants work in agriculture, construction or manufacturing, doing the so-called 3-D work (dirty, dangerous and difficult) that the locals eschew. One conundrum of the South Korean economy is that even as foreign workers are needed more urgently, youth unemployment has climbed to just under 10 percent, nearly triple the overall rate. It results from a mismatch: Well-educated young South Koreans want the kind of corporate jobs that globalizing companies are taking overseas, while low-skilled laborers from China and Southeast Asia find plenty of work in traditional industries being vacated by aging Koreans.
There are also about 150,000 “marriage migrants,” mostly Chinese and Southeast Asian women, who have come, with the government’s support, to settle down (and presumably procreate) with local Korean men. Though some of these marriages have ended in divorce, more than 5 percent of the children born in South Korea are now multiethnic. By one estimate, foreign-born or multiethnic Koreans will make up an estimated 10 percent of the entire population by 2030.
Immigration may seem like an obvious answer to any labor crisis. South and Southeast Asia have an abundance of poor, young, underemployed workers, while East Asian economies (including those of Korea, Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong and Taiwan) need to replenish shrinking labor forces and reinvigorate, even repopulate, their societies. And the benefits run both ways. In 2015, according to a recent World Bank report, immigrants sent more than $430 billion in remittances to developing countries — three times the total global aid to them. The World Bank’s president, Jim Yong Kim, who moved to the United States from South Korea as a child in 1964, has argued that, with the right set of policies, immigration can be “an engine of economic growth.” “If countries with aging populations can create a path for refugees and migrants to participate in the economy, everyone benefits,” he said in 2015.
Educated young Koreans don’t cling so tightly to the equation of blood and nation. Yet on the question of citizenship, they often wind up on the same side as staunch ethnonationalists. Though more tolerant of foreign workers, the younger generation is also wary of letting them become citizens, lest they dilute the nation’s identity — an attitude that seems to have stiffened during the country’s prolonged economic slump. One of Seoul’s main immigration programs, the Employment Permit System (E.P.S.) brings in about 275,000 guest workers for up to five years — without offering a path to citizenship. Some human rights activists say the E.P.S. so strictly binds workers to a single employer that it is akin to slavery, and migrants leaving the program have swelled the ranks of undocumented workers in South Korea to more than 200,000.
Seoul is more welcoming to ethnic Korean migrants from China. Known as joseonjok, they are the descendants of Koreans who arrived in northeastern China in the late 19th and the 20th centuries, fleeing famine and, later, Japanese occupation. The more than 600,000 joseonjok, who are granted less restrictive visas, are concentrated in the construction industry. If they marry locals, they — like all marriage migrants — can take an accelerated path to naturalization. Few outsiders, though, have become citizens faster than the 19 foreign-born athletes (from Germany, Canada and elsewhere) who joined the South Korean Olympic team to help it compete in some of its weaker sports, like ice hockey and luge. Not all Koreans applauded the inclusion of these particularly skilled immigrants — and the instant citizenship they were granted — even if a few of them did learn some lines of the national anthem.
Immigration, of course, can deliver more than just short-term benefits. Recent studies suggest that sustained bursts of growth and innovation tend to occur in places buffeted by cultural crosscurrents, invigorated by fresh energy, talents and perspectives. This is not only true in 21st-century America. Consider the ninth-century ferment of the Tang-dynasty Chinese capital Chang’an (present-day Xi’an). The Silk Road metropolis was home to thousands of Turks, Arabs, Uighurs, Indians and many others. The cross-fertilization of languages, cultures and ideas within the dynasty led to major advances in art and technology, like the invention of everything from gunpowder to woodblock printing.
