290 pp. Ballantine. $26.
While a C.I.A. analyst named Vivian Miller is on the phone assuring her husband, a software engineer, that she can leave Langley to pick up one of their sick kids, she’s also impatiently checking her computer as she downloads a highly classified new counterintelligence program. The couple are in financial straits, and Vivian needs a promotion. Coordinating with the F.B.I., she has designed an algorithm to pinpoint Russian “handlers,” the spies running the spies, a matter of heightened urgency since they’ve recently become more aggressive. Two of her colleagues have already been “pitched,” apparently unsuccessfully. But the danger may lie closer to home: Using the new program, Vivian finds a file on the computer of one suspected handler that contains an unencrypted photo of her own husband. And the information is so secret not even her F.B.I. partner is allowed to see it.
All of this is persuasively conveyed in the opening pages of Cleveland’s novel. And by Page 27, she’s dangling the sort of secret normally reserved for an ending. But instead of easing up, she doubles down. Cleveland has worked for the C.I.A., so the tradecraft in “Need to Know” is of special interest. When penetrating a computer, is an analyst really given a choice between clicking on “active” or “passive,” depending on whether she wants to mess around in there? It’s possible — more likely, certainly, than a set of wedding guests unwittingly divided between C.I.A. operatives and Russian sleeper agents.
“Need to Know” won’t pose any threat to John le Carré because it’s all surfaces. But the surfaces are very shiny and lots of fun.
346 pp. St. Martin’s. $26.99.
At first, it looks as if Hendricks and Pekkanen have written a book that’s more romance than thriller. “The Wife Between Us” alternates between two points of view. One belongs to a young and apparently innocent preschool teacher who has been swept off her feet by a rich man — a hedge fund manager, no less. The other belongs to the man’s hard-bitten ex, a saleswoman at Saks resentfully catering to the spoiled matrons who used to be her peers. The rich man — lynchpin of the triangle — says laughably “intellectual” things and looks good in both a suit and a pair of jeans.
Although the sinister elements may begin on the pale side, they soon suggest all sorts of gaslighting and bluebearding. When the rich man first meets the teacher on an airplane, he strokes a lock of her blond hair and says: “So beautiful. Don’t ever cut it.” Later, seemingly out of the blue, he buys her a house. And he insists that their honeymoon destination be a surprise.
The novel is halfway over before the first reveal, but it’s worth the wait, if only for its singularity. Then the twists come fast and furious. Not everything makes a lot of sense. That stuff you thought was local color? A surprising amount of it fits in somewhere. Those characters with walk-on parts? A couple of them offer their own surprises.
289 pp. Holt. $28.
Previously just one of a sea of faces in his class, the girl of the novel’s title approaches David Connolly, a lecturer at University College Dublin, with news that will make her unforgettable: She is his daughter. Long ago, back in Belfast, her mother was someone he had a brief affair with. Knowing nothing of her pregnancy, he left her because he found her too erratic, then moved to Dublin, married another woman and started a family of his own. But when the girl tells him her mother is dead, memories of their wild love return.
Zoe — of the radiant blond hair and the uneasy squirms and the sleeves she keeps picking at — looks like bad news from the beginning. And Perry (a pen name for the writing team of Karen Gillece and Paul Perry) is good at conveying the young woman’s manipulative neediness. Will she be victim or victimizer?
All marriages have fissures, and those of the Connollys are on pointed display. Chapters alternate between David and his wife, Caroline, who recently ended an affair of her own. (David reacted by buying a new kitchen.) Although they now choose stiff civility over argument, his wife thinks he’s taking his revenge by bringing a stranger into their lives and allowing her to become entangled with the whole family. Although this setup can become a bit trying, an explosive dinner near the end provides emotional fireworks and a fit antecedent for the shocks to come.
427 pp. Morrow. $26.99.
A damsel in distress can be a poor narrator. How to convey the magnitude of her troubles without letting her descend into irritating self-pity? Finn tackles this contradiction brilliantly, especially given his agoraphobic heroine’s situation. Anna Fox is confiding and breezy, but not brittle. The conversations presented here as amusing really do amuse. Yet the fear is always there.
Anna, a gentrifier in Harlem, spends a lot of time watching old movies and looking out her window. Separated by her illness from her husband and daughter, she’s alone nearly all the time. But since she’s a trained psychologist, she has eased into helping fellow sufferers online. Perky with her clients, she’s less so in her asides to the reader, especially when she’s rattling off the names of all the pills she adds to her incessant wine drinking.
Eventually, Anna trains her professionally keen attention on some of her neighbors, members of a family that has moved into a townhouse across the way. As, one by one, they start to visit her, disturbingly different versions of their lives are on offer.
Sometimes “The Woman in the Window” seems like a freshly warped version of an old mystery play, with its repeated entrances and exits on a single stage. Late at night, awash in pills and alcohol, Anna is sure she has seen a stabbing. Finn signals a key development ahead of time, but that doesn’t soften the punch when it comes. Plenty of revelations ensue, and as they pile up the reader feels them right along with Anna.