Andre Surmain, who transformed his cooking school’s Manhattan townhouse into Lutèce, an epicurean mecca defined by haute cuisine, even higher prices and a high-and-mighty clientele, died on Wednesday at his home in St. Paul en Foret, in the South of France. He was 97.
His death was confirmed by his nephew Peter Hurwitz.
A month after Lutèce opened in 1961, Craig Claiborne, the restaurant critic for The New York Times, described it as “impressively elegant and conspicuously expensive.” (His dinner for two was $52.30, or about $435 in today’s money.) The food, however, “could not be called great cuisine,” he wrote.
That would change soon enough. Like a soufflé, Lutèce’s reputation rose slowly by word of mouth as its menu steadily improved, until it was known in culinary quarters as America’s greatest restaurant. It became a fixture for bons vivants at dinner and a hub for the ladies who lunch.
In 1972, Raymond A. Sokolov, a successor Times critic, awarded Lutèce the maximum four stars — a rating it would retain for years as its chef, André Soltner, toiling in the restaurant’s cramped 8-by-18-foot kitchen, cooked up signature dishes like his Alsatian onion tart, crab cassolette and sautéed foie gras with chocolate sauce and orange marmalade.
Mr. Surmain (pronounced sir-meh) named the restaurant, his first, after the Latin term for ancient Paris. He recruited Mr. Soltner from Hansi, a brasserie in Montparnasse, initially as his chef, then, after Mr. Soltner threatened to quit, as his partner.
Announcing his retirement at 52 in 1973, Mr. Surmain sold the restaurant to Mr. Soltner and later opened Fuc y Fum (Fire and Smoke) on the island of Majorca, Spain; the Relais a Mougins, near Cannes, France, which earned two stars from the Michelin Guide; and its shorter-lived sister, also named the Relais a Mougins, in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr. Surmain himself was considered more snobbish than brutish, He ranked his socially conscious customers and seated them accordingly, lamented the dwindling number of deluxe dining destinations and rarely minced words if a patron failed to appreciate his restaurants’ singularity.
“We won’t do it,” he said.
Born Andre Sussman on Dec. 5, 1920, Mr. Surmain was the son of the former Nina Ratzkovski, a chemist, and Richard Sussman, whose father’s family were jewelers to the viceroy of Egypt. The couple also owned Aziza Cosmetics.
Educated in France, at the Lycée Janson de Sailly in Paris and the French artillery school in Fontainbleau, he served in the French army until 1940, the year France fell to Hitler, and immigrated to the United States. Drafted into the American military, he served with the Office of Strategic Services, the precursor to the Central Intelligence Agency, and was shipped back to Europe.
Mr. Surmain in a family photograph from the 1980s.
Six weeks before the invasion of Normandy, in 1944, he was parachuted into Occupied France and wounded in the knee by a German bullet. Before the jump he had changed his surname to Surmain, fearing that the name Sussman might give him away as Jewish if he were caught by the Nazis.
In postwar New York, he partnered with another O.S.S. veteran, Serge Obolensky, a public relations man. He promoted hotels, New Bedford scallops and a new kitchen gadget that would become known as the Cuisinart.
He and James Beard, the chef and cookbook author, met on Nantucket, Mass., where they made pâtés and sold them at a boutique owned by Mr. Surmain’s wife at the time, the former Nancy Wormser, whom he had married in 1953. Two years later, Mr. Beard and Mr. Surmain teamed up to teach cooking classes, starting in the drawing room of the Surmains’ townhouse on East 50th Street.
He is survived by his fourth wife, the former Patricia Terno; two sons, Philippe and Jean-Claude; a daughter, Micheline Battaglia; two sisters, Claudine Hurwitz and Estelle Lobet; 14 grandchildren; and five great-grandchildren. Another daughter, Ghislaine Surmain, died last year.
Mr. Surmain’s career also included catering for airlines, and while working for what became Aeromexico, he established an informal eating club. One of its members, Miguel Aleman, who owned the Mexican airline, lent Mr. Surmain $50,000 to open his own French restaurant.
Mr. Surmain in an undated family photograph. He later owned restaurants on Majorca, in Spain; near Cannes, France; and in Palm Beach, Fla.
For the first six years, Lutèce posted losses. Mr. Surmain even bowed to skeptical reviews and lowered the prix fixe lunch price from a scandalous $8.50 to $6.50.
By 1973, after a successful decade, he had grown more interested in his antique cars, sailing and his farm in Majorca than in “the incessant detail of running New York’s most consistently pleasing French restaurant,” the restaurant critic Gael Greene wrote in New York magazine.
Although Mr. Surmain began cooking when he was 8 in his parents’ apartment and taught a cooking class when he was in his 30s (his students craved the quiche Lorraine, he said), his kitchen skills were belittled by Mr. Soltner.
Jerry Della Femina, the advertising executive, once recalled that his daughter had been invited to dinner at the Surmains’ apartment.
