Brit Janeway Benjamin and Patri Aaron Friedman were married Feb. 10 by Rabbi Meredith Cahn at the Legion of Honor, part of the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco.
The groom will go by Benjamin-Friedman; the bride will keep her name and take Friedman as a middle name.
Ms. Benjamin, 28, is an associate at Meakins Law in Berkeley, Calif. She graduated from the University of California, Berkeley and received a law degree from Santa Clara University.
She is the daughter of Kim Benjamin of Los Angeles and Robert Benjamin of Westlake Village, Calif.
Mr. Benjamin-Friedman, 41, is a software developer at Google in Mountain View, Calif. He is the chairman of the board of the Seasteading Institute, a nonprofit group, based in Oakland, Calif., that encourages people to build autonomous city-states on the ocean. He graduated from Harvey Mudd College in Claremont, Calif., and received a master's degree in computer science from Stanford, as well as an M.B.A. from New York Institute of Technology.
He is the son of Diana A. Troxell of King of Prussia, Pa., and David D. Friedman of San Jose, Calif. The groom is the stepson of Elizabeth A. Cook and Eugene Troxell. The groom is a paternal grandson of Milton Friedman, a Nobel Prize-winning economist.
Ms. Benjamin recalled Mr. Friedman came across as “a character” with “a strong presence” in 2011 as he interviewed her for a job at the Seasteading Institute.
“He leaned as far back as he could go in his chair in these crazy pants with his arms crossed,” she said, and wore a T-shirt that said “I Am John Galt” (a nod to the hero of the Ayn Rand novel “Atlas Shrugged’’) and wild yoga pants with flames, moons and stars.
“I loved the idea of seasteading and wrote about it for part of my thesis,” said Ms. Benjamin, who wore a more sedate pink cardigan over a peach A-line dress with a pearl necklace and matching earrings for the interview.
She got the job, and showed up her first day, Valentine’s Day, with a plateful of home-baked pink heart-shaped cookies, and soon developed an intellectual rapport with Mr. Friedman over subjects including seasteading, transhumanism, rationalism and Paleo diets.
Toward the end of his marriage at the time, Mr. Friedman, by summer, had separated from his wife and was no longer working at the Seasteading Institute. At that point, he had no misgivings about asking Ms. Benjamin on a date of sorts — to join him on a 10-hour trip to Burning Man, an annual weeklong festival in Nevada’s Black Rock Desert, where they would hang out with Future Camp, a group of futurists and transhumanists.
They hauled some gear for the group in a red pickup truck he rented, and she brought along costumes, art supplies, and her guitar. They arrived in the desert at 3 a.m., and set up separate shelters.
Halfway through the festival they had their first kiss while drinking coffee and watching the early morning scene from atop a lifeguard tower.
“Oh yes, this is a date,’’ Ms. Benjamin recalled thinking, and said that once they returned home, she soon got to know and came to love his two young children, Tovar and Izzy.
In 2015 after Mr. Friedman proposed at Chez TJ, a French restaurant in Mountain View, they knew their commitment was long-term, really long-term.
