Our eyes are on the sky.
With a thunderous roar, a rocket called Falcon Heavy arced into the great unknown on Tuesday. The successful launch will give SpaceX — the company founded by Elon Musk, the billionaire entrepreneur — momentum to develop even larger rockets.
A playful payload was delivered into space this time round: Mr. Musk’s cherry-red electric sports car.
“It’s kind of silly and fun, but silly and fun things are important,” he said.
Some animals can count better than you.
Our animal friends keep surprising us: Scientists have found that many are able to distinguish not only bigger from smaller, or more from less, but also two from four, four from 10, or 40 from 60. Even spiders and frogs have surprisingly sophisticated number sense.
And chimpanzees’ numeric working memory is astonishing. Flash a scattering of numerals on a screen for just 210 milliseconds, then cover the numbers with white squares. A numerically schooled young chimp will touch the squares sequentially to indicate the ascending order of the hidden numbers.
Meet an Olympic engineering marvel: the SmartBroom.
There are fierce debates about the best way to sweep the ice during the sport of curling. Quick and light, or hard and slow?
Three Canadian entrepreneurs spent months pouring their creative energies into a high-tech device to hone curlers’ skills: the SmartBroom.
The implement has four sensors in the head that show force in pounds and stroke rate in hertz. The curler can then experiment to see which technique works best.
India wants to give half a billion people free health care.
The plan would offer families up to 500,000 rupees, or about $7,800, of coverage a year. While that sum seems small by Western standards, it would be enough to cover the equivalent of five heart surgeries in India.
They helped build a monster. Now they want to tame it.
Early Facebook and Google employees have formed the Center for Humane Technology, which is trying to challenge the companies they once helped create.
The group plans to unveil an ad campaign at 55,000 public schools in the United States, aiming to educate students, teachers and parents about depression that can come from heavy social media use.
Tens of thousands of Maya structures were revealed by lasers.
Researchers found the incredibly dense structures under foliage in northern Guatemala by shooting beams from planes into the tree canopy. The lasers helped create a 3-D picture that suggested an ancient society of such interconnectedness that even experienced archaeologists were surprised.
An African superhero gets a movie of his own.
“Black Panther” is a “jolt of a movie,” says Manohla Dargis, our film critic. Chadwick Boseman as T’challa, the titular superhero, leads a scene-stealing cast that includes Michael B. Jordan, Lupita Nyong’o and Andy Serkis.
