SÃO PAULO, Brazil — The American aerospace giant Boeing is eagerly pursuing a partnership with the Brazilian jet maker Embraer as part of a global battle with its European rival, Airbus.
But the talks, which moved into high gear late last year, are advancing at a politically fraught time in Brazil, and the Brazilian government — which owns a so-called golden share that gives it veto power over any change in ownership at Embraer — could derail a deal the two companies are said to be racing to complete.
A deal with Embraer would give Boeing a broader portfolio of aircraft, including, crucially, access to Embraer’s smaller regional planes, which compete directly with jets manufactured by the Canadian company Bombardier.
To prevail, however, Boeing will need to overcome political misgivings in Brazil, even though Embraer has a lot to gain.
The Brazilian government, which appeared to have been caught off guard when news of the talks emerged in late December, has responded warily, and coolly, to the idea of ceding to a foreign company significant control of an enterprise that is a source of national pride and a pillar of Brazil’s defense industry.
President Michel Temer told journalists in December that foreign participation could be welcome up to a point, but that a takeover was out of the question: “There isn’t the slightest consideration of selling control to another company,” he said.
The Defense Ministry has staked out a more nuanced position, saying it was “in favor” of a partnership as long as it did not infringe on “national sovereignty.” But it, too, ruled out giving another company a controlling interest in Embraer, which also builds jet fighters.
Boeing’s interest in Embraer grew after Airbus, its archrival, formed a partnership with Bombardier in October to make and sell the CSeries of medium-range airliners.
Boeing, backed by the Trump administration, sought to undermine Bombardier even before Airbus snapped up a 50.01 percent stake in the CSeries program, by arguing before the United States Trade Commission that the Canadian company had taken advantage of Canadian subsidies to sell planes to Delta Air Lines below market cost.
At Boeing’s urging, the Commerce Department had decided that duties of nearly 300 percent should be placed on the CSeries aircraft. But in a surprise move, the commission, an independent agency, ruled against Boeing last week, raising the stakes of its courtship with Embraer.
The two companies have a lot to gain from an alliance and virtually no overlap in production, according to analysts. Beyond expanding its portfolio, Boeing could take advantage of an army of experienced engineers who are not currently working on new models at Embraer.
When The Wall Street Journal first reported on the talks last December, Embraer’s stock jumped 20 percent. The report characterized Boeing’s interest as a “takeover” of the Brazilian company.
With Brazil’s presidential election looming in October, political opposition to the deal is only expected to grow, putting pressure on Boeing and Embraer to find common ground as quickly as possible. Officials at both companies declined to describe the state of negotiations in detail.
Conversations have been constant since December, with Boeing executives shuttling back and forth to Brasília, the capital, to meet with a newly created negotiating group, with officials from the Defense and Finance Ministries, the Air Force and the Brazilian Development Bank, which is also a stakeholder in Embraer.
Officials from both companies and the Brazilian government said Boeing had sought to make its initial takeover proposal more palatable by offering concessions. The possible concessions would include allowing the Brazilian government to retain veto rights over strategic decisions and military programs, and creating a distinct subsidiary with firewalls that would safeguard defense projects and technology.
Boeing has not abandoned hope of getting a controlling interest, according to sources at both companies familiar with the negotiations, and it is contemplating structuring the deal in a way that would leave Embraer with significant autonomy.
Joining forces would give Embraer the global reach of Boeing at a time when Chinese and Russian manufacturers are encroaching on its market. It would also cut its supply-chain costs.
Embraer was privatized in 1994, and foreign investors now hold 85 percent of the company’s shares, but the company remains one of Brazil’s most iconic and beloved brands. Putting it on the market during an election year will almost certainly force presidential candidates to stake out nationalistic positions.
While champions of a deal at both companies say they recognize that the window of opportunity is getting narrower by the day, they continue to pursue a partnership aggressively.
But some analysts are skeptical the deal can be pulled off in the face of such political headwinds.
