SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea said on Thursday that a high-ranking official, who many in the South believe orchestrated a deadly attack in 2010, would lead a delegation to Sunday’s Winter Olympics closing ceremony in the South, another sign the two Koreas are trying to work out a road map toward improving ties.
The North’s delegation will be led by Kim Yong-chol, a vice chairman of the ruling Workers’ Party’s Central Committee. The eight-member delegation will start a three-day trip on Sunday that will include attending the closing ceremony in Pyeongchang, South Korean officials said.
Mr. Kim’s trip follows another recent visit to the South by senior North Korean officials. Earlier this month, Kim Yo-jong, the sister of North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, attended the Games’ opening ceremony and met with President Moon Jae-in of South Korea. In that meeting she invited Mr. Moon to a summit meeting in the North on behalf of her brother.
Also scheduled to attend Sunday’s closing ceremony is President Trump’s daughter, Ivanka Trump, who will lead the American delegation. United States officials said Ms. Trump had no plans to meet anyone representing the North.
When visiting South Korea earlier this month to attend the Games’ opening ceremony, Vice President Mike Pence had planned to sit down with Kim Yo-jong in a meeting arranged by South Korea, but the North Koreans backed out at the last minute, according to American officials.
The North Koreans’ presence at the closing ceremony raises the possibility of a chance encounter between the North’s delegation and Ms. Trump. Mr. Pence and Ms. Kim sat just feet apart in a V.I.P. box at the opening ceremony but they did not acknowledge one another, their frosty attitudes symbolic of the hostile relations between their countries.
Kim Yong-chol, a former head of the North’s main intelligence agency, now leads a Workers’ Party department in charge of relations with South Korea. He was widely believed to have helped engineer the sinking of a South Korean naval ship in 2010, which killed 46 sailors.
Mr. Kim had been on sanctions lists in both South Korea and the United States for his alleged involvement in the North’s military provocations and nuclear weapons development. South Korea is talking with Washington to clear Mr. Kim’s trip to the Olympics, said Noh Kyu-duk, a spokesman for the South Korean foreign ministry.
Still, the South Korean government said on Thursday that it would allow Mr. Kim to lead the delegation across the border.
Although he is a longtime advocate for dialogue, President Moon has not yet decided whether he would meet with Kim Jong-un. He said he would meet the North Korean leader only if he was assured that their meeting could produce progress in helping end North Korea’s nuclear weapons programs.
Kim Yong-chol, who will lead Sunday’s delegation, is expected to meet with Mr. Moon to discuss the details of a potential summit meeting.
Until now, North Korea has refused to discuss its pursuit of nuclear weapons with the South, insisting that it was an issue between Pyongyang and the United States.
Mr. Moon is also eager to persuade the United State and North Korea to talk to each other to defuse tensions over the North’s nuclear weapons and missile programs. So far, neither the United States nor North Korea have expressed much interest in dialogue.
Kim Yong-chol is a familiar figure to South Korean negotiators. In 2014, Mr. Kim, who is also a military general, led a delegation to discuss ending hostilities after North and South Korean soldiers exchanged fire across the border.
In 2010, when two North Korean agents were caught in the South while on a mission to assassinate a high-ranking defector from the North, they said they were dispatched by Mr. Kim’s General Bureau of Reconnaissance, the North’s main spy agency, South Korean officials said. The spies told South Korean authorities that Mr. Kim personally assigned them to the assassination mission, throwing them a dinner party before they left for the South.