So when Prime Minister Najib Razak said this past week that he preferred quinoa because it was “better than rice,” he stirred up a tempest in a lunch bowl.
Mr. Najib is facing general elections under a cloud of a corruption accusations. He has denied wrongdoing in connection with a graft scandal centering on the 1Malaysia Development Berhad state fund.
Though he has been blamed for a higher cost of living since a goods and services tax began in 2015, Mr. Najib is widely expected to win a third term, thanks to a divided opposition, an upbeat economy, rural support and the redrawing of electoral boundaries that critics say favors the government.
But now the prime minister has been labeled out of touch with ordinary Malaysians because of his quinoa remarks, made while he was visiting a hospital on Thursday.
Mahathir Mohamad, a former prime minister who is leading an opposition coalition in elections expected by August, took to Twitter to jeer the prime minister and to express his support for Malaysia’s traditional grain.
“I only eat local rice,” Mr. Mahathir tweeted.
Another opposition leader, Lim Kit Siang, said he had never even heard of quinoa.
“I had to ask around whether anyone knew anything about quinoa,” he said, according to the news agency Malaysiakini.
Adults in Malaysia consume, on average, two and a half plates of rice a day, according to a paper on ScienceDirect, a database for scientific and medical research, that explored the challenges of the rice industry in the country.
Rice — the second-most important crop in the world after wheat — was subsidized by the government until 2015.
After social media users took exception to the quinoa remarks, Mr. Najib’s office said on Friday that “certain quarters” had manipulated his comments. Quinoa, his office said, was part of Mr. Najib’s healthful diet and had been recommended by a doctor.
In the question-and-answer session, the prime minister said he had to watch his diet because he did not exercise as frequently as he wanted, according to the Singapore news site The Straits Times.
He explained that quinoa — originally from South America — has less carbohydrates and sugar.
“It is better than rice,” he declared.
But the grain is more expensive than rice; prices soared between 2008 and 2013 as global demand for the grain increased.
It’s not the first time Mr. Najib has caused outrage with his culinary comments. He was jeered in 2014 after responding to complaints about the rising cost of living by pointing out that prices had fallen for some popular foods, like water spinach.