Three are parents. Three have relatives who struggle with a mental illness. Five live on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
They are among 12 jurors and six alternates ready to hear the case of a nanny accused of stabbing to death two young children in her care in an affluent part of the neighborhood six years ago.
The trial of the nanny, Yoselyn Ortega, who is mounting an insanity defense, was scheduled to begin on Thursday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan with opening statements from prosecutors and defense lawyers. But it is the expected testimony of Marina Krim — who arrived home with her third child to find her two other children bloodied and dead in a bathtub and their nanny slicing her own neck — that will undoubtedly sear the minds of everyone in the room. Jurors may also have to contend with gruesome crime scene photos.
“If you don’t get emotional during this trial then maybe you need to check your pulse,” Justice Gregory Carro said in response to one prospective juror’s question about her ability to be impartial given the emotional nature of the case. He said he did not expect jurors to be robots.
Lawyers and Judge Carro spent three days questioning potential jurors before making their final selection on Friday. The questioning laid bare how close to home the case is for many New Yorkers, especially those whose children are in the care of nannies, as well as those who have relatives who are mentally ill. At least one in five adult New Yorkers is likely to experience a mental health disorder in any given year, according to the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
“I don’t know if I could put that aside,” she said. “I’m very torn by that.” She later said she could judge the case fairly.
Another juror, an Upper West Sider originally from Kansas and the daughter of a doctor who served as an expert in criminal trials, is a physical therapist who works with patients with psychiatric issues. She also spent a summer caring for her sister’s children. When she learned that she had been selected as a juror she became upset and told Justice Carro that she felt stressed by the process. She later apologized and said she had “some anxiety over being chosen,” but could keep an open mind.
A fourth juror, also from the Upper West Side, said he had read news accounts about the murders but could be fair.
The 12 jurors and six alternates also include a bank supervisor from Washington Heights studying criminal justice, a Michigan native raising two young children in Hudson Heights, a Transit operator, a senior property manager from Harlem, a window treatment and upholstery designer originally from Mississippi, a lawyer living on the Upper West Side and an actor who is also a taxi driver. At least 13 are black, Hispanic or Asian. Ms. Ortega is a naturalized American citizen from the Dominican Republic.
Prosecutors are expected to argue that Ms. Ortega, 55, killed Lucia Krim, 6, and Leo Krim, 2, because she was angry with the Krims for asking her to work too hard. Defense lawyers will ask the jury to find Ms. Ortega not guilty by reason of insanity, meaning that she did not understand the consequences of her actions when she killed the children she cared for during two years. The start of the trial was delayed for years while Ms. Ortega’s lawyers built a case for the insanity defense. It is expected to last at least three months.
The woman was later excused.
Ms. Ortega is charged with two counts of murder in the first degree and two counts of murder in the second degree. If found guilty, she faces life in prison. If the jury determines she is not guilty by reason of insanity she faces time in a mental hospital.
The trial will put the Krims face-to-face with Ms. Ortega, the nanny they once regarded as family.
Essays written by the Krims last year on Option B — a website about grief and healing launched by Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook — provided a glimpse into how the parents confronted unimaginable loss.
Mrs. Krim said she found comfort in discovering reminders of her children all around her, like the street art on a construction site, a stencil of a boy holding a sign with colorful hearts. She connected the image to Leo.
“I felt that maybe the universe was trying to tell me something, that it was helping me to realize that there was a beautiful ‘new’ relationship waiting to be developed with Lulu and Leo,” she wrote.
The Krims have since had two more children and created a nonprofit in their slain children’s name. In his essay, Kevin Krim said he found solace in reading, particularly the works of a Buddhist monk, Thich Nhat Hanh.
“The night of their deaths had been a nightmare, the kind you want desperately to wake up from, but it keeps hitting you that you can’t and you never will,” Mr. Krim wrote.
