For months, Carter Page, the former Trump campaign adviser who was under government surveillance as part of the Russia investigation, has been shunned by Republicans and dismissed by the White House, which portrayed his campaign stint as inconsequential.
But now Mr. Page is the linchpin in a conservative effort to discredit the F.B.I. and the special counsel inquiry. He is at the center of a divisive memo written by Republican committee staff members that was released on Friday and accuses law enforcement officials of abuses in obtaining a warrant to surveil Mr. Page in 2016.
The memo falls short of the case that some Republicans promised — that the document would show bias against Mr. Trump by investigators in opening the Russia inquiry and possibly undercut the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.
But for the past year, Mr. Page himself has been pitching that narrative to journalists, politicians, investigators and almost anyone who will listen. Though Mr. Trump’s allies have repeatedly sought to dismiss him as a bit character in the 2016 campaign, Mr. Page’s role could now be political fodder in the president’s efforts to discredit Mr. Mueller’s inquiry.
Mr. Page’s rise, fall and subsequent reappearance at the center of the Russia investigation has been facilitated by Representative Devin Nunes, Republican of California and chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. Though the F.B.I. and a top Justice Department official discouraged the publication of the memo, the Republican-led committee voted this week to release it, and the president declassified it on Friday.
“I look forward to updating my pending legal action in opposition to D.O.J. this weekend in preparation for Monday’s next small step on the long, potholed road toward helping to restore law and order in our great country,” Mr. Page said in a statement on Friday, praising the memo’s release.
Mr. Page, a Navy veteran, served briefly as an adviser to Mr. Trump’s campaign until September 2016 after reports emerged of his connections in Russia, including a July 2016 visit to Moscow in which he was suspected to have met with sanctioned Kremlin officials. Mr. Page has denied that those meetings occurred.
Mr. Trump first announced Mr. Page as an adviser to his campaign in a March 2016 interview with The Washington Post. At the time, Mr. Page was pitching himself as an energy sector expert and head of his own firm, Global Energy Capital, with an extensive network in Russia, where he said he had high-level connections as part of his work in the energy field.
Mr. Page was an unknown in the political world. But he was on the radar of federal law enforcement officials, who questioned him about his contacts with a Russian intelligence operative years before he came into contact with the Trump campaign.
In 2013, Mr. Page struck up a professional friendship with the operative, Victor Podobny, who was working undercover in New York City. Mr. Page — who at the time did not have any role in American government — gave documents to Mr. Podobny about the energy sector.
Mr. Podobny was picked up by the authorities on a wiretap calling Mr. Page an “idiot” to his Russian intelligence colleagues. He was charged by the Justice Department and spirited back to Moscow before he could be arrested. Mr. Page was questioned by law enforcement officials about his contacts but never charged in the case.
Mr. Page has openly acknowledged he is the unnamed male referred to in federal court documents about Mr. Podobny.
A dossier compiled by Christopher Steele, a former British intelligence operative hired to investigate Mr. Trump’s links to Russia, claimed that Mr. Page maintained deep ties to the Kremlin, including with officials sanctioned by the United States.
Mr. Nunes’s memo claims that the dossier, whose research was funded in part by Democrats, was improperly used to justify surveilling Mr. Page after he had cut ties with Mr. Trump. But the memo left out that the research was initially funded by The Washington Free Beacon, a conservative website.
Mr. Page’s mannerisms amid the unfolding Russia investigations have emerged as a sort of Washington sideshow. Despite being under scrutiny by federal and congressional investigators as a possible agent of Russia, Mr. Page has waged a near-constant public affairs campaign, appearing on TV news shows and engaging with reporters, sometimes with obscure GIFs or movie clips.
For months, Mr. Page showed up regularly, uninvited and unannounced, at the secure offices of the Senate Intelligence Committee on Capitol Hill, where he dropped off documents he had compiled himself. One was his own dossier in which he claimed he was the victim of a hate crime by the Hillary Clinton campaign because he was a Catholic and a man.