There is a truism that a great novel cannot provide the basis for a great — or even a very good — movie. If so, the 1999 Raúl Ruiz film, “Time Regained,” adapted from the last volume of Proust’s “In Search of Lost Time,” is an exception that proves the rule.
As omnipresent as Proust’s narrator, the camera insinuates itself among the glamorous cast. Catherine Deneuve plays the former courtesan Odette de Crecy, with Emmanuelle Béart as her daughter Gilberte. Ms. Deneuve’s actual daughter, Chiara Mastroianni, has a cameo as the elusive Albertine. Marie-France Pisier trills her way through the film as the social climbing Madame Verdurin. Pascal Greggory and John Malkovich also have juicy roles, as Gilberte’s unfaithful husband and the cheerfully depraved Baron de Charlus.
Standing in for the book’s unnamed narrator is the little-known Italian actor Marcello Mazzarella, made up here with a dapper mustache and kohl-rimmed eyes to resemble Proust. He is referred to as “Marcel” and, in his outsize hat and overly large coat, cuts an almost Chaplinesque figure — an obvious outsider in this ostentatiously glittering ensemble.
Ruiz’s film has no particular plot. Or, rather, there are many. Proust’s “Time Regained” postscripts the action of his novel’s six preceding volumes. The narrator revisits past events and, in effect, explains how the entire work came into being. The movie opens with Marcel on his deathbed, imagining his novel. His recent return to Paris is much on his mind. World War I is raging as he re-encounters his old social circle, attends their soirees and observes their affairs. People are recalled at various ages; the writer is watched in memories by his childhood self.
“If there were a prize for sheer ambition at this year’s New York Film Festival, it would justly go to ‘Time Regained,’” Janet Maslin wrote in her mixed review for The New York Times. Proust is a writer whose work defeated such distinguished adapters as Joseph Losey and Luchino Visconti; Ruiz succeeds because his movie is something of a search for Proust’s own search.
The movie is also a testament to the Proustian notion that true paradises are those that are lost. “Time Regained” had its theatrical opening at the recently closed Lincoln Plaza Cinema; it may move some who see it again with an additional sense of time gone by.