Andrew Pollack, who lost his daughter in the Florida shooting, was a guest at a listening session at the White House.
It just — it doesn’t make sense. Fix it. It should have been one school shooting, and we should have fixed it. And I’m pissed. Because my daughter, I’m not going to see again. She’s not here. She’s not here. She’s in North Lauderdale, at whatever it is, King David Cemetery. That’s where I go to see my kid now.
WASHINGTON — An anguished father mourning his 18-year-old daughter vented his anger and pleaded for safer schools.

One by one at the White House on Wednesday afternoon, survivors of school shootings and family members of victims shared their stories and their calls to action. The extraordinary public exchange with the president gave voice to an intensely emotional debate over how to respond to the latest gun massacre in an American school.
A week after a gunman opened fire with an AR-15-style assault rifle at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., killing 17 people and prompting a rash of student-driven lobbying for new gun restrictions, Mr. Trump met for more than an hour with grieving people in search of solutions. News cameras captured the unusual listening session, revealing an emotional give-and-take between a president and private citizens that is typically shielded from public view.
Mr. Trump used the event to pitch his own ideas about how to prevent such debacles in the future, polling the group about whether they supported allowing teachers and other school employees to carry concealed weapons, an idea he said could have halted the carnage in Parkland.
At a listening session with grieving parents and school-shooting victims, including students from Stoneman Douglas High School in Florida, President Trump suggested teachers should be allowed to carry firearms.
It’s called concealed carry. And it’s — it only works where you have people very adept at using firearms, of which you have many. And it would be teachers and coaches — if the coach had a firearm in his locker when he ran at this guy — that coach was very brave. Saved a lot of lives, I suspect. But if he had a firearm, he wouldn’t have had to run. He would have shot and that would have been the end of it. And it would be — it’s called concealed carry, where a teacher would have a concealed gun on them. They’d go for special training, and they would be there and you would no longer have a gun-free zone. “Gun-free-zone” to a maniac — because they’re all cowards — a gun-free zone is let’s go in and let’s attack, because bullets aren’t coming back at us. The other thing I really believe that, if these cowards knew that that was — that the school was, you know, well-guarded from the standpoint of having pretty much professionals with great training, I think they wouldn’t go into the school to start off with. I think it could very well solve your problem.
Mr. Trump said he would press to strengthen background checks for people buying guns and press for enhanced mental health measures. “We’re going to go very strongly into age — age of purchase,” he added, appearing to refer to a proposal to set an age threshold for buying certain weapons, including the AR-15.
But in a session that began as a subdued conversation and sometimes descended into tears and shouting, policy proposals were overshadowed by raw expressions of fear, anger and sorrow.
Most of the students and parents invited from the Florida school appeared to support Mr. Trump, many of them prefacing their comments with praise for his leadership. But even fans of the president vented anger and desperation, laying the challenge of responding to the tragedy at his feet.
Mr. Trump, who has often struggled to express empathy in the face of tragedy, appeared moved by the personal stories, even as he asked repeatedly whether anyone in the ornate room at the White House knew how such horrors could be prevented.
During the session, Mr. Trump held a card that appeared to remind him of the basics of compassion when dealing with grieving survivors. “What would you most want me to know about your experience?” read one handwritten note on the card, captured in photographs of the event. “I hear you,” read another.
Mr. Pollack said he did not favor adopting new gun restrictions, but pleaded for Democrats and Republicans to come together to create new school safety measures.
Yet the subtext of the discussion was a contentious debate over gun restrictions and an all-too-familiar cycle of outrage, activism and promises of action, and then the inevitable inertia of Washington because of the opposition by the National Rifle Association and its allies.
Mark Barden, who lost his 7-year-old son Daniel at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., in 2012, said it was futile to believe Congress would act on new policies.
He and Nicole Hockley, who lost her 6-year-old son Dylan at Sandy Hook, pressed Mr. Trump to consider prevention programs that train schools and educators to identify students in crisis and intervene before they attempt to harm themselves or others.
One of Mr. Pollack’s sons, Hunter, said he would prefer that educators carried weapons, arguing that more firearms on campus would lead to safer schools.
Yet it was the emotional appeals that appeared to have more influence on Mr. Trump.
Mr. Barden pulled out a photograph of his son showing a gaptoothed grin.
As he ended the session, Mr. Trump promised their stories would not go unheard or unaddressed.
