Every Friday, pop critics for The New York Times weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing. This week, Bettye LaVette covers Bob Dylan, Bill Frisell covers himself and Jeff Goldblum derides mansplaining over Fever High’s danceable post-punk.
Just want the music? Listen to the Playlist on Spotify here (or find our profile: nytimes). Like what you hear? Let us know at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and sign up for our Louder newsletter, a once-a-week blast of our pop music coverage.
“Worth It” starts out like it might be restful and languid: a little guitar picking, some wordless sustained singing, and Haley Heynderickx — a songwriter from Portland, Ore. — eventually musing, “Finally I’m ready for the silence.” But calm doesn’t prevail in this eight-minute song. It turns out the singer is in a volatile relationship — “I need you sometimes/but not all the time” — and the band starts kicking and churning behind her as she zeros in on tensions, backs off, and dives back in, again and again. J.P.
Palm, an indie-rock band based in Philadelphia, delights in the dissonant chords and jagged, odd-meter patterns of math-rock, but not to the exclusion of melody. “Composite” is from its new album, “Island,” released Friday. The song places a quick, ascending guitar lick at loggerheads with a tune that hints at the Beach Boys, veering between ballad and brawl. Near the end, the music eases back as Kasra Kurt sings, “As if to say I’m sorry/Let me put the pieces back in place”; then the band unites to riff harder. J.P.
Oh, how virtuous Ne-Yo aspires to be in “Good Man.” As the track inches along with a sample of D’Angelo’s “Untitled (How Does It Feel),” he promises, with phrases that accelerate, pause and double back, to be attentive, sensual, honest, loyal. And then, around the two-minute mark, he starts to protest too much. “I would never make a fool outcha baby,” he insists, so she can just ignore what other women are saying about him. Or can she? J.P.
Red wine is a tragic temptation in this collaboration by Ana Tijoux, a French-Chilean singer (and rapper, but not on this song) and the Mexican-American singer Lila Downs. With orchestral strings behind the strum, stomp and clap of a traditional-sounding beat, the women aren’t singing about cheerful drunks. They see people desperately drowning their pain: “Shadows lost in their own darkness/Souls filling the void at a table in a bar.” J.P.
“Things Have Changed” is the title track for a full album of Bob Dylan songs by the flinty, authoritative, longtime soul singer Bettye LaVette; it’s due on March 30. Over a stalwart blues-rock backbeat, she reshuffles the verses and tinkers enough with the lyrics to make them her own; more important, she investigates every bleak, corrosive line — “All the truth in the world ain’t nothing but one big lie,” she snarls — to make sure it hits home. J.P.
The Drake comeback continues anon with this appealingly greasy collaboration with the rising Memphis rapper BlocBoy JB. Over a beat that deploys keyboards to spare but potent effect, Drake raps with a sleepy sort of taunt here, but it’s BlocBoy JB who makes the most of the situation, rapping about his rapid come-up in a wonderfully expressive voice with a blend of confidence and wonder: “So close to the game that I could steal the stat sheet.” J.C.
Here’s an inoculation against mansplaining or, indeed, any unnecessary, overconfident, ill-informed recommendations. Harking back to danceable post-punk like ESG, Fever High — the Brooklyn duo of Anna Nordeen and Reni Lane — sing insouciantly over a terse piano riff and a boom-bap beat that “I don’t need your good advice/I can do this by myself,” elaborating a bit in the verses and concluding with an anti-patriarchal “I wish that I could shut down your system.” The Jeff Goldblum spoken-word cameo near the end doesn’t add much — but then again, nobody asked. J.P.
On “Exiled,” her sophomore release, Thandi Ntuli plays pianist, producer, poet, vocalist, band director and collagist. She leads a flexible ensemble of fellow South African musicians, playing original tunes that flock and enfold around open-ended harmonic patterns, pushing deep into a haze. Her lyrics — on subjects of love, fellowship and postcolonial reckoning — spring from a similar insistence on inquiry. On “What’s Left?” she seems to be inching toward peace by resisting gratifying conclusions: “Darling, what’s left of us?” she sings. “We are just two hearts that could not love.” Then comes the rejoinder, a stirring lamentation from the trumpeter Marcus Wyatt, just as deflated, but refusing ennui. G.R.