Through Feb. 25. Gavin Brown’s Enterprise, 439 West 127th Street, Manhattan; gavinbrown.biz.
Photographer, activist, MacArthur genius, and still just 36, LaToya Ruby Frazier has established herself as an exceptional narrator of deindustrialization, environmental harm and the affections and misfortunes of black America — and she has done so in a medium, the black-and-white photo essay, that never feels timeworn in her hands. Her most substantial show yet in New York presents three series of photographs on three floors of this Harlem gallery. Together, they form a commanding statement from an artist who has combined documentary scrupulousness with manifest compassion.
Her long-running, intimate series “The Notion of Family” pictures her mother, grandmother and other relatives in Braddock, Pa., outside Pittsburgh. New photos on the gallery’s top floor recount an excursion to the Joshua Tree Outdoor Museum in California, where the African-American artist Noah Purifoy built large-scale assemblages of scrap metal and wood. The California photos are rare cases when Ms. Frazier’s use of black and white feels less than meticulous (the desert and cloudless sky often seem to fuse), yet the Joshua Tree pictures and “The Notion of Family” both delve into themes of dying industry, racial exclusion and the will to create.
“Flint Is Family,” the latest and by far the most powerful of the three series here, began as a commission for Elle magazine. Ms. Frazier spent five months with Shea Cobb, a school-bus driver, and her extended family in Flint, Mich., a city where black residents are a majority, and where drinkable water is only just being restored after years of civic protests and class-action lawsuits. These indelible pictures, as urgent as an alarm bell, intermix political activism (young black students, one carrying a sign reading “We Have Been Poisoned,” demonstrate as Barack Obama’s motorcade passes) with grim daily routines: We see Ms. Cobb’s daughter, Zion, with her mouth wide open as her mother pours bottled water to brush her teeth. Here as elsewhere, Ms. Frazier makes use of extra-long captions, detailing the state and local government’s inept handling of the crisis, but amid the images of protest and deprivation are ones of love: Ms. Cobb braids her cousin’s hair, or sits with her daughter at a restaurant, her expression caught between devotion and anxiety.
Through Feb. 18. Signal, 260 Johnson Avenue, Brooklyn; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , ssiiggnnaall.com.
Made from hand-hammered aluminum in shapes that seem plucked from a recently abandoned factory, the four sculptures bring to mind Robert Grosvenor, the easily overlooked beauty of 20th-century material culture, and a kind of 1920s industrial optimism. That is, they do before you notice the dancing little objects — a penny, a tooth, a blank computer key, all powered by magnets and hidden circuitry — with which Ms. Walsh has adorned them.
Three matchsticks standing on end buff trails in the aluminum as they periodically loop and squiggle, suggesting that an artwork has no more ultimate permanence than the thoughts that went into it. A burning candle spinning in place, meanwhile, emanates an even larger cloud of phenomenological subversion, not so much causing you to doubt the evidence of your senses as reminding you that you ought to.
Through March 18. Institute of Arab & Islamic Art, 3 Howard Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , instituteaia.org.
It’s easy to get caught up in the story of Huguette Caland. The daughter of the first president of independent Lebanon, she married the son of one of her father’s political enemies and then had an open affair and three children before becoming an artist in her 30s. In the 1960s Ms. Caland worked in an art studio near the sea in a suburb of Beirut, at the same time as the artists Etel Adnan and Simone Fattal shared a studio in that city, making paintings that hovered on the edges of abstraction, minimalism and erotica. Ms. Caland later moved to Paris, then to Los Angeles.
Two minimal, flesh-toned paintings from the mid-1970s have sinuous lines and treat the body like a landscape marked by dunes or deserts or craggy outcroppings. Ink-on-paper drawings use grids and doodling lines to create patterns that suggest veils, masks or other objects. One of the best parts of the show, however, is the two rows of Ms. Caland’s own caftans, hanging on plastic wires suspended from the ceiling, on opposite sides of the gallery. Roomy and richly colored, embroidered or scrawled upon with ink, they give a wonderful, physical sense of the artist’s presence, but also her laughing, gregarious spirit and curious vision as an artist.
Through Feb. 25. Simone Subal, 131 Bowery, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , simonesubal.com.
Anna K. E. works from the body. Trained as a ballerina, she treats herself not chiefly as a metaphor to be mined for other metaphors but as a mechanical problem worth considering in its own right.
 But what’s most striking to me is the picture this all proposes of consciousness: a rigid machine whose intricate design creates the illusion of motion.