• Spotify files to go public.
• Dick’s Sporting Goods will stop selling assault-style rifles.
• The end of an era for Ackman; the start for another one?
• What to make of Wall Street’s response to Mr. Powell?
• The Federal Reserve is walking a monetary tightrope.
• And is Jared Kushner’s weakness his family business?
Want this in your inbox every morning? Sign up here.
Spotify is certainly getting paid to be the music industry’s savior.
Perhaps more than any other streaming service, Spotify has revived the fortunes of recording artists. It is funneling billions of dollars from its subscribers to music companies, which, for the most part, faced a bleak future. But a charity Spotify is not. The company appears to be taking a bigger and bigger cut of the revenue it receives from listeners, according to numbers first made public on Wednesday.
The filing says Spotify had €3.67 billion of premium streaming revenue last year. The cost of that revenue last year was €2.87 billion. The difference between those numbers, the gross profit on streaming revenue, was equivalent to 22 percent of that revenue. That is well up from 16 percent in 2016 and 15 percent in 2015. And how did Spotify bolster its margins? A big factor: It signed more advantageous licensing agreements with music companies. “This decrease in cost of revenue as a percentage of premium revenue was driven largely by a reduction in content costs pursuant to new licensing agreements,” the filing said.
But can Spotify keep turning the screw? The music companies might be willing to compromise on price because the overall amount of dollars they receive is going up, making life easier for the first time in years. But, with Apple, Amazon and others adding subscribers, competition is intensifying. The music industry might be able to exploit that.
Accounting nerds delving into Spotify’s filing will have stumbled on an odd discrepancy.
Two metrics that attempt to capture how much cash a company is taking in had very different totals for 2017. Ebitda, or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, was negative to the tune of €324 million last year. But net cash flows from operations totaled €179 million in 2017. Both totals benefited from adding back large noncash financing costs. So what items bolstered operating cash flows but not Ebitda?
It looks like operating cash flows did better in part because Spotify waited to pay some of its bills. Such items make up what is often called working capital. Spotify wrung €439 million of cash out of working capital in 2017. The question for investors is whether the company can do that every year.
Spotify files to go public.
The streaming music service filed its prospectus for a direct listing on the New York Stock Exchange, an unusual route that bypasses the traditional initial public offering process.
Direct listings essentially move trading in a company’s stock from private markets to public ones, with new investors buying shares on the open market.
Wall Street and Silicon Valley will watch Spotify’s listing closely. If it goes well, it could spur other high profile start-ups to pursue a direct listing. Wall Street bankers are unlikely to cheer such a development. Direct listings generate lower fees than the typical I.P.O.
Spotify won’t embark on its roadshow, a series of meetings with investor ahead of the listing, for at least 15 days.
Operating loss: €378 million, compared with €235 million in 2015.
Revenue: €4.1 billion last year, up from €1.9 billion in 2015.
Big year for I.P.O.s so far.
Despite a sharp selloff in financial markets in early February, the market for public offerings started 2018 with a bang.
Through late February, 30 companies publicly listed their shares on markets in the United States, raising $11.4 billion from investors. That was the strongest annual start for the market since 2000, according to data from Thomson Reuters.
The pipeline of listings to come is also strong. On top of Spotify’s listing, which should come in the next few weeks, Dropbox filed paperwork last week to go public.
One of the U.S.’s biggest gun sellers, Dick’s Sporting Goods, said that it would stop selling assault-style rifles and high-capacity magazines, as well as limit sales of any gun to those 21 and older.
In doing so, the retailer is steering directly into the controversy that has embroiled companies that have taken on the American gun lobby.
What’s next: Mr. Stack wants what he calls “common sense” changes to gun laws, like the steps his company is taking and broader universal background checks.
And then there’s this: FedEx and UPS are feuding over ties to the N.R.A.
The end of an era for Ackman; the start for another one?
Over five years ago, Bill Ackman boldly announced that he was shorting Herbalife, declaring the company a pyramid scheme and vowing to see its stock price down to zero.
Today, Mr. Ackman finally gave up on that quest.
• Mr. Ackman’s frenemy, Dan Loeb, took the other side of that bet.
How did Herbalife investors respond Wednesday? They pushed shares in the company up 8.5 percent to $94.04, an all-time high.
But Mr. Ackman has found a new investment: United Technologies.
Why? The hedge fund mogul told CNBC that he liked the company — which happens to be considering spinning off parts of itself as a way to get more value for the conglomerate’s shareholders.
Shares in United Technologies were up 2.1 percent this afternoon, at $136.73.
Is the family business a liability for Jared Kushner?
For months, the former real estate investor’s inability to get a permanent top-secret security clearance has been a lightning rod for criticism. Now his interim credentials have been docked to secret and his West Wing portfolio clipped — and people are asking what happened.
One thing that has come up, per the WaPo, citing unidentified U.S. officials: Officials in China, Israel, Mexico and the United Arab Emirates have discussed how to manipulate him by taking advantage of his business dealings and complicated finances.
Speaking of the Kushner business: It’s is in talks to buy Vornado out of 666 Fifth Ave., the troubled Manhattan skyscraper that the two own, according to the WSJ. Critics will ask, where would the money come from?
Is it scaring off users? So far the answer seems to be no.
CNBC reports Snap’s download rates have remained strong, according to App Annie. And Snap’s shares are up 5 percent.
Snap’s redesign, which has been rolling out over the past few months, has faced growing criticism from users and weighed on the stock. Last week a tweet from Kylie Jenner, saying she did not open Snapchat, sent the stock tumbling 6 percent. Wall Street has picked up on the customer backlash and a couple of analysts have downgraded the stock.
The criticism has also overshadowed Snap’s positive fourth-quarter results earlier this month that pushed its shares up nearly 50 percent.
A lot of people are worried about E.T.F.s.
As a leader in the index investing and asset management industry, BlackRock has been the subject of third-party commentary citing concerns about the growth of index investing, as well as perceived competition issues associated with asset managers managing stakes in multiple companies within certain industries, known as “common ownership”. The commentators argue that index funds have the potential to distort investment flows, create stock price bubbles, or conversely, exacerbate a decline in market prices.
If the conclusions advanced by such commentators were to gain traction or result in the enactment of policy measures that place limits on asset managers, BlackRock’s business operations, reputation or financial condition may be adversely affected.
That is how John D. Herrmann, an analyst who covers the bond markets for MUFG Securities Americas, reacted to the testimony in Congress of Jerome Powell. In a note to clients yesterday, Mr. Herrmann cataloged upbeat remarks that Mr. Powell made, and observed that Mr. Powell seemed optimistic not just about the current economic environment, but also the outlook for the next three to four years.
What to make of Wall Street’s response to Mr. Powell?
One interpretation is that Mr. Powell wants investors and others to be more prepared for higher interest rates. Wall Street seems to have settled on a scenario in which the Fed raises interest rates steadily over the next two years. Any sign that rates may rise much more quickly than expected could cause a panicky pullback in the financial markets, which could ultimately harm the economy.
To help prevent that, Fed officials can say things aimed at prompting investors to give more consideration to certain outcomes.
Arguably, if investors were more concerned, the yield on the 10-year Treasury note would be higher than the 2.88 percent it traded at on Wednesday morning. Bank of America Merrill Lynch is forecasting the 10-year Treasury yield will be 3.25 percent at the end of this year.
Anyone surprised that the yield gets there far more quickly should not be after Mr. Powell’s testimony.
• Washington and Beijing are bracing for a new cold war, as President Xi Jinping prepares to stay in power indefinitely.
• Hope Hicks, the White House communications director, said that she hasn’t lied about issues relevant to investigations into Russia’s election interference. And the head of the N.S.A., Adm. Michael Rogers, said that the U.S. hasn’t done enough to deter Russia from future meddling.
Sky is both a telecom operator — selling TV, internet and phone services — and a media company with its own original news, sports and entertainment programming. And Sky has reach beyond the U.K. market. It is a Pan-European operation, with businesses in Britain, Ireland, Germany, Austria, Italy, Spain and Switzerland.
It’s also probably because everyone is worried about Netflix.
Critics’ corner: Investors are right to expect a bidding war, according to Chris Hughes of Gadfly.
• Toys “R” Us is in talks to sell its Asian business to Fung Group, its local partner, for at least $1 billion, unnamed sources said. And its British arm has filed for administration and will begin winding down.
Women in finance aren’t coming forward in huge numbers, in part because the movement has made the work environment more difficult to navigate.
“We have heard anecdotally that there is a chilling effect and that men are pulling back from sponsoring women,” says Stellings. She heard that one company made a rule that men and women could not meet behind closed doors in the office.
• Bill Gates is skeptical about virtual currencies and initial coin offerings. But the Marshall Islands’ government is planning an I.C.O.
• The business literally resides on Main Street (in Salt Lake City).
• Marcus has lent $2.5 billion and gained 350,000 customers since opening in 2016.
• It has quietly acquired a number of businesses, including fintech start-ups like Honest Dollar and G.E.’s former online savings division.
• Lloyd Blankfein reads through customer complaints weekly — but sends the knottiest problems to the firm’s consumer chief, Stephen Scherr.
