They were protesting in Milan over the weekend, the far-right and the anti-fascists alike; streets blocked off, intersections crowded by blue-helmeted riot policemen, tension in the air. Italy goes to the polls next month and there are fears of another xenophobic swing in a European state. There’s a tug-of-war over defining the future.
You’d think Italian fashion would be right in there. It’s one of the points of the job, after all: to hold a mirror up to the moment and reflect it in a material way — although when it does, there’s always a host of offended parties accusing fashion of trivializing the serious and demanding that it get back into its lane.
Perhaps that’s why, aside from Marni — where Francesco Risso at least tried to acknowledge the conflict by playing tone against tone, shine against utility, hard against soft, in easy dresses and stiff, belted coats, sometimes printed with a cacophony of faces, the edges left (like many emotions) frayed — the Milan shows closed in full backpedal mode.
The past is safe, after all, and safety has been something of a word of the week. How else to explain the sudden mind-meld around the need for ponchos (a.k.a. portable body tents)? At Jil Sander, Luke and Lucie Meier embraced duvet dressing, in all its swaddling shapes. You could hide inside those volumes. Safety can be tempting, especially when sexy is off the table. But it doesn’t get you anywhere.
Think of it this way: Outside the shows, there was passion and an urgent need to get a point across. Inside, there were … trench coats.
At least at Salvatore Ferragamo, where Paul Andrew was making his debut as women’s creative director (he had been its footwear designer). He had joined forces with the brand’s men’s wear designer, Guillaume Meilland, to offer a leather-focused rainbow of bourgeois basics for both genders, from the above-mentioned outerwear (best when lined in a silk-scarf print) to pleated trousers pegged at the ankle, neat blazers and little kilts. They were well-mannered, much better than what had come before, and hard to remember.
The details — especially the metal horse bits on the shoes and belts that flipped from gold to silver on demand — were telling, and indicated that Mr. Andrew has the invention to do more. Here’s hoping next time he takes a bigger chance.
Same for Paul Surridge of Roberto Cavalli, now in his second season and seemingly stuck between the brand’s heritage of animal print ’n’ id and its contemporary mores: big cat prints for men and women, a lot of embossed alligator leathers, and skinny disco flares in devoré sunset shades with matching blouses. Also butterfly cutouts on the draped jersey evening gowns. Imagine old Cavalli-meets-Gucci-in-the-Tom Ford years, and you’ll get the idea.
Giorgio Armani, meanwhile, brought back greige as well as his soft-tailored trouser suits. Also his fondness for a creative piece of headgear (Cromwellian berets in pastel fur), fringe and crystalline evening wear. Sound familiar?
Just like the first time around, some of it was great — those suits — and some of it was iffy (bubble skirts, which also showed up in couture in January). In his show notes, he called the collection “an ode to coexistence as opposed to exclusion,” which sounds potentially plugged-in, except it was expressed as all his former collections coexisting together.
Still, he’s on to something. Coexistence and community are the other words of the moment. There are also a lot of references to humanity and tribes in pre- and post-show discussions and on mood boards. But not the modern you’re-one-of-us-and-they’re-not kind of tribe, the backpacking in Peru kind. There’s no engagement with the word’s current implications.
See, for example, what Veronica Etro termed her “folk deco” show, an ethnic funfest of blanket prints and silk fringe and tassels and paisley, and Missoni’s hobos-on-the-haute-side mash-up of stripes, plaids, sparkles and slouch in the signature knit. Missoni even upcycled some old fabrics into a pair of patchwork trousers and a — yes — trench. Everything old is new(ish) again.
If anyone could be forgiven for plundering her own archive at this point, however, it’s Donatella Versace. Not just because she’s coming off her blockbuster Gianni Tribute collection of last season or because there’s so much there and so much seems relevant. Because, as the success of the FX TV series “The Assassination of Gianni Versace” demonstrated — despite the fact the brand disavowed the program — the story of Versace has transcended fashion to become part of the cultural lexicon.
In any case, Ms. Versace called her collection The Clans of Versace, stacked her runway with old friends (Natalia Vodianova, Anja Rubik, Gigi Hadid), and sent out a tartan extravaganza of primary colors and clashing prints, corsets, cling and collegiate punk. There were Versace-branded tees under bustiers atop swagged ball gown skirts, strapless black leather numbers, and a fringed beaded T-shirt dress for a diva strut.
Big belts cinched it all in, but what made it more than an energetic retread was the fact that she paired many looks with matching scarves, swathed around the face and neck; others had integral hoods. Either way, the effect was both movie star in a convertible on the Riviera and head scarf.
It was not an accident. And it was a risk — earlier in the week, Gucci had been called out on social media over its appropriation and fashionization of a head scarf and a turban on its runway. Some people will probably hate it.
But in its acknowledgment of change, and the many ways a garment can be read, at least it was not a retreat into predictability. Let’s see what happens next.