Seafood chowder.Credit...Gentl and Hyers for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Amy Wilson.
Good morning. I had this crazily delicious packet of fish a while back at the restaurant Houseman here in Manhattan — baked bluefish, wrapped in Swiss chard. I know. I didn’t think it would be crazily delicious, either. But it was and I was amazed and eventually I interrogated the restaurant’s chef, Ned Baldwin, about how he’d made it.
“Dulse butter” was his answer — he cut a few tablespoons of ground dried sea lettuce into the fat and then patted onto the fish before he wrapped it and put it into the oven to roast. The dulse acts as a kind of flavor enhancer, a natural version of monosodium glutamate. I started to cook with it all the time.
That, anyway, is the subject of my “Eat” column in The Times this week, which serves as introduction to my new recipe for seafood chowder (above). I think it might bring a lot of joy into your eating this weekend, whatever species you put into it above its base of root-cellar vegetables, clams and, of course, a lot of butter and dulse.
So make that tomorrow, why don’t you? Then eat it for dinner that night or the next. (As with most chowders, its flavor improves after an overnight rest in the fridge.) And on whichever night that you’re not slurping, make Melissa Clark’s recipe for tarragon chicken thighs with sherry vinegar and onions.
That recipe will shake out as a midweek slayer for you, I think, alongside potatoes, either mashed or roasted. But pausing on a weekend to make a recipe for the first time, working slowly and deliberately through the steps, will help when you have to knock it out fast on a weeknight evening because you’re getting home late after picking the car up from the shop that gave it an inspection because you forgot that last year’s expired at the end of last month and the precinct cops got wise to your parking on the left-hand side of the street where they could only see the 2017 sticker if they were on foot patrol and … maybe that’s just me?
Look, a weekend practice round of cooking a new recipe will pay dividends during the week. That’s just a fact.
And definitely, absolutely, mix up a few Boulevardiers. The recipe comes from the champion barkeep and writer Toby Cecchini. It is bulletproof, as we say in the trade.
As ever, we are here to help you if something goes sideways with our recipes, or with the technology we use to power them. Just sing out to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| We’ll get back to you.
Now, it’s a far cry from the pantry, but in Dwight Garner’s telling in The Times, doesn’t “The Friend,” Sigrid Nunez’s new novel, sound good?
Finally, you probably missed the Olympics opening ceremony in Pyeongchang, South Korea, this morning. It kicked off at 6 a.m., Eastern. Catch up with the broadcast on NBC tonight at 8 p.m., and then get ready for men’s slopestyle qualifiers tomorrow, and the finals of women’s moguls on Sunday, among much else. Our sports desk has complete coverage of the 2018 Winter Games, of course. See you on Sunday!