U.S.|California Today: Would a Qualcomm Takeover Be Bad for San Diego?
California Today: Would a Qualcomm Takeover Be Bad for San Diego?
Today’s introduction comes from Conor Dougherty, an economics reporter based in California.
San Diegans are watching nervously as Qualcomm — the city’s most valuable company and one of the area’s biggest employers — battles a proposed takeover from a rival semiconductor firm. As my recent article outlined, it is easy to see why the city is so anxious.
Qualcomm is not just a big employer. The company and its co-founders have showered San Diego with hundreds of millions of dollars in charitable donations. Irwin Jacobs, Qualcomm’s co-founder and original chief executive, has his name on buildings across town.
Still, there is not much San Diego can do to influence Qualcomm’s future. While cities spend millions trying to lure new companies and attract big investments like Amazon’s newest headquarters, takeover battles are purely corporate affairs. San Diego’s civic boosters and economic development agencies have resigned themselves to spectating.
But how much do big companies actually matter to a city? Not as much as small companies.
Big companies certainly have their benefits. They are generous philanthropists and tend to have more stable employment, so they help cities weather downturns. But over the past 50 years economists have shown that urban growth is much more highly correlated with the prevalence of small companies, suggesting that entrepreneurship is more important than big employers for a city’s long-run prosperity, according to Edward Glaeser, an economics professor at Harvard who studies cities.
The good news for San Diego is that it has entrepreneurship in spades. The city is a center of start-up activity and venture capital investment, so while it does not have big recognizable companies — like Los Angeles does with its Hollywood studios or San Francisco with its tech giants — in the long run, Qualcomm or no Qualcomm, the city seems to be doing just fine.
Think you are bad at math? Well, it turns out that may actually be part of the problem.
Having a positive attitude has been thought to affect how much a child learns and achieves academically, and researchers at the Stanford University School of Medicine think they now know why.
In a recent study, they found that when elementary school students maintained a positive attitude about math while doing problems, an important memory center in their brains — the hippocampus — functioned better. Put another way, if you’re interested in math and believe you’re good at it, that attitude enhances your memory and makes your brain better at problem solving.
But don’t fire the tutor just yet. Dr. Chen cautioned that there are limits to what confidence can do.
