Style|Remind Me, Why Was It That We Ever Watched Infomercials?
In the ’90s, the commercial became the show as infomercials ruled the night. Were we all just looking for televised Prozac?
Print headline: “The Stepford Channel,” published here in October 1992.
The story: It was the ’90s and suddenly David Letterman and Jay Leno found themselves competing for eyeballs with the likes of Jay “the Juiceman” Kordich. The infomercial — that mind-numbing, long-form television commercial in which washed-up celebrities hawked juicers or fitness machines — had been around in some form for years. It reached its cultural zenith, however, in the George H.W. Bush years, that last era before the internet shattered our collective attention span.
The hard numbers: What infomercials lacked in Hollywood credibility, they made up for in profit. In 1991 alone, the industry generated more than $750 million in product sales, inspiring its own version of the Oscars (the Play awards) and minting its own superstars. Tony Robbins, the anvil-jawed motivational guru who repeatedly confessed his former loserdom to famous friends, the dutifully nodding ex-football star Fran Tarkenton among them, had surfed this wave of entertainment-free entertainment to $100 million in sales for his “Personal Power” series.
An early version of “The Walking Dead”? The infomercial landscape came to resemble a zombie apocalypse of the celebrity undead. Many past-their-prime(time) stars suddenly seemed to be beaming into our living rooms. There was Linda Gray, late of “Dallas,” alongside James Brolin hawking “The Secret of Creating Your Future.” Makeup mogul Victoria Jackson trying to sell $150 million worth of cosmetics through her “Beauty Breakthroughs” with Meredith Baxter and Ali MacGraw. Inevitably, Richard Simmons showed up with a mawkish pitch for his “Deal-A-Meal” diet plan. Even actual A-listers (Jane Fonda, Martin Sheen, arguably Cher) stooped to conquer.
Silver linings: Fortunately, the ascendance of the infomercial coincided with the apogee of Generation X, whose armchair pastime was making fun of terrible movies and television shows (to wit, “Mystery Science Theater 3000”). These saccharine testimonials proved a gold mine for jaded, Gen X-centric comedians. “The Ben Stiller Show” memorably torched “Tony Bobbins.” Mike Myers and Dana Carvey opened “Wayne’s World” with a mock infomercial for the Suck Kut hair vacuum. And without breathless infomercial gurus like Tom Vu, Chris Farley’s bellowing motivational speaker bit on “Saturday Night Live” would have been unimaginable.
How it ended: In the era of Netflix, Hulu and Apple TV, who will sit still for even a 30-second spot, let alone a 30-minute spot?