WASHINGTON — They stood not 10 feet apart in a V.I.P. box: the 58-year-old vice president of the United States and the 30-year-old sister of North Korea’s reclusive dictator, representatives of two countries locked in a stubborn, ever more perilous nuclear standoff.
But Mike Pence and Kim Yo-jong stared fixedly ahead during the chilly, blustery opening ceremony of the Winter Olympics on Friday in Pyeongchang, South Korea. There would be no dramatic handshake to upstage the athletes, flag carriers, drummers or torchbearers.
The politics behind this near miss were set a week earlier in Washington, a senior administration official said, when President Trump told Mr. Pence, in a meeting with Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, that he was open to a meeting between the vice president and the North Koreans — but only if Mr. Pence delivered a tough message, and only if the encounter was away from TV cameras.
Neither of those conditions applied on Friday. As an official traveling with Mr. Pence told reporters, it would have been tough to talk “geopolitics over speed skating.” In any event, neither Ms. Kim nor Kim Yong-nam, 90, the president of North Korea’s Supreme People’s Assembly, who accompanied her to the Games, made an approach toward Mr. Pence.
And yet the tableau was still historic — the visible manifestation of a great contest playing out between the United States and North Korea over how to shape South Korea’s perceptions of North-South relations in the uncertain period after the Olympics are over.
Mr. Pence, seated next to President Moon Jae-in of South Korea and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan, projected an image of solidarity with America’s allies against an aggressive North Korea. Ms. Kim, seated a row behind them, brought a message of unity from her brother Kim Jong-un, becoming the first member of the Kim dynasty to visit the South since the Korean War.
Mr. Moon, administration officials said, wanted Mr. Pence to shake hands with the North Koreans, viewing it as a way to further the South’s diplomatic engagement with the North. So did Mr. Tillerson, who has been fumbling for his own channel to the North. But Mr. Trump, the officials said, was suspicious of a publicity stunt that would play to North Korea’s advantage.
Indeed, Mr. Pence spent much of his trip to Asia shoring up the United States’ ties with South Korea and Japan, and flinging sharp words at North Korea. In Tokyo, he warned that his country would soon impose harsh new sanctions on the North. The timing of those sanctions was unclear, though one official suggested that they might take a while.
“The time has come for North Korea to permanently abandon its nuclear and ballistic missile ambitions, to recognize there is no future as a member of the family of nations for a nuclear-empowered North Korea,” Mr. Pence said to reporters after visiting a memorial to the Cheonan, a South Korean Navy warship sunk by North Korea in 2010, killing 46 sailors.
At the memorial, Mr. Pence also met with four North Korean defectors, along with Fred Warmbier, the father of Otto F. Warmbier, the college student from Cincinnati who fell into an irreversible coma after being detained in Pyongyang, and died soon after being returned to his parents.
At the opening ceremony, White House officials said, Mr. Pence was keenly aware of the optics. They said that if he were ducking a meeting with the North Koreans, he could easily have moved to the box where the American delegation, including Mr. Warmbier, was seated. But that would have set up another resonant image: Mr. Moon in his box with Ms. Kim.
While Mr. Pence chatted with his Japanese and South Korean counterparts, officials noted that the North Koreans sat by themselves, though Mr. Moon made a point of shaking hands with Ms. Kim.
Handshakes — or the lack thereof — have long played an outsize role in diplomacy. In 1954, a year after the end of the Korean War, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles refused to shake the hand of the Chinese premier, Zhou Enlai, at a conference in Geneva. For decades, Mr. Zhou nursed bitterness at the slight — a breach that was only fully healed when President Richard M. Nixon clasped his hand in Beijing in 1972.
Mr. Obama made an art of shaking hands with American rivals: Hugo Chavez of Venezuela and Col. Muammar al-Qaddafi of Libya in 2009; Raúl Castro of Cuba in 2013, at the funeral of Nelson Mandela in South Africa. In 2013, however, Mr. Obama failed to shake hands with President Hassan Rouhani of Iran at the United Nations General Assembly, in a near miss that carried echoes of Mr. Pence’s nonencounter on Friday.
There had been feverish speculation about a meeting, fueled in part by the White House, which made it clear that Mr. Obama would be open to one, if he happened to bump into Mr. Rouhani. In the end, the Iranians balked, worried about the political fallout back home though a few days later, before leaving New York, Mr. Rouhani did telephone Mr. Obama.
Like Mr. Obama, Mr. Pence has one more chance for a history-making encounter, on Saturday. But his aides told reporters that they knew of no plans for a meeting.