304 pp. Harper/HarperCollins. $27.99.
At the beginning of the occupation the résistants distributed leaflets, and were easy prey for the Gestapo, the German secret police. But by 1944, as the invasion of Normandy approached, the Resistance was large and effective: telephone and telegraph lines cut, trains derailed, power stations blown up, German officers assassinated.
One of those résistants, in 1944, was 20-year-old Robert de La Rochefoucauld, the subject of Paul Kix’s intense, highly detailed and well-written book, “The Saboteur.” Working from La Rochefoucauld’s 2002 memoir, and the video of an oral history produced by the La Rochefoucauld family, Kix has produced a narrative that is both chilling and powerful.
This La Rochefoucauld did, winning a Croix de Guerre, made a Chevalier de la Légion d’Honneur and awarded other medals. After parachuting into France, he joined a Resistance network and trained résistants in the use of explosives to blow up power plants and railroads, then sabotaged the factory the Germans used to repair them. While guiding two British pilots toward freedom, La Rochefoucauld was arrested by Spanish police agents and sent to a prison camp. In time, he was flown back to London, where he was trained in sabotage and silent killing, and was given arduous physical training. Eventually, he was parachuted back into France and, in 1943, arrested, and sent to Auxerre prison.
These many narratives, about holding dear to one’s honor in the face of persecution by a powerful enemy, will never go out of style. The reason they remain popular and widely read today is this implicit question: What would you have done? Hard to answer, but it’s a question that, given the political circumstances of the world we live in, sadly needs to be asked. Reading “The Saboteur,” one understands how a certain person at a certain time answered it. La Rochefoucauld faced torture and death, yet he carried on. There is inspiration in his example, and that makes “The Saboteur” well worth reading.