Jeanine Pirro, the Fox News personality and longtime friend and champion of President Trump, has discussed with him the possibility of a book project to counter the damning portrayal of his presidency in Michael Wolff’s book “Fire and Fury,” according to three people with knowledge of their conversations.
The project has been described among West Wing advisers as “No Fire, No Fury,” according to two administration officials. Ms. Pirro met with Mr. Trump in the White House on Wednesday, hoping to secure his participation.
Over lunch, Mr. Trump agreed to be interviewed by Ms. Pirro for the book, according to one of the people briefed on their discussion.
Ms. Pirro, 66, who has been friendly with Mr. Trump since his tabloid days in the 1980s, is likely to write an account that is highly favorable to him. She has recently emerged as one of his most vociferous defenders — and a frequent visitor to the West Wing.
It was not clear whether Ms. Pirro was planning to use the book she already has in the works, tentatively titled “Liars, Leakers and Liberals,” as a vehicle. That book is due out June 12 from Center Street, an imprint of the publishing giant Hachette.
White House aides declined to comment.
Ms. Pirro, a former Westchester County district attorney, has not been shy about her newfound proximity to power. On Wednesday, she tweeted a photograph of herself standing by the White House gates.
“Guess where I am?” she wrote.
Ms. Pirro’s book will have to compete in a crowded Trump publishing marketplace.
Sean Spicer, the former White House press secretary, is releasing an account of his rocky tenure, “The Briefing,” in July. “Under Fire: Reporting From the Front Lines of the Trump White House,” by the Washington correspondent April D. Ryan, is due in September. Mr. Comey’s memoir, “A Higher Loyalty: Truth, Lies and Leadership,” will be released in April.
Center Street, Ms. Pirro’s imprint, is a popular platform for conservatives and allies of Mr. Trump. It published “Let Trump Be Trump,” by the Trump loyalists Corey Lewandowski and David Bossie, last year.
