After his hit series “Six Feet Under” ended in 2005, Alan Ball indulged his inner fanboy, creating the vampire melodrama “True Blood” and working on the gothic small-town-crime story “Banshee.” The move suited him — his aptitudes for dark comedy and unsettling atmosphere were a natural fit for genre entertainment.
But with “Here and Now,” his new family drama for HBO (beginning Sunday), he’s back to making Big Statements, his mode in his Oscar-winning screenplay for “American Beauty” in 1999. “We’re living in a new reality” is the tagline on the show’s billboards, and Mr. Ball wants to say something definitive about it.
Unfortunately — and this was also true of “American Beauty,” despite its multiple Academy Awards — he doesn’t have anything new or particularly interesting to say. Straight white people are self-loathing and lame. Dads are depressed but redeemable, moms are pretty much a lost cause. We’d all be better off if we put away our cellphones and got outside.
The children constitute a rainbow chorus calling out the pretensions and blind spots of their parents, a philosophy professor (Greg) and professional conflict resolver (Audrey) whose smug ’60s liberalism is indicated by the scent of patchouli and the sound of Joni Mitchell. Mr. Ball is particularly hard on Audrey, missing no chance to paint her as controlling and narcissistic.
She’s not as off-putting as Carolyn, the wife and mother played by Annette Bening in “American Beauty.” But like Ms. Bening, Ms. Hunter is stymied by her character’s harshness, which seems phony — it has no discernible roots. In one giggle-inducing scene, when Audrey gives instructions to the catering staff of a party in Spanish, Ms. Hunter rolls her R’s triumphantly, as if Audrey expects the servers to break out in applause.
While Audrey dominates, Greg sags. The clichés of middle-age disaffection and disillusionment compound one another — of course Greg has a regular date with a young Asian-American prostitute (Jessica Lu), and of course he looks agonized and exhausted while he has sex with her.
Eventually we learn that Greg’s funk is a response to current events — while Donald Trump isn’t mentioned by name, he is referred to fairly directly, and Greg, bemoaning the chaotic state of the world, cries, “We lost, we lost.” Having assembled a family as a progressive experiment in diversity, he now fears there was no point.
Mr. Ball touches on important themes here, but he’s not offering much more than one-sided lecturing. Issues like racism and sexual exploitation are reduced to the dramatic equivalent of soundbites, and there’s never any doubt which side of a conflict we’re expected to be on. One character whose race, gender and behavior mark him as deplorable in the show’s terms is elaborately shamed for no real narrative purpose, other than the satisfaction of seeing him shamed.
Running parallel to the family Sturm und Drang is a mystery, possibly supernatural in nature, involving hallucinations on Ramon’s part that seem to connect him to his Iranian-American psychiatrist (Peter Macdissi). Reminiscent of the brain condition that gave Peter Krause’s character visions in “Six Feet Under,” this story strand provides some reason to watch, along with Mr. Robbins’s affable performance and the overall polish always supplied by Mr. Ball, who wrote the first two episodes and directed the first.
It remains to be seen, though, whether there’s anything new about Mr. Ball’s new reality.