Moroccan, Navajo or Tibetan? Flat weave or shag? These are a few of our favorite rug options at various prices.
The actress Julianne Moore, the designer Jenna Lyons and the artists Brice and Helen Marden are among the stylish New Yorkers who have helped make these shaggy, generally diamond-patterned carpets from North Africa one of the design world’s biggest trends.
Secret Berbère has its central location in North Central Morocco, with outposts in Madrid and Paris. The company ships some of the world’s best Berber carpets worldwide for less than $4,000.
Shoppers are sometimes frustrated by these carpets’ sizes; because they are woven by nomadic tribespeople who sleep in long narrow tents, they seldom run wider than seven feet. That’s why Ms. Lyons now has two side by side and Ms. Moore has two woven together for her West Village townhouse.
Doris Leslie Blau, the Upper East Side emporium frequented by many top decorators, produces “contemporary Moroccans” in wider sizes (and at much higher prices).
A few months later, a number of these carpets were wholesaled through an auction house that specializes in modern design.
One that DLB offers for $14,500 was sold to me for $3,750.
I appreciated getting such a good deal, but I’ve never been in love with it. A fake is always a fake.
For two decades, Fort Street Studio and Joseph Carini Carpets (formerly Carini Lang) have sold carpets to practically every celebrity in the $100 million club.
Both firms produce hand-knotted rugs with handsome geometric prints, both work largely in silk and wool silk blends, and both offer living-room rugs for upward of $20,000, customizing their signature designs to a customer’s preferences.
Madonna and Brad Pitt, each of whom have multiple homes, own carpets from both.
Dolma, a Tibetan-rug showroom on Lafayette Street in New York, has a similar aesthetic to Fort Street Studio and Carini, but is far less expensive.
Its offerings don’t have the same tapestry-like effect as the higher-end places, but the silver plush rugs (around $5,000) still look beautiful underneath sofas and chairs from every era. They are also slightly less likely to make your apartment look as if it’s been “done” by an interior designer.
Still looking for a rug like the ones made in 17th-century Iran? Want to flash your wealth like Paul Manafort or Adnan Khashoggi?
For decades, these intricately woven Middle Eastern carpets were standard operating procedure among masters of the Western universe.
Then things got more informal, and the market became flooded with high-quality fakes.
Today, Persian masterworks can still be found through Peter Pap Oriental Rugs, based out of Dublin, N.H., as well as Nazmiyal Antique Rugs, Beauvais Carpets (both in Manhattan) and Mansour (Los Angeles).
Prices generally start around $20,000, said Jason Nazmiyal, an owner of Nazmiyal Antique Rugs and go up, and up.
Flat-weave wool rugs from Sweden are available in most sizes and have developed a sizable following of buyers who shop for them at auction.
Prices there tend to be far lower than at retail. And thanks to sites like Live Auctioneers and Invaluable, which aggregate the listings of auction houses in a format similar to eBay, the process of acquiring great, collectible design has been democratized, making middleman sites like 1stdibs less necessary. The downside to buying at auction is that you can’t return.
A black and white banded kilim from Mazandaran (an Iranian province by the Caspian Sea) is a folkloric carpet whose slightly uneven lines will juxtapose nicely with sleek Hans Wegner chairs and B&B Italia sofas.
So will a Tuareg, a straw and leather mat that’s gone from the mosques of Mauritania (where worshipers use them as prayer mats) to Manhattan hot spots like the Ace Hotel.
Naomi Watts and Liev Schreiber had one in their dining room. Christian Louboutin has one at his vacation home near Aswan, Egypt.
These carpets give a room a masculine edge, even if walking barefoot on them is barely more fun than traipsing around cobblestone in five-inch heels.
Some of the best ones can be had for as little as $1,500.