The setting for an idyllic marriage proposal often conjures up images of rose petals, candles, romantic dinners and heartfelt monologues on love. Those same details fill many a daydream of the perfect Valentine’s Day, so it’s no surprise that Feb. 14 has become one of the most popular days of the year to propose. But the day also leaves proposers with the challenge and pressure of coming up with a unique way to present the ring.
Ms. Cantrell said that inventive couples focus on what makes their relationship unique and use that as inspiration for creating a memorable engagement. In her role, she guides proposers to think about important days in their relationship. This technique helps them determine the best day to ask rather than relying on the calendar. “If your first date was on the second Tuesday of the month, then propose on the second Tuesday of the month to give a little nod to the date that changed your life,” she said.
That approach works for location too. A romantic dinner reservation can be part of it, but proposers should consider how the establishment relates to their courtship. Picking an upscale restaurant because it offers a Valentine’s Day prix fixe special does not send the same message as returning to an influential getaway destination, stopping by a favorite local eatery or dining in a corner of your home.
Ashley Durham, a wedding photographer and co-owner of Randy and Ashley Studios in Peyton, Colo., said that some of her favorite proposals even happened in bed. As for putting the ring in the dessert on a plate that reads, “Marry Me?” Likely, you’ll want to skip it.
Less pricey concepts can also be rife with misconception. Ms. Durham pointed out the popularity of the hiking proposal in Colorado. In an attempt to snap a photograph of the moment with a sweeping landscape as the backdrop, the proposer will stop along on a trail at a vantage point, set up for a posed picture, and quickly pull out a ring. This feels natural if the couple treks on a regular basis but borders on contrived to less outdoorsy people.
