Show sites are smaller, we hear, but even if you didn’t make the guest list this season, there are plenty of ways to take part in the festivities surrounding New York Fashion Week.
On Thursday, Rebecca Taylor will collaborate with Tilt Brush by Google, a cool VR tool that allows users to “paint” in a 3-D space, on an immersive installation that will take over her entire meatpacking district store. Customers will be able to experience Ms. Taylor’s fall 2018 collection through augmented reality and order pieces like a velveteen leopard print jacket ($550) and high-waist pants ($395). At 34 Gansevoort Street.
On Friday, Makoto Azuma, a flower artist best known in the fashion world for the ice-encased floral structures he created for Dries Van Noten, will unveil an installation at Opening Ceremony filled with unusual specimens like five-needle pines ($1,800) and Japanese royal ferns ($720). At 35 Howard Street.
Also on Friday, the Danish label Ganni, beloved by street style influencers, will open a pop-up souvenir shop with its signature print dresses and hand-knit sweaters ($520), alongside tourist staples like posters and key rings with images of Copenhagen shot by Ana Kras ($4). At 230 Elizabeth Street.
Looking to get snapped by street style paparazzi? The Select, opening on the fifth floor of Bergdorf Goodman on Saturday, will feature Charlotte Groeneveld’s favorite Tibi dress ($475) alongside other fashion finds handpicked by the street style stars Margaret Zhang, Tamu McPherson, Ada Kokosar and Blair Eadie.
Narciso Rodriguez is celebrating his 20th anniversary by rereleasing nine archival looks including a color-blocked wool sheath ($2,295) and a pale pink silk charmeuse gown ($2,995) exclusively with Barneys New York.
Maison Margiela’s cloud-shape leather Glam Slam bag, available at Dover Street Market.
And Dover Street Market is releasing a series of new products, including a soft Maison Margiela cloud-shape leather Glam Slam bag ($1,690) ready for airplane nap time, whether or not you’re embarking on the fashion month grand tour.
Popup Florist, a favorite of fashion clients including Barneys and Net-a-Porter, is opening a permanent New York store just in time for Valentine’s Day. There you’ll find unexpected arrangements like the Pick of the Bunch, which has an assortment of seasonal blooms in a paper apple bag ($20). At 63 East Seventh Street.
Black satin Naughty Emoji Thongs, available at Alison Lou.
Not a fiend for chocolates? For a boxed set that’s a bit more irreverent, leave it to the jewelry designer Alison Chemla of Alison Lou and the lingerie designer Morgan Curtis of Morgan Lane, who have collaborated on black satin Naughty Emoji Thongs ($298 for seven). At Alison Lou, 20 East 69th Street.