This wrap-up is a new experiment to connect Australian readers with the best of The New York Times.
Bitcoin may save the internet? Celebrity social media feeds are bunk, and reality TV drag queens can unlock the mysteries of gender?
Clearly there’s a lot to discuss. And we (that’s our Australia bureau) are here to help, with a few fantastic recent stories about the intersection of pop culture and technology — handpicked for Australian readers.
When you’re done reading, come on over to our NYT Australia Facebook group for more discussion.
Some of us are human, some of us are bots. It sounds dystopian, but really: it’s just your social media feed.
This report shines a light on social media’s murky black market, where politicians, athletes and celebrities are buying millions of fake followers. Even Australia’s politicians have been scrutinized: Tony Abbott reportedly gained 70,000 followers in 12 hours ahead of the 2013 election.
Perhaps more alarmingly, these social drones might be borrowing your identity.
Are my followers human? Tools like Twitter Audit, although not perfect, can tell you how “real” your followers are – or if you’re just tweeting into the bot-o-sphere.
The Bitcoin bubble is a red herring, Steven Johnson says. An even bigger opportunity is here.Credit...Photo illustration by Delcan & Company. Balloons by Jenue & Laura Ortega.
If you think Bitcoin is just about money, you’re missing the point.
Bitcoin’s foundation, blockchain, could be our guiding light back to the internet’s utopian, democratic roots. It sounds lofty, but disrupters have changed the nature of the internet before.
And if you still don’t really get what cryptocurrency is, don’t worry: Mr. Johnson, one of Silicon Valley’s most respected tech writers, breaks it down with refreshing clarity.
Should I invest in Bitcoin? No.
Is ‘RuPaul’s Drag Race’ the Most Radical Show on TV?
And 24 years later, reality TV host and drag performer RuPaul Charles now carries the torch of unrestrained, anarchist fun over political correctness.
Where can I watch it already? Stream Season 3 of “RuPaul’s Drag Race: All Stars” on Stan.
Millions of women around the world have said #MeToo, but the impact of those words can depend on your level of celebrity, wealth, skin color, or just where you are in the world.
In China, the government is blocking phrases like “anti-sexual harassment” on social media, effectively muzzling the movement.
One professor suggests it’s partly because “people are not encouraged to speak up against superiors” in Chinese culture. As Australia continues to grapple with sexual assault on its campuses, could international students be less likely to report harassment?
How can I follow how #MeToo is developing around the world? We’re glad you asked. Sign up to The #MeToo Moment newsletter to get weekly missives on gender and sexual harassment news in your inbox each week.
Who would have thought painstakingly slow, hand-painted messages would be an incredibly effective way to cut through the digital cacophony?
Paul Lindahl didn’t. But he pursued the outmoded career path anyway.
Now, as brands are searching for new ways to convey “authenticity” and “meaning,” Mr. Lindahl is courting names like Gucci, Coca-Cola and Spotify from his paint-spattered Brooklyn studio.
How could it go wrong? By hand-painting your advertisement over a well-loved, 20-year-old community mural, like another company did in the Sydney neighborhood of Newtown last year. It didn’t go down well.
Strava's online exercise-tracking map unwittingly reveals remote military outposts — and even the identities of soldiers based there. The situation shows how data collection can lead to unintended consequences.
In a remote part of Afghanistan — a US military outpost. In the middle of Niger the outlines of an expanded base and airstrip. In Syria, exercise routines and possible patrolling routes on a base where American special forces trained. By design, these secretive locations are supposed to be difficult to spot. But a heat map posted online by Strava, a company that tracks people’s exercise routes, has inadvertently put these places on public display for all the world to see. Many of the military bases are already well known, like Bagram and Kandahar air fields in Afghanistan. And the material we’re revealing here doesn’t go beyond anything that isn’t already available on the open web. But Strava’s platform has drawn attention in a new way to the activity of military personnel in far flung outposts and has laid bare some loopholes in the security of military bases. How did this happen? Strava is an app and social network that connects with devices like Fitbit and is used to log workouts. It’s popular with U.S. soldiers and others stationed abroad and the Pentagon has distributed several thousand of them to its personnel. They use it to track their exercise routines and everyday activities like walks or patrols. But it also tracks users’ locations, and in November 2017 the company updated a map showing over 1 billion activities and 3 trillion GPS points. Twenty-year-old international security student Nathan Ruser was the first to point out how Strava’s map could compromise operational security. The map alone doesn’t show the complete picture and its satellite images are outdated, but it does tell you where to look. So by combining it with recent satellite imagery and other reporting, we get a clearer sense of what’s happening on the ground. Take this new U.S. Air Force Base in Sarrin, Syria. The map shows workouts are walking routes — activities that provide a clear blueprint of the base and by tracing the lines, we can follow soldiers to a newly set up helicopter pad. Here’s what else we found. A new compound at a French military site in Mali, Strava highlighted the camp in the first place and no other mapping platforms had marked the site. These U.S. forward operating bases in Afghanistan. The location of a U.S. drone base under construction in Agadez, Niger, and various military facilities in Djibouti, where the U.S. is fighting extremist groups in the Horn of Africa. And there are some mysterious sites that we can’t yet identify. An area in the middle of the Nigerian desert. Two remote locations surrounded by sand barriers in Yemen And here’s an unusual activity in the desert in Mauritania that led us to a suspected military site, including an extended airstrip nearby. Strava also allows users to share photos and workout routes. It’s basically Facebook for athletes. This allows everyone with an account to see who is working out where. For example, the “King of the Camp” run at a U.S. military base in Iraq, or the “Embassy River Wall Segment” in Baghdad’s green zone, or the perimeter base run where more than 15 individuals stationed at a U.S. military base challenge themselves. We found photos posted by users from inside military bases and the online profiles of several U.S. service members stationed at one base near Mosul in Iraq. A Pentagon spokeswoman said that this data release emphasized the need for personnel to have situational awareness. And it’s assessing if any additional training or guidance is required. There are some areas where people presumably are not allowed to bring their cellphones. User activity at C.I.A. and N.S.A. headquarters, for instance, can be seen around the perimeters, but not beyond certain points inside the structure. But out in the remote corners of the world where the U.S. military is operating, there’s plenty to see.
“Whoever thought that operational security could be wrecked by a Fitbit?” said Nathan Ruser, 20, in an interview from Thailand.
Mr. Ruser, who studies international security at Australian National University, recently posted to Twitter his discovery that a fitness app had revealed the locations of military sites in Syria and elsewhere.
The Pentagon is reviewing the situation.
