It was my milliner friend Gabrielle Djanogly — a font of good stories and folklore — who first told me of the connection between sewing scissors and midwifery, the same instrument cutting both embroidery thread and umbilical cord. It was revelatory: I’d grown up using the little stork scissors in my own mother’s sewing box, and it had never occurred to me that such a story might have lurked behind their design. Of course, once you make that connection, you see immediately that the spindly metal bird with its snipping bill is a sibling to the stork on the spoon handle that records details of a baby’s birth.
The stork scissors in my own mother’s sewing box were part of an orderly feminine realm populated by objects designed for delicate hands and sharp eyes — little silver thimbles, slim needles, fine thread — to be called upon for acts of maintenance and repair. They occupied quite a different technical vocabulary from the medieval-looking shears she later used in her sheep shed to trim rank wool. And yet technically, the only difference was one of scale: Dagging shears and tiny stork alike were both fitted to the mechanism of the human hand.
Despite all the above, I don’t feel I have a distinct personal history with scissors — I think my experiences are quite universal. After all, these are some of the most basic and ancient of human tools. I sensed that “The Secret Life of Scissors” and its curator would yield some wonderful stories, and I wasn’t wrong. The exhibition is actually based on the curator Teresa Collenette’s personal collection, and I think she would forgive me for suggesting she has something of an obsession. Toward the end of the installation period, we met for tea at a hipster cafe in Bermondsey. Ms. Collenette heaved a laden cotton bag — printed with the scissored crest of the Craftivist Collective — onto the wooden countertop and drew out a procession of highlights from her collection for me to examine.
In itself this illustrates the peculiar cultural status we afford scissors. To have sat in a public place and casually passed a collection of large knives to and fro would have been unthinkable. Join those knives together with a hinge, and suddenly the blades acquire other associations, despite a number of them looking quite lethal. In my 20 years’ experience as a writer on art and design, it is very unusual to be allowed to handle objects so freely just before they go on exhibition, but in this case they were perhaps more likely to cause me damage than vice versa.
