• A closer look at potential privatization targets under the White House’s infrastructure plan.
• What investors should be watching to discern where the markets are headed.
• Carl Icahn and Darwin Deason urge shareholders not to “let Fuji steal” Xerox.
• General Dynamics’s big deal shows that military spending is set to go up.
• Where Dina Powell is going next.
It’s a sea of green.
Stocks on Wall Street endured their worst week in two years last week.
Monday they capped their biggest two-day advance since 2016.
The S&P 500 rose 1.4 percent Monday and has added nearly 3 percent since Thursday’s close. Ten of the index’s 11 sectors were higher on the day.
The Dow Jones industrial average jumped nearly 400 points, or 1.7 percent. General Electric was the only member of the 30-stock index to finish lower on the day.
The Nasdaq Composite rose 1.8 percent and turned positive for the year.
• How many corrections have there been since 1980? 36, Ryan Detrick of LPL Financial writes. That comes to a little less than one a year.
• What made this correction unique? It was the first time the S.&.P. 500 crossed into a correction nine days after hitting an all-time high, Mr. Detrick wrote.
• The S.&P. 500 has moved at least 1 percent in eight sessions, matching last year’s number of 1 percent moves.
• One trader made nearly $200 million on a bet that volatility would surge, according to Pravit Chintawongvanich, the head of derivatives strategy at Macro Risk Advisors, via Bloomberg.
• Bloomberg also reports that E*Trade added 64,581 gross new brokerage accounts in January, the most in a month since September 2016.
Has the 30-year bond bull market reached a top?
Ray Dalio thinks so.
Yet Jeff Rosenberg, the chief fixed-income strategist at BlackRock, said that it is a “fool’s errand” to call the end of the bond bull market. Mr. Rosenberg told CNBC that while he expects higher bond yields to persist for a period, he is not ready to call the end of the bond bull market.
The vast majority of the Nation’s electricity needs are met through for-profit investor-owned utilities. Federal ownership of these assets can result in sub-optimal investment decisions and create risk for taxpayers.
Some context: Only one U.S. airport — Puerto Rico’s — has successfully been privatized. (Chicago’s bid to privatize Midway failed four years ago.) Thus far, St. Louis is the only mainland U.S. city that is exploring privatizing its airport, but the effort has drawn criticism.
The average level of return that infrastructure investment funds have sought was about 10.6 percent in 2016, down from 14 percent in 2004, according to a report by PricewaterhouseCoopers and the Global Infrastructure Investor Association. Infrastructure in general is regarded as a lower-return asset class with fairly consistent cash flows.
While the Blackstone Group is raising $40 billion for its own infrastructure fund (half of which is coming from Saudi Arabia), it’s hard to see private investors filling in the $1.3 trillion required to fulfill the Trump administration’s vision.
• PwC and the G.I.A.A. note that roughly $200 billion had been raised by infrastructure investors since 2006.
• Roughly $1.7 trillion was invested worldwide between January 2010 and September 2016.
The recent, complacency-shaking declines in stock prices will have forced investors to take more seriously the yardsticks used to assess whether stocks are worth buying. None of the metrics on their own reliably can predict the direction of stocks, but when markets are freaking out and much is a blur, well-chosen indicators can steady the nerves and clarify the mind.
It’s the 10-year Treasury note’s yield, which moves in the opposite direction to its price. A higher yield reflects greater inflation fears among investors — and a higher likelihood of that interest rates are going up.
• In the longer term, they can eventually slow economic growth.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury note has retreated to 2.83 percent Monday, while United States stocks are trading higher. The Dow Jones industrial average, the S.&P. 500 and the Nasdaq Composite are all up more than 0.5 percent.
The government inflation figures come out on Wednesday.
The recent volatility in the stock market has stirred up the valuation debate. Put more directly, did the declines take stock prices down to level where they no longer look expensive?
There are many ways to tackle that question. But for no particular reason, let’s look at the Rule of 20 today. This yardstick subtracts the inflation rate from the number 20 and compares that answer with the price-to-earnings ratio of the S.&P. 500. Stocks are theoretically overvalued if the price-to-earnings ratio is higher.
Right now, the S.&P. 500 price-to-earnings ratio is 21.1 times, 3.2 above the 17.9 that you get from subtracting the inflation rate from 20. That suggests stocks could have further to fall.
If you find the debate over valuation unsatisfactory ...
There are also technical indicators, which look at how traders react to a wide selection of market measurements. One of the most interesting right now is the 200-day moving average on the S.&P. 500.
But at one point Friday, it looked like that was where things were heading. Shortly before 1 p.m., the Standard & Poor’s 500 briefly broke below its 200-day moving average, or 2539, before recovering and closing the week above 2619, up 1.5% on the day.
The 200-day moving average—the continually updated average price of the past 200 days—is considered a strong measure of investor sentiment. If the S&P 500 had continued to fall below the average, it would have conveyed real bearishness. The S&P 500 hasn’t closed below that moving average in 408 trading sessions, going back to around the U.S. presidential election in November 2016, according to LPL Financial.
Icahn and Deason urge shareholders not to “let Fuji steal” Xerox.
Carl Icahn and Darwin Deason, two of Xerox’s biggest investors, sent a letter to shareholders criticizing the printer and copier maker’s deal with Fujifilm Holdings of Japan.
It really is a remarkable achievement by Fuji. Without putting up any cash, they will acquire majority control and ownership of a venerable American icon. In exchange, we – the existing Xerox shareholders – will receive (1) an additional, indirect 25% interest in a Fuji subsidiary that just last year disclosed a $360 million accounting scandal caused by a “culture of concealment” and Fuji’s failure to have adequate management systems and (2) a one-time special dividend financed with our own assets.
Xerox said on Jan. 31 that it would combine operations with Fujifilm Holdings in a $6.1 billion deal.
The complicated transaction will fold Xerox into an existing 55-year-old joint venture. Xerox shareholders will receive a special cash dividend of $9.80 a share and will own 49.9 percent of the combined business, which will be publicly traded. The move is expected to save at least $1.7 billion in costs, though Fujifilm will cut 10,000 jobs.
At the end of last year, Mr. Icahn launched a campaign to unseat the Xerox’s board, and late last month, he and Mr. Deason pressured the company to explore a deal — including revising or ending the Fujifilm joint venture.
Broadcom will walk if it doesn’t get control of Qualcomm’s board.
Broadcom’s chief executive, Hock Tan, appeared on CNBC to discuss his company’s $121 billion bid for Qualcomm. The appearance comes just days before the two companies are scheduled to meet to discuss the deal and less than a month before Qualcomm’s annual shareholder meeting on March 6. Broadcom proposed a slate of 11 directors to replace the entire board of Qualcomm in December.
Who wants to buy which Time Inc. titles from Meredith?
Meredith has closed its deal to buy Time Inc. Now the media industry is buzzing about which publications Meredith— a predominantly women-focused, non-newsy publisher — is likely to sell.
Is Facebook losing younger users?
The answer is yes, according to new figures from the market research firm eMarketer.
What’s happening: The company agreed to buy CSRA, a provider of information technology to the federal government, for $6.8 billion.
General Dynamics will pay $40.75 a share in cash, up 32 percent from CSRA’s Friday closing price.
CSRA’s management team has created an outstanding provider of innovative, next-generation IT solutions with industry-leading margins. We see substantial opportunities to provide cost-effective IT solutions and services to the Department of Defense, the intelligence community and federal civilian agencies.
The deal came as President Trump has pushed for higher defense spending since taking office. Last week’s budget deal added billions for military programs.
After leaving the White House as deputy national security adviser for strategy, Ms. Powell is going to academia. She will become a non-resident senior fellow for the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs at the Harvard Kennedy School.
Many had been wondering where Ms. Powell would go after her tenure in the Trump administration. Before joining the White House, she had been a fast-rising executive at Goldman Sachs, where she oversaw the firm’s impact investment business.
Before that, she had been an official in the George W. Bush administration.
Was Friday too volatile for you? Let’s see how today goes. S. & P. 500 futures were up this morning, suggesting a rise today. But some savvy market players warn that more pain may be in store.
The head of Goldman Sachs’s equities trading sent a pessimistic note to clients on Friday, according to Robin Wigglesworth of the FT. The message: We haven’t hit a market bottom yet, and the era of “buy the dip” is over.
From Andrew: Something to think about. How much of the economy’s recent success has been a function of the wealth effect in the stock market? If even some of it is, how would more volatility affect consumer spending — and cycle back through the markets?

For context: Unilever spent more than $9 billion on marketing last year, for products from Dove soap to Lipton iced tea.
Remember: Unilever was already outspoken about the need to clean up the digital ad industry. And shareholders like BlackRock have called upon public companies to do more social good, or risk a backlash.
Are the infrastructure and budget plans ‘science fiction’?
That’s what Axios reckons, since neither White House proposal is likely to go anywhere.
Don’t look for more specifics from the Trump administration, including on how its initiative will be funded. Republican lawmakers are wary of more spending: The government funding bill that Mr. Trump signed last week will push the budget deficit toward $1 trillion.
Politico points out that the proposal would shift many project decisions to state governments.
Meanwhile, the White House wants $23 billion for more immigration enforcement, including for Mr. Trump’s border wall.
• The fallout from the resignation of Rob Porter, the former White House staff secretary, continues. The White House doesn’t have its story straight, and is having to deny reports that the fate of John Kelly is in question.
The state’s attorney general, Eric Schneiderman, sued the movie studio and its founders, alleging violations of sexual discrimination and harassment laws. The net effect: The $500 million bid by Maria Contreras-Sweet, Ron Burkle’s Yucaipa Companies and Lantern Asset Management may be dead.
Eric Soufer, director of communications and senior counsel to Mr. Schneiderman, said the attorney general’s office considered asking a judge for a temporary restraining order that could block the sale but opted not to and filed the civil rights lawsuit instead. He added that the office reviewed the proposed terms of the sale and that they did not include a victims compensation fund.
The city’s fate is closely tied to Qualcomm, which has 13,000 local employees and generates almost 4 percent of the region’s economic output. So the prospect of a sale is jarring there, especially as Broadcom (nee Avago) is known for cutting cost at the companies it takes over.
“As a businessperson in San Diego, if you’re not following this you’re living in a cave,” said Jason Hughes, chief executive of Hughes Marino, a commercial real estate brokerage.
Other news on the potential deal: K.K.R. and C.V.C. have joined the $100 billion financing package for the bid. And Broadcom and Qualcomm plan to meet on Valentine’s Day.
Dara Khosrowshahi is clearing the decks for Uber’s I.P.O.
Friday’s surprise settlement between Uber and Alphabet removes yet another potential headache for the ride-hailing giant as it prepares to go public next year.
Uber ended a legal fight with a $245 million stock payout to Alphabet, less than it originally offered as a settlement. And its latest valuation is $72 billion. And Alphabet got pledges that its competitor would not wrongfully use its autonomous driving tech.
The other big question: Can Alphabet’s Waymo find a profitable business plan as self-driving rivals catch up technologically?
Why? Because a) they’re expected to use more energy in the country this year than homes are, and b) the global financial crisis has left citizens and lawmakers there critical of speculative financial ventures.
Meanwhile, the rural town of Wenatchee, Wash. has become a haven for Bitcoin miners, thanks to its hydroelectric dams. But utilities are still figuring out how to handle their power needs without wild price swings.
Where Bitcoin is trading today: About $8,800, according to CoinMarketCap, up 8.5 percent over the last 24 hours.
