
It is intended to be a gentle letdown — one that Andrew, of course, can’t or won’t accept. It is also a reminder that this series is about failures of recognition: not only failures to recognize gay lives, worth and dignity, but also failures of self-recognition.
Obviously, Cunanan hated the wealthy old men he serviced as a gigolo and hated the younger men he desired who didn’t want him and, feeling time slip away, started retaliating against life by murdering those he resented, which he found to be a drug more powerful than anything he’d ever experienced. Eventually, he murders Versace, the genius artist, who he’s more jealous of than anyone.
That succinct hypothesis is very much supported by this episode (brava, Toni!), in which Cunanan’s dismal career as a rent boy, his failure to attract men his own age and his jealous rage are examined in considerable detail. I’ve come to accept that origin-of-evil questions are outside the scope of “American Crime Story.” But that acceptance doesn’t make this unrelenting portrait of pathology any easier to absorb.
The episode begins in 1996 — a year before the murders — at the spacious San Diego villa of Norman Blachford, a sixtysomething businessman who, after losing a partner to AIDS, became Andrew’s sugar daddy. In exchange for free housing, a luxury car and a monthly housing allowance, Andrew gives Norman advice on acquiring art and antiquities, and occasional sex.
Norman also throws Andrew a birthday party, to which Andrew invites the object of his infatuation, David. To impress him, Andrew asks his friend Jeff to impersonate the naval officer he used to be and to present Andrew with a gift of Ferragamo shoes — as a sign, Andrew says, that he is loved. (Jeff agrees, grudgingly, to present the gift but not to dress up.) The stunt backfires: Jeff and David take an immediate interest in each other, but not so much in Andrew. And we know from a previous episode that they will end up getting together, which Andrew discovers before killing them both.
Andrew’s pathologies are apparent to anyone who bothers to look. Norman’s protective friend Gallo spots Andrew snorting drugs and confronts him. “You think Norman’s the lucky one, don’t you?” he says. “But you’re wrong: You’re the lucky one.” Andrew is only able to parade himself around like an equal because Norman, who has built an immensely successful company from scratch, is generous enough to want Andrew to feel that way.
That mismatch between Andrew’s laziness and ambition comes to the forefront when he presents Norman with an ultimatum: He demands a higher living allowance; first-class flights; a Mercedes-Benz XL600; and a place in Norman’s will, as his sole heir. Norman refuses. He has performed some “due diligence,” he says, and has learned that Andrew is not Andrew DeSilva, Ph.D., the estranged son of New York millionaires, but Andrew Cunanan, college dropout, who was recently working at a Thrifty drugstore for $6.16 an hour and living in a cramped condo with his mother, MaryAnn.
It is an extraordinary scene. Confronted with the truth, Andrew remains in denial. When it becomes clear Norman won’t relent, Andrew grabs a patio chair and smashes a glass tabletop with it — a mere hint at the serious violence to come.
David, the industrious son of a Wisconsin hardware-store owner, gives Andrew what amounts to a final chance, asking simply for the truth. Andrew still can’t stop his prevarications. He says his father was a stockbroker at Merrill Lynch who later returned to the Philippines “to run vast pineapple plantations”; that his mother oversaw a literary publishing house until she retired; and that his parents adored him so much that they lavished little Andrew with the master bedroom, a credit card and an occasional lobster when the school lunch wasn’t good enough.
Andrew seems unaware that high-achieving people from modest backgrounds tend not to be impressed by tales of pampered childhoods.
What could be more generous than spending everything on other people and being left with nothing? What could be more generous than finding soul mates for other people and then ending up alone? People have taken from me, and taken from me, and taken and taken from me. Now I’m spent. And they say this man has nothing left to give. And a man with nothing to give is a nothing man.
Consumed by self-pity, delusion and addiction, Andrew hits bottom. He returns to Norman’s mansion, desperate for money; Norman threatens to call the police. Finally Andrew goes home — to his mother’s dingy apartment.
Mary Ann seems, if such a thing is possible, even more deluded than her son. She believes he has been traveling with Versace to Tokyo, Sydney, Moscow and Milan. She gives him a bath.
Although we don’t know much of her story yet, she appears simple-minded and emotionally fragile, and her hold on Andrew nonexistent. Telling her that the next stop in his glamorous life is Minneapolis, Andrew drives off to begin his murderous spree. She will never see him again.