Of late, these rotating entry points and those who jump them have become stumbling blocks for Mayor Bill de Blasio, who despite his liberal credentials, has been vocally opposed to the Manhattan district attorney’s office's new policy of declining to prosecute most who are arrested over fare evasion.
Mr. de Blasio, a champion of improving the lot of poor New Yorkers, has adamantly defended the police practice of using evasion of the $2.75 fare as a means for officers to check the names and warrants of those they stop, most of whom are black or Hispanic.
He has been unpersuaded by critics on the left who believe the approach — pioneered in the 1990s by William J. Bratton, Mr. de Blasio’s first police commissioner — is a form of biased and overly aggressive policing akin to stop-and-frisk. And he does not think most are motivated by poverty.
Before the mayor spoke, police officials highlighted a rise in crime on subways in Manhattan, specifically a jump in robberies: There have been 19 so far this year, up from nine in the same period a year ago.
Some police leaders say that the dramatic decreases in crime have directly resulted from decades of attention to the turnstiles — one of the first widespread examples of the broken-windows philosophy adopted by Mr. Bratton.
The spat over how to deal with fare evaders cuts to the heart of criminal justice reform: In a city where crime has reached previously unfathomable lows, how much more can the justice system change?
The answer has divided Mr. de Blasio from typical allies like the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance, and the new City Council speaker, Corey Johnson, both self-identified progressive Democrats. It has also, improbably, aligned the mayor with Joseph J. Lhota, his 2013 Republican rival and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority chairman.
Mr. Lhota, who has been engaged in an epistolary battle with Mr. Vance over the policy, suggested on Wednesday that if the new policy led to a surge in fare evasion, he would consider a drastic solution.
On Monday, Mr. Lhota urged Mr. Vance in a letter to reconsider the policy, citing a recent arrest of a man from Virginia whom officers confronted over failing to pay his fare and then discovered that he was wanted for attempted murder in his home state.
“In the name of the millions who both depend upon and pay for M.T.A. services every day, I strongly urge you to reverse this unilateral policy,” Mr. Lhota wrote.
Hours later, Mr. Vance wrote back with a point-by-point description of his approach, which began last week and only applies to those arrested in the subways and not on the city’s buses. “Our policy does not alter, in practice or in effect, the N.Y.P.D.’s enforcement of fare evasion," he wrote. “In fact, this policy allows N.Y.P.D. officers to conduct more enforcement of subway crimes,” Mr. Vance added, because officers are encouraged to hand out summonses and return to the beat, rather than spending time in court.
“I would be just as strong in opposition to the mayor’s position on this,” Mr. Jones, who is also the head of the antipoverty nonprofit Community Service Society, said. He added that he disagreed “fundamentally” with Mr. de Blasio’s assertion that poverty did not play a role in fare evasion.
While Mr. Jones favored reduced fares for poor New Yorkers, and tickets rather than arrests for lawbreakers, others went further.
“The policy should be either reduced fare or free fare; that would eliminate a lot of the problem to begin with,” said Robert Gangi, a criminal justice reform advocate who unsuccessfully challenged Mr. de Blasio in the 2017 Democratic primary.
Officers are not interested in fare evasion in and of itself, Mr. Gangi and Mr. Jones both suggested: If they were, they would situate themselves to visibly discourage people from hopping the turnstiles — or more commonly, sneaking through an open emergency entrance door — rather than secreting themselves to observe the crime and then make an arrest.
None of the four other district attorneys offices have emulated Manhattan’s approach, though the Bronx and Brooklyn have been reviewing their policies.
By the end of the day, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo weighed in with a statement urging “all parties” to find “balance” — but declining to take a side.