CAIRO — At least four protesters were shot dead in Sudan on Thursday, according to members of the country’s main protest movement. The killings took place during another round of large-scale demonstrations, potentially escalating a tense, monthslong standoff between protesters and military leaders.
The shootings came just three days after paramilitary forces fired on demonstrators, killing five teenagers and an adult.
Thousands had taken to the streets in the capital, Khartoum, and in cities across Sudan on Thursday to demand justice for the killings earlier this week, in the south-central city of El-Obeid.
“The protests today were a message on El-Obeid — that we are one and that each life matters,” said Nadreen Rugheem, a physician who protested in Khartoum.
Months of protests had toppled Sudan’s longtime president, Omar al-Bashir, in April, leaving the country in the hands of a transitional military council. But negotiations to form a new civilian government, held against a backdrop of violence against protesters, have been troubled.
The violence on Thursday took place as negotiators from the protest movement and the military council began talks on a power-sharing deal that aims to steer the country to civilian rule within three years.
The killings will “surely have a negative effect on the talks and on the relationship between the two negotiating sides,” Khalid Omar, a spokesman for the Forces of Freedom and Change, a coalition representing pro-democracy groups, told The New York Times.
On Thursday, men in plain clothes shot at protesters from buildings surrounding a protest site in Omdurman, a city next to Khartoum, according to the main protest group, the Sudanese Professionals Association, which cited eyewitnesses.
The protesters, all in their 20s, were shot with live ammunition, three of them in the head and one in the chest, the group said. A video appearing to show a bleeding protester was widely shared online.
The Sudanese Professionals Association said the shootings came shortly after the police had fired tear gas and rubber bullets at protesters. At least two protesters were injured by rubber bullets, the group said.
Responding to the El-Obeid killings earlier this week, the military council said Thursday that members of the Rapid Support Forces paramilitary had fired on the predominantly student rally without being ordered.
The council said seven paramilitary members had been expelled and detained after the killings, though at the same time it accused the protest movement of coercing students to join its demonstrations. The paramilitary group is led by Lt. Gen. Mohamed Hamdan, the deputy chief of the military council.
The military council did not immediately comment on Thursday’s killings.
