Just 10 presidential candidates managed to qualify for the next debate, which will be three hours long.
After two rounds of back-to-back debate nights over the summer, the next Democratic presidential debate will be a one-night affair.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind.
The debate will be held in Houston on Sept. 12, from 8 to 11 p.m. Eastern time, and will be broadcast on ABC and Univision. The moderators will be George Stephanopoulos, David Muir, Linsey Davis and Jorge Ramos.
On Saturday, the D.N.C. said it would hold another debate in Ohio on Oct. 15. If 11 or more candidates end up qualifying — in other words, one more candidate than the current 10 who have qualified — a second debate will be held Oct. 16. The deadline to accumulate qualifying polls and donors to make that debate is 11:59 p.m. on Oct. 1.
For the September debate, the one-night format means the leading candidates will all share the stage for the first time. Because of the size of the previous debate fields, two of the highest-polling candidates, Mr. Biden and Ms. Warren, have yet to face each other directly. But on Sept. 12, they will be next to each other at center stage, ABC News said Thursday.
From left to right, the candidates will stand as follows, in an order determined by polling averages: Ms. Klobuchar, Mr. Booker, Mr. Buttigieg, Mr. Sanders, Mr. Biden, Ms. Warren, Ms. Harris, Mr. Yang, Mr. O’Rourke and Mr. Castro. Candidates with higher averages are closer to the center of the stage.
The candidates will have one minute and 15 seconds to answer questions, and 45 seconds for responses and rebuttals. There will be opening statements but no closing statements.
The one-night format means that, once again, 10 candidates will be jostling for speaking time — a situation that can lend itself more to sound bites than to in-depth, well, debate. For that reason, some observers had been hoping for two debate nights with five or six candidates apiece.
It was about twice as difficult to qualify for this debate as it was for the first two sets of debates, and exactly half as many candidates qualified.
Several candidates who didn’t make the cut this time around criticized the D.N.C.’s requirements, saying the committee was unfairly narrowing the field with five months still to go before the Iowa caucuses.
Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana, in an interview on MSNBC on Wednesday, said the debate would be “missing something” by not including him. Mr. Bullock, who often emphasizes that he is the only Democratic presidential candidate who has won a statewide race in a state that voted for President Trump, said there would be no “rural voice” onstage.
The D.N.C. is accepting polls from 16 organizations for the debate qualifications, and some highly regarded pollsters are not on the list. Several more candidates, including the billionaire investor Tom Steyer and Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii, might have qualified for the debate if more polls had been counted. But a larger list would not have helped Mr. Bennet or Mr. Bullock, because neither has met the donor requirement.
Some lesser-known candidates have criticized the donor requirement, too, arguing that it creates an incentive to focus on fund-raising rather than voter outreach. It seems, though, that 130,000 donors was actually an easier bar to clear than 2 percent support in four polls.
Four candidates — Ms. Gabbard, Mr. Steyer, the self-help author Marianne Williamson and Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington, who ended his campaign last week — met the donor threshold but not the polling threshold. Nobody, by contrast, met the polling threshold without meeting the donor threshold.
Mr. Steyer got three of the four polls he needed, but failed to reach 2 percent support in either of the polls released Wednesday morning. Ms. Gabbard hit that mark in two polls, and Ms. Williamson in one.
Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York, who ended her campaign on Wednesday, and former Gov. John Hickenlooper of Colorado, who also dropped out recently and is now running for Senate, were the only other candidates to reach 2 percent in a qualifying poll.
So don’t get too excited about the one-night format. The second night will probably be back in October.
Reid J. Epstein contributed reporting.