Saoirse Kennedy Hill.
BOSTON — A granddaughter of Robert F. Kennedy died on Thursday afternoon after suffering an apparent overdose at the Kennedy compound in Hyannis Port, Mass., according to two people close to the family.
The young woman, Saoirse Kennedy Hill, 22, was the daughter of Courtney Kennedy Hill. She was at the compound, where her grandmother, Ethel Kennedy, lives, when emergency responders were called on Thursday afternoon, the family friends said. She was taken to Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, where she was pronounced dead.
Marcus Breen, a professor of communication at Boston College, said Ms. Kennedy Hill was an engaging student in a class he taught on social media and social justice.
“In classes she was often the first student to offer an opinion on readings that demanded clear critique about the challenges of contemporary society,” he said in an email.
Professor Breen recalled that Ms. Kennedy Hill once sought him out after a class conversation on feminism and rape culture, asking him whether the issues were appropriate for the classroom given that some students may have been survivors of sexual assault.
Ms. Kennedy Hill spent part of her childhood in Ireland, and often said she was proud of her Irish heritage and her Gaelic given name, which means freedom. Her father, Paul Michael Hill, is one of the Guildford Four, who were falsely accused of involvement in Irish Republican Army bombings; he was imprisoned for 15 years before his conviction was overturned. He and Ms. Kennedy Hill’s mother married shortly after his release in 1993, and separated in 2006.
Ms. Kennedy Hill marched on Cape Cod with her mother in March 2018 as part of a nationwide protest against gun violence, according to The Barnstable Patriot.
The Kennedy compound on Cape Cod is the storied summer residence of one of America’s most enduring political dynasties. It consists of three white clapboard houses on six acres of waterfront property along Nantucket Sound and was originally the home of Joseph P. Kennedy, the patriarch of the Kennedy clan.
The compound was a base of operations for the presidential campaign of his son John F. Kennedy in 1960, and later served as a summer White House. Senator Edward M. Kennedy kept the home as his primary Massachusetts residence for several decades until his death in 2009.
In 2012, the Kennedy family donated the main house to the Edward M. Kennedy Institute for the United States Senate.
The death adds to a litany of tragedies that have befallen the Kennedys and taken on the grim aura of a family curse. President Kennedy and Senator Robert F. Kennedy were both slain by assassins. Their brother Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. was killed in World War II, and their sister Kathleen Cavendish died in a plane crash in 1948. The president’s son, John F. Kennedy Jr., was killed in 1999 when the airplane he was flying crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off Martha’s Vineyard; his wife and sister-in-law were on board and were also killed.
Last month marked the 50th anniversary of Chappaquiddick, another Kennedy family tragedy that took place when Edward Kennedy drove off a bridge on a small island next to Martha’s Vineyard. The accident killed Mary Jo Kopechne, the 28-year-old passenger in Mr. Kennedy’s car.