In the years before his death, Osama bin Laden spent his days behind the walls of his compound in Pakistan, fretting about his son living thousands of miles away.
He penned letter after letter, describing the curriculum that the son, Hamza bin Laden, then 23, should study, the qualities he should cultivate and the safety measures he should follow. In one, he advised his son, who was just 13 when he saw his father for the last time, not to leave his house.
In another, he discussed whether the young man could rejoin him in Pakistan, advising him to travel on a cloudy day when it would be harder for a drone to track him. He devised a complicated security protocol, calling for the son to switch cars inside a tunnel in order to fool overhead surveillance.
The care he showed was not just that of a father for a son. It appears to have also been an attempt by the world’s most hunted terrorist to secure his legacy.
Analysts believe that since at least 2010, Al Qaeda was secretly grooming Hamza bin Laden to take over the organization, a move that now appears to have been foiled. According to three American officials, the younger bin Laden was killed during the first two years of the Trump administration.
If confirmed, his death represents another blow to Al Qaeda, whose ranks were hollowed out by relentless American attacks and by the rise of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS. The older terrorist network has struggled to appeal to a younger generation of recruits, who were lured to ISIS by slick videos shot on drones and GoPros when Al Qaeda was still issuing hourlong lectures by aging leaders staring at camcorders.
The younger bin Laden was supposed to solve several of Al Qaeda’s most pressing management issues: No older than 30, he was almost four decades younger than Ayman al-Zawahri, the group’s current leader, who has been vilified by ISIS as an old-fashioned and out-of-touch manager.
Because he carries the most famous name in terrorism, the younger bin Laden is able to draw on the devotion that jihadists around the world feel for his father. For these reasons, Al Qaeda hoped that Hamza bin Laden would be a unifier, appealing not just to the group’s base but also to the recruits it lost to ISIS, many of whom are at a crossroads after the ISIS’s loss of territory in Iraq and Syria.
The terrorist leader appears to have had an heir in mind: his son. With that son reported dead, what’s next for Al Qaeda?
Today: In his final years, Osama bin Laden seemed to be grooming a handpicked successor to run the most feared terror network in the world: his own son. Rukmini Callimachi on what we learned this week about those plans.
It’s Wednesday, August 7.
Rukmini, what do we know about Hamza bin Laden?
Hamza bin Laden was the son of the woman who became Osama bin Laden’s favorite wife. She was a woman who was highly educated. She was a child psychologist who had graduate degrees and who, in many ways, became Osama bin Laden’s equal. But because they met when she was in her mid-30s, and because she was frail of health, she had difficulty giving birth. She had multiple miscarriages, and Hamza bin Laden is her only child. So this is the child of his favorite wife, and that positioned him to become Osama bin Laden’s favorite son. The one way to think of Hamza is that he grows up alongside Al Qaeda. Al Qaeda was founded in 1988. We believe that Hamza bin Laden was born a year later, in 1989, in Saudi Arabia. Soon after, he moves with his mother and father to the war theater in Afghanistan. They are eventually kicked out of Afghanistan and seek refuge in Sudan, and he spends the first seven years of his life in Sudan. He is in Sudan when his father begins plotting the major terrorist attacks that we know Al Qaeda for — the East Africa embassy bombings in Tanzania and Kenya, the attack on the U.S.S. Cole, a warship that was attacked in the Gulf of Yemen, and eventually 9/11.
So what happens to Hamza after 9/11?
So less than two months after 9/11, Osama bin Laden takes three of his sons, including Hamza, to the base of a mountain in the Hindu Kush and says goodbye to him. In the goodbye, they stand in an olive grove. They embrace each other. And Osama bin Laden gives each of his children a Muslim rosary. These rosaries have 99 beads, which represent the 99 names of God in classical Arabic. And bin Laden reminded his sons to remain steadfast in their faith, to pray, and to seek strength from God. The three boys, along with their mothers, leave across the mountains. They initially go to Pakistan. From there, they’re smuggled into Iran, where, for a time, they lived in a safe house run by a senior Al Qaeda member. At a certain point, the Iranian regime learned of their whereabouts and arrested them, and they spent the next couple of years in a series of military detention camps. But it is in these camps that somehow, Hamza bin Laden and the people around him are able to begin getting letters out. These are letters that are smuggled out of the camps and across the region to where bin Laden is in hiding, and it is in these letters that you begin to glimpse the rich relationship between father and son, and the hope that Osama bin Laden had placed in the future of his son Hamza.
So what do the letters actually say?
I didn’t expect that from the bin Ladens.
So bin Laden is micromanaging his son’s escape from hundreds of miles away. He’s extremely detail-oriented.
So what do you make of the dynamic between father and son from these letters, given everything you’ve explained about Hamza’s place?
Well, what’s clear is the importance that he has in Osama bin Laden’s life, and in Osama bin Laden’s plans for the future. He’s being protected. Osama bin Laden doesn’t want him to be on the front lines, doesn’t want him to be taking part in any actual fighting. At one point, he tells the aide that he doesn’t even want his son to be let outside of the house where he is staying in Iran.
Because he’s too precious. This is a person who was being groomed — apparently — to become a future leader. And so even though he’s very eager to be out on the battlefield, having him be injured or hurt or killed would put a wrench in those plans. And this tension continues until May 2, 2011.
Tonight, I can report to the American people and to the world that the United States has conducted an operation that killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of Al Qaeda, and a terrorist who’s responsible for the murder of thousands of innocent men, women and children.
Osama bin Laden is killed by American special forces in Abbottabad, Pakistan.
So in this moment, Hamza bin Laden loses his protector and his groomer, but I wonder if it’s also an opportunity.
It does create an opportunity for Hamza, yes. Yes.
Rukmini, what happens to Hamza after his father dies? What becomes of this plan to groom him into the next great leader of this movement?
So Osama bin Laden is killed in the spring of 2011, and we lose track of Hamza for a while at this point. But this moment in time coincides with the period when Al Qaeda begins to splinter.
What does that mean? Does that mean Al Qaeda disappears? Of course it does not. Al Qaeda has become a very different, a very splintered, a very fractured organization. You can find pieces of it in Yemen, pieces of it in Somalia, pieces of it still in Afghanistan and in Pakistan, pieces of it around the world.
2011 is the start of the rise of ISIS.
The group calling itself the Islamic State of Iraq describes all Christians as legitimate targets.
New threats and declarations from the militant group ISIS.
A dispute emerges between ISIS and Al Qaeda over ISIS’s presence in Syria, and they formally split in 2014, which coincides with when ISIS declares its territorial caliphate.
That’s an Islamic State from Syria to eastern Iraq. And it’s calling on Muslims to swear allegiance to it.
They essentially said, we are the Islamic State. We are the one and only leaders around here. And Al Qaeda effectively said, not so fast. We’re not bowing down to you. So there was really a political power struggle there, I think.
Very quickly, they go from having been part of the same organization to being enemies that were out to kill each other.
I remember this moment very well, because at that point in time, I was talking to members of Al Qaeda on social media — on Twitter, on Telegram, et cetera. And I started to see how members of Al Qaeda that had sworn fealty to Al Qaeda began to have doubts, and began defecting in order to join ISIS, which was seen as the new kid on the block and the more exciting, youthful group, and the one that was actually making things happen. They had declared a caliphate, whereas Osama bin Laden had always spoken of a caliphate as a dream for the distant future.
2015 is the next time that we hear from Hamza.
And he emerges in an audio recording, where he is introduced to the jihadist universe by Ayman al-Zawahri, who is the current leader of Al Qaeda.
And in that audio recording, Hamza goes on to call for lone wolf attacks in the west, very much extending his father’s message.
So how much do you think the reappearance of Hamza bin Laden in this moment, when Al Qaeda is losing young members to ISIS, may have been a deliberate attempt to kind of reframe Al Qaeda?
It sure looks like that. At this point in time, Al Qaeda is hemorrhaging members, and they’re having an especially hard time recruiting young jihadists. Anyone who is a millennial or a 20-something is, in general, choosing to join ISIS over choosing to join Al Qaeda, and now, suddenly, they bring out this person, who has the most famous name in terrorism. He’s handsome. He’s young. And although they don’t say this, it does begin to look that way. And if you look at ISIS propaganda, there’s kind of a subset of ISIS literature that attacks Al Qaeda, and that specifically attacks their leader, Ayman al-Zawahri. What’s interesting about that dynamic is that I am not aware of ISIS ever attacking Hamza bin Laden. Even though ISIS has removed itself from the Al Qaeda sphere and has had a divorce with its former terrorist parent, they continue to revere Osama bin Laden. Osama bin Laden remains a beloved figure among jihadists all over the world.
Tonight, the man groomed to be the heir apparent to Osama bin Laden, his son Hamza, is dead.
U.S. media outlets now reporting that officials have received intel confirming his death. The circumstances surrounding it are not yet clear.
NBC broke the news that Hamza bin Laden had most likely been killed in an airstrike in the first two years of the Trump administration.
Rukmini, what does it mean for these groups that Hamza bin Laden — if this reporting is correct — has been killed?
Right. So on the one hand, it’s a blow to Al Qaeda’s future. He’s the one figure that they had who met all of those qualifications. He was young. He was charismatic. He had a famous pedigree in terrorism. So on the one hand, stripping these groups of their leaders — we hope — is going to hobble them. It’s going to hurt their organization. It’s going to cause the organization to implode. But the other way that it can go is that the lack of a charismatic leader means that the glue goes away. And so already, with the death of Osama bin Laden, we saw soon after that Al Qaeda split into two — Al Qaeda and ISIS. Now, with the death of Hamza, this could be a fatal blow to Al Qaeda. I don’t actually think it is. What would be worse is if Al Qaeda then begins to splinter internally, and then you have just a many-headed snake.
Why would that be worse?
The splitting of Al Qaeda and ISIS created a landscape that made the world more dangerous than it was before, because ISIS, in order to differentiate themselves from Al Qaeda, became a much more brutal group. I hate to say this, because it sounds almost obscene to say it, but Al Qaeda, in a way, was a moderate group compared to what we saw ISIS become. ISIS introduced levels of torture and levels of atrocities that we have never seen before. And so there is always a danger that if Al Qaeda splinters again, that the new group that emerges from that could be more brutal, could be more deadly, could be more vicious than the one we already have in place. Taking people like Hamza bin Laden, who are actively calling for the death of Americans — taking those people off the battlefield — it’s hard to argue that that isn’t a sound policy. But unfortunately, we have a recent history to reckon with. And that is the history of the last five years with the rise of ISIS, where we saw a monster even worse than Al Qaeda be born. It could be that. Or it could be that the organization has just faced too many blows, and that in the lack of any clear leader, that they lose their way.
Thank you, Rukmini.
It’s my pleasure, Michael.
Today, I’m announcing the following initiatives, the following actions. Number 1, safety protection orders.
On Tuesday, the governor of Ohio, Mike DeWine, proposed a series of laws that he said would reduce the chances of another mass shooting like the one in Dayton over the weekend.
We have to empower people to get help for family or loved ones who may be a danger to themselves, or a danger to others, and have access to firearms — a deadly combination.
Governor DeWine called for a red flag law that would allow police to confiscate guns from anyone deemed dangerous by a court, and for a law requiring background checks for gun buyers. ^ARCHIVED RECORDING^ (CHANTING) Do something! Do something! Do something! Do something! The plan comes two days after DeWine, a Republican, was interrupted during a vigil for victims of Sunday’s shooting by constituents who demanded that he take action.
Some chanted, do something! And they were absolutely right. We must do something. And that is exactly what we are going to do.
The Times reports that congressional Republicans, also facing intense pressure, are coalescing around a federal version of a red flag law. If passed, it would be the most significant gun control legislation enacted in 20 years.
At the very beginning, when I wrote the first book, “The Bluest Eye,” I came at it as not a writer, but a reader. 
Every little homely black girl was a joke, or didn’t exist in literature, and I was eager to read about a story where racism really hurts and can destroy you, and it’s not a joke, as they made out that we were.
Toni Morrison, who transformed the American literary canon by telling the story of black identity in 11 best-selling novels, including “Song of Solomon,” “Beloved” and “Paradise,” and by becoming the first black woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature, has died. In a 2015 interview with The Times, Morrison described writing as a life-sustaining force.
I don’t think I could have happily stayed here with the calamity that has occurred so often in the world if I did not have a way of thinking about it — past, present, future — which is what writing is for me. It’s control. Nobody tells me what to do. I am in control. It is my world. It’s sometimes wild, the process by which I arrive at something. But nevertheless, it’s mine, it’s free, and it’s a way of thinking. It’s pure knowledge.
On Tuesday, a spokesman for her publisher confirmed that Morrison was working on a novel at the time of her death.
“If it’s true that he is dead, then Al Qaeda has lost its future because Hamza was the future of Al Qaeda,” said the former F.B.I. agent and counterterrorism expert Ali Soufan, who sounded a note of caution because it is unusual for Al Qaeda not to announce such a death.
But the circumstances of his death, like much of his life, remain murky. The United States government does not know precisely how he died.
An American airstrike in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region, in May or June 2017, targeted Mr. bin Laden. It killed his son but not him, according to current and former American officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss the circumstances of Mr. bin Laden’s death, which remain a closely held secret.
The officials said Mr. bin Laden may have been wounded in the strike.
A third American official said that Mr. bin Laden died in December 2017 after being wounded in an airstrike.
By February, when the State Department put a $1 million reward for information on his whereabouts, intelligence officials believed he was dead. Officials now have the high confidence that he is dead even if the exact circumstances of his death remain unknown.

Al Qaeda, usually forthcoming in announcing the death of a leader as a martyr, has issued no confirmation or denial. One of the American officials said Al Qaeda had kept the death secret out of concern that the news would hurt its fund-raising.
Mr. bin Laden was thought to have been living along the Afghan-Pakistani border but there were only vague reports about possible sightings.
Letters to and from his father — found by the Navy SEAL team that killed the elder bin Laden and were later declassified — indicate that he was living in Iran for several years, including in 2009 and 2010. Initially he lived in a Qaeda safehouse before being imprisoned in a military camp, Mr. Soufan said.
Mr. bin Laden has not been as elusive in his public statements. After his father was killed in Abbottabad, Pakistan, in 2011, he promised vengeance, calling for attacks on Western capitals and warning Americans that they would be “targeted in the United States and abroad,” according to the State Department.
In audio recordings released by Al Qaeda beginning in 2015, he called for the overthrow of the Saudi monarchy and urged Syrian jihadi groups to unite to liberate the Palestinians. In one, he advised prospective jihadis to “follow in the footsteps of martyrdom-seekers before,” according to analysis from the Long War Journal, a publication from the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a Washington-based policy institute.
Hamza bin Laden was only 13 when his father walked him and his brothers to the base of a mountain in Afghanistan and said goodbye for the last time. It was 2001 and planes piloted by Qaeda operatives had just slammed into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and another hijacked plane had been foiled on its way to Washington.
The terrorist leader knew that retaliation was not far behind and made arrangements to send his boys away. He handed each of them a set of Muslim prayer beads, reminding them to seek strength in their faith.
“You bid us farewell and we left, and it was as if we pulled out our livers and left them there,” Hamza bin Laden wrote in a letter addressed to “my beloved father” years later.
The identical gifts to his sons suggest that the senior bin Laden intended to be equal in his affection. But chroniclers of the family say that it was not long before it became clear that he had a special relationship with Hamza, the only son of Khairia Sabar, a highly educated Saudi woman who became Osama bin Laden’s favorite wife.
The two married when she was in her mid-30s, and they struggled to conceive. She endured repeated miscarriages before giving birth to Hamza in 1989, according to Mr. Soufan’s profile. Hamza was believed to have been born in Jidda, Saudi Arabia, one of 23 children his father would eventually have, according to Western intelligence agencies.
His mother became a partner in her husband’s project of global jihad, even helping him draft the speech he planned to deliver on the 10th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attack, according to Mr. Soufan.
That lineage became even more important after 2014, when ISIS declared its caliphate and appointed a caliph. Only men who are descended from the family of the Prophet Muhammad are eligible to be named caliph.
When Hamza was 2, his father moved from Afghanistan to Sudan. He was there until the age of 7, when the Sudanese government gave in to international pressure and expelled him. He and his followers returned to Afghanistan where they sought refuge with the Taliban and lived in a complex of concrete huts, lacking plumbing, electricity and even doors.
After the 2001 attacks, he was spirited over the mountains into Pakistan, before seeking refuge in Iran, where he initially lived in a Qaeda safe house, according to Mr. Soufan. He and his mother were eventually arrested by the Iranian authorities and incarcerated in a military camp.
As Hamza grew older, he sought no special treatment within the group as Osama bin Laden’s son.
Hamza bin Laden married a daughter of a senior Qaeda leader, Abdullah Ahmed Abdullah, a wedding that was recorded on video found in the Abbottabad compound.
Thomas Joscelyn, a senior fellow with the Foundation for Defense of Democracies who has been studying Al Qaeda for years, said that the younger bin Laden’s role in the organization was opaque.
Mr. Joscelyn cited evidence in the older bin Laden’s personal files that Hamza had received elite training but that Osama bin Laden preferred that his son not take on a military role.
Hamza’s own ambitions, based on his audio recordings and letters to his father, indicated a desire to take an active role in Al Qaeda.
“My beloved father, I was separated from you when I was a small child, not yet 13, but I am older now, and have attained manhood,” he wrote in the 2009 letter.
In 2017, the United States officially listed him as a global terrorist. In a letter published by Al Qaeda the same year, Hamza bin Laden said his 12-year-old son had been killed, according to the SITE Intelligence Group. The circumstances were unclear.
Three Iraqi intelligence officials said there was a failed attempt to kill Hamza bin Laden that year.
In February, the State Department announced a $1 million reward for information about his whereabouts, and Saudi Arabia revoked his citizenship. According to the American officials, he was already dead by then.