American stock markets fell by about 3 percent on Wednesday amid indications that the global economy could slow down before shares rebounded slightly on Thursday. Mr. Trump lashed out at those questioning his confrontation with China, including the conservative editorial page of The Wall Street Journal.
His speech was at times a greatest hits album of favorite lines, replaying the 2016 campaign against Hillary Clinton and bashing the news media, Democrats and America’s allies in Europe. Typically rambling, veering on and off script seemingly at random over an hour and a half, he repeated points he had already made earlier in the evening as if he did not remember already making them.
His talk was also marked by repeated inconsistencies. The same president who last year said trade wars were “easy to win” told his supporters that “I never said China was going to be easy.” The same president who compared America’s intelligence agencies to “Nazi Germany” when he took office complained that Democrats “use the term Nazi” to attack their opponents.
But while the Democrats rage and resist … [cheering] [crowd chanting “U.S.A.”] “ that guy’s got a serious weight problem. Go home. Start exercising. Get him out of here, please. Got a bigger problem than I do. Got a bigger problem than all of us. 
As he made his case for his economic stewardship, which polls show is perhaps his biggest political asset, he boasted, “Hey, you got low interest rates, the lowest ever.” He made no mention of his regular attacks on the Federal Reserve for keeping interest rates too high.
New Hampshire, which Mr. Trump narrowly lost in 2016, is a state where the economic argument may not resonate the same way it does in other places. Its unemployment rate had already fallen to 2.8 percent under President Barack Obama and has since ticked down to 2.5 percent.
Even as the president argued that he had helped New Hampshire, he all but endorsed Corey Lewandowski, his former campaign manager, if he ends up running against Senator Jeanne Shaheen, a Democrat, next year.
Mr. Lewandowski has not announced his candidacy and no decision is imminent, according to a person working with him. In June 2016, Mr. Trump fired Mr. Lewandowski at the urging of his children, but the president has retained a fondness for him and speaks with him often.
Before his ouster, Mr. Lewandowski helped Mr. Trump notch his first primary victory, in New Hampshire, which helped vault him to the Republican presidential nomination. Mr. Lewandowski would hope to run on the same outsider energy that Mr. Trump channeled that year.
At the same time, Mr. Lewandowski has significant vulnerabilities. On Thursday, hours before the Trump rally, the House Judiciary Committee subpoenaed him in relation to the report by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. His opponents would be almost certain to raise questions about his business activities since Mr. Trump took office.
Gov. Chris Sununu of New Hampshire, a Republican who is up for re-election next year, has told the White House he has concerns about the effect that Mr. Lewandowski’s candidacy could have on others on the ballot, according to two people briefed on the discussions.
The Republican primary race already has several declared candidates, including the retired Brig. Gen. Donald C. Bolduc and Bill O’Brien, the former state House speaker.
The rally in Manchester, a southeastern city of 110,000, drew people from several nearby states. At the front of the line to get into the rally, a cluster of people who had been there from the night before agreed that the president’s stance on immigration was a key reason they would be voting for him again in 2020.
But even among the die-hards at the front of the line, there was some detectable unease as the stock market reeled. Kevin Steele, 40, a self-described Democrat for Trump, said he hoped that Mr. Trump’s trade war would be over soon.
