Newly unearthed documents reveal how an environmental-minded socialite became an ardent nativist whose money helped sow the seeds of the Trump anti-immigration agenda.
From 2005 to 2017, the Colcom Foundation gave millions to anti-immigration and population-control groups, some with close ties to the Trump administration.
Former Attorney General Jeff Sessions and current senior policy adviser Stephen Miller are longtime FAIR allies.
Miller was the keynote speaker at the CIS annual awards ceremony in 2015.
ombudsman of U.S.
Kris Kobach, who led the president’s voter fraud commission, worked as a lawyer for IRLI.
Kellyanne Conway, the president's counselor, conducted polling for these groups.
Kris Kobach, who led the president's voter fraud commission, worked as a lawyer for IRLI.
Former FAIR director Julie Kirchner now the ombudsman of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.
Mrs. May’s story helps explain the ascendance of once-fringe views in the debate over immigration in America, including exaggerated claims of criminality, disease or dependency on public benefits among migrants. Though their methods radically diverged, Mrs. May and the killer in the recent mass shooting in El Paso applied the same language, both warning of an immigrant “invasion,” an idea also promoted by Mr. Trump.
In many ways, the Trump presidency is the culmination of Mrs. May’s vision for strictly limiting immigration. Groups that she funded shared policy proposals with Mr. Trump’s campaign, sent key staff members to join his administration and have close ties to Stephen Miller, the architect of his immigration agenda to upend practices adopted by his Democratic and Republican predecessors.
Much of the money behind the movement can be traced to one wealthy heiress who made it her life’s work to keep immigrants out of America.
Today: Newly unearthed documents tell the story of a rich, environmentally-minded heiress who helped sow the seeds of the modern anti-immigration movement. My colleague Nick Kulish tells Natalie Kitroeff about his investigation.
It’s Monday, August 19.
Her name is pronounced Cordelia Scaife May.
Tell me about Cordelia Scaife May’s life as a young woman.
Cordelia May was born in Pittsburgh in 1928. And when the first photos of her appeared on the front pages of newspapers around the country, they asked, could this be the richest baby in the world?
She was an heiress to the Mellon family fortune. They were barons of banking, titans of industry with oil, aluminum, all the sort of might of Pittsburgh distilled into cold, hard cash. She was raised outside Pittsburgh in a mansion that was known as Penguin Court because her mother was trying to breed and raise emperor penguins to waddle the ground. She was so excited about Admiral Byrd’s Antarctic expeditions.
Expeditions have been sent or are expected to be sent by Britain, Australia, Norway, Chile, Russia and the Argentine. But Admiral Byrd’s will surely be the biggest.
Cordelia herself as a young girl was super into animals. She had purebred dogs. The family had horses. She was very into nature, and birds in particular. You know, from the outside, it seemed like Cordelia had this fabulous life. But actually, she was quite unhappy. Her mother was an alcoholic, and she once described that there was no laughter in her household growing up.
So what’s the story that explains how she gets from that childhood to her interest in immigration policy?
You know, it’s actually a long story, and a story that begins in her youth with her unlikely friendship or admiration for Margaret Sanger, the founder of Planned Parenthood.
I guess I was what I would call a born humanitarian.
Sanger was a close friend of her grandmother’s, and someone she described as the only person who brought any joy into her house as a child. Initially she wasn’t drawn to Sanger because of her politics and her pursuit of family planning and birth control for women. It was actually that she’d been to jail, which appealed to Cordelia’s rebellious streak as a young woman.
So she thinks Sanger is cool.
She thinks Sanger is very cool. But over time, that friendship and her desire to emulate Margaret Sanger led her to engage deeply with Planned Parenthood and other birth control and population issues.
And at this point, what is Planned Parenthood and Sanger’s work all about?
At that point, it’s really about access to contraceptives. It’s about family planning. It’s about taking women, first in the United States and then around the world, from just having as many kids as they end up getting pregnant with, and choosing, I want to have two kids. I want to have three kids. This is when I want to have them. Family planning in the most literal sense.
The people that come to our organization and want to have the same methods or whatever it is that one can have to prevent pregnancy. And those women will say to us, I — we ask their religion very often. And they say, I am a Catholic. I was raised in the Catholic church. This, my church is wrong on this. And that is said over and over and over again.
And what about that is attractive to May? Why is that interesting to this heiress?
She was really passionate about the natural environment and preserving it. And that really dovetails with birth control for her, because she sees overpopulation as destroying the habitats of the animals that she loves so much. But in addition to that, she was — from what we read in her letters, she was a feminist. She cared about women’s issues. Women should have a right to plan their smaller families, and the birds and the bees and the bunny rabbits should have as much room to roam as possible.
So what does she do with that new focus?
Well, she becomes involved with a group known as the Population Council, which was founded by a member of another of America’s great families, John D. Rockefeller III.
 Today, the giants of the oil industry stand as monuments to Rockefeller, the architect of our business age.
The Population Council’s goal was to lower birthrates around the world, and she went to birth control clinics in Chicago. She visited family planning efforts in Korea and Japan and Taiwan. And perhaps most importantly, she and her family gave $11.4 million to the council during the 1960s, which was a lot of money in those days. As time goes on, you can see her already becoming more militant. In the 1970s, she’s sort of pushing up against the Population Council’s desire to stick with contraceptives and keep abortion at arm’s length. And she and her representatives are saying, we have to make abortion upon request something that’s available to all women. The pace of controlling population is too slow. The growth of the global population is too much.
So she starts to take more hard-line positions, even though, in this case, it’s about something we now think of as a progressive measure, which is universal access to abortion.
Right, exactly. Abortion appears to be less about family planning and more about controlling the population.
So where does her story go from here?
Well, something very important and actually tragic takes place in her life. In August 1973, she secretly marries her childhood friend and longtime companion, Robert W. Duggan. And he is the district attorney for the county that includes Pittsburgh. And rather than a giant, lavish wedding in a cathedral somewhere, they get married in a rinky-dink little room with knotty pine walls on Lake Tahoe in Nevada. They pay a justice of the peace $5. And perhaps more importantly, they don’t tell anyone. So if you’re this heiress, why do you have this quickie wedding? Well, her longtime friend, her longtime companion, is under investigation for corruption. He has apparently been taking payoffs from illegal gambling rings, you know, to look the other way. And essentially, his defense is, I’m getting the money from her. Unfortunately, this defense does not work. The investigation and the prosecution starts closing in on him. And eventually, he is indicted for tax evasion. And on the day that he is indicted, he is found dead from a shotgun wound outside his country house. It appears that he shot himself, that it’s a self-inflicted wound.
So how does that tragedy affect her work?
It appears — and there’s a little speculation involved in this, obviously. But it appears to make her a little more radical. There’s a harder edge to her letters and to what she’s writing to people at that time after the tragedy. And her attitude toward family planning starts to change. Her aide goes to the Population Council and tells them that she thinks family planning is a waste of money. The Rockefeller aide who takes the meeting says that he almost got the impression that she favored compulsory sterilization. And for the first time, something comes up that we’d never seen before, which is the idea that, quote, the U.S. should seal its border with Mexico.
And how do you understand why she made this jump from being so focused on population control to immigration?
There’s a sort of confluence of events that helps bring this about, right?
Dr. Ehrlich, when did the thought first come to you that perhaps our time as mankind on Earth was limited?
Population control was a really big concern with the baby boom.
The thing that’s important remember about population control is that if we want to avoid a tremendous rise in the death rate, we absolutely must have a tremendous decrease in the birthrate.
Now, there’s a famous book called “The Population Bomb” by a Stanford professor named Paul Ehrlich.
So the first thing that should happen is that the president ought to say, from now, here on out, no intelligent, patriotic American family ought to have more than two children, preferably one if you’re starting a family now — not any law, but just say this is what responsible people do.
But in the late 1970s, the birthrate has fallen quite a bit. We’re out of the baby boom at this point. And among the biggest contributors to population growth in the United States is immigration.
America was founded by immigrants. We are the so-called melting pot of the world. And most of those immigrants entered this nation legally.
In 1978, Border Patrol apprehended close to 900,000 unauthorized immigrants.
Today, however, illegal aliens are a great and continuing problem.
And another 600,000 legal immigrants are also arriving, the greatest number since the 1920s. So if your concern is how many people are there in the United States, then your focus starts to shift toward immigrants.
Does she seem to care who the immigrants are? Is there part of this that’s about race?
So the language at least suggests that at least some of this is about racism.
She says she isn’t racist, but the people that she’s worried about are not the white immigrants. It’s the immigrants from non-white countries that she’s preoccupied with.
Nick, why does this matter for the modern immigration movement? What exactly does that have to do with the evolving views of this one rich woman?
It matters because Cordelia Scaife May puts her money where her mouth is. And she has a lot of money. Equally important is in 1978, she meets a very unusual gentleman named Dr. John Tanton, an ophthalmologist who, in his spare time, likes to form political advocacy groups.
He’s an ophthalmologist who — his side gig is forming public pressure groups?
Exactly. He’s like a character out of a Frank Capra movie up in this small town in Michigan, this very charismatic, good-looking, square-jawed guy who’s just great at getting people excited about an issue. It’s weird, but he’s really good at it. He actually was involved in a lot of the same issues. He was involved in environmental issues. He was involved in a group called Zero Population Growth, which was exactly what it sounds like. So through these circles from the population movement, Dr. Tanton got acquainted with Mrs. May. And he came to her seeking her help, which is to say her money, to get his group, the Federation for American Immigration Reform, off the ground.
And does she help out?
She does. She provides him with $50,000 in seed money, with the one condition that she remains anonymous. She is in the background. She is not tied to this work.
And he starts the group, and she gives him more money, and more money, and more money, to the point where there’s an internal memorandum where he writes that “Mrs. May has been our single biggest supporter. She just gave us another $400,000. That relationship is pretty well under control.” And the more money that she gives him, the more ambitious he becomes. He spins off the research arm of FAIR into something called the Center for Immigration Studies.
The Center for Immigration Studies, a nonprofit public interest institution, looking into immigration’s effects on social and economic interests in the U.S.
He moves the legal litigation group and turns it into the Immigration Reform Law Institute.
We’re a national public interest organization working for rational immigration policies. We seek to end illegal immigration and maintain legal immigration rates under an overall ceiling consistent with America’s domestic priorities.
Pretty soon, he’s starting to build almost an ecosystem of groups that reinforce each other. The Center for Immigration Studies has a report that is cited by FAIR or is used in a legal memorandum that’s written by the Immigration Reform Law Institute. And it isn’t clear to everyone that these groups are all coming from the same place.
Nick, given that May comes from a very well-known and very wealthy family, I wonder if they have a reaction to the way that she’s suddenly spending the family fortune.
And this is also the place where she talks about this idea that the country is being invaded.
So help us understand May’s actual impact on the development of this movement, which feels so connected to the ideas that she’s articulating here.
Well, there are all these groups. The big three that people think about the most are NumbersUSA, the Center for Immigration Studies and the Federation for American Immigration Reform. And they put their might together and are able to pressure, at all levels, the government — at the local level, at the state level.
Elizabeth Mayor Thomas Dunn has instructed his city employees to speak only English during working hours. The English-only rule, according to the mayor, applies to business and private conversations as well.
Pushing English language laws.
The Senate Judiciary Committee began considering a proposed constitutional amendment to make English the official language of the United States.
Laws that make it tougher for illegal immigrants to live in certain towns.
California’s Republican Governor Pete Wilson wants to cut off social services to illegal immigrants and to deny citizenship to their U.S.-born children.
Proposition 187 that was meant to restrict public benefits to undocumented people in California.
After he announced his proposals in August, his poll ratings rose. Wilson finds support among members of such groups as the Federation for American Immigration Reform. That’s a national organization, which contends that immigrants are a drain on America’s resources.
This goes all the way up to Congress.
The United States Senate is debating a very vital issue for our country, and that is immigration reform. I urge the senators to continue to work toward a comprehensive bill.
One of the groups, NumbersUSA, they managed to get millions of calls and faxes and letters to congresspeople.
Republicans have been bolting from the president on this issue. They believe that he’s absolutely tone-deaf. And he continues to go down this road even though many members of his party, both in the House and the Senate, object.
And a lot of folks think that they’re the most important reason that immigration reform was derailed under George W. Bush.
We have a number of grassroots groups now working to stop them from getting the 15 votes they needed for cloture last time and failed on it. The risk to the president — he’s not on the ballot again, and he has believed in this from day one. And so he wants this, very much so. He views it as a legacy item. But the risk for the Republican Party is a lot of conservatives think if you pass this legislation, some of the base will stay home in the 2008 elections, and you will have even more damage after the heartache of 2006 for the Republican Party. That is the calculation. The president and his team disagree, but many conservatives think if even just a little bit of our base stays home, more trouble.
So it seems like there’s this broad base of support for all of these anti-immigration ideas. But in reality, they are all stemming from one source, which is Mrs. May.
Right. It feels like a groundswell. But then when you look back at their roots and when you look back at where their money is coming from, Mrs. May and Dr. Tanton are always behind it.
And these groups, the big three that you mentioned, these are groups that have enormous resonance in today’s political atmosphere, right? I mean, they have a ton of influence.
And that goal is to end the lawlessness that now exists in our immigration system.
Who became attorney general.
I have put in place a zero-tolerance policy for illegal entry on our southwest border. If you cross the southwest border unlawfully, then we will prosecute you. It’s that simple.
And his aide, Stephen Miller, who is now the most important person, probably, in government when it comes to immigration issues.
And so you see these groups created through May’s money cultivating allies in Congress. The key ones here are Jeff Sessions and Stephen Miller. And now we know these are folks who have brought their hard-line immigration policies and beliefs with them to the White House, to the administration.
In many cases, it feels like they wrote the playbook. And now Miller is calling the plays. And it goes beyond that.
It’s just that border security is national security, and we have a flood of drugs coming into this country and into our communities.
Kellyanne Conway, the president’s adviser, was doing polling for these groups. I think a lot of people don’t realize that.
We have, obviously, an increase in gang members coming over.
Other folks from FAIR, from CIS, have moved into important positions in the government’s immigration apparatus.
We’ve got 31 sanctuary cities, six sanctuary states. You’ve got people wanting to make us an entire sanctuary country. We just need Democrats to come to the table and be honest with themselves and who they’ve been in the recent past.
And how do you see all these officials with ties to this movement influencing the Trump administration’s policies on immigration?
Until we can have a wall and proper security, we’re going to be guarding our border with the military.
— to capping legal immigration, prioritizing skills over family ties in terms of who we let in.
Another shift in President Trump’s immigration policy as the administration announced it would deny green cards to immigrants who seek out food stamps, Medicaid and other forms of public assistance, while favoring wealthier immigrants.
President Trump has once again delivered on his promise to the American people to enforce longstanding immigration law.
You see most recently reducing access to public benefits for migrants, for legal migrants.
A rule that encourages and ensures self-reliance and self-sufficiency for those seeking to come to or to stay in the United States.
Like this new rule that was issued on public charges.
If people are not able to be self-sufficient, then this negative factor is going to bear very heavily against them in a decision about whether they’ll be able to become a legal permanent resident.
The overarching idea they started with is fewer people. And for that, you have to do legal as well as illegal immigration.
Nick, do you think that without Cordelia Scaife May, these views don’t become mainstream? Should her money be seen as the critical driver for the movement?
That’s a really good question, because look, there are a lot of tectonic forces at play in the world, like offshoring and automation and migration driven by climate change, that really helped push this onto the agenda and would have anyway, even if there wasn’t a Mrs. May. But what is undeniable is that four decades of well-funded groups able to push these ideas with her money now gaining political power and literally being part of making the policy. I think it’s very fair to think of her as a driver of this issue as well as this movement.
Thank you so much, Nick.
Here’s what else you need to know today. In the capital of Afghanistan, a suicide bomber posing as a guest at a wedding blew himself up on Saturday night, killing at least 63 people and wounding 182. It was among the most lethal attacks on civilians there in the past few years and highlighted the limits of a proposed peace deal between the U.S. and the Taliban, which is responsible for most violence in the country. Saturday’s suicide bombing was claimed by an affiliate of ISIS, not the Taliban. And congressional Democrats and Republicans are criticizing a decision by Israel to bar two members of the House, Rashida Tlaib and Ilhan Omar, from traveling to the country. Israel barred the lawmakers at the request of President Trump. Both are highly critical of Israel’s treatment of Palestinians, but it appeared that Israel was prepared to allow them in until Trump intervened. Both Tlaib and Omar will address the travel restrictions during a news conference later this morning.
Unlike her more famous brother, the right-wing philanthropist and publisher Richard Mellon Scaife, Mrs. May largely stayed out of the public eye. A childless widow who lived alone outside Pittsburgh, she instructed associates not to reveal her philanthropic interests and in some cases even to destroy her correspondence. While her unlikely role as the quiet bursar to anti-immigration organizations has been previously reported, her motivation and engagement in the immigration issue remained largely hidden.
The New York Times, through dozens of interviews and searches of court records, government filings and archives across the country, has unearthed the most complete record of her thinking. Mrs. May’s unpublished writings reveal her evolution from an environmental-minded Theodore Roosevelt Republican — in 1972 she was the nation’s largest single donor to mainstream congressional candidates — to an ardent nativist. Her ideological transformation presaged the Republican Party’s own shift from blue-blooded, traditional conservatism toward hard-right populism.
Chatty, handwritten notes to John D. Rockefeller III, the philanthropist Helen Clay Frick and the head of the National Audubon Society about luncheons and overseas trips gradually gave way over the years to darker exchanges with fringe figures who believed that black people were less intelligent than white people, Latino immigrants were criminals and white Americans were being displaced.
Restrictionist groups she financed have blocked attempts at amnesties and immigration reform bills in Congress over the years. They fought for Proposition 187 in California to deny education, routine health care and other public services to undocumented immigrants; they argued against in-state tuition for the children of undocumented workers in Utah. They supported “show me your papers” laws in Arizona and Georgia and draconian local ordinances in Hazleton, Pa., and Farmers Branch, Tex.
The groups have wasted little time seizing the moment since Donald Trump came to the White House. As Mr. Stein’s organization, known as FAIR, put it in a federal tax filing last year, Mr. Trump’s election presented “a unique opportunity” to enact its longstanding agenda of “building the wall, ending chain migration, rolling back dangerous sanctuary policies, eliminating the visa lottery” and more.
Nowhere in the document is the name of its largest benefactor ever mentioned.
Mrs. May’s immigration activism began in the 1970s, when the numbers of legal and illegal arrivals in the country were reaching heights unseen in decades. But she grew up during a period with the lowest levels of immigration in a century (and lower than any period since), thanks to a 1924 law that imposed strict quotas favoring Western European migrants. Her family lived in a part of the picturesque Ligonier Valley, outside Pittsburgh, that was more than 99 percent white when she was a child.
When the first photographs of an infant Cordelia Mellon Scaife appeared in newspapers across the country, she was heralded as potentially “the richest baby in the world.” Her life would be one of privilege: Her family vacationed in St. Moritz, Switzerland, and in Palm Beach, Fla., their movements tracked in society columns.
Young Cordy grew up in a stately Cotswold-style manor, staffed with servants, known as Penguin Court. Her eccentric mother, Sarah Mellon Scaife, tried to breed emperor penguins to waddle the grounds after the craze over Adm. Richard E. Byrd’s Antarctic expeditions.
But Mrs. Scaife, a sharp-tongued art collector, was an alcoholic and her daughter later described her youth as largely miserable. A friend of her parents, the dancer-actor Fred Astaire, tried to help her get discovered in Hollywood when she was 19 but her trip was ill timed. “The only star around was Lassie,” she remarked to an author, Burton Hersh, writing about the Mellon family.
After a marriage at age 20 that lasted just a few months, Mrs. May joined in the family tradition of philanthropy. Her mother had provided funding for Dr. Jonas Salk’s lab at the University of Pittsburgh, where he developed the polio vaccine. Mrs. May became active in local charities, including a children’s health center and a school for the blind, and started the Laurel Foundation in 1951, when she was 23, to channel her giving. She also donated to Republican candidates, both local and national.
But it was Margaret Sanger, the famous and, in some circles, scandalous founder of Planned Parenthood, who provided the sense of direction Mrs. May had craved. Mrs. Sanger was a close friend of her grandmother. Mrs. May acknowledged that it was not the birth control pioneer’s “works or ideals” that initially appealed to her but the fact that she had been jailed for her activities.
Mrs. May first worked for the Planned Parenthood chapter in Pittsburgh and later joined the board of the International Planned Parenthood Federation. “I have always admired and tried to take a part in the work that you started,” she wrote in a 1961 letter to Mrs. Sanger.
Colcom Foundation giving to anti-immigration and population-control groups dwarfed its giving to environmental and other causes.
For some of America’s elite in the 1960s and ’70s, supporting efforts to limit population growth was partly an act of noblesse oblige. The Fords donated millions for United Nations-backed family planning projects worldwide.
Mrs. May joined the board of the Population Council, a group founded by John D. Rockefeller III that emphasized family planning and economic development as ways to lower birthrates around the world. She and some relatives together contributed $11.4 million to the council during the 1960s, and Mrs. May joined the group’s president, Frank Notestein, on trips to Asia to review projects.
Overpopulation became an even more mainstream concern in the United States after the runaway success of “The Population Bomb,” the 1968 book by the Stanford biologist Paul Ehrlich. After the enormous bulge of baby boomers, many Americans came to favor smaller families.
But a 1973 letter to the Population Council from Mrs. May’s office revealed her increasingly tough stance on population control. Contraceptives had made too little impact, the letter said.
In August 1973, Mrs. May secretly remarried, this time to her childhood friend and longtime companion Robert W. Duggan, the district attorney in the county that includes Pittsburgh. The couple paid $5 for a justice of the peace in Nevada to wed them in a remote spot on Lake Tahoe.
When the marriage was disclosed, it made front-page news in Pittsburgh, in part because her new husband was fighting to stay out of prison amid a federal corruption probe. The swift nuptials had come between his appearances before a grand jury, and just days after Mrs. May was summoned by the Internal Revenue Service.
Six months later, Mr. Duggan was indicted for evading taxes on payoffs he received from an illegal gambling ring. The same day, he was found dead at his country house, apparently from a self-inflicted gunshot.
Mrs. May blamed her brother for turning on her husband. The siblings had long shared advisers, worked on charitable matters together and helped each other, but the rupture was so complete that they stopped speaking. The scandal and the ensuing tragedy in essence robbed Mrs. May of her two closest confidants.
By the end of the year, after more than two decades working with Planned Parenthood, she had resigned from the group. Two years later, her top aide delivered a stern message to Mr. Zeidenstein, the new president of the Population Council: Family planning and famine relief were a waste of money. Instead, “the U.S. should seal its border” with Mexico. According to a memo by Mr. Zeidenstein, Mrs. May’s views were becoming so radicalized that “one got the impression” she favored compulsory sterilization to limit birthrates in developing countries.
Mr. Rockefeller, taken aback by Mrs. May’s shift, wrote to her that he “had not been aware that differences of this seeming magnitude existed between us.” She responded that she would have severed ties sooner if not for her regard for him, and sent him the mission statement for a new group she had bankrolled, the Environmental Fund.
The Environmental Fund pushed mainstream concerns about overpopulation to the fringe and stoked opposition to immigration. Virginia Abernethy, a self-described “ethnic separatist” who became involved in the group, now called Population-Environment Balance, said in an interview that Mrs. May was “the first person who comes to mind” of those who pushed the population-control movement to oppose immigration.
“She funded a great deal of the original research,” said Ms. Abernethy, a retired Vanderbilt University professor who spoke last year at a white nationalist conference headlined by the former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke.
Through her work with the fund, the heiress struck up a close friendship with Garrett Hardin, a microbiologist and ecologist who argued that the modern welfare state encouraged overpopulation and ecological depletion. When Mrs. May sent him news clippings about riots in Los Angeles, Mr. Hardin responded that the media was finally seeing that “maybe the blacks are less than saintly” and lamented “the predominant Latinity of apprehended criminals” where he lived in California.
She also met John Tanton, a charismatic eye doctor and environmentalist from Michigan, who would leverage Mrs. May’s financial resources to propel the budding anti-immigration movement forward.
With the square-jawed good looks of a soap opera M.D., Dr. Tanton, who died last month at 85, worked with Planned Parenthood and the Sierra Club and was the national president of Zero Population Growth in the 1970s. As the Baby Boom ebbed, he turned his attention to curbing immigration.
That November, Dr. Tanton wrote a nine-page proposal for funding from Mrs. May to start a group called the Federation for American Immigration Reform, or FAIR.
“We plan to make the restriction of immigration a legitimate position for thinking people,” he wrote. Mrs. May provided $50,000 to get the group off the ground.
FAIR’s early policy goals, some reflected decades later in proposals pursued by the Trump administration, called for not only an end to illegal immigration, but also a sharp reduction in legal migration. The group advocated increased funding and staffing for Border Patrol to police the southern frontier, campaigned against Cuban refugees and pushed to restrict public benefits for undocumented immigrants.
Dr. Tanton redoubled his attention to Mrs. May with flowery letters quoting Shakespeare, research into birds she was curious about and recommendations for a game ranch in Kenya. He invited her to a nature preserve in Michigan.
She produced a five-page typed response, rife with comments about Filipinos “pouring” into Hawaii and “Orientals and Indians” sneaking across “long stretches of unmanned border” with Canada.
She compared medical science’s success in reducing infant mortality rates to veterinarians prolonging the lives “of useless cattle.” Birthrates had dropped in a few areas, she noted, and millions died of starvation every year, but population growth rates continued to climb. “Even wars no longer make much dent; during 11 years of conflict, both North and South Vietnam showed a net increase in population,” she wrote.
Mrs. May’s Laurel Foundation gave $5,000 to the Institute for Western Values to distribute a translation of the French dystopian novel “The Camp of the Saints” in the United States. The book, about an invasion of poor immigrants overwhelming Europe, is an essential text in white-nationalist circles and has often been cited by the former Trump adviser Steve Bannon. A subsequent English edition was published by the Social Contract Press, which was founded by Dr. Tanton and funded by Mrs. May’s foundation.
Internal FAIR documents show that her advisers played just such an active role in the development of Dr. Tanton’s growing network of groups. Mrs. May’s longtime adviser Gregory Curtis advocated splitting off FAIR’s research component, which became the Center for Immigration Studies in 1986. Dr. Tanton also broke off FAIR’s litigation arm, and continued founding or fostering new groups.
The move was “critical in not just hiding the sources of funding, but it allowed his creations to meet the I.R.S.’s so-called public support test,” which prevents charities from relying too heavily on a single donor, said Charles Kamasaki, a fellow at the Migration Policy Institute who has worked on the pro-immigration side of the issue. “Part of Tanton’s genius, and it really was genius, was creating these multiple shells,” he said.
The sheer number of groups nurtured with Mrs. May’s money — dozens over four decades — played an important role in the success of the anti-immigration movement by giving it the appearance of broad-based support. Groups would send representatives to appear before Congress, talk to journalists and provide briefs in lawsuits, without disclosing their common origins and funding.
When Dr. Tanton had trouble getting grass-roots support for an Arizona ballot initiative in 1988 to require government business to be conducted only in English, he turned to Mrs. May to pay canvassers. When he decided in the 1980s to host a gathering of a brain trust to strengthen the intellectual underpinnings of the movement, Mrs. May committed $15,000 a year and the use of her Gulfstream jet.

Charges of consorting with racists helped push Dr. Tanton to the fringe of acceptable debate, after a private memo he wrote warning of a “Latin onslaught” became public. Dr. Tanton fell further out of favor when it emerged that FAIR had secretly accepted more than $1 million from the Pioneer Fund, a group that embraced eugenics.
Birds remained a passion of Mrs. May’s. When she died, she was remembered in the local press for, among other things, her support of Pittsburgh’s aviary.
In 1996, Mrs. May, then 68, established a new foundation, Colcom, to pursue her most important goals even after her death, including assisting charitable initiatives in Pittsburgh and western Pennsylvania, as well as cultural and environmental causes.
But environmental groups were “doomed to failure,” she wrote in her nonprofit application to the I.R.S., until they recognized “that the degradation of our natural world results ultimately from the press of human numbers.” In addition to stricter immigration, she supported “the study of human intelligence as it relates to schools and the workplace” and “research in the area of human differences,” she explained, echoing the language of the eugenics movement.
According to tax documents, Colcom has funded not only FAIR and other large organizations Mrs. May helped create, but also lesser-known ones like the American Immigration Control Foundation, which has likened immigration to a “military conquest” with the effect of “substantially replacing the native population”; the International Services Assistance Fund, whose focus is promoting chemical sterilization of women around the world; and VDare, a website that regularly publishes white nationalists and whose name is derived from Virginia Dare, the first child of English settlers born in the New World.
John Rohe, vice president for philanthropy at Colcom, said “it’s impossible for me to know what every recipient of a grant from Colcom puts out,” but that racial discrimination had no place in Colcom’s views on immigration.
Colcom has given generously to a group once run by Dr. Tanton called U.S. Inc. Largely using money from Mrs. May, U.S. Inc. has funded immigration-related groups in at least 18 states and the District of Columbia.
Since 2005, the Colcom Foundation has given more than $150 million to groups in John Tanton’s anti-immigration network. More than $17 million went to U.S. Inc.
One of them was NumbersUSA, today the largest grass-roots organization in the country advocating reduced immigration. Its greatest success was helping to derail comprehensive immigration reform under President George W. Bush, by mobilizing supporters to flood their representatives with calls and faxes.
NumbersUSA and the other main restrictionist groups funded by Mrs. May emphasize that they want stricter limits on immigration, but do not oppose all immigration. They reject any contention that prejudice or xenophobia motivates them. The Center for Immigration Studies sued the Southern Poverty Law Center for designating it a hate group, a label the law center has also applied to FAIR.
The nation’s failure to stop the Sept. 11 hijackers presented the anti-immigration groups with a powerful opportunity to link migration and security, driving a militarization of the border that continues to this day. From the rise of the Minutemen to the start of the Tea Party to the Trump presidency, the Tanton-May network has harnessed each surge of anti-immigration sentiment.
The main groups cultivated new allies in Congress, none stronger than Jeff Sessions, then a senator from Alabama, whose office served as an unofficial Capitol Hill headquarters for the restrictionist movement. Mr. Sessions, who later became attorney general in the Trump administration, hired as a spokesman Stephen Miller, who would give a keynote address at a Center for Immigration Studies event years later, in 2015, before joining the Trump campaign.
Though her money and activism seeded the political landscape for Mr. Trump’s nativist policies — he argues that “the country is full,” claims Mexicans are “dirty” and “dangerous” and immigrants are stealing jobs — the heiress would not see the Queens real estate heir ascend to the presidency. Mrs. May, who had pancreatic cancer, died at her home in 2005, at age 76. Her death was ruled a suicide by asphyxiation.
She left land on the island of Maui to the Nature Conservancy of Hawaii. Her Gulfstream jet was sold for $26.7 million. She was remembered in the local press for her devotion to the environment and family planning, her support of Pittsburgh’s aviary and her quixotic bequest to a donkey sanctuary in Devon, England. Her obituary in the local paper didn’t mention immigration at all.
Mrs. May left almost everything to the Colcom Foundation. In 2005, $215 million from her family trust poured into the foundation’s coffers, along with another $30 million from her personal estate. As her affairs were wound up, another $176 million transferred from her estate in 2006.
In all, since Mrs. May’s death, the anti-immigration groups have received $180 million. The market value of Colcom’s assets is $500 million, more than she bequeathed it in the first place.
Thanks to her vast inherited fortune, Mrs. May’s ideas, and causes, survive her.
“The issues which I have supported during my lifetime have not been popular ones in many cases, nor do I anticipate that they will be so in the future,” Mrs. May wrote to Colcom’s board members in the group’s mission statement, calling on them “to exercise the courage of their convictions” after her death.
