We’re covering Beijing’s increasing control of the Hong Kong economy, an atmosphere of anxiety in Kashmir and the digitization of J.D. Salinger’s work.
The Chinese government has forced Cathay Pacific Airways, one of Asia’s largest international carriers, to bar employees who support or participate in Hong Kong’s anti-government protests from working on flights to mainland China. Beijing also ordered the airline to identify all crew members on mainland flights for approval.
So far, the carrier said it had removed one pilot from flying duties and fired two airport ground staff for misconduct.
Impact: The orders illustrate the power that China wields over international companies in the semiautonomous territory, potentially creating an atmosphere of fear that experts say could become a bigger threat to the Hong Kong economy than the protests themselves.
The latest: On Sunday, in the 10th straight weekend of protests and clashes across the territory, police fired tear gas into a subway station, and the authorities accused protesters of using gasoline bombs.
Jeffrey Epstein, the wealthy investment manager who was facing charges of recruiting and sexually abusing teenage girls, apparently hanged himself in a Manhattan jail on Saturday. Procedures to closely monitor him after a suicide attempt last month were not being followed, law enforcement sources said.
Mr. Epstein’s accusers, as well as members of Congress and senior law enforcement officials, have demanded answers about why he was not being closely supervised.
What’s next: The investigation that led to sex trafficking charges against Mr. Epstein will continue, focusing on the people who were said to have participated in his sexual exploitation scheme.
Go deeper: A cache of previously sealed legal documents from the investigation into Mr. Epstein was released on Friday with new, disturbing details about his interactions with young girls.
Shops and schools shuttered. A landscape of sandbags and battered trucks. Armed officers deployed to just about every corner of the mountainous valley and, in some villages, a soldier posted outside each family’s home.
Correspondents for The Times, in one of the first glimpses of life in Kashmir since the Indian government revoked the region’s limited autonomy last week, found a population that felt besieged and furious.
“It’s a living hell here,” a doctor at a Srinagar hospital said.
Since the decision to rescind Kashmir’s status, about eight million people have been cut off from the rest of the world, with no internet, TV or phone service, creating widespread anxiety and confusion.
Conflicting reports: Officials in New Delhi circulated photos on Saturday that showed open fruit markets and crowded streets, saying the valley was returning to normal.
Go deeper: Photographers managed to work around the communication blockade to publish images of Kashmir under lockdown.
In late July, Chinese authorities said that most detainees in Xinjiang had been released from the indoctrination camps built to eliminate what the government has described as the threat of Islamic radicalism.
But the vast network of detention camps remains and has even expanded, according to an investigation by The Times. There is now also evidence of a system of forced labor, with factories rising near the camps for “reformed” detainees, which critics say is another form of subjugation.
How we know: For seven days, reporters from The Times traveled around the Xinjiang region, speaking to former detainees and observing the camps, factories and religious sites.
Efforts to approach the camps were repeatedly blocked by plainclothes security officers, and interviews were monitored by Chinese officials.
Reminder: The camps have already swallowed up an estimated one million Muslims, and former detainees describe indoctrination efforts that forced them to renounce their religious beliefs and embrace the ideology of the Communist Party.
Sweden — long seen as an egalitarian and welcoming country — has seen a steady rise in anti-immigration nationalistic rhetoric and sentiment. Above, a predominantly immigrant district in Stockholm.
Underneath Sweden’s shift to the right is an international disinformation machine, devoted to the cultivation, provocation and amplification of far-right passions and political forces, according to a Times examination of its content, personnel, financing and traffic patterns.
China: One of the strongest typhoons to strike the country in years left at least 30 people dead and at least 18 missing, state news media reported.
Myanmar: At least 51 people died in floods and a landslide that was triggered by monsoon rains, and dozens more are unaccounted for, the authorities said. The torrential downpour was expected to continue for the next few days.
Libya: At least three U.N. staff members were killed after a bomb-laden vehicle exploded outside a shopping mall in Benghazi on Saturday, a spokesman for the international organization said.
Norway: The police said they were investigating a foiled attack on Saturday as an attempted act of terrorism. A white gunman in a helmet and armor opened fire at a mosque near Oslo but was overpowered by a worshiper. The suspect, who was charged with attempted murder, had expressed anti-immigrant and extremist views online, the authorities said.
Snapshot: Above, the nightly “penguin parade” on Phillip Island, Australia, a major tourist draw since the 1920s. In the 1980s, when increased development on the Summerland Peninsula threatened the penguins’ survival, the government bought all of the property in the area in what is thought to be the world’s only such buyback for the sake of wildlife.
Serena Williams: In tears, the tennis star suddenly quit the Rogers Cup final match against the Canadian teenager Bianca Andreescu after the first set, in which she seemed a little out of sorts and made several errors.
J.D. Salinger: Digital editions of four of the author’s classic novels — including “The Catcher in the Rye” — will be released this week, making him perhaps the last 20th-century literary icon to surrender to the global digital revolution.
Simone Biles: The gymnast became the first woman to perform a triple double (two flips with three twists) at the U.S. Gymnastics Championships on Friday. She promised to try the maneuver again on Sunday, when the women’s all-around title will be decided.
Cook: You don’t need a colander for this one-pot zucchini-basil pasta.
Watch: A Times writer looks back at the raunchy coming-of-age film “Superbad” and finds it (mostly) holds up. But she admits she may have loved it for the wrong reason.
Listen: “Leave Me Alone” is from the new album by NF, who emerged from the Christian rap scene with Eminem-esque pop hits. Now he has the No. 1 album in the U.S.
Read: “Semicolon” is a history of the punctuation mark; it’s one of 12 books on our weekly recommended list.
Smarter Living: The great thing about yoga is you don’t need prior experience to give it a shot. You can also do it almost anywhere. We’ve got a guide to some of the basics, from a five-minute session to breathing exercises.
We also asked experts how to test, prevent or diagnose food allergies in children.
You may have heard of the Sargasso Sea, the world’s only borderless sea.
Floating in the northern Atlantic Ocean, it is formed by mats of free-floating sargassum seaweed. Eels, turtles and fish thrive in its fronds.
But there’s another proliferation of sargassum farther south, disrupting marine life, smothering fields of seagrass and decomposing stinkily on Caribbean beaches.
It’s being called the Great Atlantic Sargassum Belt, a vast bloom that has been recurring almost every year since 2011.
Researchers are looking into possible causes. It could be that nutrient-rich water from two sources — deep water off of West Africa and runoff from the Amazon River — is feeding the blooms.
Combating the problem is crucial for tourism-driven economies in the Caribbean. Barbados deployed its armed forces to combat the seaweed last year, and Mexico is putting its navy on the case this year.
Some people are trying to find uses for the bounty. One Barbadian entrepreneur is turning it into fertilizer, and foragers suggest — you guessed it — trying it for dinner.
To Mark Josephson and Eleanor Stanford for the break from the news. Nadav Gavrielov wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is about India’s crackdown in Kashmir.
• Here’s our Mini Crossword, and a clue: Lucky break (5 letters) You can find all our puzzles here.
• The Times’ Crossword puzzles increase in difficulty as the week progresses, with Mondays consisting of familiar vocabulary and a straightforward theme.