A log cabin in Ludlow, a midcentury modern house in Madison and a Victorian in New Bern.
Ludlow, which is 120 miles northwest of Boston, is the site of Okemo Mountain Resort, a ski area bought last year by Vail Resorts. Though the community is dominated by vacation homes, this property was originally a primary residence. The two-bedroom log cabin was built in 1971, followed in 1980 by a gambrel-roofed garage that was later converted into a guesthouse with a three-bedroom living space and separate one-bedroom apartment. The home is less than a mile from cafes, grocery stores, boutiques and restaurants in the center of town. Okemo Mountain is a mile and a half away.
Indoors: At the heart of the log cabin is a living room with wide-board pumpkin pine floors, a double-height ceiling and a stone fireplace. A large eat-in kitchen has maple color cabinets, granite countertops and a stone tile backsplash. There is also a separate dining room.
A loft space lined with bookshelves overlooks the living room. Behind it is a pair of large bedrooms with vaulted ceilings and hardwood floors; a hallway bathroom is between them. The large finished basement has a rec room, a craft room and a laundry room.
In the 1980 building, described as the “gambrel garage,” is a two-story unit with a long living room, bedroom and full bathroom downstairs and a kitchen and two bedrooms upstairs. A separate one-bedroom apartment within the building has a sitting room, full bathroom, kitchen and private entrance.
Outdoor space: The 4.7-acre property includes two chicken coops and an in-ground swimming pool with a pool house (it has electricity but no plumbing). A shed that looks like a tiny barn stores tools for tending the extensive garden.
Designed and built by Herb DeLevie, who attended Frank Lloyd Wright’s architectural school Taliesin, this house was commissioned by Max and Arlyne Hurwitz, a couple who lived next door. Mr. Hurwitz sold apples from a pushcart on State Street in Madison, and the unusual property was at one time opened for public tours and promoted as “the house that apples built.” It is on the edge of Hoyt Park in the Sunset Hill neighborhood, less than 10 minutes southwest of the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus and downtown.
Indoors: The house was built on nine levels separated by short flights of stairs, and its most distinctive current feature is a central fireplace constructed from 70,000 pounds of Wisconsin rock. (A runner-up might be the 15-foot double front door with medieval Spanish door pulls.) In the past, the house also had an indoor swimming pool that was later converted into a sunroom with a lofted home theater above it. The coping and railings remain, along with the possibility of restoring the entire pool, which originally included a waterfall.
The double-height living room has sloping timber columns set flush against the walls and a glass corner that looks out to a stone patio. Dangling from a copper canopy mounted on the dining room ceiling is a 12-foot chandelier with 24 purple crystal cones. The kitchen is lined in period cabinets and Formica countertops and has a walk-in pantry. The main level also includes a study that can be used as a bedroom, and an updated bathroom with a vessel sink and glass shower.
Five curving stairs lead down from the area outside the kitchen to the sunroom, with its canted window set in a wall of wood. Below that is a walkout basement with a wood paneled rec room and kitchenette. The basement also contains a bedroom, a half bathroom, a sauna, a laundry room and a storage room.
On the highest level, two bedrooms, connected by a catwalk, overlook the living and dining rooms. The carpeted master has a fireplace and sliding doors that open to a sun porch (a continuation of the glass sunroom wall below).
Outdoor space: The 0.18-acre corner lot is partially bounded by a stone wall and includes a large patio with built-in seating. The detached garage holds two cars.
Built in the late 1890s for John H. Smallwood, a merchant, this house sits in New Bern’s historic district, near a downtown hub of shops, restaurants and churches, several blocks from the riverfront. The sellers bought it in the early 1990s and did an extensive interior renovation, including mechanical system upgrades.
Indoors: Crossing a wraparound porch, you enter through a front door with original patterned pressed glass. To the right, the front parlor has wide plank floors, an Eastlake-style decorative fireplace mantel and a molded plaster ceiling.  A built-in upholstered bench extends below a bay window. A rear parlor with boldly striped wallpaper is used as a dining room. It is next to a living room with a coffered ceiling and a working gas fireplace. Both rooms have glass doors opening to the backyard. This level also has a powder room with a white vanity and floral wallpaper.
Three bedrooms line up on the second floor. The master has French doors that open to a balcony and an en suite bathroom with double sinks, a jetted tub and a glass walk-in shower. One of the guest rooms also has a private balcony, as well as a brick fireplace that is flanked by decorative antique church doors. The guest bathroom includes a claw-foot tub. There is also a small laundry room on this level.
The third floor contains a 400 square-foot bonus room and half bathroom.
Outdoor space: The 0.14 acre lot has elegant brick paving in front and back, a wood, brick and iron fence on one side of the property and a charming garden shed. There is off-street parking in the driveway.
