Gauff, 15, teamed with Caty McNally, 17, to claim the doubles crown at an event in Washington. Gauff said they want to win together again at the U.S. Open.
WASHINGTON — The surging American teens in women’s tennis now have a trophy to show for their breakout summer, after two of them, Coco Gauff and Caty McNally, claimed the doubles title at the Citi Open on Saturday.
Gauff, 15, and McNally, 17, dominated the fourth-seeded team of Maria Sanchez and Fanny Stollar, 6-2, 6-2, to claim the first WTA title for each in front of a capacity crowd on the tournament’s second court.
McNally had struggled with a hip injury during a loss in her singles semifinal earlier Saturday, but she rallied alongside Gauff, who lost in the first round of singles on Tuesday, to close out their second title together. Their first title came in their lone previous partnership, at last year’s United States Open junior tournament, in which they did not lose a set.
Their win Saturday capped another emphatic run: Not only did Gauff and McNally not lose a set, but they also never lost more than three games in a set in their four victories.
Gauff and McNally plan to put their undefeated record as a team on the line once more at the U.S. Open later this month. Asked if she thought they could go three-for-three as a team in New York, Gauff did not sell their chances short.
While McNally received a main draw wild card into the prestigious WTA event near her hometown, Cincinnati, later this month, the 15-year-old Gauff will have three weeks until her next competitive match, which will come at the U.S. Open, as her play is limited by the WTA’s age eligibility rule.
During the week before the U.S. Open, Gauff will play an exhibition match against the WTA’s No. 1 player, Ashleigh Barty, during the ATP tournament in Winston-Salem, N.C. After her star turn at Wimbledon, where she beat Venus Williams and reached the fourth round, Gauff figures to remain a headliner for the foreseeable future, attracting the kind of large crowds that followed her during her runs at Wimbledon and Washington.
Gauff said she was taking her duty as a role model seriously.
