WASHINGTON — President Trump said on Tuesday that Russia should be readmitted to the Group of 7 industrialized nations, a call for ending Moscow’s pariah status on the world stage that is likely to earn a cool reception when the group’s annual summit opens this weekend.
Speaking a few days before his planned departure for the summit, in Biarritz, France, Mr. Trump said that Moscow’s exclusion since 2014 from the group of leading economic powers should be reversed and, ignoring Russia’s aggression in Ukraine, contended that the true reason for it was President Barack Obama’s wounded pride.
Mr. Trump, who made similar comments before last year’s Group of 7 meeting in Canada, did not attach any conditions to his proposal, which could signal that the international community has moved on from Russia’s aggression toward Ukraine. It was the latest of several suggestions by Mr. Trump — whose 2016 campaign’s contacts with Kremlin-affiliated Russians were the subject of a long federal investigation, and who has personally courted the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin — that Russia has been unfairly treated by the United States and its allies.
That was in contrast to the view of France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, who a day earlier told a visiting Mr. Putin that Russia could rejoin the elite gathering if it helped end the continuing conflict in Ukraine. Moscow has supported a bloody rebellion by pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine that the United Nations estimates has claimed more than 13,000 lives since it began five years ago.
In a news conference with Mr. Putin, Mr. Macron called resolving the international “dispute” over Russia’s policy toward Ukraine “the key” to Russian readmission into a reconstituted Group of 8.
Steven Pifer, a former United States ambassador to Ukraine, said he could envision a Russian return to the annual meetings, which aim for consensus action on issues like trade, terrorism, energy and the environment. But that should happen only if Russia earns its readmission by helping bring peace to Ukraine, he said.
President Trump said Russia should be readmitted to the Group of 7 nations during a meeting on Tuesday with Romania’s president.
So it was the G8 for a long time. And now it’s the G7. And a lot of the time we talk about, we talk about Russia. We’re talking about Russia because I’ve gone to numerous G-7 meetings and I guess President Obama — because Putin outsmarted him — President Obama thought it wasn’t a good thing to have Russia in. So he wanted Russia out. But I think it’s much more appropriate to have Russia in — it should be the G8 because a lot of the things we talk about have to do with Russia. So I could certainly see it being the G8 again. And if somebody would make that motion, I would certainly be disposed to think about it very favorably.
Mr. Pifer allowed that demanding the return of Crimea to Ukraine seemed much less realistic than an end to the conflict in eastern Ukraine. “It’s hard to see how Ukraine gets the leverage to get Crimea back,” he said.
In his remarks on Tuesday, Mr. Trump made no reference to Russia’s annexation of the strategically valuable Crimean Peninsula, which began with a military intervention after Ukraine’s 2014 revolution ousted a pro-Russia leader and was consummated in a referendum widely condemned as illegitimate.
Instead, Mr. Trump, who has shown little concern about the fate of Crimea and has even suggested that it may rightfully belong to Russia, implied that Moscow’s real offense had been to embarrass his predecessor, Mr. Obama, who had unsuccessfully warned Russia against seizing the region.
“Well, that’s not the way it really should work,” he added.
The president addressed the issue on Tuesday in response to a question from a reporter, who noted that the United States will host next year’s Group of 7 summit. Mr. Trump hinted that he would not press the issue himself, however.
“Whether you like it or not — and it may not be politically correct — but we have a world to run,” he added.
But that scenario appears highly unlikely for now. No other Group of 7 leaders echoed Mr. Trump’s call last year. Nor does Russia seem to be clamoring for readmission.
Responding to a New York Times article that he is likely to tap his deputy secretary of state, John Sullivan, as his next ambassador to Moscow, Mr. Trump said that Mr. Sullivan was “very respected” and “could very well” be his nominee.