The 1940s thriller enjoys an afterlife as a classic movie and as a buzzy word in political and psychoanalytic discourse.
As a popular art, movies inevitably enrich our lexicon with their titles — “Dirty Harry” is a term for rogue cop and “Star Wars” a moniker for a missile defense system.
Sometimes a title becomes a verb: To “gump,” from “Forrest Gump,” is to insert a fictional character into a historical situation. The verb “to gaslight,” voted by the American Dialect Society in 2016 as the word most useful/likely to succeed, and defined as “to psychologically manipulate a person into questioning their own sanity,” derives from MGM’s 1944 movie, directed by George Cukor.
“Gaslight,” in which a diabolical husband plans to drive his wife mad through a campaign of false accusations, fabricated memories and bland denials of his previous statements, had two successful iterations before the Cukor film. A British adaptation of Patrick Hamilton’s 1938 play, released in 1940 as “Gaslight,” cast the Austrian émigré Anton Walbrook as its duplicitous villain; the following year Hamilton’s play opened on Broadway with Vincent Price as the smooth-talking husband and ran for 1,295 performances.
Although featuring a major star as the villain, Charles Boyer, cast against type, Cukor’s film differed from previous productions. It strengthened the part of the abused wife — largely overshadowed by actors playing the abusive husband — by giving the role to a great actress: Ingrid Bergman.
Traumatized by the murder of her aunt, a well-known opera singer, Paula Alquist (Bergman) is inveigled by her new husband, Gregory Anton (Boyer), a fortune seeker, to taking up residence in the abandoned house where the killing occurred. There, for reasons that become obvious to the audience long before Paula is able to grasp them, he convinces her that, as she puts it, she does “senseless, meaningless things.” He also proceeds to frighten her out of her wits, in part by dimming the gaslights in the house and blaming it on her imagination.
Reviewing “Gaslight” in The New York Times, Bosley Crowther equated the husband’s mind games with the director’s. The movie, he wrote, “has pulled such a ticklish assortment of melodramatic camera tricks that the audience was giggling with anxiety.” Among the many tactics used to unnerve Paula was the hiring of an insolent Cockney housemaid (18-year-old Angela Lansbury in her first movie role).
Where the play was confined to a single claustrophobic set, the movie is opened up to include scenes in Italy and the Tower of London. (Cukor also employed a third star, Joseph Cotten, as a sympathetic, if unlikely, representative of Scotland Yard.) Mainly, however, the movie gives Bergman full rein. Girlishly trusting, passionately in love, tragically confused, hysterically terrified and implacably vengeful by turns, she runs a strenuous gamut of emotions to play her final scene as though it were a Shakespearean tragedy.
 It’s remarkable that, as robust a presence as she is, she convincingly plays a timorous victim. Hollywood rewarded her with an Oscar and Alfred Hitchcock, who had made two analogous gothic thrillers, “Rebecca” (1940) and “Suspicion” (1941), in which Joan Fontaine coped with a sketchy spouse, cast Bergman in two upcoming pictures, “Spellbound” (1945) and “Notorious” (1946).
For its part, MGM undertook to gaslight audiences by pretending that the British movie never existed. The studio tried to destroy all prints; that the first “Gaslight” survived at all may be credited to the director Thorold Dickinson’s foresight in making a personal copy.
Like the movie’s horrible husband, MGM had a reason. Bergman’s bravura performance aside, the Dickinson film is superior to the Hollywood version in nearly every way: more economical (running half an hour shorter), more brutal (opening with the murder of an elderly woman and the killer ransacking her flat), and a lot nastier.  Unctuously pious, he’s clearly unhinged as well as openly predatory in making the housemaid his mistress. (Cathleen Cordell is a lot tawdrier than Lansbury as well.) There’s a terrific bit of business where the pair go off to the music hall to catch some French cancan dancers.
By then, the plot became overly familiar. In addition to Hitchcock’s two kindred gothics, other versions of this female noir included Joseph H. Lewis’s “My Name is Julia Ross” (1945), Vincente Minnelli’s “Undercurrent” (1946) and two Anatole Litvak 1948 melodramas, the Barbara Stanwyck vehicle “Sorry Wrong Number” and Olivia de Havilland in “The Snake Pit.” “Gaslight” was dramatized on the radio and satirized on TV. By the time Robert Aldrich made “Hush … Hush, Sweet Charlotte” (1964) in which Joseph Cotten and Olivia de Havilland conspire to undermine Bette Davis’s sanity, the verb “to gaslight” had made its way into both popular culture (used in sitcoms as early as 1952) and psychoanalytic discourse.
Maureen Dowd may have been the first to apply the “gaslight” to politics. Her 1995 op-ed piece, “The Gaslight Strategy” playfully described the Clinton administration’s attempt to provoke the speaker of the house, Newt Gingrich, into making irrational outbursts. In Gingrich’s case, she thought such a scheme was unnecessary: “You can’t Gaslight someone who is already a little lit.” True or not, we’ll see if this term, so commonly used in the last presidential election, continues to have relevance in the next.
The 1944 version of “Gaslight” can be streamed via Amazon Prime, Vudu and YouTube; the 1940 version is available from Amazon Prime, iTunes, and Vudu.