Or Los Angeles freeways without speeding, or Moscow without grinding traffic.
The solution may be to program vehicles based on the local customs. In California, keeping up with the flow of freeway traffic typically means driving 10 to 15 miles an hour over the posted limit, whereas drivers in some parts of the East stay much closer to the legal speed (emphasis on some).
Autonomous vehicles are classified by six levels, from zero to five. Fully autonomous, Level 5, vehicles will not be available for 10 years or longer, Mr. Rosekind believes, and only after they’ve been tested for billions, not the current millions, of miles.
Those rules are being contemplated by such organizations as SAE International, a transportation standards-setting organization; university transportation departments; and Partners for Automated Vehicle Education, a recently formed industry and academic coalition that is conducting autonomous vehicle demo days, workshops and other activities.
While news media attention has recently focused on the handful of deaths caused by autonomous vehicles, education is needed to convince people that the self-driving cars will be much safer than today’s cars and trucks, which kill more than 30,000 people every year in the United States, Mr. Rosekind said.
Autonomous vehicles could be designed to never exceed the speed limit except in emergencies, resulting in a sharp drop in traffic tickets — and revenue. Or local governments could mandate that such a car’s software be programmed to stay within certain speed limits, or stay off residential streets that are now used as freeway-avoiding shortcuts.
The problems will be worst when autonomous and manually driven vehicles occupy the same roads; will a driver try to outwit a self-driving vehicle, or will that car always have the advantage?
Given that vehicles are typically kept for close to 12 years, it will be decades before the majority of the 278 million standard vehicles — and their independent and unpredictable drivers — are off American roads.
Until then, it’s possible that self-driving cars will need their own lanes, to avoid mixing it up with cars driven by humans, whose errors now account for 94 percent of vehicle crashes.
Other potential changes include a reduction in the need for parking lots, once autonomous cars can simply park themselves anywhere, or circle around until they’re needed. Architects are working on parking lot designs that can be repurposed into offices.
And cities will need to find new sources of revenue if an autonomous vehicle can drive away from a parking meter once it expires, or never park at all.
How an autonomous vehicle behaves will be of concern not just to drivers but to manufacturers and insurance companies. “If the automaker is ultimately responsible for an autonomous vehicle’s behavior, then they will want it to act conservatively,” Mr. Winfree said.
Within the next several months, SAE International expects to have formulated a list of autonomous-vehicle standards. They include autonomous testing protocols for drivers, as well as the standardization of the placement of emergency stop buttons, the action that should be taken in case of an emergency, and the type of warning that pedestrians should receive when an autonomous vehicle is approaching.
Industry executives expect that in the next few years, the public will begin to see self-driving vehicles operating in limited environments, such as people movers and delivery vehicles. (Lyft is testing self-driving vehicles in Las Vegas and Phoenix, with a human backup ready to take the wheel.) Their hope is that public sentiment toward autonomous cars will become more positive thanks to education efforts, and once people can buy them.
And as more old-school cars fade off the roads in favor of the self-driven ones, it’s possible that vehicle flow could be adjusted more dynamically, based on the number of pedestrians present, said Chris Gerdes, the director of the Center for Automotive Research at Stanford University and a former chief innovation officer for the Transportation Department.
