The writer and director Lulu Wang narrates a sequence from her film, starring Awkwafina.
The writer and director Lulu Wang narrates a scene from her film, featuring Awkwafina and Zhao Shuzhen.
I’m Lulu Wang, and I’m the writer and director of ‘The Farewell.’ “Ha!” This is a scene between Billi and Nai Nai, her grandma. It’s the morning after Billi has arrived in China, and Nai Nai is exercising. It’s played by Nora Lum, aka Awkwafina, and Zhao Shuzhen as Nai Nai. “Ha!” This was the first scene that we shot on the first day of production. And I was kind of nervous about it, because I wasn’t sure of the chemistry between the two actors. And the entire scene is shot in one take with a static camera. And we just let the actors move freely around the frame. But I knew that I wasn’t going to be able to edit the scene. So Anna Franquesa Solano is my DP, and we talked a lot about this scene, because it’s the first scene where Billi and Nai Nai are together alone. And we wanted it to be a static shot because we wanted the audience to feel the natural chemistry between the two actors— “Ha! Ha!” —without the camera getting in the way. So we put markers down on the floor, eventually, because at first, we gave the actors a lot of freedom, and Nora would roam off camera. And she would just be off camera the whole time. So this exercise is something that my own grandmother did. And it was always kind of funny to me, but she took it very seriously. And I had a hard time, actually, getting Zhao Shuzhen, who plays Nai Nai, to do the exercise, because it’s not something that she does in her real life. And it’s actually quite difficult. It takes a lot of core strength to really get the loudness of that ‘ha.’ So it took a lot of practice, and she was pretty winded by the end of it.
This sound echoing through a neighborhood in the Chinese city of Changchun isn’t that of laughter, but of a disciplined workout routine. It’s coming from Billi (Nora Lum, a.k.a. Awkwafina) and her grandmother, or Nai Nai (Zhao Shuzhen).
In “The Farewell,” Billi has returned to the city to visit her ailing Nai Nai, who has been diagnosed with cancer. But the grandmother hasn’t been told this diagnosis and thinks that Billi, along with the rest of her family, is visiting for a wedding.
The shooting style often aims to mirror that narrative through unbroken, stationary shots. Its writer and director, Lulu Wang, explained how in an interview.
Here, Wang discusses how she worked with her actors and gave them the freedom to move around the frame and even out of it to build a naturalistic sequence that solidifies the chemistry between them.
