Etgar Keret, the writer of absurd, sad, funny and very short stories, grows up.
The car crash brought it all into focus.
For the short-story writer Etgar Keret, a new collection usually takes shape in response to some overwhelming event in his life. He’ll be writing his three- or four-page tales, saving them to folders on his computer that he occasionally loses, then boom, something happens that ties them all together. This time it was a literal boom. Two years ago, he was on his way from Connecticut to Boston when his driver, speeding to get to the next reading, hit another car on the highway.
The windshield shattered, the airbags exploded, and the car filled with the smell of fuel. Keret had broken two ribs.
With that, he had the binding idea for his sixth collection of stories, coming in September in English as “Fly Already.” In many ways these sardonic and very short fables are the next installment in the series of strange scenarios cooked up in Keret’s brain since his first collection appeared in Hebrew in 1992. In the United States, they have made him into a cult darling for those who have heard him interpreted on “This American Life” or read them in The New Yorker.
These tales join the one about a man who discovers that his girlfriend transforms every night into a hairy, heavyset couch potato, or the one about a woman who finds that her lover has a zipper in his mouth hiding another man inside, or the one about the talking goldfish that grants its owner three wishes. They are absurd stories your stoned friend might unfold while giggling, but the best of them land at some insight into the human condition, all economy and charm.
He said he was “happy and flattered and a bit confused” by the award since he never saw himself as an Israeli writer in the mold of Amos Oz or David Grossman, literary lions of an earlier generation who tried to capture the reality of living in a country always at the cusp of conflict. Keret might be classified more as a Jewish than an Israeli writer, more versed and interested in the varieties of alienation, working in the tradition, he said, of Franz Kafka, Sholem Aleichem or Isaac Bashevis Singer — who are, incidentally, remembered for their short stories.
The title story of the new collection is a perfect example. In it a father and his young son watch as a suicidal man prepares to jump from a rooftop. The boy gets excited, thinking he’s seeing a superhero about to fly, while the father, emotionally wounded from a car accident in which his wife died, yells for him not to do it. The father and son run to stop him, but it’s too late. Standing on the edge, a red-haired woman sees them and thinks the father is going to jump with his child in his arms, and yells “Don’t do it. Please don’t do it.” It’s all over in seven pages — long for a Keret story — and like many of his tales it lands on a punch line that is poignant but also ridiculous, with a postscript in which the boy, his father and the woman go out for ice cream.
Keret also said this collection was a return to the sci-fi inflections of his earlier stories. One of the most nightmarish new pieces is “Tabula Rasa,” about an institute in which people pay to produce clones they can then kill. It’s told from the perspective of a man who turns out to be the clone of Hitler, whose creation was paid for by a Holocaust survivor. But Keret shifts the readers’ sympathies to the clone, who has so much humanity that the survivor is robbed of the satisfaction he thought he would get from shooting him in the head.
Keret’s parents were both Holocaust survivors. He described his father, who died a few years ago, as a “compulsive optimist” who, after being forced to hide in a hole with his parents for two years, would tell his son that life could only get better. Keret said his father fought to humanize and historicize the Holocaust, to see it as more than a story of unmitigated oppression.
“I really feel that there is something dehumanizing in being just a victim,” Keret said. When the Holocaust shows up in his stories, it is often as a foil, a background to the lives of individuals like the narrator in “Yad Vashem,” who is touring Israel’s Holocaust museum. He comes to understand that his girlfriend is going to leave him, and his own private grief, so engulfing for him, becomes larger than the horrific images of genocide depicted around him.
Not an interview goes by, including this one, when Keret isn’t asked when he’ll finally devote himself to a longer, more sustained work: a novel. For him it’s an uninteresting question. When he starts thinking of bigger projects, his mind turns to screenwriting. He directed “Jellyfish,” a film written by his wife, Shira Geffen, that won the 2007 Camera d’Or at Cannes. His next project is a French television series the two of them created, starring Mathieu Amalric as a real estate broker, that is set to premiere in March.
Follow Gal Beckerman on Twitter: @galbeckerman.