Summer moves at Juventus were the latest example of a broken economy in which teams are selling players they should keep, and keeping players they would prefer to sell.
Sign up here to receive Rory Smith’s weekly newsletter on world soccer, delivered to your email inbox every Friday.
Paulo Dybala had no reason to think he would be leaving Juventus this summer. When the Argentine forward departed for Brazil, and the Copa América, at the end of last season, he presumed he would soon be back in Turin (and not just because of Argentina’s record at the Copa América).
Indeed, if anything, he was excited by the prospect of returning. Last season was probably the most frustrating of the four the 25-year-old Dybala has spent in Turin. His coach, Massimiliano Allegri, had recalibrated his side to accommodate Cristiano Ronaldo, relegating Dybala to the fringes — either of games or the team — more often than he would like.
Still, the summer had offered hope. Allegri, surprisingly, had left the club, replaced by Maurizio Sarri. Dybala thought he would be well suited to Sarri’s fast, technical style, the precise pinball that had brought him such success at Napoli, and won him the Europa League at Chelsea.
It was something of a shock, then, to discover that Juventus did not see things the same way. Dybala was told the club needed money, and that it had decided he might be the source of it. He was offered the chance to join Manchester United, in a swap for Romelu Lukaku. He was almost sold to Tottenham Hotspur.
That Juventus needed to find some way of balancing the books was not a surprise, perhaps not even to Dybala: paying Ronaldo’s salary was onerous enough, and this summer the club had invested heavily in the Dutch defender Matthijs De Ligt, too.
More unexpected was the fact that it was prepared to sell Dybala — la joya, the jewel, as he is known — in order to do it.
The explanation is simple, but it contains a message that Europe’s elite class of superclubs would do well to heed.
Juventus tried to sell Dybala — and instead succeeded in selling Moise Kean, a teenage striking prospect of considerable promise, to Everton — because it could not sell the players it actually needed to shift. The likes of Sami Khedira, Gonzalo Higuain and perhaps even Blaise Matuidi were all on the market as Juventus tried to rejuvenate its squad, but the club could not find takers for any of them.
The vast majority of clubs cannot afford to match those players’ salaries; those that can are not the sort of teams that tend to buy castoffs. So Juventus, getting desperate, turned to Dybala, Kean and the right back Joao Cancelo: selling players it should want to keep because it cannot sell the players it no longer needs.
Juventus is not the only one of Europe’s aristocrats caught in the trap. Real Madrid does not quite know what to do with James Rodriguez and, in particular, Gareth Bale. Barcelona has been unable to find a home, permanent or temporary, for Philippe Coutinho. Paris St.-Germain does not want to keep Neymar, and he does not want to stay, but their unhappy union may have to continue for some time.
It is easy, in this situation, to blame the players, to say they should all be prepared to drop their salary expectations in order to play the game they love, but that has always had the air of the sort of advice it is rather easier to preach than practice. If you are owed a certain amount of money — however little you theoretically need that money — it is a bold step to forego (a portion of) it willingly, simply because your debtor has decided they do not want to pay it.
It is better, perhaps, to look at the clubs: to ask if perhaps they might use this summer as a learning experience, a chance to fine-tune their recruitment policies, moving away from stockpiling as many players as possible and toward a more focused, scientific, youth-oriented approach.
Elite players nearing their 30s should not be on long-term contracts. They should not be signed for large fees or guaranteed market-defying salaries on a presidential whim. Clubs should not be assembling rosters packed with 25 high-profile senior internationals.
There is a chance that all of this will work out in the end: it might require a spider diagram to explain it, but essentially if Neymar leaves P.S.G. — perhaps with Coutinho or Bale or Rodriguez in part-exchange — then Dybala may move to Paris (or be part of a swap deal for Inter Milan’s Mauro Icardi). All of the dominoes may yet line up just right. Even if they do, though, there is a lesson from this summer for Europe’s great houses. If they do not learn it, they may yet find themselves undone by their own gluttony.
With Apologies, Something About V.A.R.
You may have noticed that the referee for this week’s UEFA Super Cup between Liverpool and Chelsea did not share the same gender as the players on the field. Stephanie Frappart, the Frenchwoman who took charge of the Women’s World Cup final last month, became the first woman to referee a “major” — the quotation marks are because that is a generous description of the Super Cup — UEFA game.
It went extremely smoothly, too: Jurgen Klopp, the Liverpool coach, said that if his team had played as well as she “whistled,” it would have won, 6-0. (What a surprise, patriarchy fans, that a woman should be as capable of enforcing a set of rules and running around some grass as a man would).
The only (minor) controversy stemmed from elsewhere. In extra time, with Liverpool leading by 2-1, Frappart awarded Chelsea a penalty for a foul by the Liverpool goalkeeper Adrian San Miguel on the Chelsea forward Tammy Abraham. At first glance, it looked as if she had got the decision correct; Adrian protested his innocence, of course, but then that’s what they all do.
The replays, though, muddied the waters. The more camera angles viewers saw, the less it looked like a penalty. Nevertheless, it stood. And it stood because UEFA’s diktat on the use of V.A.R. is that if the referee has not made a “clear and obvious” error, the original decision will stand.
That is an understandable logic, but it is unsatisfying. I am pro-V.A.R., but anti the reasons for V.A.R. (I think it would be easier if we all just accepted referees sometimes get things wrong.) If you are going to go to the trouble of introducing it, though, on the grounds that it is a way of getting more decisions right, it seems odd to have a built-in system to protect decisions a referee gets wrong.
Perhaps it is inevitable that there will be some gray areas; some decisions, after all, are intrinsically borderline, and perhaps in those situations the on-field referee should have the final say. Perhaps what constitutes “clear and obvious” needs to be, well, more clear and obvious (debatable penalties are fine; a millimeter on an offside call is not).
Either way, it feels as if the sort of thing that will turn fans against the whole idea. Most would have accepted Frappart’s penalty call as understandable five years ago; now, with a mechanism in place that has been proselytized as a guarantee of accuracy failing to live up to its billing, there is no need to make allowance for human error. Technology is much harder to forgive.
It is impressive, even by La Liga’s standards, that it only confirmed the time and date of the opening game of its season with about a week’s notice. Given the levels of disorganization in its scheduling, it perhaps should not be a surprise that Spain’s top flight has found some of its broadcast rights a bit of a hard sell.
 La Liga confirmed Thursday that its games would be broadcast on free-to-air television in Britain this season; indeed, it will be the only league regularly available to the vast majority of television viewers in Britain.
It always surprises me that more leagues have not pursued this strategy. It is beneficial, of course, to get as much money as possible for your broadcast rights; but is it not better, in the long-term, to build an audience first? Would it not be sensible for leagues seeking to break in to a potentially lucrative arena to allow as many people as possible to watch their product, and only once that fan base is established to seek to maximize its return?
Perhaps that is naïve — I am, famously, not a television executive — but it feels as if this may play in La Liga’s favor eventually. The more people have chance to watch Lionel Messi and Joao Felix and Eden Hazard, the more people are likely to decide, when the time comes, that it is worth taking out a subscription to do so. Serie A took that into consideration into selling its American rights to ESPN, too. It is important to have something to sell, of course, but so is having someone to sell it to.
Manchester City started its Premier League season with a 5-0 win at West Ham. Is there any point any of the rest of its opponents turning up this year? Probably not.
It looks as if U.S. Soccer and its marquee team, the world champion women’s national side, are heading for court over gender discrimination. Mediation talks between the two camps collapsed this week. US Soccer is not looking good on this.
And if you’ve seen Arsenal play recently, you will have noticed their beautiful jersey. It’s part of a wave of nostalgia for a very specific period of soccer history: the late 1980s and early 1990s. I tried to find out why that era dominates soccer’s cultural space, and learned what a raglan sleeve was in the process.
Speaking of nostalgia, Bruce Jones got in touch to share a story about finding an Everton jersey for sale in a Nairobi street market, and to wonder whether the “uncomplicated authenticity” of fans that makes English clubs so popular might be lost in the rush to corporatize and sanitize soccer, if it might lose its identity in its attempt to mass-market its appeal. He also has an idea for a rule change: outlawing any tackle that involves winning the ball with the sole of the foot. That makes considerable sense.
Strictly speaking, this is overdue — the size of a goal is based on the size of a Victorian man, most of whom were considerably smaller than Manuel Neuer — but I am also very much of the view that the rarity, and the value, of goals is what makes soccer special. I’m not sure we should change that too lightly.
Thanks, as ever, for all of the correspondence to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| If you wish to convey your thoughts anonymously and with cursing, please consider Twitter. If you prefer to consume soccer through the medium of pictures of spaniels, there is Instagram.
