A Justice Department newsletter that is distributed to federal immigration judges and other employees contained a blog post this week from an extremist group that included an anti-Semitic reference, a national union for the judges said.
The briefing is sent out daily by the department’s Executive Office for Immigration Review, which is responsible for adjudicating the nation’s immigration cases.
That term has historically been used in a non-pejorative way to describe “rule by judges,” but more recently it has been co-opted by white nationalists and anti-Semitic extremists, according to the Anti-Defamation League.
Kathryn Mattingly, a spokeswoman for the immigration review office, said on Friday that the office would not renew its contract with the service that provided the newsletter and would stop distributing the briefing to its staff.
On Friday, Judge Tabbador said she learned about the newsletter from colleagues who were outraged about the link to the white nationalist website.
On Thursday, the parent union, the International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers, also sharply criticized the Justice Department.
Mr. Shearon also urged the Justice Department to apologize to everyone who had received the newsletter, to take steps to ensure no such material would be distributed again in an official federal government publication and to provide appropriate safety and security measures for immigration judges.
The VDare post also included a photograph of Judge Amiena Khan, the executive vice president of the immigration judges’ union, which has publicly criticized the use of a quota system in immigration court and other attempts to speed up proceedings.
Judge Tabaddor and Judge Khan have spoken out repeatedly against what they say is an attempt to turn immigration judges from neutral arbiters of the law into law enforcement agents enacting the White House’s policies. They have called for immigration judges to be independent of the Justice Department.
“There are examples throughout the course of history of societies ruled by judges, with one of the more well-known examples being the land of Israel as described in the Biblical books of Joshua and Judges,” he said in an emailed statement on Friday.
That reference is used to convey their “displeasure and belief that these judges are acting independently and without accountability to a form of government — mainly as it pertains to social issues, specifically immigration,” Mr. Tuchman said.
“Many of the extremists on VDare who use this term are in fact anti-Semites, and they may intentionally be using ‘kritarch’ as a way to express their anti-Semitism, but on its own, the term is not self-evidently anti-Semitic,” he said.
On Thursday, after the uproar over the news briefing began, VDare wrote on its website that the word “kritarch” meant only “rule by judges” and that it was “strange” that Judge Tabaddor believed the term was meant to be anti-Semitic.
Steven Mains, the chief executive of TECHmis, the company that compiles the news briefings for the immigration review office, said in an interview on Friday that the briefings were cobbled together by his company’s editors from a variety of news sources using key words provided by the department. The 40 or more final choices are not vetted by the Justice Department before being sent to the list of recipients, he said.
Elisha Brown and Mariel Padilla contributed reporting.