A patient in Illinois is the first to die of a mysterious lung illness linked to vaping, public health officials announced on Friday.
The death occurred as doctors and hospitals nationwide report an increasing number of vaping-related respiratory illnesses this summer: 193 cases have now been reported in 22 states, including 22 cases in Illinois, officials said.
Many patients, including some in Illinois, have acknowledged vaping of tetrahydrocannabinol, or (T.H.C.), the high-inducing chemical in marijuana, according to statements from federal and state health agencies.
Amid the lack of information, investigators are scrambling to find shared links to the respiratory problems. Officials said earlier this week that many patients, most of whom were adolescents or young adults, had described difficulty breathing, chest pain, vomiting and fatigue.
“More information is needed to know what is causing these illnesses,” said Ileana Arias, an official with the C.D.C., said on Friday.
“We’re at a relatively early stage of understanding,” Mitchell Zeller, director for the Center for Tobacco Products at the F.D.A., said on Friday. The collective agencies were throwing “a lot of resources at this,” he added, but part of the problem was that state investigations are not always complete, making it difficult to form a clear picture.
One theory, as of yet unproved, is that illnesses may result from substances that are thought or known to be toxic in vaping products, which use heat to vaporize nicotine and other inhalants.
Dr. Michael Lynch, medical director of the Pittsburgh Poison Center at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, said the lung injuries doctors there are seeing are consistent with chemical inhalation injuries.
Dr. John Holcomb, a pulmonologist in San Antonio, Tex., noted that the F.D.A. has no control over the ingredients used in vaping products.
Others suggested that individuals are emptying out commercial nicotine pods and filling them up with a combination of T.H.C. oil and other chemicals.
If the respiratory illnesses can be traced to T.H.C.-laced vapors, public health officials and doctors expressed concern that it may signal the emergence of a second front in the battle against youth vaping: the growing use of unregulated, bootleg or black market cannabis liquids.
