RIO DE JANEIRO — Hours after leaders of some of the world’s wealthiest countries pledged more than $22 million to help combat fires in the Amazon rainforest, Brazil’s government angrily rejected the offer, in effect telling the other nations to mind their own business — only to later lay out potential terms for the aid’s acceptance and then, on Tuesday evening, accepting some aid from Britain.
President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil expressed his ire in a series of Twitter posts on Monday, extending his verbal feud with President Emmanuel Macron of France, who had announced the aid package at the Group of 7 summit meeting.
But early the next day, Mr. Bolsonaro offered possible terms for its acceptance. If Mr. Macron withdrew what he called personal insults and insinuations that Brazil does not have sovereignty over the Amazon, he said, he would reconsider.
“He will have to withdraw his words, and then we can talk,” Mr. Bolsonaro said.
After refusing the G7 help, Brazil decided to accept $12 million in aid from Britain to help fight the fires in the Amazon. The decision was made after Brazil’s foreign minister, Ernesto Araújo, was offered the help by Dominic Raab, the British foreign secretary, in a meeting on Tuesday.
More than 26,000 forest fires have been recorded in the Amazon rainforest this month, the highest number in a decade, setting off outrage and calls for more protections. The forests absorb a significant share of the planet’s climate-warming carbon dioxide, are home to indigenous peoples, and are a vital habitat for endangered species.
But the rancor over the G7 donation spilled into the United Nations, which is planning a climate summit next month during its annual General Assembly. Asked at a news briefing about Brazil’s apparent refusal to accept the money, Luis Alfonso de Alba, a Mexican diplomat who is the secretary-general’s special envoy for the climate summit, sought to avoid taking sides.
Maps and images based on satellite data provide clues to how the fires started.
Mr. Bolsonaro has been widely criticized by environmentalists for calls to open up protected parts of the Amazon rainforest to logging, farming, mining and other development, which many say has caused further exploitation of the region. The illegally set fires and resulting deforestation, critics say, are being driven by his policies.
On Tuesday, Mr. Bolsonaro and members of his cabinet met with governors from all nine states that make up Brazil’s Amazon region to discuss the fire and offers of aid.
Some governors made clear they supported Mr. Bolsonaro’s drive to develop the Amazon, and complained that too much of their states’ territories were blocked off as indigenous and environmental reserves, hampering their growth.
Others were more concerned with securing the help offered by the G7 countries, and with bolstering diplomacy.
During the meeting, Mr. Bolsonaro blamed the international crisis in which he finds himself on media outlets that reported on the fire, on those who oppose him for not wanting to protect more indigenous land, and on France, whose president Mr. Bolsonaro believes has overreacted to the problem to score points at home.
These international demonstrations of concern are, in reality, attempts to infringe on Brazil’s rights over its own territory, he said.
Accepting international help might come with “a price,” Mr. Bolsonaro warned, including the protection of other lands. “And this will take us to a destiny we already know: Brazil’s insolvency,” he added.
But as much as Brazil’s sovereignty must be respected, the country is not in a position to reject help, said Elizabeth Uema, a representative of an association of public servants who work in Brazil’s environmental agencies. Brazil also cut 25 percent of the budget for the main environmental agency, Ibama, this year.
Some Brazilians are growing concerned about economic losses from the crisis. Norway and Germany have suspended contributions to the Amazon Fund, which bankrolls much of the equipment used in environmental law enforcement, over what they see as Brazil’s interference in the effort.
Mr. Macron himself has threatened to block a major European trade deal with four South American nations, including Brazil, which was just completed but has not been ratified. And Swedish and Norwegian pension funds have started investigating whether international companies with investments in the Amazon were taking enough action to save the rainforest.
Last Friday, Blairo Maggi, a former agriculture minister and the main shareholder at Amaggi, one of Brazil’s main grain trading groups, told a local radio station that he was worried the crisis could lead to a boycott of the country’s exports.
