Long before streaming video, it captured images of campus life every 20 seconds. The quirky project, believed to be the longest-running public webcam, will shut down at the end of August.
Two grad students at San Francisco State created the FogCam in the early days of the web and kept it going for 25 years.
It has been around longer than Facebook, Billie Eilish and the Impossible Burger. It survived a dot-com boom, bust and boom again. It has outlasted five mayors. But now, after 25 years, the San Francisco FogCam, which many people contend is the world’s oldest webcam, will be turned off for good.
At the end of August, Jeff Schwartz, known online as Webdog, and Dan Wong, called Danno, are switching off the webcam they set up in 1994 to capture student life at San Francisco State University. The two were earning their master’s degrees in instructional technologies in the Graduate College of Education at the time, and started the webcam as an experiment. But as the men got older, and the webcam became harder to maintain, they decided to let it go.
“It’s just time to move on,” Mr. Schwartz said in an interview on Tuesday.
The two announced FogCam’s closing Aug. 17 on Twitter, causing a flurry of stories in the local San Francisco press.
Indeed, it was a cult favorite among certain quarters of the technorati. Those were the early days of the internet, and everyone, it seemed, was experimenting with new technologies. Netscape released its first web browser that year. Steve Jobs, a co-founder of Apple who was ousted in 1985, was making software at NeXT. (Mr. Jobs returned to Apple in 1997.) A year later, Pixar’s “Toy Story” would debut in theaters. The FogCam, by contrast, didn’t do much of anything special, which was part of its quirky charm. It was enough of a novelty in that time, long before streaming video, to see live images from an ordinary, everyday place.
Mr. Schwartz said the men created the webcam with a Mac computer and camera they bought at the campus bookstore. Webcam photos were updated on the site every 20 seconds. For a short time, they had a chat room. In a 2004 interview with the Golden Gate Xpress, Mr. Wong explained that he and Mr. Schwartz created it to give outsiders “a typical view of campus life.” But Mr. Schwartz said they often had run-ins with school administrators who threatened numerous times to shut it down.
As a result, they were forced to frequently change the webcam’s location. Their first choice was the student center, but they were denied access. (It was an era when people still guarded their privacy, Mr. Schwartz said.) Over the years, they placed it in front of the student health center, in a room overlooking Tapia Drive and where it is now, facing Holloway Avenue on the edge of campus.
He said the webcam once captured a group of people dancing. “That was cool,” he said. When the rain fell, FogCam viewers saw students running to escape the wet, their umbrellas turned inside out. “It was a slice of life,” Mr. Schwartz said.
