NEW DELHI — India’s Hindu nationalist government on Monday unilaterally wiped out the autonomy of the restive Kashmir region, sending in thousands of army troops to quell any possible unrest the move would bring in a disputed territory fought over by India and Pakistan.
For years, India’s Hindu nationalists have wanted to curtail the special freedoms enjoyed by Kashmir, a mountainous, predominantly Muslim territory that has turned into a tinderbox between India and Pakistan, both of which wield nuclear arms.
On Monday, Amit Shah, India’s home minister, announced in a quick speech, which belied years of steady plotting, that the central government was removing the special, somewhat autonomous status that served as the foundation for Kashmir joining India more than 70 years ago.
Several top Kashmiri politicians were taken into custody. Mehbooba Mufti, a former chief minister of Kashmir, managed to get out a message shortly before she was arrested on Monday night.
With an overwhelming majority, the upper house of Parliament passed a related bill Monday evening that split the state of Jammu and Kashmir, which includes the Kashmir Valley and the Ladakh area, into two federal territories: Jammu and Kashmir, which will have a state legislature, and Ladakh, a remote, high-altitude area, which will be ruled directly from New Delhi.
Officials in Pakistan were contacting allies around the world to try and oppose the action, but many analysts said Pakistan has little credibility on the issue. Pakistan has a long history of covertly supporting militant groups in Kashmir, despite pressure from allies to stop.
The B.J.P.’s leaders have cast the Kashmir issue as a nationalist cause and have raised fears of Pakistani infiltrations and terrorist attacks in the region.
Kashmir has been racked by bloodshed for years. Many Kashmiris don’t want to be part of India and a small but stubborn insurgency has been fighting Indian forces. Countless Hindus across India feel solidarity with Kashmiri Hindus, a minority in that area, who had been driven out over the years during the conflict.
Long-simmering tensions with Pakistan reached a breaking point in February, when a Kashmiri militant rammed a vehicle filled with explosives into a convoy of Indian paramilitary forces traveling on a highway, killing at least 40 soldiers. A banned terrorist group, Jaish-e-Muhammad, which is based in Pakistan, claimed responsibility.
It was the deadliest attack in the region in three decades, and set off a tense military standoff between India and Pakistan that culminated in a dogfight between Indian and Pakistani warplanes. Pakistan shot down and captured an Indian pilot, whose return helped calm the tensions.
President Trump recently met Prime Minister Imran Khan of Pakistan in Washington and offered to mediate on Kashmir, but India rejected that, saying Kashmir was a domestic, not an international, issue.
On Monday night, Kashmir seemed quiet. According to a few people who spoke to their relatives in the state government (some officials were given satellite phones), most streets were deserted. Soldiers were everywhere. Many people were scared to leave their homes.