New York|A Suburb Believed in Liberal Ideals. Then Came a New Busing Plan.
A Suburb Believed in Liberal Ideals. Then Came a New Busing Plan.
A school district confronts its segregated school system.
MAPLEWOOD, N.J — This suburb, with its high-performing schools, seems a haven of diversity and progressiveness. Signs that trumpet “Stigma-free Town” and “Hate Has No Home Here” hang from lampposts and, after a series of fatal police shootings across the country, “Black Lives Matter” placards popped up on lawns.
But now a strategy to tackle racial inequity in the school district is challenging the town’s self-image, casting a harsh light on segregation and the stark achievement gaps between black and white students — and raising pointed questions about race and class.
In the district that serves Maplewood and its neighbor, South Orange, the plan is to eliminate guaranteed seats in neighborhood elementary schools, bus children to other buildings and reduce the grouping of students by test scores, which has resulted in white students filling a disproportionate share of higher-level classes.
Though children of all backgrounds would be bused, a significant number would likely be white because of school enrollment trends.
Johanna Wright, a member of the district’s board of education, said the clear racial disparities in the system should make everyone feel the need to respond.
“There can be no more lying about the racism that infects public education in our school district,” she said.
While the district is generally considered high performing based on measurements like standardized test scores and the number of high school graduates bound for college, there are major differences between white students and black students.
The school district has, as far back as the 1960s, made efforts to racially integrate its schools — including using busing. But critics say some of the schools have struggled to achieve the ultimate goal of full integration. Marshall & Jefferson Elementary Schools have participated in busing in the past as part of integration efforts, but today, like other district elementary schools, provides bus transportation largely for geographic reasons.
Black students in the district are, on average, academically three grades behind their white peers and are five times likelier to be suspended than white students, according to an analysis in 2017 by ProPublica. On state tests in math and language arts, black students lagged behind their white classmates in all seven elementary schools.
And though the district has just one high school, white and black students have disparate experiences. White students made up 64 percent of the students who took Advanced Placement courses at Columbia High School, the ProPublica analysis found, while black students represented just 22 percent. In classes geared toward gifted and talented students, 83 percent of the seats were filled by white students, compared with the 7 percent of seats filled by black students.
“You can peer through a doorway of a classroom and you can tell, based on the racial makeup of the class, what level it is,” said Walter Fields, the leader of the Black Parents Workshop, a local advocacy group that filed a lawsuit this year accusing the district of discriminating against students of color.
In private Facebook groups and online forums, the district’s initiatives have set off impassioned clashes: Some parents say neighborhood schools provide convenience and familiarity; others worry that their children will be placed in less rigorous classes; and some question the district’s commitment to improving the treatment of black and Hispanic students.
Across the country, school districts are grappling with similar issues involving segregation and racial inequities.
The topic has also seeped into the race for the White House after Senator Kamala Harris took former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., a leading Democratic contender, to task for his past opposition to busing.
On the surface, Maplewood and South Orange are fairly diverse — about 60 percent of the combined population of 42,000 is white, while the rest of the residents are people of color. And the towns are well-off; the median household income in both communities exceeds $120,000, more than double the national average.
But housing patterns have divided the district. Of its seven elementary schools, one is predominantly nonwhite students, while the rest are majority white. The school with more students of color lags behind the others in academic achievement and has a higher concentration of low-income students.
While the schools, like the towns, are diverse, students are often separated by race. White students represent about half of the roughly 7,100 students. African-Americans make up 35 percent, and the rest are Hispanic, Asian or of mixed race, according to the census.
But those figures mask significant differences in the elementary schools.
At Seth Boyden Elementary School, which is in a section of Maplewood that is less well-off than other parts of the district, 57 percent of the 522 students are black. The highest African-American enrollment in the town’s other elementary schools is 18 percent.
Over half the students at Seth Boyden receive free or reduced-price lunches; in the town’s other elementary schools that figure never climbs above 20 percent.
The district has long tried to address the differences by allowing white parents to send their children to Seth Boyden, though that has largely failed to rectify the imbalance. Black parents at Seth Boyden had not been allowed to send their children to other schools until a year and a half ago, when the district ended that policy.
Ronald Taylor, who took over as superintendent in July after leading another New Jersey school district, said in emailed responses to written questions that the integration plan was still evolving and was “far from complete.’’ He said he was confident that once finished and “properly rolled out,’’ it would help achieve racial equity.
Mr. Taylor said he did not have enough information to address questions about the achievement gap. “I am in the earliest stages of my appointment and cannot make rushed judgment of our challenges,” he said.
In 2014, after the federal Office of Civil Rights found black students significantly underrepresented in advanced classes, the district agreed to hire a consultant to develop solutions. But the consultant, Thelma Ramsey, left without producing a plan.
Ms. Ramsey said school officials and some parents thwarted her efforts.
The school district is aiming to address the educational disparities by adopting controlled choice — a system used elsewhere that is designed to ensure that schools reflect a community’s demographic and economic makeup. Parents would be allowed to rank their school choices, but there would be no guarantee they would get their top pick. Children would have to travel to other parts of the district.
School officials said many children already are bused to schools outside their neighborhoods, in part because of overcrowding.
Many details of the plan, which also includes spending $140 million to renovate and repair school buildings, have yet to be sorted out, and it is not expected to begin before September 2021.
Mr. Ficarra recalled how some parents reacted when the integration plan was first presented.
“We got the kind of resistance where people say, ‘We are very much in favor of total integration — but,’” he said.
Parents and former students said they believed one reason black students have struggled is teacher bias in a district where the vast majority of the work force is white. Of the district’s 712 school employees, 554 are white, while 123 are black.
T.J. Whitaker, who teaches English at Columbia High School and is one of its few black teachers, said black students often begin high school having rarely read books by black authors.
Khadijah White, who graduated from Columbia High School in 2000, remembers being told she would not be able to learn the material in a math class, and that she could not get into A.P. classes, including biology, citing bias from white teachers. As a result, she said, she gave up her dream of becoming a forensic investigator.
“I was very much discouraged,” said Dr. White, who lives in Maplewood. She ended up getting a doctorate degree from the University of Pennsylvania and is now an assistant professor of journalism at Rutgers University.
Some parents wonder whether the district’s integration plan can really close a persistent achievement gap.
Some residents say the towns’ progressive self-promotion too often stops at the school door.
