DU YUN at the Stone (Sept. 3-7, 8:30 p.m.). The winner of the 2017 Pulitzer Prize for music for her opera “Angel’s Bone,” Du Yun is taking up a residency at the Stone that is typical of her broad tastes. On Tuesday and Wednesday, when she collaborates with OK Miss, there are ballads, folk and punk; on Thursday, she sings and plays piano with Shayna Dunkleman on drums and electronics; on Sept. 6, she is joined by Raven Chacon on electronics and Ryan Muncy on saxophone. Expect the unexpected.
HERE AND NOW LABOR DAY FESTIVAL at Bargemusic (Aug. 30, 7 p.m.; Aug. 31, 6 p.m.; Sept. 1, 4 p.m.). This festival always shows the Brooklyn barge-cum-concert hall at its best. This year, three almost-identical programs showcase world or local premieres, with all three featuring music by Jonathan Howard Katz, Paul Chihara, Marty Regan, Jonathan Cziner and David Taylor; Friday’s concert adds pieces by Louis Karchin and Kathleen Supové, while Saturday’s and Sunday’s add piano works by Stanley Walden. Performers include the pianists Ursula Oppens and Daniel Schlosberg, the samisen player Yoko Reikano Kimura and the cellist Julian Schwarz.
RESONANT BODIES FESTIVAL at Roulette (Sept. 3-5, 7:30 p.m.). The seventh year of this excellent and innovative festival plays true to type, with three concerts on successive nights, each made up of sets from three particular singers and their chosen collaborators. On Tuesday, the singers are Jane Sheldon, Anthony Roth Costanzo and Charmaine Lee; on Wednesday, Anaïs Maviel, Kate Soper and Ted Hearne; and on Thursday, Erin Gee, Arooj Aftab and Stephanie Blythe, appearing in her drag persona, Blythely Oratonio. Special passes are available if you can make it to all three nights.
SUMMER HD FESTIVAL at Lincoln Center Plaza (Aug. 30-Sept. 2, 8 p.m.). The Met’s annual big-screen showings of past film broadcasts conclude, with about 3,000 free seats each night. Full details are available online, but the pick is Cilea’s “Adriana Lecouvreur” on Monday. It stars Anna Netrebko, Anita Rachvelishvili and Piotr Beczala, with Gianandrea Noseda on the podium.