President Trump, at the G7 summit in Biarritz, France, once again caught off guard allies who disagree with him on trade tariffs, global warming, Russia and China.
One big, happy family. Well, big, anyway.
Trump admitted ‘second thoughts’ on China. His spokeswoman says he was misinterpreted.
Iran’s foreign minister visits Biarritz, prompting much speculation.
The leaders came to ‘real convergence’ on helping tame the Amazon fires.
Beneath the obligatory veneer of civility expected at the annual gathering of some of the world’s leading powers, there had been tensions during the day, including over issues like trade, climate change and Iran.
But for this one moment, anyway, the leaders were on the same stage — if not the same page.
Less than five hours after President Trump appeared to waver in his threats to escalate a trade war with China, the White House insisted that the president had done no such thing and that his only regret was that he had not been more aggressive.
Speaking to reporters earlier Sunday morning, Mr. Trump was asked if he had second thoughts about ratcheting up tariffs and threats against China last week, in moves that rattled global stock markets.
Mr. Trump added that “We’re getting along very well with China” and said that he did not expect to declare an emergency that could allow him to order American companies out of China, as he had suggested days earlier.
“President Trump responded in the affirmative — because he regrets not raising the tariffs higher,” she said in a statement emailed to reporters.
Her statement underscored the president’s disdain for being seen as weak or backing down in the face of criticism. But it also reflected the back-and-forth nature of Mr. Trump’s trade confrontation with China, which has shifted between negotiations, threats conveyed over Twitter, and a series of escalating tariffs.
Last week, after China announced retaliatory tariffs on $75 billion in American goods, Mr. Trump reacted furiously. In a series of tweets, he condemned China’s intransigence and vowed to impose even higher tariffs on a broader set of Chinese products.
It seemed on Sunday morning that his attitude had shifted — until Ms. Grisham said it had not, at least for now.
A surprise guest, Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif of Iran, arrived in Biarritz on Sunday, to great speculation about what his presence means.
The French government invited Mr. Zarif after consulting on Saturday evening with leaders of other Group of Seven nations, French officials said.
“Iran’s active diplomacy in pursuit of constructive engagement continues,” Mr. Zarif said on Twitter afterward.
The foreign minister said he had met on the sidelines with Mr. Macron after meeting with Mr. Le Drian. He said he had also given a joint briefing to British and German officials.
The Europeans have kept up dialogue with Iran even as Mr. Trump has abandoned the 2015 nuclear agreement with Tehran and sought to impose “maximum pressure” on the government there. Mr. Macron and his counterparts in Britain and Germany have sought to salvage the nuclear deal, even as Iran has begun exceeding its limits.
It was not clear whether the Americans tacitly accepted Mr. Zarif’s visit to Biarritz or if it was in effect a poke at Mr. Trump by Mr. Macron.
Mr. Trump has said he would be open to negotiating with Iran, despite repeated clashes in the Persian Gulf region involving tankers and drones, and sanctions that Mr. Trump has imposed on Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Trump said he had not discussed or signed such a joint statement, but had no objection to Mr. Macron’s outreach.
Mr. Macron, the French president, said leaders at the G7 summit had agreed that the fires scorching the Amazon rain forest were an emergency.
“There is a real convergence to say: ‘Let us all reach an agreement to help, as quickly as possible, the countries that are hit by these fires,” he told reporters.
Mr. Macron said that France had a special stake in the issue because of French Guiana, an overseas department that borders Brazil. That puts some of the Amazon forest in French territory.
Mr. Macron said French officials were in touch with countries in the region to “finalize” what he called “very concrete commitments” with “technical and financial means.” He did not provide details.
He said that while he respected each country’s national sovereignty, the issue was too important — because of “biodiversity, oxygen, the fight against climate change” — for the international community to ignore.
“We must be very clear: While respecting sovereignty, we must have a reforestation objective,” Mr. Macron said.
“What we are working on now is an international mobilization mechanism to more efficiently help these countries, but with them,” he said.
Johnson, praised by Trump as ‘the right man’ for Brexit, has a tricky balance to strike.
The comments followed a breakfast between the two leaders and their advisers, their first face-to-face meeting since Mr. Johnson became prime minister last month.
Mr. Johnson has said he wants to negotiate a deal with the European Union by Oct. 31, when Britain is scheduled to withdraw, but he has also promised to deliver Brexit on that date, with or without an agreement.
He and European leaders have said they are pessimistic about the chances of reaching a pact by then, but he gave a somewhat more hopeful assessment on Sunday. “I think it’s going to be touch and go,” he told the BBC.
Mr. Johnson is trying to strike a tricky balance between the bloc and Mr. Trump, a Brexit supporter and critic of European Union trade policies. The prime minister needs a favorable trade agreement with the United States to cushion economic losses from loosening ties to the European Union, Britain’s biggest trade partner.
What such a deal would achieve, or when, remains anyone’s guess. And Sunday’s encounter with Mr. Trump, who is unpopular with many Britons, illustrated that, for domestic political reasons, Mr. Johnson has to tread carefully.
British critics fear that a trade deal with the U.S. could harm the National Health Service by forcing it to pay more for pharmaceuticals, and allow the import of food held to lower standards than in Europe.
The prime minister also met in Biarritz with Donald Tusk, the head of the European Council, to discuss Brexit.
Trump and Abe said a U.S.-Japan trade pact was near.
President Trump teased a breakthrough in trade talks with Japan on Sunday morning, saying that the United States was “very close” to a major deal.
“We still have some remaining work that has to be done at the working level,” he added, referring to the precise language of a pact.
Robert Lighthizer, Mr. Trump’s trade representative, said the deal would focus on “agriculture, industrial tariffs and digital trade,” expanding access to Japanese markets for American producers. Both Mr. Trump and Mr. Abe cited an agreement for Japanese businesses to buy surplus American corn.
Mr. Trump appeared to say that the agreement would mean that he would not follow through on threats to increase tariffs on Japanese autos. “On Japan they’re staying the same,” he said.
Mr. Abe said he hoped that he and Mr. Trump would be able to sign a final agreement next month, when they attend the United Nations General Assembly.
Mr. Trump has once again ruffled feathers in Brussels and beyond, by suggesting that Russia be invited back into what used to be known as the Group of 8.
Russia was suspended in 2014 after it seized Crimea from Ukraine and supported militias trying to break parts of eastern Ukraine away from the country.
Mr. Trump said last week that he thought bringing Moscow back into the fold would be “appropriate,” drawing quick rebuffs from European members France, Germany and Britain.
Administration officials downplayed the issue, noting that Russia had not asked to rejoin the club. But on Sunday, Mr. Trump said the United States, as the host of next year’s meeting, might invite Russia to participate.
At last year’s G7 meeting, the president said Russia should be invited back, and even stated that its annexation of Ukraine was partly justified — a position roundly rejected by major allies of the United States.
European Union officials have noted that there are other international forums for Russia, like the Group of 20, that include countries like China and Saudi Arabia that are not democracies.
With recession fears looming, Trump wants to talk about trade, not climate and inequality.
Amid fears of an impending recession that could jeopardize his re-election next year, President Trump’s focus at the G7 meeting will be economic, with particular attention on his clash with China.
But this weekend, Mr. Trump’s advisers have accused President Emmanuel Macron of France, the host of the meeting, of focusing too much on “politically correct bromides” and “niche issues” like global warming and inequality, rather than economic growth.
They also complained about a tax France recently imposed on tech giants like Facebook and Google.
Mr. Trump, who has waged an escalating trade war with Beijing, has talked about cutting off trade with China and forcing American companies to stop operating there — extraordinary threats that have sent shock waves through world markets.
In briefing reporters before his trip, senior administration officials cited barriers to trade and foreign investment, and “currency stability” as being among the concerns he will raise at the summit meeting — concerns that, for Mr. Trump, inevitably lead back to China.
They also cited reform of the World Trade Organization, a recent target of the president’s ire. In particular, he has criticized its trade rules that favor developing countries, which include China, though it now has the world’s second-largest economy.
Macron is giving a bigger role to non-G7 countries, particularly from Africa, but not to advocacy groups.
Nations that are not in the Group of 7 have taken part in past gatherings, but they were kept mostly on the sidelines, included in “outreach sessions” at the ends of summits.
But President Emmanuel Macron of France, who says that economic inequality should be the group’s primary focus, wants broader representation, so he has invited the leaders of India, South Africa, Australia and Chile to take part, along with the heads of member nations. There will also be a session focusing on Africa, with the leaders of Burkina Faso, Egypt, Rwanda, Senegal and South Africa.
“We have designed all of the G7 agenda with our African partners,” Mr. Macron said.
But some critics said the French president had not gone far enough in opening up the meeting. Réseau Action Climat, an umbrella group of groups fighting climate change, said that it might boycott the gathering because not enough nongovernmental organizations were allowed to take part.
Talk of solidarity on North Korea could not disguise differences between Trump and Abe.
Sometimes disagreements cannot be cloaked by diplomatic happy-speak.
That was the case when Mr. Trump and Shinzo Abe, the prime minister of Japan, speaking to reporters on Sunday, had very different reactions to the fact that Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, continues to test short-range missiles.
Mr. Trump shrugged it off.
“I’m not happy about it. But again, he’s not in violation of an agreement,” the president said, adding that he and Mr. Kim had not talked about such weapons.
Mr. Trump was clearly focused on whether the North Korean leader had violated agreements between the two of them. But when Mr. Trump asked Mr. Abe to offer his own thoughts, Mr. Abe focused instead on limits set by the United Nations.
But Mr. Trump and Mr. Abe both seemed determined to show that they were allied on the matter.
“I can understand how the prime minister of Japan feels,” Mr. Trump said.
An elegant resort has turned into an armed camp, as French officials try to head off violent protests.
After a year of sometimes violent Yellow Vest protests, and accusations of police brutality, the French authorities, wanting to take no chances with the summit meeting, have deployed more than 13,000 security personnel to Biarritz.
Meetings among world leaders tend to attract crowds of demonstrators, and the handling of security is widely seen as a test for the French interior minister, Christophe Castaner, and for President Emmanuel Macron.
There were some clashes on Saturday, with security forces using water cannons and tear gas to disperse protesters. On Sunday, demonstrations in and near Biarritz drew thousands of people protesting globalization, demanding action against climate change, or calling for Basque independence.
Ordinarily, Biarritz is a small, elegant seaside resort known for good surfing, but it now resembles a nearly impenetrable armed camp.
The local airport and train stations have been shut down for the duration of the summit, there is a no-fly zone overhead, boats are banned or heavily restricted along parts of the coastline, and several roads leading to the heart of the town have been closed. Cars are barred from the beachfront area where world leaders are staying, and access to the city center is strictly controlled, even for local residents.
August is peak tourist season, and store and restaurant owners worry that business will suffer, though French officials insist that the legions of officials and journalists descending on Biarritz will make up for any loss of tourists. As the summit meeting approached, local merchants witnessed the unusual sights of empty cafes, quiet streets and calm beaches.
Reporting was contributed by Michael Shear and Peter Baker from Biarritz, France; Steven Erlanger and Matina Stevis-Gridneff from Brussels; Aurelien Breeden from Paris; and Richard Pérez-Peña and Stephen Castle from London.