The revival, starring Katrina Lenk and Patti LuPone, will open next spring on Stephen Sondheim’s 90th birthday.
Goodbye, Bobby. Hello, Bobbie.
A re-gendered revival of the 1970 musical “Company,” which had a well-received production in London that opened last year, will arrive on Broadway next spring starring the Tony Award winners Katrina Lenk and Patti LuPone.
The show, with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and a book by George Furth, is about a chronically single about-to-turn 35-year-old wrestling with the judgment of a group of married friends. The original production won six Tonys, including best new musical, in 1971, and it has been revived twice, most recently in 2006.
The new production involves a significant rejiggering of the show’s gender dynamics. The protagonist, who is celebrating a 35th birthday in the show, is now female, implicitly introducing the biological clock into perceptions of her singleness. The production also reverses the genders in one of the show’s married couples, so that there is now a stay-at-home husband and a bread-winning wife, and transfers one of the show’s signature songs, “Getting Married Today,” which is about last-minute wedding jitters, from a straight woman (Amy) to a gay man (Jamie).
“Company” will be the first musical directed by Ms. Elliott on Broadway, and also her first Broadway venture as lead producer. She and Chris Harper formed a production company, Elliott & Harper, so that she could take more control of her own work.
Ms. Lenk, who won a Tony last year for “The Band’s Visit,” will play Bobbie, succeeding Rosalie Craig, who played the role in London. Ms. LuPone, a legendary Broadway star who won Tonys for “Evita” and “Gypsy,” will play Joanne, a friend with a drinking habit and an amazing song, “The Ladies Who Lunch”; Ms. LuPone also played the role in London, to great acclaim.
The revival will be staged at the Bernard B. Jacobs Theater, with an opening scheduled on March 22, which is the night of Mr. Sondheim’s 90th birthday.
“Company” will provide one of several upcoming opportunities for Mr. Sondheim’s fans to revisit his work.
A Broadway revival of “West Side Story,” for which he wrote the lyrics, is scheduled to open next February, and Steven Spielberg’s new movie adaptation of the 1957 musical is expected in December 2020.
“Assassins,” which features music and lyrics by Mr. Sondheim, is now having a well-reviewed revival at the Signature Theater in Washington, and is slated to be presented next spring at the Classic Stage Company in New York.
And for those who like to plan well ahead: the director Richard Linklater said this week that he will spend the next 20 years shooting a film adaptation of “Merrily We Roll Along,” with music and lyrics by Mr. Sondheim, starring Ben Platt, Beanie Feldstein and Blake Jenner as three friends whose relationships change over time.