His casting on the ABC reality show makes political deception into a joke.
On one level, I suppose, you could say that being cast on ABC’s “Dancing With the Stars” is punishment enough. It is not generally a sign of a thriving career. You don’t have to be a scandal subject or a public joke or an “Oh yeah, it’s that guy” to get cast on the show, but it doesn’t hurt.
All of which may be reason to ignore the fact that “Dancing” has cast the former White House press secretary Sean Spicer, heretofore best known for tap-dancing to his boss’s tune and waltzing past the photographic evidence to insist that President Trump’s inauguration crowd was the largest of all time, period.
Besides which, it isn’t cool to get mad about things like this. It’s so strident. It’s so earnest. 
But this is one time when we should get uptight. “Dancing With the Stars” is just a silly, innocuous reality show, that’s true. And that’s exactly why it shouldn’t be helping Sean Spicer dry-clean his reputation.
I’m not saying there’s nothing funny about Spicer. There’s always something funny about incompetent deception. Melissa McCarthy, playing him as the administration’s hapless Baghdad Bob on “Saturday Night Live,” made him hilarious.
Since he resigned from his job in 2017, Spicer has tried to use the jokes as a giant whoopee cushion to land on, bounce back from and move on to some undetermined, respectable future. At that year’s Emmys, he showed up behind a moving podium, playing McCarthy playing him.
He’s tried, not much more artfully than he spun in the press room, to walk a line between sort-of apologizing for his behavior as press secretary and sort-of remaining a defender of the administration for which he set his credibility on fire. His 2018 book, “The Briefing,” neither an apology nor tell-all nor loyalist defense, was not well-received.
Enter “Dancing With the Stars” to present him as a good sport who can laugh at himself, who is out there willing to try some dance moves and maybe look silly and hey, can’t we all just let bygones be bygones?
Now, look: It’s not as if reality shows cast only paragons of honesty. But this is not simply a matter of Sean Spicer’s having lied. It’s a matter of Sean Spicer’s being a liar, professionally.
That is, he’s not a famous person who happened to do something dishonest. He is a person who is famous — singularly, even in an era of “alternative facts” — for spreading disinformation, about the inauguration, about the president’s claims that he was wiretapped by the previous administration, about Michael Flynn’s resignation. At least publicly, dishonesty is his brand.
I know it’s not as if ABC just hired Sean Spicer to anchor the evening news. I know I might sound like a humorless scold for attacking the stunt-casting of a silly reality show.
But that’s just the point. To treat Spicer, and his reason for notoriety, as a harmless joke is to whitewash the harm of what he did, which was to say things so absurdly false that he invited his political side to join him in denying their own eyeballs, to encourage people to believe that facts don’t matter if they hurt your team.

Letting Sean Spicer tango onto prime time this fall is not the largest disgrace of all time. But it’s still a disgrace. Period.