Still, the plan could resonate with black and Hispanic families who believe that these selective programs unfairly divert money and attention from neighborhood schools.
The plan includes all elementary school gifted programs, screened middle schools and some high schools — with the exception of Stuyvesant High School and the city’s seven other elite high schools, whose admission is partially controlled by Albany.
Gifted programs and screened schools have “become proxies for separating students who can and should have opportunities to learn together,” the panel, made up of several dozen education experts, wrote in the report.
About a quarter of the city’s middle and high schools require that students be screened — through exams, attendance rates and grades — for admission. New York screens more students for its schools than any other city in the country, and those screened schools tend to have a disproportionately white and Asian enrollment.
Mr. de Blasio has been criticized by some on the political left for not demonstrating a willingness to implement major desegregation policies.
Mr. Carranza did not develop any significant integration policies of his own during his first year on the job, and his input on the proposals will be a definitive test of his willingness to push for disruptive and unpopular change in order to desegregate schools.
Still, the mayor has final say over whether to approve the recommendations.
Some of those policies deepened inequality even as student achievement rose. Mr. de Blasio has been sharply critical of his predecessor’s philosophy on education, but must now decide whether to dismantle some of the structures that Mr. Bloomberg helped to build.
The panel recommended that the city replace gifted and screened schools with new magnet schools — which have been used in other cities to attract a diverse group of students interested in a particular subject matter — along with enrichment programs that are open to students with varying academic abilities.
Though it may be months before the mayor issues a decision, the release of the recommendations is likely to set off an intracity battle in a public school system that is nearly 70 percent black and Hispanic and mostly low-income.
Even a partial rollback of selective academic programs would have a profound effect on many of the city’s 1,800 schools.
Last year, New York’s elementary school gifted classes enrolled about 16,000 students and were nearly 75 percent white and Asian. Black and Hispanic enrollment in the programs has plummeted over the last decade, after Mr. Bloomberg’s attempt to diversify them by creating a test-based threshold for admission backfired.
Still, the so-called School Diversity Advisory Group acknowledged that the city would have to take pains to prevent middle-class families from fleeing the system.
The mayor and chancellor were both noncommittal in statements.
The panel presented the mayor and chancellor with a rough blueprint for overhauling its selective academic offerings, but left many details up to the city.
The city should get rid of the standardized admissions exam for elementary school gifted programs, which is offered to prospective Kindergarten students and has sparked a cottage industry of expensive test preparation for toddlers, the panel said.
Mr. de Blasio should also place a moratorium on new gifted programs, stop most grouping by academic ability and phase out existing gifted classes by not admitting new students, the panel said. If the recommendations are accepted, New York would shed its current gifted offerings within about five years.
In order to integrate high schools, the panel recommended that the city not open any new screened high schools, eliminate geographic zones as a criterion for admission and should not consider lateness or attendance in evaluating prospective students.
The widely varying quality of the city’s neighborhood elementary schools, which have become increasingly segregated since the 1970s, is the public school system’s most intractable problem.
Though Mr. de Blasio has vowed to create a school system where the idea of “good schools” and “bad schools” becomes obsolete, dozens of schools are extremely low-performing, and many more are struggling.
Gifted education has long been seen as a third rail issue in New York. Mr. Carranza’s pronouncements about gifted education have already made some parents skittish, and a single Brooklyn school’s recent decision to scrap its gifted program made headlines.
If the last few years are any indication, the push to eliminate the screening process is also sure to encounter fierce opposition.
Only one of the city’s 32 school districts — Brooklyn’s District 15, which includes Park Slope — has scrapped academic screens for middle school enrollment, opting instead for a lottery system. The Upper West Side’s District 3 has reserved seats at top middle schools for low-performing students.
But it took years of often bitter debate for those politically progressive and racially diverse neighborhoods to finally adopt those plans.
Outside of those corners of the city, black and Hispanic children are more likely to be enrolled in schools with low test scores and scarce resources.
After only seven black students got into the city’s most elite public high school, Stuyvesant, some black and Hispanic alumni and elected officials called on Mr. de Blasio to expand gifted classes into poor and minority neighborhoods.
Research has found that some schools in poor and minority neighborhoods that use academic screening can provide crucial opportunities for underserved children, and the panel stressed that it wanted to maintain admissions policies that help identify and enroll vulnerable students in high-quality schools. Programs for students learning English and students with special needs should be largely maintained, the panel found.
