He has 11 wins in 17 days, all in straight sets. He is tied with Rafael Nadal for the ATP Tour lead with 41 victories this year.
MASON, Ohio — With an unorthodox playing style one rival described as “good sloppy,” Daniil Medvedev has been cleaning up on the ATP Tour.
Medvedev defeated Jan-Lennard Struff, 6-2, 6-1, on Thursday in the third round of the Cincinnati Masters for his 41st win of the season, tying Rafael Nadal for the tour lead. In the last 17 days, Medvedev has had 11 wins, all in straight sets.
Medvedev, a 23-year-old Russian, is now ranked a career-best No. 8. He was ranked outside the top 50 a year ago, losing in the preliminary qualifying rounds at this tournament.
This year, he arrived at Cincinnati after reaching back-to-back finals in Washington and Montreal, falling to Nick Kyrgios and Nadal.
Medvedev, along with ninth-ranked Karen Khachanov, represent a resurgence of Russian men’s tennis, which had been largely absent from the top tier of the men’s game since the retirements of the two-time Grand Slam champions Yevgeny Kafelnikov and Marat Safin.
In the quarterfinals on Friday, Medvedev will next face another young Russian, 21-year-old Andrey Rublev. Ranked 70th, Rublev defeated third-ranked Roger Federer, 6-3, 6-4, on Thursday.
Medvedev wins not through any particularly strong weapon, but on a game built around never giving opponents a comfortable or straightforward shot to play.
They often suffer considerably, bending and breaking while trying to fend off the flurry of flat, low blows that Medvedev flings across the net.
In January, Medvedev proved the toughest test, by far, for Novak Djokovic on his run to the Australian Open title. Medvedev drew the eventual champion into long, grueling rallies that left Djokovic harried and hurting, and calling for a midmatch medical timeout.
Medvedev beat Djokovic on his next attempt, in three sets, in the quarterfinals of the Monte Carlo Masters in April. His next quarterfinal Masters victory, 6-3, 6-1, over fourth-ranked Dominic Thiem last week in Montreal, was even more emphatic.
Fifth-ranked Kei Nishikori, whom Medvedev beat in the Japan Open final in Tokyo in October for his biggest title, said Medvedev’s greatest strengths were tactical.
Perhaps the most flummoxed by Medvedev is seventh-ranked Stefanos Tsitsipas, who is 0-4 against him.
Tsitsipas then lapsed into Greek to ask his manager, Nick Tzekos, to translate a word he was searching for.
Medvedev said he agreed with Tsitsipas’s assessment.
His technique, in which his gangly arms and almost golf-like swings produce flat, zipping shots, draws mixed reviews when style points are awarded.
Medvedev sees his style as funny rather than ugly, but he is still sometimes taken aback when he gets a chance to see what others do.
The score lines, at least, have been beautiful for Medvedev, who has won 22 of his last 26 sets. But more than his play, Medvedev has been satisfied by his mind-set in recent weeks.
Medvedev acted out frequently earlier in his career, including one incident at Wimbledon two years ago when he took out a change purse and threw coins toward the umpire’s chair to suggest rigged officiating after a loss to Ruben Bemelmans.
