It has been five years since men’s tennis had a first-time singles champion at a Grand Slam tournament. Will the U.S. Open be different?
Marin Cilic remembers looking up and seeing the confirmation that he had achieved a dream.
His name on a screen with “Champion of US Open 2014,” after he defeated Kei Nishikori to claim his first Grand Slam title.
Five years on, no other man has gained a comparable experience. Men’s tennis has been without any first-time singles champion in the last 19 Grand Slam events, a record stretch that’s longer than any other since the formation of the sport in the 1800s.
Men’s singles at Grand Slam tournaments has been dominated by the so-called Big Three of Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic, who continue to glide through draws at ages when they would have been thought to be well past their peaks. Since the Cilic-Nishikori final in New York, only one other major final — Andy Murray vs. Milos Raonic at Wimbledon in 2016 — has not featured at least one member of the Big Three.
Among them, they have won the last 11 major championships. They are jockeying for the record for men’s Grand Slam titles — Federer’s 20 leads Nadal (18) and Djokovic (16). And they are the top three seeds at the 2019 United States Open, which begins Monday.
At Wimbledon, where Federer, 38, lost a tight final to Djokovic, 32, after beating Nadal, 33, in the semifinals, they seemed further from the pack than ever.
The obvious contenders among the “youngsters” inspire as much exasperation as excitement. At Wimbledon, the players ranked No. 4 to No. 6 — Dominic Thiem, Alexander Zverev and Stefanos Tsitsipas — lost in the first round.
Thiem came closer to a first Slam title than any man had since Cilic when he won the second set of this year’s French Open final against Nadal. Then Nadal pummeled him, 6-1, 6-1, in the third and fourth sets.
Still, Thiem, 25, is the only man currently under 30 to have won a set in a Grand Slam final.
Though the old favorites remain popular, the lack of new winners makes men’s tennis unusually stale on the sports landscape. Since Cilic won the U.S. Open in 2014, there have been 13 new major winners in men’s golf, and nine first-time Grand Slam singles champions in women’s tennis.
“If we were doing a great job, we’d have people winning multiple weeks in a row; we’re not,” he added.
Women can quickly vault up the rankings: The two most recent No. 1 players in the WTA, Naomi Osaka and Ashleigh Barty, had each spent only a few months in the top 10 before reaching the top spot. Nishikori, though, has spent much of the five years since his U.S. Open final in the top 10, and has yet to crack the top three in the rankings.
The man who appears to be knocking most loudly on the door of a Grand Slam breakthrough this summer is Daniil Medvedev, a 23-year-old Russian who surged into the top 5 after reaching the finals of Washington and Montreal and winning Cincinnati in a three-week stretch.
But Goffin hesitated when asked if Medvedev’s momentum would carry over to New York.
Djokovic, whom Medvedev beat in the semifinals of Cincinnati, sounded similar notes.
After winning in Cincinnati last Sunday, Medvedev himself said he would be “satisfied — doesn’t mean happy — with a quarterfinal,” having only reached one fourth round at a major previously.
Earlier in the tournament, he elaborated on the challenge of scaling up his success.
