On Monday, the U.S. Open will unveil a new statue of Gibson, who achieved many firsts for African-Americans in tennis.
In the summer of 1950, the national women’s tennis championships at the West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills, Queens, reached a turning point. On one side was the favorite, Louise Brough, a blond Californian and the reigning Wimbledon champion. On the other side was the rangy, Harlem-raised Althea Gibson. She was not only the first African-American to play in the iconic tournament, the forerunner of the United States Open, but she also appeared headed toward a historic victory, leading by 1-6, 6-3, 7-6.
“Fans were shouting from the stands for Althea’s opponent to: ‘Beat the nigger. Beat the nigger,’ ” Bertram Baker, a New York Assemblyman, would recall later.
Then torrents of rain suddenly began to fall from the darkening skies. Fans raced for cover as a bolt of lightning shattered one of the stone eagles atop the stadium, and play was suspended.
“I’ll always remember it as the day the gods got angry,” said Baker, executive secretary of the American Tennis Association, an African-American organization.
But when the match resumed the next day, Gibson, 23, was visibly unnerved by the hordes of photographers, and Brough beat her in just 11 minutes.
Nonetheless, Gibson had broken the color barrier at the highest level of tennis and would go on to become the first black player to be ranked No. 1 in the world. She was the first African-American to win a Grand Slam title, at the 1956 French Championships, and the winner of both the U.S. national championship and Wimbledon in 1957 and 1958.
Over the years, the United States Tennis Association has paid tribute to the tennis legends Billie Jean King, for whom the national tennis center at Flushing Meadows is named, and Arthur Ashe, for whom there is both a statue and a stadium that bears his name. Virtually nothing had been done on the grounds to honor Gibson.
But on Monday, the U.S.T.A. will unveil a granite sculpture of Gibson, who won 11 Grand Slam titles before she retired and became reclusive in her later years.
She became the first black champion in Wimbledon history in 1957 and accepted the trophy from Queen Elizabeth II. A ticker-tape parade up Broadway in New York feted her return. Gibson appeared on the covers of Sports Illustrated and Time that year, the first black woman to do so.
 The only competition that bears Gibson’s name is a seniors cup in Croatia. And yet the top three American women in the world rankings are black, a vivid reflection of Gibson’s breakthrough.
Now, as some African-American women with long-ignored contributions are at last getting their due, Gibson’s legacy is being pushed to center stage on multiple fronts. Two proposed films about Gibson — one co-produced by Whoopi Goldberg — are in the works. This past weekend, the city of East Orange, N.J., where Gibson lived for years and was the director of recreation, sponsored a series of events in her honor. Gibson’s family members are also seeking to have a portion of West 143rd Street between Lenox and Seventh Avenue where she grew up to be renamed Althea Gibson Way.
Gibson was born on a cotton farm on Aug. 25, 1927, in the small town of Silver, S.C., and migrated north with her family around 1930. A tenacious athlete from a young age, Gibson learned boxing from her father and easily won the sports competitions sponsored by the Police Athletic League outside her building. In 1939, she won the city’s girls paddle ball championship; soon after, Harlem’s Cosmopolitan Tennis Club, composed of mostly African-American professionals, offered her a junior membership.
Gibson won her first A.T.A. tournament in 1942. At a time when most female players wore tailored dresses, she often wore shorts with a collared shirt. Some observers, seeing her lean 5-foot-11 frame and short cropped hair, mistook her for a man.
Hubert Eaton, a North Carolina doctor and a tennis champion, initially made that error. But during the 1946 A.T.A. Nationals tournament in Wilberforce, Ohio, he and Robert Johnson, a doctor from Lynchburg, Va., realized that they were watching a young woman of great skill with the potential to transform the sport they loved, even though she lost the match at hand. The two were leaders in the A.T.A.’s mission to find a player who could integrate the all-white U.S. Lawn Tennis Association competitions.
At the match’s end, Eaton approached a dejected Gibson and asked if she would someday like to play at Forest Hills. “Don’t kid me now,” Gibson said, according to a 1957 article in The New York Post.
The doctors invited Gibson, then 19, to live in their homes so they could help her develop her game.
One month later, Gibson was admitted to the U.S. national championships at Forest Hills, making her the first black player to compete there. In 1951 she was the first black player to compete at Wimbledon.
Gibson’s race, however, affected her tennis years despite her efforts to maneuver around it. One of her closest friends in the sport was a British player named Angela Buxton, who was Jewish. They became doubles partners, in part because other players refused to do so, and together they won at the French Championships and Wimbledon in 1956.
Gibson and Buxton did not talk about the discrimination they perceived, Buxton said. Instead, they focused on tennis, and Gibson routinely stayed at Buxton’s apartment in London, where the duo went to the movies and shared corned beef sandwiches at the local butcher’s. When Gibson won Wimbledon in 1957, Buxton made the floral dress Gibson wore to the winners’ ball.
Gibson retired from amateur tennis in 1958, having made virtually no money from the sport, and struggled to earn a living in the 1980s and 1990s. In 1995, when Gibson was living alone in New Jersey and overcome by sickness and poverty, it was “Angie baby,” as she called her old friend, who she telephoned.
Buxton had a letter describing Gibson’s plight and calling for contributions placed in a prominent tennis magazine. Soon, funds began to pour in. Gibson pulled out of her slump, bought a silver Cadillac convertible and lived for almost another decade.
On Monday, Buxton will be one of a handful of her closest friends at the statue unveiling on the southeast side of Arthur Ashe Stadium. Others expected to be there represent the two doctors who were instrumental in Gibson’s life and whose homes and courts are now being restored.
Shortly afterward, King, who as a teenager read Gibson’s biography over two dozen times, appeared before the U.S.T.A. board in 2017. King, like many others, had long felt that Gibson had not received her due for reasons including her gender and the fact that she played years before the Open era, when cash prizes became permitted. Gibson also was a somewhat reluctant public figure and never adopted a high-profile stance on behalf of tennis or African-Americans as Ashe did.
King lobbied the board on Gibson’s behalf for over two decades.
Gibson’s statue will be only the second on the U.S. Open grounds that honors a tennis champion.
Sally H. Jacobs, a former reporter for The Boston Globe, is writing a biography of Althea Gibson for St. Martin’s Press.