Here are some tips for getting ready: Make a plan, bring documents, close lids, clear the yard, blast the freezer.
With Tropical Storm Dorian nearing Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands on Wednesday, and then possibly bound for Florida or Georgia as a hurricane over the Labor Day holiday weekend, officials are warning residents to have their evacuation plans in place.
Forecasters have described Dorian as a compact storm whose path has been difficult to predict with precision. It is expected to bring heavy rainfall and high winds to Puerto Rico on Wednesday afternoon, and the island has declared a state of emergency. As the storm continues northwestward, it could develop into a Category 2 hurricane and approach the southeastern United States.
“Anywhere from South Carolina — the Carolinas — down to Georgia and almost the entire coastline of Florida, you need to have your plans ready,” Ken Graham, the director of the National Hurricane Center, said on Wednesday morning. He said that the center of the hurricane could arrive “in any one of those areas,” though no evacuations had yet been ordered.
When a hurricane is poised to make landfall and the authorities issue an evacuation order, you may not have much time before you leave to protect your home from the storm — and from flooding.
“People have a hard time internalizing, preparing for something that’s outside their realm of experience,” said J. Marshall Shepherd, a meteorologist and professor of geography at the University of Georgia. Here’s what you can do to get ready.
Pack an emergency kit, including cash, prescription medicines and three days’ worth of food and water (for people and pets). If your house floods and you can’t return immediately, this is essential. Be sure to consider provisions for those with special needs, like older people. If you need help coming up with a list, this one from Wirecutter, a New York Times company, has suggestions for any household.
Take documents and protect valuables.
Take irreplaceable keepsakes with you, if possible. Otherwise, move belongings with sentimental or monetary value upstairs or to high shelves to protect them from floodwaters.
“We put a lot of stuff on the bed,” said Donald Avery, a Houston resident who was evacuated from his home during Harvey. The floodwaters wouldn’t be that high, he remembers thinking. “Everything we moved to the bed was destroyed.” But his wife’s photograph collection, which they moved upstairs, was undamaged.
