Only one of the two people guarding Jeffrey Epstein normally worked as a correctional officer, according to three prison officials.
Attorney General William P. Barr said there would be an investigation into a federal jail’s failure to adequately watch Jeffrey Epstein, who apparently hanged himself about two weeks after being taken off suicide watch.
I was appalled and indeed the whole department was, and frankly — angry — to learn of the M.C.C.’s failure to adequately secure this prisoner. We are now learning of serious irregularities at this facility that are deeply concerning and demand a thorough investigation. The F.B.I. and the Office of Inspector General are doing just that. We will get to the bottom of what happened and there will be accountability. But let me assure you that this case will continue on against anyone who was complicit with Epstein. Any co-conspirators should not rest easy. The victims deserve justice and they will get it.
Mr. Barr also said Mr. Epstein’s suicide would not halt the investigation into other people who might have helped him traffic teenage girls for sex. On Monday, F.B.I. agents and New York detectives raided Mr. Epstein’s private, 70-acre island in the United States Virgin Islands, looking for documents, photographs, videos, computers and other materials, people briefed on the matter said.
In addition, only one of the two people guarding the Special Housing Unit — known as 9 South — normally worked as a correctional officer, according to three prison officials with knowledge of the case. The officials did not say what sort of job the other employee usually worked.
Mr. Epstein’s death came just two weeks after he had been taken off suicide watch at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in Lower Manhattan, where he apparently had tried to kill himself on July 23, officials said.
He was being held at the detention center awaiting trial on federal sex-trafficking charges. He had been accused of luring dozens of underage girls into giving him erotic massages and engaging in other sexual acts at his mansions in New York City and Palm Beach, Fla.
“I was appalled, and indeed the whole department was, and frankly angry, to learn of the M.C.C.’s failure to adequately secure this prisoner,” Mr. Barr said at a conference in New Orleans for the Grand Lodge Fraternal Order of Police.
That Mr. Epstein was taken off suicide watch and left unsupervised long enough to have apparently taken his own life has sparked a public outcry, prompting criticism of the Justice Department and the Bureau of Prisons, which operates the Manhattan jail. Mr. Barr announced Saturday that both the F.B.I. and the Justice Department’s inspector general would open respective probes into the circumstances surrounding Mr. Epstein’s death.
“The Council of Prison Locals has been sounding the alarm about the hiring freeze,” said Eric Young, the president of the union that represents federal prison workers across the country.
Since leaving suicide watch on July 29, Mr. Epstein had been housed in 9 South, a secure housing unit in one of the prison’s most restrictive wings. His lifeless body was found in his cell around 6:30 a.m., by a guard conducting morning rounds. He had used a bedsheet to hang himself, one official said.
Mr. Epstein was being housed alone. Under normal procedures, he should have had a cellmate, but the inmate housed with him had been recently transferred and had not been replaced, several officials said.
According to Bureau of Prisons' policy, several high-ranking prison officials would have had to have approved Mr. Epstein’s removal from the facility’s suicide prevention program, including the prison’s chief psychologist.