They met at a libertarian conference in Las Vegas in July 2015, where they discussed Milton Friedman, Anton Chekhov and John Locke.
He was the philosophizing founder and chief executive of Overstock.com, a publicly traded e-commerce retailer that sells discount furniture and bedding. She was an ambitious graduate student from Russia.
It was the start of a three-year relationship between the e-commerce executive, Patrick Byrne, and the young woman, Maria Butina, that became romantic at times. She is now serving 18 months in prison after being accused by federal prosecutors of trying to infiltrate powerful political circles in the United States at the direction of the Russian government. She ultimately pleaded guilty to a lesser charge.
In an interview late Wednesday, Mr. Byrne said he wanted to shed light on what he saw as problems in the way top law enforcement officials had handled the government’s case against Ms. Butina.
The release, titled “Overstock.com CEO Comments on Deep State,” sent the company’s shares plummeting more than 30 percent over the next two days, while opening an intriguing new chapter in the tale of Ms. Butina and her connections to influential Americans. Her lawyer, Robert Driscoll, confirmed that Ms. Butina and Mr. Byrne had been “romantically involved” and that, according to Mr. Byrne, government officials had instructed him on how to interact with her.
Ms. Butina, 30, was sentenced to prison after pleading guilty to failing to register as a foreign agent. She achieved notoriety by networking with groups like the National Rifle Association, and by posing for pictures with Republicans like Donald Trump Jr. and Scott Walker, the former Wisconsin governor.
For a time, she dated a Republican political operative who had worked on several campaigns. Her lawyer said that she was dating the Republican operative while periodically seeing Mr. Byrne.
Mr. Byrne, whose father had been the chief executive of the insurance company Geico, has a reputation for speaking his mind with financial analysts and in interviews. He has criticized reporters personally, some say in an effort to silence criticism. Once, in a conference call with journalists and analysts, he accused Wall Street of running a giant scheme to hurt companies, orchestrated by someone he referred to as the “Sith Lord.” The news release on Monday was particularly colorful and, at times, cryptic.
Shadowy Foreign Agent? Hardly. Inside Maria Butina’s Prolific Social Media Feed.
These social media posts belong to an accused Russian agent. She’s Maria Butina. The U.S. charged her with conspiring to act as a foreign agent. She pleaded guilty, and agreed to cooperate with investigators as part of her plea deal. Butina admitted to opening up unofficial lines of communication with influential Americans, and warming them up to the idea of Russia as a friend. But she’s no shadowy foreign agent. She was all over social media: at least 11,000 tweets, 100 YouTube videos, 4,700 Facebook friends, LinkedIn, a blog, etc. Let’s take a closer look into these accounts to find out who she is and how she might have been trying to wield influence. This is Butina during a photo shoot for GQ Russia in 2014. She was a well-known gun rights advocate in Russia. And her early social feeds followed her activism. By 2015, she started posting from the United States. These are from a National Rifle Association meeting in Nashville. They were posted on one of her Russian social media pages. U.S. court records show that infiltrating the N.R.A. was one way Russia tried to influence Republican politics. And Butina fit right in. Here she is networking with top N.R.A. officials. Then there is the Republican Party. There’s a few ways she gets inside: at a teenage Republican summer camp in South Dakota; here she is with Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker; in 2015, she asked a question of then candidate Donald Trump. “I am visiting from Russia.” “Ah, Putin. Good friend of Obama, Putin. He likes Obama a lot. Go ahead.” “My question will be about foreign politics.” At a prayer breakfast in 2017, she posed with her alleged handler, an influential Russian official now under U.S. sanction. And right here, is where President Trump spoke that same morning. All the while, Butina maintained the image of an active twentysomething. She studied international relations at American University. She exercised and took flying lessons. But now her social feeds are quiet. She’s been sentenced to 18 months in prison. And then, deportation.
Ms. Butina, according to Mr. Byrne, introduced herself and said she wanted to discuss her gun rights group, but he was not interested. She then told a different story: that she was working for a top official at Russia’s central bank and wanted Mr. Byrne to go to Moscow to speak about blockchain technology. Mr. Byrne arranged to meet her for lunch in his hotel suite the next day.
They hit it off, he said, discussing Russian history, literature and philosophy. “She said, ‘You are a very famous man in Russia,’” he recalled.
Still, Mr. Byrne described being somewhat suspicious of Ms. Butina’s intentions. Eventually, he said, he began to communicate with the F.B.I. about their interactions. Mr. Driscoll, Ms. Butina’s lawyer, said that Mr. Byrne had contacted him after she was sentenced to prison in April and had told him that he had spoken periodically to the F.B.I. about Ms. Butina. An F.B.I. spokeswoman declined to comment.
After the convention, Mr. Byrne and Ms. Butina kept in touch through text messages. She told him that she wanted him to meet her in Paris, Rome or Montenegro. They finally decided to meet at the Bowery Hotel in New York in September 2015. Mr. Byrne, who calls himself a “56-year-old bachelor,” said that the rendezvous in New York quickly became romantic. They met several more times in different cities around the United States, and she visited him at his home in Utah.
“I think she admired him, but I don’t think she was looking to settle down,” Mr. Driscoll said.
During the visits, Mr. Byrne said, Ms. Butina spoke increasingly about meeting or seeking to meet people involved in the presidential campaigns of Hillary Clinton, Mr. Trump, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas and Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, which made Mr. Byrne wary. Her lawyer said that she was merely an ambitious person hoping to advance her career by improving relations between the United States and Russia.
Mr. Byrne has recently been focused on developing a blockchain business called tZero, which he describes as the place where “blockchain meets capital markets.” Overstock is based in Midvale, Utah, and until this week its stock had been soaring. On Thursday, the company’s share price rallied to rise more than 16 percent, erasing many of the recent losses.
In the news release on Monday, Mr. Byrne said he had previously worked with law enforcement authorities in a case involving a friend who was murdered and also as part of a “shake up” of Wall Street a decade ago.
Mr. Driscoll urged Justice Department officials to examine Mr. Byrne’s concerns further.
