ATLANTA — Matt Ryan and Sam Darnold both appear ready for the regular season.
Ryan looked sharp in his preseason debut for the Atlanta Falcons, completing nine straight passes, and Darnold led the Jets on another scoring drive in his team’s 22-10 victory Thursday night.
After sitting out the first two exhibition games, Ryan played most of the first half on Thursday. He completed 10 of 14 passes for 118 yards, a performance that was even more impressive considering that Brian Hill and Justin Hardy dropped back-to-back passes in the back of the end zone that could have been touchdowns, drawing boos from the meager crowd at Mercedes-Benz Stadium.
The Jets (1-1) are certainly pleased with Darnold, who followed up a marvelous drive in the preseason opener by completing 5 of 7 passes for 46 yards. He guided the Jets on a 66-yard touchdown drive to start the game, capped by Ty Montgomery’s 1-yard scoring run.
Le’Veon Bell sat out again for the Jets. He could make his debut with his new team next week.
Atlanta’s backup quarterback, Matt Schaub, took over for Ryan and closed out the first half by leading the Falcons (0-3) on their lone touchdown drive. Running the two-minute offense to perfection, Schaub completed 8 of 10 passes for 76 yards to set up Ito Smith’s 4-yard touchdown run with 33 seconds remaining.
The Jets’ Taylor Bertolet, who was signed last weekend after Chandler Catanzaro missed two extra points in the preseason opener and unexpectedly retired, botched two extra points, raising more concerns. Bertolet did connect on a 49-yard field goal in the third quarter.
Giorgio Tavecchio, taking over in Atlanta after the release of the team’s longtime kicker, Matt Bryant, missed two 52-yard field goal attempts. One was deflected at the line, while the other sailed wide left.
The ball was knocked away from Atlanta’s third-string quarterback, Matt Simms, for a fumble that led to the Jets’ winning score, which came when the team’s fourth quarterback of the night, Luke Faulk, connected with Deontay Burnett on a 9-yard touchdown pass with 11 minutes 38 seconds remaining.
James Burgess finished off the Falcons by intercepting a pass from Simms and returning it 28 yards for a touchdown in the closing minutes.