WASHINGTON — Three years ago, when Ibram X. Kendi was up for the National Book Award, he thought he had no chance.
One of those risks is the center, which is still in the ramping-up stage. On a recent visit, it was a pristine but sparsely decorated warren of cubicles, but Dr. Kendi envisions it as a place that will not just study racist ideas, but develop public programs aimed at dismantling them.
Another is “How to Be an Antiracist,” published by One World, an imprint of Random House. Part memoir, part social analysis, part polemic, it’s a book that, like its predecessor, seems to be arriving at exactly the right moment, as President Trump’s verbal attacks on lawmakers of color and on the city of Baltimore have spurred both intense outrage and debate on how to respond.
But it’s also a book that directs some of its most unstinting criticism at the author himself, and what he sees as his own racist ideas.
Dr. Kendi defines racist ideas expansively: any idea that there is something inherently better or worse about any racial group. There is no such thing as “not racist” ideas, policies or people, he argues, only racist and antiracist ones.
Among the most painful personal episodes he revisited, he said, is the one that opens the book: a speech he gave in a high school oratory contest named for Martin Luther King Jr., in which he assailed African-American youth for its supposed failures.
The thunderous applause from the mostly black audience gave him the confidence, he writes, that he could succeed in college, despite mediocre grades and test scores. The speech, which he listened to over and over, was also, in his view, deeply racist.
Dr. Kendi might seem to have been anointed as the latest in a line of charismatic (and usually male) African-American public intellectuals, stretching from W.E.B. Du Bois and Alain Locke to Henry Louis Gates Jr. and Cornel West.
But he is also emblematic of a new generation of young black historians who are working collaboratively to create new institutions, and find new ways of reaching the public.
His work “reflects the collective desire to produce innovative research that will not simply meet tenure requirements but transform the world,” said Keisha N. Blain, an associate professor of history at the University of Pittsburgh and president of the African-American Intellectual History Society, a 5-year-old group to which Dr. Kendi belongs.
He studied journalism at Florida A&M University, a historically black institution, and initially planned to be a sportswriter. After a few internships at newspapers, he enrolled in the graduate program in African-American studies at Temple University. His doctoral dissertation, published in 2012 as “The Black Campus Movement,” is a study of the 1960s student activism that led to the creation of the first black studies programs.
Temple’s department was, and still is, led by Molefi Kete Asante, a leading theorist of Afrocentricism. That influence, Dr. Kendi says, was crucial to his own work, which classifies what he calls “assimilationist” ideas — the belief that African-American people and spaces should strive toward a standardized white norm — as inherently racist.
And he credits his dissertation adviser, Ama Mazama, a Guadeloupe-born scholar of African and Caribbean culture, with providing a model of what an “intellectual combatant” could be.
Dr. Kendi — tall and trim, with long dreadlocks he wears pulled back and a fondness for West African cloth pocket squares — also speaks softly and carries enormous ambition.
Writing a sprawling narrative history rather than a narrower monograph — and publishing it with a trade press, Nation Books, and not an academic one — was a risky move for a junior scholar without tenure.
But today, he embraces it as a way of boldly claiming space in a field — the intellectual history of race — that has been overwhelmingly dominated by white men.
Some scholars have questioned Dr. Kendi’s broad definition of racist ideas, which seems to ensnare just about everyone in American history, including Frederick Douglass, Du Bois and Barack Obama. (Mr. Obama’s celebrated 2008 speech on race, Dr. Kendi writes, mixed antiracist and assimilationist ideas).
But others have welcomed “Stamped” as a broad, accessible history that directly and unapologetically engages with the present.
In keeping with his activist approach to scholarship, Dr. Kendi organized the inaugural Antiracist Book Festival, held last April, which drew roughly 3,000 people to hear a mix of junior and senior scholars, along with activists, novelists, poets, Y.A. authors, educators and publishing professionals.
