A clerk at a store in Memphis, Anwar Ghazali, 29, was found guilty of fatally shooting Dorian Harris, 17, as he ran out last year.
Dorian Harris, 17, grabbed a few cans of Spiked Watermelon beer from a cooler in the Top Stop Shop in Memphis last year. He ran out the door without paying, dropping one in his haste. The store clerk grabbed a handgun and chased him, firing off a few shots into the dark night, on March 29, the authorities said.
“I think I shot him,” the clerk, Anwar Ghazali, 29, told a customer when he returned to the store, according to a police affidavit and the Shelby County District Attorney’s office.
Mr. Ghazali didn’t call the police, the authorities said.
Mr. Harris’s body was discovered two days later in a nearby yard, where he had bled to death from a gunshot wound in the back of his left leg, the district attorney’s office said, and Mr. Ghazali was arrested.
After a four-day trial, Mr. Ghazali was convicted by a jury on Thursday of second-degree murder, the Shelby County district attorney, Amy Weirich, said in a statement on Friday.
“This defendant took it upon himself to be the judge and jury and the executioner over a $2 beer,” she said of Mr. Ghazali, according to WMC Action News in Memphis.
Mr. Ghazali faces 15 to 25 years in prison and will be sentenced on Sept. 23, his lawyer, Blake Ballin, said in an email on Monday. He was initially indicted on first-degree murder charges, which would have carried a life sentence, but Mr. Ballin argued at the trial that the case was “neither a premeditated nor a knowing killing.” The gun belonged to the store’s owner, he said.
He said that Mr. Ghazali did not call the police because he did not believe that he had actually hit the teenager with gunfire.
After the shooting, several dozen people protested, demanding the closing of the store, according to local news reports. Mr. Ballin said Mr. Ghazali had worked there as a cashier for about two months.
“If we don’t value black lives and believe that Dorian’s life is worth far more than an allegedly stolen beer, then we’re not authentically honoring my father,” the Rev. Bernice A. King — the daughter of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and the chief executive of the King Center for Nonviolent Social Change in Atlanta — said on Twitter in April 2018.
In a statement released after the verdict, Mr. Ballin described Memphis as a community that is struggling and plagued by racial and economic inequality.
“I understand why this case has caused public frustration, because another African-American kid has been needlessly killed,” Mr. Ballin said in an email on Monday.
