WASHINGTON — President Trump said on Tuesday that any Jewish person who votes for a Democrat is guilty of ignorance or “great disloyalty,” intensifying his efforts to drive in a partisan wedge over religion and support for Israel even as he appeared to draw on an anti-Semitic trope.
Mr. Trump did not go into specifics about what he considered to be Jews’ disloyalty, but his language was reminiscent of the anti-Semitic smear that Jews have a “dual loyalty” and are more devoted to Israel than they are to their own countries.
Mr. Trump’s comments were the latest turn in a controversy over religion and politics that erupted last week after Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, at the president’s urging, barred an official visit to Israel by the first two Muslim women in Congress. The congresswomen, Representatives Ilhan Omar of Minnesota and Rashida Tlaib of Michigan, both Democrats, have been harshly critical of Israel’s policies toward Palestinians.
The president’s comments were condemned by diplomats and analysts across the political spectrum. They accused him of endangering bipartisan support for Israel in the United States, the country’s most reliable ally, in his zeal to curry favor with some Jewish voters and tighten his alliance with Mr. Netanyahu.
In his comments on Tuesday, the president lashed out anew at Ms. Omar and Ms. Tlaib for suggesting on Monday that the United States cut off aid to Israel. The two are vocal supporters of the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement, known as B.D.S., which promotes strong advocacy for Palestinian interests and is hostile to the policies of the Israeli government. . The movement is often condemned as inherently anti-Semitic.
The accusation that Jews have dual loyalty is nothing new, but it has become a toxic element of white nationalist philosophy.
The remark was the latest from a president who has a history of using language that stokes racial and religious divisions. That language has been echoed in recent statements and writings of deranged people bent on violence.
“This attack is a response to the Hispanic invasion of Texas,” the manifesto said.
The president’s “disloyalty” comment was met by outrage from many Jewish leaders, who called it divisive and dangerous.
“What the president is doing is creating an environment in which anti-Semitism can flourish,” Mr. Deutch said on CNN.
Mr. Trump’s remarks had broad implications: According to the Pew Research Center, 79 percent of Jews voted for Democrats in last year’s midterm congressional elections. The president’s comments were in keeping with his strategy of trying to make Ms. Omar, Ms. Tlaib and two other progressive congresswomen of color the faces of the Democratic Party.
Some of Mr. Trump’s Jewish allies sprang to his defense, arguing that the president was giving voice to a sense of befuddlement among many American Jews that too many Democrats appeared to be tolerating extreme views about Israel within their ranks. Matt Brooks, the executive director of the Republican Jewish Coalition, said the views of Ms. Omar and Ms. Tlaib, both of whom have made remarks condemned as anti-Semitic, were far outside the mainstream of their party and the country as a whole.
In fact, the Democrat-led House voted overwhelmingly last month to condemn the boycott-Israel movement. During the debate, Ms. Tlaib, who is Palestinian-American, passionately defended the movement as a legitimate economic protest to advance human rights, calling Israel’s policies toward Palestinians “racist” and comparing the campaign to American boycotts of Nazi Germany.
On Monday in St. Paul, Ms. Omar raised the prospect of cutting off aid to Israel, arguing that a central purpose of the Israel visit that she and Ms. Tlaib had hoped to make was to conduct oversight over the $3 billion in funding that United States provides.
During the news conference, Ms. Tlaib broke down in tears when discussing why she turned down a last-minute offer by Mr. Netanyahu’s government to allow her to visit her 90-year-old grandmother in the West Bank if she promised not to speak out about the boycott during her stay.
Mr. Trump ridiculed the congresswoman for the display, saying her grief was not genuine.
“I saw a woman who was violent and vicious and out of control,” Mr. Trump added, without elaborating on what violence he was referring to.