President Trump on Thursday all but endorsed his former campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, for a potential Senate run from New Hampshire, saying he would be “hard to beat” if he ran and a “great senator” if he won.
Mr. Trump first made the remarks in an interview with the New Hampshire radio host Jack Heath, amid reports that Mr. Lewandowski is seriously considering a campaign in his home state to become the Republican challenger to the Democratic incumbent, Senator Jeanne Shaheen.
He said that he had been asked whether he would support Mr. Lewandowski, whom Mr. Trump fired at the urging of his children in June 2016, but with whom he has remained close.
An announcement from Mr. Lewandowski about the Senate race is not yet imminent, according to a person working with him. He was expected to ride in the presidential motorcade Thursday night with Mr. Trump from the airport to the rally.
Mr. Lewandowski is one of the most high-profile witnesses who was interviewed by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, who investigated possible conspiracy between Russian officials and the Trump campaign, as well as possible obstruction of justice by Mr. Trump. Mr. Lewandowski, according to the report submitted to the Justice Department by the Mueller team, told federal investigators that Mr. Trump had wanted him to personally intervene with Jeff Sessions, then the attorney general, over the probe. On Thursday, hours before the Trump rally, the House Judiciary Committee subpoenaed Mr. Lewandowski in relation to the Mueller report.
Before his ouster, Mr. Lewandowski helped Mr. Trump notch his first primary victory, in New Hampshire, a win that helped vault him to the nomination. Mr. Lewandowski would hope to run on the same outsider energy that Mr. Trump channeled that year.
Just how formidable Mr. Lewandowski would be is a source of disagreement among political professionals, most of whom predict an ugly Republican primary race and general election in New Hampshire.
His opponents would be almost certain to raise questions about his business activities since Mr. Trump took office. In the years since he was fired, Mr. Lewandowski co-wrote two books about Mr. Trump with David Bossie, the head of the conservative group Citizens United. But he has also been an adviser to companies that have interests with the government, and he would be required to file financial disclosure forms that would reveal the extent of those business arrangements.
In May 2017, Mr. Lewandowski left the lobbying firm he helped start, Avenue Strategies, amid increasing questions about whether he was lobbying without having registered. Since then, Mr. Lewandowski has had private clients and for many months gave paid speeches to different groups. Mr. Lewandowski has previously said he is not a lobbyist, and that he has never called government officials on behalf of a client.
Democrats are also looking to highlight allegations of assault made against Mr. Lewandowski. In 2016, during the campaign, he was accused of grabbing a reporter for Breitbart News who was trying to ask Mr. Trump questions at one of his properties in Florida. Mr. Lewandowski was charged with simple battery by the police. The charges were later dropped. The following year, a pop singer accused Mr. Lewandowski of slapping her at a party in Washington.
And Gov. Chris Sununu of New Hampshire, a Republican who is up for re-election next year, has told the White House he has concerns about the impact that Mr. Lewandowski’s candidacy could have on others on the ballot, according to two people briefed on the discussions.
The G.O.P. primary already has several declared candidates, including the retired Brig. Gen. Donald C. Bolduc and Bill O’Brien, the former state house speaker. After Mr. Bossie released a private poll he had commissioned from a pollster working with Mr. Trump’s campaign that showed Mr. Lewandowski leading in a theoretical Republican primary, aides to Mr. Bolduc released their own internal survey showing Mr. Bolduc ahead.