Curtis Ray Watson sexually assaulted and killed a veteran prison executive before he fled on a tractor, officials said.
Five days after escaping from prison, a Tennessee inmate emerged from a field on Sunday, weathered and mosquito- and tick-bitten, and surrendered to law enforcement, officials said.
The inmate, Curtis Ray Watson, was captured on Sunday roughly 10 miles from the prison, the West Tennessee State Penitentiary, in Henning, Tenn., which is about an hour’s drive northeast of Memphis. 
Just before 11 a.m., Mr. Watson, with his hands raised, knelt down as Ashley Bird, a correctional officer, and Jessica Brown, a probation/parole officer, took him into custody, officials said.
Ms. Bird and Ms. Brown were at the “right place at the right time,” Tony Parker, the commissioner of the state Department of Correction, said.
Both Ms. Bird and Ms. Brown were at the news conference but declined to speak. A witness, Alexia Lebel, 38, recounted the capture, which she watched from across the road.
Ms. Lebel, an employee at the Dollar General Store in Henning, said she witnessed Mr. Watson’s arrest through the store window.
She watched Mr. Watson, 44, who was serving a 15-year prison sentence for felony charges of aggravated kidnapping and aggravated child abuse, approach a car before one of the women came out and took him into custody.
Immediately after Mr. Watson was apprehended, Ms. Lebel said, it felt as though the entire community of Henning, which has a population of less than 1,000 people, came out.
Mr. Watson had been on the lam since Wednesday, but a break in the case came around 3:30 a.m. on Sunday.
Harvey and Ann Taylor were awakened by their security system, which alerted them that someone was behind their home on Graves Avenue. They reviewed the footage and saw a man looking in their outdoor refrigerator. Ms. Taylor recognized him as the escapee and called 911, Mr. Taylor said at the news conference.
Within 30 minutes of the call, hundreds of law enforcement officers descended and conducted both ground and air searches, Mr. Rausch said.
The Department of Correction posted an alert that said Mr. Watson had changed clothes and was wearing camouflage overalls and a hat and carrying a backpack.
Moments after the capture, the bureau posted a video of Mr. Watson, in handcuffs, being placed in a police vehicle, which was surrounded by onlookers.
Mr. Watson was taken to a hospital. There was no indication anyone had helped him in the escape, Mr. Rausch said.
On the day of his escape, Mr. Watson had been released from the prison for his work assignment mowing lawns, according to officials and court records. As a jail trustee, he had access to prison equipment, including a golf cart and a tractor.
Between 9 and 10 a.m., Mr. Watson drove away on a tractor, according to court records.
Officials say Mr. Watson killed the prison executive, Debra Kaye Johnson, who had been with the Department of Correction for 38 years, and who lived in a state-owned house on the prison grounds.
Ms. Johnson’s body was found at 11:30 a.m. at her home with ligature marks and a cord wrapped around her neck. The medical examiner’s office determined that she had been strangled and sexually assaulted.
