A Colorado judge dismissed a lawsuit that sought to remove team executives from deciding which of Pat Bowlen’s heirs will take over. The N.F.L. may make the next call.
A Colorado state court judge has dismissed a lawsuit that sought to remove three executives who have been overseeing the Denver Broncos in recent years because the team’s former owner, Pat Bowlen, had dementia.
The case brought last October by Bill Bowlen, a former minority owner of the team and brother of Pat Bowlen, the longtime Broncos owner who died in June, is part of an increasingly complicated family struggle for control of the N.F.L. team.
Bill Bowlen’s lawsuit argued that an independent overseer was needed because the executives had conflicts of interest given they work for the team, are trustees of Pat Bowlen’s estate and had power of attorney over his affairs.
Pat Bowlen had served as the Broncos’ principal owner from 1984 to 2014, when, as he battled the effects of Alzheimer’s disease, he surrendered control of the team to a trust led by the executives. When Bowlen, who died in June, gave up the team, he empowered the executives — the Broncos chief executive Joe Ellis; Richard Slivka, the team’s general counsel; and Mary Kelly, a Denver-based lawyer — with picking the next principal owner from among Bowlen’s heirs, or choosing to sell the team.
The dismissal of Bill Bowlen’s lawsuit does not end the ownership tussle, though; instead, it puts the matter squarely in the N.F.L.’s hands.
In an effort to resolve the dispute out of court, N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell in March appointed Carmen Policy, a former executive with the San Francisco 49ers, to serve as arbitrator in an N.F.L.-sanctioned mediation. Policy has been asked to determine whether the trustees have the authority to decide which of Pat Bowlen’s seven children can become the new controlling owner of the team, or if the team should be sold. He also must determine if the trustees have acted within the boundaries of Pat Bowlen’s succession plan.
Bill Bowlen has supported a bid by Beth Bowlen Wallace, one of Pat Bowlen’s daughters from his first marriage, to become the next principal owner of the team. Ellis, the Broncos’ chief executive, has said that whoever succeeds Pat Bowlen must meet a series of requirements in accordance with the succession plan, and that Bowlen Wallace, who worked for several years at the team until 2015, has not met them yet.
Brittany Bowlen, a daughter from Pat Bowlen’s second marriage, has expressed interest in running the team someday. She previously worked at league headquarters and was a business analyst for the Broncos, and she is now working at McKinsey, the consulting firm, in Denver. She is expected to return to the team later this year in a senior management role.
Though Bill Bowlen’s lawsuit was dismissed because Pat Bowlen died, meaning the executives no longer had power of attorney over his affairs, the judge who first oversaw the case expressed reservations about the many roles played by the executives. Bowlen argued in his filing that the executives answered only to themselves and accused them of having an interest in taking as long as possible to choose a new controlling owner because they could lose their jobs under the new leadership group.
The judge, Charles M. Pratt, seemed to agree, noting that because the executives were the sole trustees of Pat Bowlen’s trusts and were key players running the Broncos, they have little independent oversight.