Friday: A Times reporter returns to Jewish sleepaway camp. Also: Wildfire prevention and the story of a formerly $1 billion property in L.A.
My colleague Dan Levin wrote a story about an all-gender cabin at a 90-year-old Jewish summer camp in Groveland, near Yosemite National Park.
The Indigo Girls’ hit song “Closer to Fine” crooned through the arts and crafts shack, cluttered with campers’ drying tie-dyed T-shirts and ceramic mugs. Had I suddenly been time-warped back to the summer of 1995?
Sadly, no. But the great thing about sleepaway camp is that pastimes like lanyard bracelets, awkward dances and dodge ball never really change.
When I visited Camp Tawonga, a 90-year-old rustic Jewish sleepaway camp near Yosemite National Park, it felt like returning to the summer camps where I spent many school vacations two decades ago. Almost.
Unlike most sleepaway camps, then or now, Tawonga has sought to blend Jewish tradition with a social justice mission to be inclusive of all campers, particularly youth who are L.G.B.T.Q.
While Camp Tawonga has for years allowed children to bunk in cabins that matched their gender identity, rather than their biological sex, this summer the camp offered a new option: a cabin for all genders.
Amid a nationwide rise in youth who see gender identity as a spectrum, I was curious to meet the campers who chose to bunk in the all-gender cabin, known as AG-6, and learn why Camp Tawonga chose to offer it.
Upon my arrival, I met Meg Adler, a longtime Camp Tawonga staff member, who helped create a “beyond the binary” campfire for campers and staff who did not feel comfortable at the men’s or women’s campfires. She explained that letting young people know they don’t have to conform to gender norms is part of the camp’s larger goal of making sure every camper feels secure and confident being themselves.
“We’re trying to show that you’re right just as you are and we should celebrate you,” Ms. Adler said.
Along with hiking and swimming, each cabin participates in activities aimed at helping them challenge gender stereotypes and discover their own resilience.
In an age of gender-reveal parties and conservative criticism over state laws that mandate the inclusion of L.G.B.T. issues in sex education, Camp Tawonga’s approach can seem radical. But for many of the campers in AG-6, the normalcy at camp was transformative — and often healing.
Grae Smith, 13, a transgender boy who was in AG-6, said he has struggled with feeling unhappy about his body and was usually afraid to meet new people.
At first, he said, those emotions followed him to camp, but surrounded by supportive campers and counselors, Grae soon found the courage to let his guard down and simply have fun.
Today, from The Times’s Styles desk, Molly Lambert brings you the tale of the $1 billion mountain top that sold for $100,000.
It feels like a parable, some sort of made-up real estate Icarus story, but it really happened — just recently, in fact. The land, in L.A., was sold to a lone bidder at auction. The property, once the most expensive in Los Angeles, was in foreclosure.
Like so many things in L.A. it was both as simple as that, and much more complicated. Also, celebrities were involved.
Here’s the story. And with that, have a nice weekend.
