At the U.S. Open, Kristie Ahn has reached the fourth round of a Grand Slam event for the first time. Her parents aren’t entirely thrilled.
Before he immigrated to the United States, Don Ahn loved playing tennis in his youth in South Korea. He wanted his children to play, too.
Getting his daughter, Kristie, to take up the sport was easy. Getting her to stop is proving far tougher.
Kristie Ahn, 27, was born at Flushing Hospital, just two miles from the Grandstand court where she defeated Jelena Ostapenko on Saturday in third round of the United States Open.
The match was a high point of Ahn’s career. Her three wins this week were her first in the main draw at a Grand Slam tournament — 11 years after her first try. Her parents had hoped her perseverance in tennis would have worn off by now.
Ahn qualified for the 2008 U.S. Open when she was 16. She wanted to turn professional and take the first-round prize money she earned — $18,500 that would have meant forfeiting college eligibility.
Don Ahn would not budge.
Kristie ended up at Stanford, becoming captain of the powerhouse women’s team there.
When she graduated, she made a deal with her father to pursue professional tennis. He agreed to provide financial support for three years.
Kristie Ahn recalled her father’s glee late in 2017, the last year of their deal.
When Ahn’s results picked up in 2017 and she was able to sustain a career on her own, her parents were not thrilled.
“She’s got the education — why is she hanging around here?” asked her mother, Fay.
Last year, for the first time since high school, Kristie moved back to her parents’ home in Englewood Cliffs, N.J. She had felt isolated and lonely while training in Florida. Her parents thought that meant she was quitting tennis, but she hired a local coach and kept going.
Ahn, now ranked 141st, isn’t sure how much longer she will chase that dream, but she wants to put as much into tennis as she can. She had $548,241 in career prize money before the Open, and she has earned at least $280,000 more by reaching the fourth round. She will play No. 25 Elise Mertens on Monday.
Ahn earned a spot in the U.S. Open main draw this year by winning the U.S.T.A. Wild Card Challenge, which rewards the player who earns the most rankings points over a series of summer tournaments. In eight years of the Challenge, she is the first winner, male or female, to reach the round of 16 of the Open.
To Don, going corporate beats the uncertainties of professional tennis.
Don said his daughter would thrive once she entered a corporate environment.
Those skills are already appreciated by many in the tennis world, including the players who serve alongside Ahn on the WTA player council.
Ahn has suggested to her parents that leaving the tour before finishing her two-year term on the council next year would be a stain on her record as she entered the job market.
Fay Ahn said the attitude she and her husband had toward tennis often baffled others in the sport.
