MOSCOW — As thousands of riot police flooded central Moscow on Saturday to curb protests calling for fair elections, the Russian authorities announced they had opened a criminal money-laundering investigation against an anticorruption organization led by Russia’s most prominent opposition activist.
The money-laundering case is a sharp escalation in the Kremlin’s drive to silence Mr. Navalny, the driving force behind a surge of public dissent in recent weeks, and to snuff out opposition to President Vladimir V. Putin, whose popularity has slumped as Russia’s economy continues to stagnate.
Fearful that even modest peaceful protests could snowball into a serious challenge to Mr. Putin and his so-far secret plans for what will happen when his supposedly final term ends in 2024, the authorities have taken an increasingly hard line against all forms of dissent on the street.
Mr. Navalny was arrested and sentenced to 30 days in jail last month for organizing a protest after the authorities barred several opposition candidates from running for Moscow’s City Council. Officials claimed that the candidates had falsified signatures on petitions to run, a charge the opposition candidates denied.
On Saturday, police officers grabbed Lyubov Sobol, another prominent opposition figure, as she took a taxi to a protest along the Boulevard Ring, a tree-lined road and pedestrian walkway in the center of Moscow.
OVD-Info, an independent group that monitors arrests, reported that nearly 830 people had been detained by late Saturday afternoon. (Last weekend’s protests drew nearly 1,400 arrests.) Most are likely to be released at the end of the day, but some of those detained in earlier protests have been charged with rioting, a crime punishable by up to 15 years in jail.
Among those detained on Saturday was Igor Kalyapin, a member of Mr. Putin’s human rights commission. In an interview from a police van with TV Rain, an independent online channel, Mr. Kalyapin said that he had not taken part in the protest and had simply been taking video with his phone.
He said there was “no legal basis whatsoever” for his being grabbed by members of Russia’s National Guard, a security force whose chief, Mr. Putin’s former bodyguard, last year threatened to “make nice, juicy mincemeat” of Mr. Navalny.
The huge display of police muscle on Saturday seems to have deterred many people from joining the second weekend protest march, which had been called by Mr. Navalny’s organization and other opposition groups to denounce the exclusion of the dissident candidates from the September election.
After years of denouncing Mr. Navalny and like-minded Russians as a “nonsystem opposition” bent on overturning Russia’s established order, the Kremlin has prompted fury by making it impossible for them to enter the political system.
Konstantin Yankauskas, a would-be candidate barred from taking part in the September elections, was released from prison on Saturday — and then bundled into a police van waiting for him outside the detention center.
The crowds were far smaller than the July 27 rally outside Moscow City Hall. Instead of congregating in one place, Saturday’s protesters were scattered along an inner ring road. A group of protesters clapped rhythmically as they walked past a statute of Vladimir Vysotsky, a late-Soviet-era singer and counterculture icon.
A man walking past a line of police officers said to them, “You could be in Siberia fighting fires, instead you’re waving nightsticks.” It was an apparent reference to the 7.4 million acres of forest ablaze in Siberia.
As with last weekend’s protest, which the authorities condemned as a “mass disturbance,” Saturday’s march was peaceful, with violence coming only from police officers.
While mostly ignoring the protest in favor of reports about Mr. Putin and the start of an international army games outside Moscow, state-controlled news outlets presented protesters as violent hooligans. Rossiya-24, a state television news channel, reported that rubber-bullet pistols, knives and gas cylinders had been found on the detained. It described the protest as illegal and said participants could face criminal prosecution.
“We came to defend our rights. We want the candidates to be allowed. You see what is happening in Russia,” said Denis Malygin, 30, an underwriter at a Moscow bank.
He and his girlfriend, Viktoria Vasilyeva, 24, have been attending the recent demonstrations to show their anger at the heavy-handed intolerance of dissent shown by the authorities.
“I experienced it myself,” he said. “I was simply an observer last week. I was filming all of the abuse of power, and I also had my arms roughly pinned to my sides and was put into a paddy wagon.
In Trubnaya Square near the Moscow Circus, a young man in a suit stood silently with a sign reading, “Give Us Back Our Elections,” as riot police officers — called “cosmonauts” because of their helmets and body armor — swept through the esplanade in a pincher operation, trapping sightseers, circus-goers and journalists.
In Pushkin Square, the police broadcast a message warning protesters gathered around a statute of the revered Russian writer Alexander Pushkin that they were breaking the law and would “held responsible” if they did not leave.
The Russian Constitution guarantees the right to public protest, but a law requiring that all protests by more than one person obtain official permission has largely invalidated this right and has allowed the authorities to classify peaceful gatherings as criminal actions.