Women feel tremendous pressure to look good, especially during vacation season. But what about the men and boys who are suffering quietly?
Ms. Phillips is a professor of psychiatry at Weill Cornell Medicine.
Relaxing on the beach, bathing in the late-summer sun, we get to slowly let go of the stress from our hectic lives. But you may have a nagging, unsettling thought: “Do I look O.K.?” We feel tremendous pressure to look good, especially during the Labor Day vacation season, when our bodies are more exposed and the looming probability of picture-taking reaches its apex.
A quick sift through the internet yields countless images of perfectly toned, svelte bodies. And Instagram’s filtered feed is filled with the most anatomically flattering photos of your friends, layering on the pressure to negatively compare yourself with others.
A Google search of “getting your body ready for the beach” produces hundreds of millions of hits, often accompanied by ads for products that promise to whip you into shape. Yet, as ever, modern women are pushing back. On blogs and news sites, and in books from Naomi Wolf’s 1991 best-selling classic, “The Beauty Myth,” to this month’s “Trick Mirror” by The New Yorker’s Jia Tolentino, there has been a proud backlash against the malignant idea of a perfect female aesthetic.
But what about men and boys?
Male body insecurity and body dysmorphic disorder have been central subjects of my scientific research and a focus of mine as a psychiatrist who has both treated patients and conducted clinical research studies. Nearly two decades ago, my co-authors and I distilled our findings on the depth of male body image insecurity in “The Adonis Complex: The Secret Crisis of Male Body Obsession.” Since then, the crisis has only gotten worse while public attention paid to it has not kept pace.
Nearly eight million Americans, more than 1 in 50, have body dysmorphic disorder (B.D.D.), a mental health condition that afflicts nearly as many males as females. People of all ages and sexual orientations living with this condition have distressing or life-impairing preoccupations with nonexistent or slight flaws in their appearance that they think make them unattractive, even monstrous.
It doesn’t help that the forces of 21st-century life have put aesthetic insecurity into hyperdrive: We now have extremely high-definition cameras on our phones that capture every pore and wrinkle, a culture of taking selfies and video stories with those very devices and a social media complex that allows us to post our best, perhaps altered, images in an effort to keep up.
A growing body of research has made it clear that greater use of social media is associated with negative body image and lower self-esteem: One study published this year of more than 10,000 14-year-olds found a significant association between greater social media use and poorer body image. But perhaps less known or acknowledged is that these findings can equally apply to males. Another recent study, for instance, discovered that frequent checking of dating apps is associated with significantly greater body shame in men.
Patriarchy has meant that women around the world have dealt with incomparable pressure about their bodies for centuries; and yet for men there is no equivalent to the feminist body-positivity movement, which has gained more traction in female spaces. Nor does the average social circle for men accept or reward truly opening up about bodily insecurity.
There are chat forums about male body image on the internet, but some are part of the problem: Reddit-style threads full of men telling men that if they only worked out harder or fasted more fastidiously, they too could be more desirable and datable. Some sites designed to share workouts also end up critiquing and shaming participants for everything from minor double chins to technical measurements like one’s purported body fat percentage.
Much of this is a reflection of a deep anxiety about not achieving the “in” look of certain influential men — think of the physiques of athletes like Odell Beckham Jr., actors like Armie Hammer and models like David Gandy — men with highly defined necks, jaws, cheekbones, upper bodies and abs. The toxic aspiration on these sites isn’t representative of all men, but they give a telling, if limited, peek into the half-joking, self-hating ways in which men often talk to one another about their bodies. One of the most popular forums, Bodybuilding.com, has more than 137 million posts. In between workout and nutrition advice, it’s filled with some men calling not just others but also themselves “betas,” “low-T manlets” and a series of other put-downs.
While some of the evidence for this body image crisis can be atmospheric, hard to quantify, we know from the American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery that the number of men undergoing cosmetic procedures between 1997 and 2015 increased by more than 325 percent. But for those with B.D.D., surgery is not a solution and can indeed make B.D.D. worse.
I’ve seen in my own patients, and in my research studies, how B.D.D. often causes social anxiety and avoidance, work or school difficulties, inability to do daily tasks or even leave the house. Many people with B.D.D. consider suicide. Some follow through. Fortunately, effective treatments (medications and cognitive-behavioral therapy) are available. And scientists are learning that B.D.D. involves aberrations in visual processing: Faces and objects can, in fact, literally look different to people with B.D.D. I’ve had many male patients with B.D.D. who were so obsessed and tortured that they could not hold a job, see friends or date. In reality these men were good-looking; other people did not see the defects they perceived.
Although suicidal thoughts are common among men with B.D.D., there are an untold number of men — young, older and in between — who do not have extreme symptoms but are beset by quiet desperation about their bodies nonetheless. They are the men who may just be feeling down about their body type and facial features if they aren’t “performing” well in today’s image-and-app-addled dating scene. We are all still reckoning with the virtually unlimited opportunities to check our appearance, manipulate it and compare it with others’.
To help mitigate this crisis, we can first acknowledge men’s body-image worries, which often go unrecognized. And among children, teenagers or adult friends, it’s important to remember that teasing, bullying or even negatively commenting on someone’s appearance in a joking way can be emotionally wounding and may contribute to the development of B.D.D.
Perhaps more than anything, it’s crucial that we all reinforce the fact that masculinity (or femininity) is not defined by how you look — besides being untrue, it’s arbitrary.
The supposedly ideal male body has morphed over the millenniums. In Greek mythology, Adonis — who was half-man and half-god — was the ultimate figure of masculine beauty, lusted after by Aphrodite, the goddess of romantic love. The myth’s legacy is so strong that still today people call a handsome young man “an Adonis.” In the 1500s, Titian painted the most famous depiction of him, hunting with his dogs, and Venus, Aphrodite’s Roman counterpart, clutching him in her arms.
But in sitting with the painting, you see that in comparison with today’s idealized image Adonis looks a bit unchiseled, even cherubic in the face. Many of today’s men may be pursuing a face and a body that will be less trendy in a couple of years. For all the obsession over brawn, there’s also a growing trend toward praising the daintier, lanky looks of men like Timothée Chalamet and Jaden Smith.
This alone tells us that some singular rubric of male perfection is, like Adonis, a myth; that men can instead work on self-acceptance, within the bounds of healthy exercise and eating.
At a time when sexism remains so rampant, it may feel awkward to call for attention to men’s body-image struggles. But there’s no harm in hoping that everyone can feel good about themselves. As one popular website advised women this summer, “All you need to be ‘beach body ready’ is to have a body.” It’s good advice for anybody.
