Representative Steve King of Iowa, a Republican whose history of making racist and divisive remarks led him to be stripped of his committee assignments earlier this year, questioned Wednesday if there would “be any population of the world left” if it were not for rape and incest. His comment drew swift condemnation from top House Republicans and at least one called for him to resign.
Mr. King, who represents a deeply conservative district in northwest Iowa, made the remarks to the Westside Conservative Club in Urbandale, Iowa, as he explained his opposition to exceptions for rape and incest in anti-abortion legislation.
“It’s not the baby’s fault,” Mr. King said, according to a video of the comments published by The Des Moines Register, which first reported the story.
A spokesman for Mr. King did not immediately respond to a request for comment. But House Republican leaders broke from their August recess to publicly chastise him.
Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, the minority leader, and Steve Scalise of Louisiana, the minority whip, both said Mr. King’s comments underscored why he had been removed from his committees, though both stopped short of saying further action was necessary.
The No. 3 House Republican, Representative Liz Cheney of Wyoming, called Mr. King’s comments “appalling and bizarre” and reiterated her suggestion that he resign.
Building a border wall, ending birthright citizenship and disparaging undocumented immigrants. Representative Steve King championed anti-immigration views years before President Trump made them a focal point of his administration.
“And it looked like this: 10 feet wide, 13 and 1/2 feet tall. It’d construct itself to be a 12-foot finished wall, just like that.” That’s Representative Steve King — “We do that with livestock all the time.” — pitching the idea of building a wall between the U.S. and Mexico, more than a decade before it became President Donald Trump’s central immigration policy. “The wall’s going to get built folks, just in case anybody has any question. The wall’s going to get built.” King has been a Republican member of Congress from Iowa for the past 16 years. “The gentleman from Iowa is recognized.” He’s made a name for himself as a hard-line opponent of illegal immigration and for his inflammatory, sometimes racist, statements — “We are the immigrants!” — like when he disparaged so-called “Dreamers,” children brought by their parents as undocumented immigrants, in 2013. “For every one who’s a valedictorian, there’s another hundred out there that — they weigh 130 pounds and they’ve got calves the size of cantaloupes because they’re hauling 75 pounds of marijuana across the desert.” King was an early and fervent supporter of Donald Trump. “He’s a quick study. He’s an astute study. And if you explain something to Donald Trump, he’s listening carefully, and you need to get it right.” And the feeling has been mutual. “He may be the world’s most conservative human being.” [cheering] Trump’s election in 2016 gave King a staunch ally in the White House. These days, the president’s statements sound like echoes of things King said years earlier. “It’s our job, here in this Congress, to decide who will be citizens, not someone in a foreign country that can sneak into the United States and have a baby and then go home with a birth certificate.” King’s ideas and public statements, which once seemed fringe, now appear in the national discourse. His views are central to the white identity politics that heavily influence the Trump administration. The Iowa congressman’s ultra-conservative ideas have been a long time in the making. “Preventing babies to be — from being born is not medicine. That’s not constructive to our culture and our civilization. If we let our birth rate get down below the replacement rate, we’re a dying civilization. And right now —” King has denied that his statements are racist and often invokes the idea of protecting our civilization. It’s a concept of national identity and racial superiority that’s a common talking point among white nationalists. In an interview on MSNBC, King himself explained. “Where did any other subgroup of people contribute more to civilization?” “Than white people?” “Than Western civilization itself, that’s rooted in Western Europe, Eastern Europe and the United States of America and every place where the footprint of Christianity —” “What about Africa?” “— settled the world.” “What about Asia?” “That’s all of Western civilization.” “But what about Africa? And what about Asia?” He’s even gotten close to white nationalists outside of the U.S., appearing with far-right Dutch politician Geert Wilders. King has also been to Austria several times since 2013, where he’s cozied up to the far-right Freedom Party. Back at home, King has been re-elected eight times and is considered a party kingmaker in Iowa. But the 2018 midterms were his toughest contest yet. He won by just three points. And days before the election, a member of his own party called King out as a white supremacist. After more than a decade in Congress, his rhetoric may be finally catching up with him.
Mr. King was removed from committees in January after he questioned why white supremacism was offensive. The next step, should Republicans want to further punish him, would likely be to expel him from the conference, which according to party rules would require a 2/3 vote of the members. It is unclear whether Republicans would do that.
However, during a private conference meeting in June, a proposal by one member to reinstate Mr. King on his committees drew no support from any other member of the conference, according to one person familiar with the session.
Mr. King is a politically problematic figure for the broader conference, which is trying to demonstrate inclusivity and can ill afford to let him become the face of the party at a time when its numbers of female and minority politicians are shrinking. At least two Republican women are not seeking re-election to the House, and the lone black Republican in the conference, Representative Will Hurd of Texas, has also declined to run again.
Mr. King’s latest remarks come just over a week after J. D. Scholten, a Democrat who nearly defeated him in 2018, announced that he would run again for Mr. King’s congressional seat in 2020. Mr. King defeated Mr. Scholten by just 10,000 votes last November. Mr. King also faces a Republican primary challenger, State Senator Randy Feenstra, who has far outraised him.
“His comments are disrespectful to survivors and don’t reflect Iowan values,” Mr. Scholten added.
Numerous Democratic presidential candidates called on Mr. King to resign.
 Resign,” said Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York.
Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota was one of several candidates who urged donations to Mr. Scholten.
After Mr. King made his comments about white supremacy to a New York Times reporter, a number of powerful party leaders, including Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, suggested he should resign, and the House overwhelmingly passed a resolution disapproving of Mr. King’s statements.
Mr. King has insisted that his comments were misunderstood.
Two months later, in March, Mr. King came under scrutiny again when he said he did not “have an answer” when asked directly whether he believed a white society to be superior to a nonwhite society.