Pro Football|Questions About Kaepernick Hover Over Jay-Z’s Deal With the N.F.L.
Questions About Kaepernick Hover Over Jay-Z’s Deal With the N.F.L.
The league cannot seem to escape the issue of the quarterback’s absence, which became a significant topic at a news conference held by Commissioner Roger Goodell and Jay-Z.
Last week, Colin Kaepernick wrote on Twitter: “5 am. 5 days a week. For 3 years. Still Ready.” A 59-second video linked to the post showed Kaepernick working in a gym, lifting weights and doing push-ups. When the video ends, “Denied work for 889 days” appeared on the screen.
The video, which had been viewed more than 3.2 million times as of Wednesday evening, was a reminder that one of the N.F.L.’s biggest headaches had not gone away.
The issue resurfaced on Wednesday, when N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell appeared at a news conference with Jay-Z, the music impresario and one of Kaepernick’s most public supporters in his struggle to return to the league. The quarterback, who helped the San Francisco 49ers reach the Super Bowl in the 2012 season, has been out of the N.F.L. since the 2016 season, when he began kneeling through the national anthem to protest police brutality against people of color.
Jay-Z and Goodell came together to announce a deal that will make Jay-Z a co-producer of the Super Bowl halftime show. He will also help promote the league’s social justice initiatives.
If the commissioner thought that teaming up with Jay-Z would end a perception that Kaepernick had been blackballed by the league, he was mistaken. During the news conference at Jay-Z’s office in Manhattan, Kaepernick’s name was invoked over and over in one way or another.
The first question to Jay-Z was why he had partnered with the league even though Kaepernick, 31, has been unable to land a job in the N.F.L. despite repeatedly expressing his commitment to football.
At the news conference, the questions didn’t let up.
Jay-Z said he had spoken to Kaepernick but declined to provide details about their conversation.
Goodell said that player protests spurred by Kaepernick had raised awareness of social injustice and that the focus should be on work the players are doing to solve problems.
“That’s where they want the attention,” he said.
Goodell did not answer questions about whether players would be penalized if they protested during the anthem this season. A measure to force players to stand through the anthem has never been enforced, in part because of a grievance filed by the players union. But Jay-Z answered a hypothetical question about whether he would kneel during the anthem if he were an athlete.
And so it went, on and on.
Kaepernick’s absence on the field has created a wedge between the league and African-American fans, as well as with many members of the music industry. That wedge was so deep that the N.F.L. had trouble booking an act for this year’s Super Bowl halftime show in Atlanta.
Jay-Z turned down an offer to play, and other musicians said that, because of the league’s treatment of Kaepernick, they would not perform if asked.
Robert K. Kraft, the owner of the New England Patriots, recognized that the N.F.L.’s difficulty finding a top band to play at the Super Bowl reflected a deeper problem — the alienation many African-American football fans felt because of Kaepernick’s plight. So Kraft helped bring Jay-Z and Goodell together, and he attended their first meeting about a possible partnership in Los Angeles in January.
In February, shortly after the Super Bowl, the N.F.L. paid several million dollars to settle a grievance that Kaepernick had filed accusing the league’s 32 teams of colluding to keep him off the field.
He is viewed favorably by four times as many African-Americans as he is by other fans, according to the Q Company, while his negative Q score, which measures how many people rated Kaepernick “fair” or “poor,” is five times higher among people who are not African-American.
African-American players, who make up the majority of N.F.L. rosters, are also much more engaged with Kaepernick’s fight to return to the league.
Eric Reid of the Carolina Panthers, who knelt with Kaepernick as a 49er and who filed a collusion grievance after he had trouble finding a job for part of 2018, criticized the N.F.L.’s deal with Jay-Z.
Saquon Barkley, the star running back for the New York Giants, retweeted Kaepernick’s workout video, then told The Daily News on Monday that he continued to support the former quarterback.
In the end, the deal announced Wednesday may lead to a more entertaining Super Bowl. It may also raise a lot more money for groups fighting social injustice that the league is backing through its “Inspire Change” campaign.
But even with all its resources, the league is probably going to have a hard time shaking the Kaepernick questions.
