SAN FRANCISCO — YouTube said on Thursday that its site was used to spread disinformation about the mass protests in Hong Kong, days after Twitter and Facebook cracked down on thousands of China-backed accounts that compared the demonstrators to terrorists and accused them of being at the whim of foreign interests.
In a blog post, YouTube said it had disabled 210 channels this week that had uploaded videos about the protests in Hong Kong. The channels had worked in a coordinated fashion to spread disinformation, the company said. YouTube, which is owned by Google, did not specify when the channels were taken down.
The revelations highlight how China has embraced Western social media platforms to disseminate its messaging, employing techniques that were pioneered by Russia several years ago. Russia has used Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, YouTube and other social media to distribute divisive and inflammatory content, including ahead of the 2016 American presidential election.
China has historically not needed Western social media as much because Beijing exerts tight control over the internet through a system of filters known as the Great Firewall. But people in Hong Kong, a former British colony that has a different governance system than the rest of China, widely use Facebook and Twitter and other Western social media apps.
In its blog post on Thursday, YouTube did not address why it disclosed the disinformation channels days after Facebook and Twitter had revealed their findings. Unlike Twitter and Facebook, the company also did not include examples of the content it removed.
For more than two months, antigovernment protests have gripped Hong Kong, with anger rising over China’s growing influence. Here are tactics the Chinese government is using to frame the narrative.
Foreign influence, terrorism, possible intervention. This is how China is trying to shape the story of what’s happening in Hong Kong. For weeks, antigovernment protests have gripped Hong Kong, with anger rising over China’s growing influence. The Chinese have responded by trying to control the narrative. Here’s how. This is Junius Ho, a lawmaker in Hong Kong with strong ties to Beijing. At this press conference, he shows off pictures of foreigners seen at the protest. It’s an attempt to tie them to some kind of outside influence. Foreign influence and antigovernment sentiment are also common themes in posts by CGTN, China’s international media outlet. This post shows a tweet from former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who is voicing support for the Hong Kong protests. The tweet is used as proof that the U.S. is interfering in Hong Kong. Clinton’s tweets were also part of a music video that CGTN published featuring Chinese mainland rappers. “And Mrs Clinton, you know nothing about Chinese citizens. Now I got some words from your president.” “Something is probably happening with Hong Kong.” “Somebody wanna split Hong Kong from us.” One story in the People’s Daily, the official paper of China’s Communist Party, was blunt in its reporting on foreign influence. “There is no question that the United States has its hand in what’s going on in Hong Kong, though to what extent is hard to measure.” Chinese officials are increasingly framing the protests as threats to national security. There’s also a pattern of focusing on protesters being violent. The media labels these demonstrations as organized by a small group of rogue actors. Video of simulated military exercises carried out by police in mainland China show the protesters as dangerous rioters. And when protests at Hong Kong’s International Airport escalated, CGTN emphasized an incident in which a reporter from the mainland was tied up and beaten by protesters. The next day, many demonstrators apologized for their actions at the airport. CGTN did not report this. Chinese media put out this video about its police in Shenzhen. It shows the People’s Armed Police Force stationed in a city that borders Hong Kong. The video says the People’s Armed Police Force “shall participate in handling riots, disturbances, severe violent crimes, terrorist attacks, and other incidents disturbing social peace.” China also released this video of antiprotestor drills being carried out by the Hong Kong Garrison of the People’s Liberation Army. Satellite images and video confirm China’s show of force in the region. It’s unclear if China’s uniformed police will actually be deployed in Hong Kong. And the People’s Liberation Army already has a troop presence there. Instead, these videos are more likely a show of nationalism to prevent the movement from spreading to mainland China. They also act as a reminder that military intervention in Hong Kong remains an option. But what’s noticeably absent from Chinese reports on Hong Kong? People are kept in the dark about the real reasons for the protests.
YouTube and Mr. Huntley did not respond to requests for comment.
“This aspect of the information operation is much like the Twitter or Facebook content, part of a larger whole that goes across platforms,” said Graham Brookie, the director of the Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab. “Each one of those parts is extremely important in terms of understanding the larger network.” He added that YouTube rarely released data about content it removes to researchers, and that the company may fear amplifying false content by publishing it.
According to a database of the Twitter accounts that posted disinformation about the Hong Kong demonstrations, which was provided by Twitter this week, some of the accounts routinely posted links to YouTube videos. Mr. Brookie said his team found thousands of YouTube videos in the database.
Some of that content appeared benign — including cooking tutorials — and remains live on YouTube. But many of the YouTube videos shared on Twitter had been removed and replaced with messages stating that the YouTube accounts had been terminated. It was unclear if the accounts had been removed by YouTube or by their operators.
Archives of the removed videos, hosted by the digital library the Internet Archive, showed that some of them focused on Chinese political issues beyond the huge protests in Hong Kong. Several removed videos featured the exiled Chinese billionaire Guo Wengui, who has used social media to accuse leaders of the Chinese Communist Party of corruption. The videos said Mr. Guo was a fraud.
YouTube said it would continue to allow media outlets backed by the Chinese government to post and advertise on its platform. Twitter had said on Monday that it would ban state-backed media from posting ads on its service.
Even though the major Western social platforms are blocked within China, Chinese state news outlets have spent hundreds of thousands of dollars to build their presence on YouTube, Facebook, Twitter and other sites, government procurement records indicate.
YouTube inconsistently identifies content that has been sponsored by a government, using a warning label format that it has also deployed to guide viewers away from violent or anti-Semitic content.
One YouTube video of a comedy routine posted by Shanghai Media Group, and tweeted by an account Twitter linked to the Chinese disinformation campaign, came with the label: “SMG is funded in whole or in part by the Chinese government.” But another video from China Central Television that was tweeted by accounts linked to the disinformation campaign carried no such label.