Corey Lewandowski: fired Trump campaign manager, pugilistic politico, lobbyist.
Future U.S. senator?
That kind of talk is prompting an outbreak of agita among Republicans in the Granite State. “There’s zero added value to have somebody like Cory on the ticket,” said Dave Carney, a longtime G.O.P. strategist in the state.
Sarah Huckabee Sanders is reportedly mulling a run for governor of Arkansas in 2022. Speculation about a possible presidential bid continues to surround Nikki Haley, Mr. Trump’s former U.N. ambassador, who’s been taking small steps to distance herself from the president. And some Republicans are trying to push Secretary of State Mike Pompeo into the Senate race in Kansas.
Of course, running for office as a political hack isn’t quite the same as having served as a cabinet member or a White House aide. But in such a polarized political environment, the question is whether administration experience plays differently than it has in the past.
Former Senator Judd Gregg called Mr. Lewandowski a “thug.” The Union Leader, a conservative bulwark in the state, published a signed editorial against his candidacy. And Gov. Chris Sununu, a Republican, is signaling to allies that he’d rather Mr. Lewandowski sit out the race.
Their argument: Mr. Lewandowski could win the primary, but he’d cost Republicans the state in the general election. They also say he would do little to expand on Mr. Trump’s base in the fiercely independent state.
“The idea that you’re going to run for the Senate with the slogan, ‘A Senator Trump can call his own,’ that’s a leap of faith,” Mr. Rath said.
Democrats, meanwhile, think it’s a great idea. They used the attention around Mr. Lewandowski’s possible bid to issue a call of their own: a congressional subpoena.
For the next installment of our new interview series, Candidates on Rides in Iowa, we have the senior senator from Minnesota, Amy Klobuchar.
Reid Epstein: Hi Senator. Can you say three nice things about the Iowa State Fair, relative to the Minnesota State Fair?
Amy Klobuchar: Oh, more than that.
First of all, they have more trees than we do, but it’s a bigger space, and not maybe bigger space, but there’s more room for people. Secondly, they have fine art in their cow. Now, I personally love our butter princess, but they are in different categories. Ours is a phenomenon, and theirs is a beautiful work of art, a butter sculpture. And the third thing is that I have never had corn-dog-flavored beer. They’re being very creative, and I’m going to try that. So there you go.
You’ve talked about looking forward to being in the debates when there are fewer people on the stage.
With a battle looming, Biden will seek to link the Supreme Court vacancy to the future of health care.
Social conservatives see a goal within reach, thanks to their bargain with Trump.
Poll shows Ginsburg’s popularity and points to advantage for Democrats.
Yeah. Yeah. Kind of a “Hunger Games” situation.
Is there footage of that?
No. It was fourth grade. We didn’t even have footage back then. Yeah, so that’s what this reminds me of.
But do you think the field is too big still?
I think that — of course, when you’re in it, you want it narrowed down. But it’s going to narrow down. I’m not as hyper about that as some people. And I think it’s hard for the voters to discern, and that’s where the debates can seem very messy to them. But I think once you get down to 12 people, something like that, it’s just going to be a little better.
You make veiled references to Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders, about people having big plans that haven’t implemented them. Do you think they’re electable in a general election?
That’s going to be up to the voters. I would argue that the people of this country have had a lot of promises made by one Donald Trump, and that having someone that looks them in the eye and tells them the truth is going to be meaningful over time. And I would also add to that, I’m actually someone that has passed numerous bills, over 100 bills where I’m the lead Democrat, and that’s got to mean something.
Well, does everyone in the field count as someone who would get things done?
No. I don’t think so. I think people are going to have to evaluate the records to see what they passed, how they’ve worked together, what they’ve done. And it’s not just, especially for rural policy out here, putting together words on paper.
You’ve struggled to break into the top five candidates in this race. What do you make of the current state of things?
— It’s not fair to those people that want to take a selfie on a Sky Glider to me. And I think it’s way too early to evaluate this. I get doing it in November, December.
Look, no one thought Jimmy Carter was going to be the candidate. And a lot of people didn’t think Bill Clinton was going to be the candidate at this point. And a lot of people didn’t think Barack Obama was going to be the candidate. And while we have a big field, to be in the top tier of that field, the top 10, I think anything’s possible. And our supporters think that, and my staff thinks that, and that’s how we’re running this race, so.
Is it frustrating to see newcomers like Beto O’Rourke and Pete Buttigieg getting all this attention from cable news and having viral moments, when you’ve been elected three times?
It is what it is. I think you have to be able to make your case, and maybe I’ll be wrong, but I think, in the end, experience matters. And also, how you have used your power matters. And so that’s just the case I’m going to keep making. If I’m wrong, I’m wrong. But we’re not giving up, and we’re going to keep doing it.
What does an Amy Klobuchar viral moment in this campaign look like?
Jumping off the Sky Glider and hanging down and then creating the momentum so you fall off.
Yeah, that would be a good one. I think something like that. So anyway, we’ll see. I just think you can’t — you just wait for that moment and you respond.
Is this the most humiliating thing you’ve done as a presidential candidate?
Oh, this is nothing. I did an interview with our local Fox on a giant slide.
• A new undertaking from The Times Magazine: The 1619 Project, observing the 400th anniversary of the beginning of American slavery. It’s an enormous effort, and well worth spending some time with.
• From the Climate desk: How one billionaire could keep three countries hooked on coal for decades.
• New York magazine’s restaurant critic takes on the hard-to-resist-but-also-kind-of-sad allure of the desk salad.
Jeffrey Epstein’s painting of former President Bill Clinton in a blue dress. You can never unsee it.
