The road race was going to speed along Germany’s new Autobahn, into the Austrian Alps and on to Rome, through the new heart of fascist Europe.
To maximize the propaganda value of the affair — in part marking the Nazis’ 1938 alliance with Italy and the absorption of Austria — the German entry in the 1,500-kilometer race would be based on the KdF-Wagen, Hitler’s new people’s car.
With its Nazi origins largely forgotten, that car became famous after the war as the cuddly Volkswagen Beetle. The Beetle and the Berlin-to-Rome racer — known as the Type 64 — shared the same prolific designer, Ferdinand Porsche.
This car, which some view as the absolute origin of the Porsche sports car story, will be sold at auction in Monterey, Calif., on Saturday. It is likely to sell for millions.
Viewed strictly as a car, the Type 64, while advanced for its time, is hardly impressive by today’s standards.
It is tiny, and with a body made from thin sheets of hand-formed, aircraft-grade aluminum, it exudes fragility. It doesn’t make up for its lack of robustness with any significant power. The car’s modified, air-cooled Volkswagen four-cylinder engine is estimated to make 40 horsepower, and its top speed is around 90 miles an hour.
The Type 64 stands in stark contrast to the impressive-to-this-day 1970 Porsche 917K racecar (200-plus m.p.h., 520 horsepower), which holds the record as the most valuable Porsche sold at auction. That model was auctioned for $14 million in 2017 by Gooding & Company, based in Santa Monica, Calif.
Clearly the lion’s share of the Type 64’s value lies somewhere other than in performance or imposing presence.
Before the car’s consignment to RM Sotheby’s, Mr. Prill examined the car for authenticity.
The Type 64’s streamlining, courtesy of the designer Erwin Komenda — who would, a decade later, design the 356, the first production Porsche — was quite effective, allowing the car to maintain impressive speeds of well over 80 m.p.h. on the Autobahn.
It has been frequently reported that there were originally three Type 64s. Mr. Prill isn’t so sure. “We know from period photos that there were at least two, although no two cars were actually ever photographed together,” he said.
There is no known photo of the third car, which, according to Mr. Prill, was most likely never completed or put on the road.
The American soldiers chopped off the car’s sleek roof, and eventually the engine succumbed to abuse, rendering the car useless.
The G.I.s tossed it ignominiously onto a scrap heap. The lone surviving car resurfaced soon after the war, still in the hands of the Porsche family.
According to the auction company, Ferdinand Porsche’s son, Ferry, applied the Porsche name to the nose of the car in 1947. Soon thereafter, the car was sold to Otto Mathé, an Austrian racer. He owned it for many years.
Alexander Weaver, a car specialist for RM Sotheby’s in Los Angeles, echoed Mr. Prill’s sentiments as to the difficulty of placing a value on the car. Nevertheless, the auction house expects the car to sell for at least $20 million.
Johan Dillen, a racer and writer, got a test drive recently, too. He agreed with Mr. Prill’s assessment that the car was clearly a thoroughbred in its manners, but said that with its total lack of soundproofing or a muffler, the Type 64 made an unusually painful racket when in motion.
