We’re covering the widening impact of protests in Hong Kong, the old-fashioned efforts to fill an information void in Kashmir and a growing threat to Komodo dragons.
A flood of protesters at one of the world’s busiest airports caused more than 150 flights to be canceled on Monday, and the protests and travel disruptions are expected to continue today.
The sit-ins began Friday and escalated into Monday in response to police actions at protest sites in other parts of the city.
Officers fired tear gas inside a subway station, apparently the police force’s first use of the weapon in an enclosed area, and charged at demonstrators with batons. Some protesters donned eye patches in sympathy with a woman whose right eye had been injured during the clashes.
Political impact: The antigovernment protests, in their third month, have now disrupted the basic functioning of a financial hub known for order and efficiency. But if the police escalate their response, and videos of bloodied protesters continue circulating online and in the news media, support for the protests could grow.
Practicalities: Here’s what you need to know if you’re flying in or out of Hong Kong.
Another angle: Versace, Givenchy and Coach apologized to China for producing T-shirts that identified Hong Kong and Macau as countries, triggering a backlash online from Chinese consumers who perceived the designs as a violation of China’s sovereignty.
A week into the Indian government’s lockdown of Kashmir, local journalists have resorted to old fashioned techniques: fanning out on motorcycles with a pen and paper.
With the region’s lines of communication cut, only about half a dozen of the 50 or so well-known Kashmiri newspapers are up and running. They’re putting out just a few pages in make-do editions that residents pass around hand to hand.
Life inside: Eid al-Adha, one of the holiest days on the Muslim calendar, was a somber affair this year in the predominantly Muslim valley. Most mosques were ordered shut, main roads were sealed off and families found themselves alone and depressed inside their homes.
Attorney General William Barr criticized the management of the federal jail in Manhattan where Jeffrey Epstein, the financier who was accused of sexually abusing girls, apparently hanged himself.
Mr. Epstein’s death came just two weeks after he was taken off suicide watch and was left unsupervised long enough to have apparently taken his own life, security lapses that have prompted a public outcry.
Business dealings: Lawyers, bankers and accountants have been trying to understand the sources and uses of Mr. Epstein’s finances. Tens of millions of dollars flowed through his bank accounts, shell companies and, at times, charities.
Perspective: Conspiracy theories exploded online at the news of Mr. Epstein’s death, serving as “a grim testament to our deeply poisoned information ecosystem,” writes a Times Opinion writer.
The state-owned oil giant will invest $15 billion for a 20 percent stake in the petroleum-related businesses of Reliance Industries, one of India’s biggest companies.
The deal is a clear sign of the kingdom’s desire to build closer relations with India at a time when the Indian economy has slowed and Prime Minister Narendra Modi has ramped up efforts to court foreign investors.
For Reliance, which is run by Asia’s richest man, Mukesh Ambani, the deal offers the means to invest in other faster-growing sectors like telecom, television and retail.
But Saudi Aramco’s investment is a blow for Pakistan, which has been trying to rally support from fellow Muslim nations to oppose India’s unilateral decision to revoke Kashmir’s semiautonomous status.
Separately: Saudi Aramco also announced in its first-ever earnings call that it was prepared for an initial public offering, although the timing remained unclear.
As lawmakers and regulators investigate Facebook’s market power, the social network has started to modify its behavior in both pre-emptive and defensive ways.
The company has halted acquisitions that could incite antitrust concerns, and combined the systems behind its Facebook Messenger, Instagram and WhatsApp platforms. The chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, has said the changes will help build a more “private” Facebook — but critics note that they may also make it harder to break up.
India floods: Furious monsoon rains in parts of India and Pakistan have left more than 150 people dead, displaced hundreds of thousands more and wiped away entire villages.
U.S. immigration: The Trump administration announced a new policy, to go into effect in 60 days, that would penalize legal immigrants who rely on public programs like food stamps, in an attempt to narrow the number of people who are granted permanent legal status. Immigration advocates have pledged to sue the administration to block the policy.
South Korea: The government said it would remove Japan from a list of countries entitled to preferential treatment in trade after a similar move by its neighbor this month, yet another escalation of tensions between the two countries.
Russia: American intelligence officials are investigating a mysterious explosion in the country’s far north last week that apparently involved a new type of nuclear-propelled missile, one that President Vladimir Putin has hailed as the centerpiece of Moscow’s arms race with the U.S.
Australia: With China no longer accepting much of the world’s recyclable waste, the Canberra government moved last week to eventually ban exporting any recyclable waste. The move, to encourage onshore recycling, could provide lessons for the rest of the world.
Snapshot: A Komodo dragon, one of only about 3,000 left in the world, in Indonesia, where the Komodo National Park has become a major tourist attraction. But the inundation of visitors is threatening the animals and pristine beauty drawing them there.
Amelia Earhart: A new clue has persuaded the explorer who located the remains of the Titanic in 1985 to turn his attention to the aviator’s disappearance in 1937, one of the enduring mysteries of the 20th century. He’s focused on a remote atoll in the Pacific island nation of Kiribati.
Credit...David Malosh for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Simon Andrews. Prop Stylist: Paige Hicks.
Cook: Sam Sifton’s freestyle roasted chicken Parm breaks a few rules.
Watch: The trailer for “This Changes Everything.” The star-studded documentary about gender inequality in film and TV is equal parts history lesson and constructive criticism, our critic writes.
Go: In Zadar, on the Dalmatian Coast in Croatia, the 52 Places Traveler was overwhelmed by the crowds. Then he thought outside the guidebook.
Listen: The South African singer Sho Madjozi offers mixed up, pan-African rap.
Smarter Living: Feeling a little uninspired at work? Our Smarter Living newsletter suggests getting through it by reminding yourself that you have impact. Try dividing your big goals into smaller ones, where achievement will be easier to see. Or take a timeout and write down a few ways your work has helped your colleagues. If all else fails, take a break from work to do something you love.
The history of roller derby is one of booms and busts — and it’s currently booming once again: 463 leagues have started in 33 countries over the last 15 years.
Roller derby was born at the Chicago Coliseum on Aug. 13, 1935, when an event promoter named Leo Seltzer created the Transcontinental Derby, a monthlong event with coed teams skating a total of 57,000 laps — the equivalent of the 2,700-mile width of North America.
The sport got another boost in the 1960s, when Mr. Seltzer’s son, Jerry, started airing the games on local TV stations. That’s when the real drama began, as spectators flocked to the collisions and feuds that took place as each team’s “jammers” tried to score points by passing their opponents, and “blockers” tried to hold them back.
The most recent revival began in 2001, when a group of women in Austin, Tex., relaunched the sport with a decidedly feminist bent, along with a bevy of complicated tactics and terms. This year’s championship playoffs for the Women’s Flat Track Derby Association start next month.
To Mark Josephson and Eleanor Stanford for the break from the news. Victoria Shannon, on the briefings team, wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is about moderate Democrats who have a different vision of their party from its outspoken progressive wing.
• Here’s our Mini Crossword, and a clue: Most of the Earth’s surface (five letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• Our 52 Places traveler, Sebastian Modak, is halfway through his yearlong trek. Submit your questions about his experience so far.