Judge, the Yankees’ star slugger, has struggled all August, with just one home run since July 20. But he’s already learned to avoid overreacting to slumps.
Fresh off a brief question-and-answer session with reporters, Aaron Judge headed out of the Yankees clubhouse and into a rare night off in New York. His plans were typically low-key — dinner with friends — and similarly free from worry, despite a lingering slump at the plate. Judge had no intention of reviewing his 0-for-4, three-strikeout afternoon in the Yankees’ 6-5 victory over the Orioles on Wednesday.
“Short memory,” he said, citing the mantra that has kept him grounded during an especially tough month.
Judge is batting just .200 in August with only one home run since July 20, a span of 95 at-bats.  But Judge insisted his only homework would be studying the corps of Indians pitchers he will likely face during the coming four-game series.
Such is the emotional makeup of the 27-year-old star whose path to success has been anything but linear. When Judge says “baseball can really humble you,” he is referring to his struggle just to make contact in 2016, when he batted .179 in a 27-game stint, striking out in half of his at-bats. But Judge proceeded to raise his average by more than 100 points in 2017, crushing 52 home runs and setting a Yankees’ record for most home runs at home in a single season.
Such a disparity has left its mark on Judge and fuels his enduring Zen.
The restraint manifests both on and off the field. His fellow Yankees say Judge’s professionalism is the template for the entire roster: He doesn’t smash garbage cans or water coolers, even after questionable calls from umpires. In the sixth inning on Tuesday night, for example, Judge took a third strike that a subsequent replay showed was several inches off the plate. But instead of arguing with the umpire Marvin Hudson. Judge instead walked a straight, quiet line back to the dugout.
To a man, the Yankees are convinced Judge will return to his career norms in both batting average and power — as long as he avoids further injury. Judge missed two months of the 2018 season with a fractured wrist and was sidelined for 55 games this year with a severe oblique strain. Carlos Beltran, a special advisor to the team who dealt with a similar injury during his playing career, predicted Judge’s oblique would remain tender for the rest of the year and thus cut into his power output.
Judge disputed that assessment, however, and said his current home run drought had nothing to do with his health.
The Yankees would obviously welcome the return of Judge’s long balls. They have an unobstructed path to the playoffs, but the season-long struggles of their rotation will come into sharper focus in October, only increasing the need for run production.
The Yankees have been lucky that LeMahieu, Gio Urshela and, lately, Gleyber Torres have filled the void created by Judge’s struggle. The Yankees scored 33 runs in a four-game sweep of the Orioles and remain comfortably ahead in the American League East.
But that was their final game this season against the Orioles, and not every pitching staff will be as easy to overwhelm as Baltimore’s was. The Indians, who have surged to within a half-game of the Twins at the top of the American League Central, are second in the league with a 3.68 E.R.A. and represent a better litmus test for the middle of the Yankees’ lineup. Manager Aaron Boone is playing the long game, however, especially when it comes to Judge.
Judge admits the current slump “stinks” — he’s the only Yankee with 20 or more plate appearances against the Orioles whose slugging percentage was under .500. But he continues to live by an ironclad ethos: stay cool.
