“Family Pictures USA,” hosted by the filmmaker Thomas Allen Harris, seeks to highlight common ground through shared personal history.
He sought to do the same with others’ family histories beginning in 2009, when he launched Digital Diaspora Family Reunion. The project took Harris across the country, collecting family photos and stories, through one-on-one interviews and in community photo sharing events, that he posted online with the goal of preserving the personal histories before they were lost.
Now comes the TV version. “Family Pictures USA,” premiering Monday night on PBS, is a kind of “Antiques Roadshow” for family photos, built around community sharing events where Harris talks to people about the pictures they bring. Then he investigates the common roots among the various participants, as well as the broader history of the region.
The first episode visits North Carolina — the other two are set in Detroit and Southwest Florida — where Durham’s tobacco money transformed a small town into a city of possibilities, as seen in family photos from black and white entrepreneurs, immigrants and a community of drag performers. Viewers also meet members of the Occaneechi Band of the Saponi Nation, who repurchased their ancestral lands for future generations.
“The family album allows us all to start from a certain common space,” he said.
In a recent interview, Harris discussed the family album in understanding identity and how his series responds to the concept of the United States as a “divided country.” Here are edited excerpts.
Who was the person holding the camera in your family?
My grandfather, Albert Sidney Johnson Jr. He was my mother’s father. There are principally color slides that would become photographs. And then he was also taking Super 8 in the late ’60s, early ’70s. In the ’80s, he started working in video as well. So he would document the family, his extended family which was the church family, and his in-laws and cousins.
What impact has the rise of mobile phones had on the family photo album?
I have images that were taken over 100 years ago. But images I took like five years ago were lost by a device falling in water or a miscalculated click.
The difference between what’s going on now versus what went on in terms of the family album over multiple generations is that you had curation of the album, a curated narrative. For me, the archive or family album is in many ways like a language. The more you use it, the more you see its relevance, maintain and keep it. The less you use it, the more you lose track of it, and it eventually disappears.
We frequently hear about how America is a “divided country.” Does “Family Pictures USA” wrestle with that concept at all?
We’ve been working in this realm for a long time, across a lot of different administrations and different periods, different social tonalities and political realities. We use a frame that’s been informed by compassion and acceptance. And, I dare say, love. When people take family pictures they’re like: “Oh my God! I love this person. I love the situation. I want to memorialize that.” The project comes out of that space, that energy behind the creation of the family album.
So much of our project which doesn’t get talked about frequently is our relationship to the land. I was so happy to be able to do at least two of the shows in rural communities, because a lot of the images are images of the land. So when you think about family pictures it’s the people, it’s their livestock. It’s also the other things that sustain us in terms of the earth.
How were you able to get people to tell their family stories? There can be a lot of tension when talking about the past: racism, sexism, classism and how that manifests today.
When you start with the family album you’re starting with something like a family truth, an indelible truth. It’s an image of their family. It’s a narrative that they claim. It was really important for me to have a kind of neutral attitude toward that.
We did a lot of intense research before we’d go to a place, particularly about the narrative and the influence of places. In North Carolina, it’s tobacco and textiles moving from the antebellum period to the Civil War, after Reconstruction and beyond, to what’s happening today.
The reality is that America is an immigrant country. And culturally it’s made up of all these immigrant flavors. It has always been combining with the Native American, the anchor. It’s not something that just happened once in the past. It’s actually something that’s ongoing.
The old story — rooted in colonialism, stories rooted in superiority, whether that has to do with gender, or class, and racial superiority — is no longer working for us culturally. So what can replace that? For me the irony is that we can actually replace that with old photos to tell new stories!
What surprised you at the photo sharing events?
How many people find relatives, blood relatives, extended family in one another’s family albums. How many people cry in realizing a story they may have known but didn’t understand how it impacted them. Or realize how it impacts them emotionally in terms of a story of transcendence, or a moment in time. You’re going from being a farmworker to being the first person in one’s family to go to college. Or talking about a dad who was in World War II and flew over 40 different missions and came back, or didn’t come back. The deepness of the emotions and how they connect with the larger story of a country or world events.
No matter how many I hear, each story seems just as new, just as fresh, just as relevant and just as moving.