The topic of immigration was, once again, a major point of contention during the fourth Democratic debate, with former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. under attack from hecklers as well as his fellow Democrats over the Obama administration’s deportation record.
Asked whether he would resume President Barack Obama’s deportation rate — which outpaced the first two years of the Trump administration — Mr. Biden said, “Absolutely not.” But he defended Mr. Obama’s record.
“To compare him to Donald Trump, I think, is absolutely bizarre,” he said.
The exchange over immigration began when Julián Castro, who served as Mr. Obama’s housing secretary, defended his proposal to decriminalize border crossings, which he has called the only way to end the Trump administration policy of separating children from their parents at the border.
Mr. Biden — who seemed to raise his finger during the June debate to indicate he favored Mr. Castro’s plan — has since disavowed that position.
Other Democrats, siding with Mr. Castro, joined in piling on Mr. Biden, the front-runner.
Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York repeatedly asked whether Mr. Biden had tried to stop deportations during the Obama administration.
Americans view immigration as the country’s top problem at the moment, their concern prompted in large part by images of children separated from their parents at the border. Yet there is broad disagreement over a solution.
The Trump administration’s crackdown at the border — and the reaction by many Americans who believe migrants have been harshly treated — have pushed Democrats left on the issue. A number of the Democratic candidates have embraced not only decriminalization but also a plan to provide health care benefits to undocumented migrants.
Democratic political advisers worry that the candidates have moved too far left of center, and that it will play into Republican hands by alienating general election voters. In memos, they have urged Democrats to embrace a more moderate message, one that emphasizes reforming immigration but also securing the border.
In advance of Tuesday night’s debate, when Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts argued for decriminalizing border crossings, President Trump’s campaign released a new ad blasting Democrats on immigration, calling their ideas radical and Socialist.