The great Broadway legend who died this week revitalized a beloved art form.
Many theater artists have their opening night rituals, but it was Hal Prince’s approach to the day after that has long been the stuff of legend.
The morning after an opening, Mr. Prince, the inventive Broadway giant who died this week at the age of 91, would always schedule a meeting for his next show. Regardless of how the night went, there he was, bright and early the next morning, back at work. On to the next show. Always the next show.
It is difficult to overstate just how outsized an influence Mr. Prince has had on the trajectory of musical theater, an art form that has been regularly pronounced frivolous, irrelevant and obsolete, only to reinvent itself time and again. Many of the key moments of renewal and revolution in the past 65 years of musical theater were thanks to Mr. Prince himself.
Mr. Prince co-produced his first musical when he was 26. A charming comedy about a labor strike at a pajama factory, “The Pajama Game” did not exactly promise to be a commercial juggernaut. The production was in such dire financial straits that on opening night, Mr. Prince worked in the wings as an assistant stage manager to save a few dollars. “The Pajama Game,” of course, went on to become a smash success, launching Mr. Prince’s career — as well as that of a young choreographer named Bob Fosse — and earning Mr. Prince his first of 21 Tony Awards.
“The Pajama Game,” along with Mr. Prince’s next production with Frederick Brisson and Robert E. Griffith, “Damn Yankees,” defined an entire era of Broadway musicals. Urbane crowd-pleasers, slyly subversive, with hummable tunes and happy endings, these shows began to stretch the definition of what musical comedies could be, pushing the boundaries of wholesome 1950s entertainment. Gwen Verdon’s striptease as Lola in “Damn Yankees” may look tame to our contemporary eyes, but this was the same age in which Ricky and Lucy, the most famous married couple on television, slept in separate twin beds.
Mr. Prince would go on to produce or co-produce such paradigm-shifting musicals as “West Side Story” and “Fiddler on the Roof.” It was as a director, though, that Mr. Prince truly reshaped what the American musical was, and what it could do — not once, not twice, but three times.
Even for someone who championed a show about the union politics of pajama manufacturing, “Cabaret” must have seemed like a questionable idea for a musical. Based on stories by Christopher Isherwood and John van Druten’s play “I Am a Camera,” the musical told the tale of a dilettante expat and a sexually conflicted writer against the backdrop of Hitler’s rise to power.
Radical in its subject matter, “Cabaret” was also groundbreaking in form, using music not merely to advance the story and develop character, but as a direct, often ironic commentary on the narrative itself.
In his storied run of collaborations with Stephen Sondheim in the 1970s, Mr. Prince pushed the limits even further. Musicals, he and Mr. Sondheim demonstrated, could be as intimate and naturalistic as “A Little Night Music,” or as operatic and sweeping as “Sweeney Todd.” Or they could be both, as in “Follies,” a musical that he directed with Michael Bennett and that masterfully switches registers from exquisitely observed realism to jazz-hands-and-sequins theatricality and back again.
Mr. Prince would reinvent the genre once again with Andrew Lloyd Webber, with “Evita” and “The Phantom of the Opera,” shows that forever changed the sound and scope of Broadway at a time when many critics were ready to pronounce (again) the death of the musical.
Recent years have seen yet another musicals renaissance, with shows like “Hamilton” and films like “La La Land” reigniting interest and excitement on an increasingly global scale. Improbably, the musical is becoming once again what it has always purported to be: a popular entertainment.
But perhaps even more improbably, these recent successes have come at a time of extraordinary experimentation and originality, with innovative, daring musicals like “Fun Home,” “The Band’s Visit” and “Hadestown” establishing themselves as critical and commercial hits.
It’s hard to imagine any of this being possible had Mr. Prince not paved the way.
Much to my regret, I had the privilege of meeting Mr. Prince only once. Along with four other awe-struck writers, I shuffled into his office on a Tuesday morning last summer to interview him as research for the TV mini-series we had just begun to write, “Fosse/Verdon,” about the 30-year creative and romantic partnership between Bob Fosse and Gwen Verdon. Mr. Prince played a pivotal role in their story, as the producer who hired Mr. Fosse to choreograph “Damn Yankees” — pairing Mr. Fosse and Ms. Verdon for the first time. As a character in the series, Mr. Prince would appear in the first two episodes, played by Evan Handler.
That morning in his office, Mr. Prince began the conversation with an apology, regretting that he couldn’t spend more than two hours with us. The writers of his next musical were in town, and he was meeting them for a work session. He was 90 years old. He could spare only so much time reminiscing about the past. There was work to be done. On to the next one.
