It’s Thursday. NY1 is celebrating the first anniversary of its podcast Off Topic/On Politics with a live show tonight at the Chelsea Music Hall.
Weather: Dry and sunny with a high in the mid- to upper 80s. Tonight will be partly cloudy with temperatures in the low 70s.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Aug. 11.
Juan Rodriguez is a social worker in the Bronx. Last week, he forgot his 1-year-old twins inside his parked car.
Now the man whose wife maintains is a “great father” is facing criminal charges.
Catch me up: What exactly happened?
Last Friday, Mr. Rodriguez drove from his home in Rockland County to his job at the James J. Peters V.A. Medical Center in the Bronx. The temperature that day reached 86 degrees.
Around 8 a.m., he parked his silver Honda Accord and went inside to work. Around 4 p.m., he got back into his car and began driving home. Two blocks later, he realized his twins were in the back seat.
He jumped out and screamed.
Mr. Rodriguez was arrested and charged with two counts each of manslaughter, criminally negligent homicide and endangering the welfare of a child.
He was released Saturday after posting bail and is due back in court today.
Researchers said the problem has gotten worse since the mid-1990s, when safety concerns over airbags and crashes led to greater use of rear-facing car seats that keep children out of view of their parents in the front seat.
Mr. Rodriguez is struggling for answers.
“He couldn’t explain it,” one of his closest friends, Alfredo Angueira, told my colleagues.
Mr. Rodriguez also reached out to Dr. David Diamond, a professor of psychology in Florida, seeking answers.
“He thought he was the only person who had ever done this,” Dr. Diamond said in an interview on Monday.
Since 1998, according to Dr. Diamond, 440 children nationwide have died of heatstroke after being forgotten in cars.
Between 1990 and 2018, there were 889 children under 14 years old in the United States who died of heatstroke after being left in a car, according to KidsAndCars.org, a nonprofit focused on vehicle safety.
Last year, 52 children nationwide died this way, making it the deadliest year on record, according to the organization.
July is the most common month for this type of death, and Thursday and Friday are the most common days for it to occur.
More than half of the deaths occurred when parents left their children in a vehicle unknowingly.
As streets get clogged, the rich are turning to helicopters.
The most decorated Tony Award winner of all time died on Wednesday. Hal Prince was 91.
Anna Wintour saw “Moulin Rouge! The Musical” in Times Square. She even removed her sunglasses for the occasion.
Woodstock 50 has been canceled. Organizers had struggled to secure a location.
On the Lower East Side in 1983, the police arrested a young man who they said was writing graffiti in a subway station. An hour later, that man, Michael Stewart, was admitted to a hospital in a coma. He died 13 days later.
Decades later, an answer to that question can be seen for the first time — at the Guggenheim.
“Basquiat’s ‘Defacement’: The Untold Story” is a new exhibition that focuses on a painting inspired by Mr. Stewart’s death.
According to the curator of the exhibition, Chaédria LaBouvier, the painting is the only work in Jean-Michel Basquiat’s canon that addresses a current event of his time.
The exhibition is also a first for the museum: Ms. LaBouvier, 34, an independent curator, is the first black woman to organize a solo exhibition at the 80-year-old institution.
“There are a lot of stories that we need to re-examine, reclaim, re-treat. This is one chapter among many,” Ms. LaBouvier said.
It’s Thursday — make time for some art.
I was practicing my fly-casting on an empty section of the lawn in Riverside Park. About five casts into my practice session, I noticed a police patrol car driving slowly nearby. It stopped, and an officer got out and walked toward me.
Oh, no, I thought. What law could I possibly have broken?
He stopped in front of me.
