In Zadar, on Croatia’s Dalmatian Coast, the 52 Places Traveler was overwhelmed by the crowds. Then he thought outside the guidebook.
Our columnist, Sebastian Modak, is visiting each destination on our 52 Places to Go in 2019 list. Before Zadar, he was at a once-in-generation party in Vevey, Switzerland.
Overtourism in Europe, and Croatia, isn’t a new phenomenon: Dubrovnik, about 200 miles down the coast, has so many people flooding its “Game of Thrones” filming locations that the city has had to limit the number of cruise ship passengers who can disembark at any one time. Zadar was on the 2019 52 Places list as an alternative to hot spots like Dubrovnik and Split. I arrived in Zadar expecting to see a place still on the less-discovered side of the equation.
My first encounter with Zadar beyond the crowds started at one of the aforementioned konobas — a small, wood-paneled spot called Konoba Tovar where, in the dead zone between lunch and dinner, I was able to find a seat at one of the outside tables. My plan was to nurse a cold beer while I stared into my phone and figured out what to do next. It wasn’t long before a Croatian man sipping on a glass of rosé at the next table engaged me in the kind of small talk conversation common in bars across the world.
Darko Matanovic, I learned, is an artist who splits his time between the capital, Zagreb, and Zadar, and his work between abstract paintings for the art show circuit and idyllic scenes of the Dalmatian Coast for tourists. Summer in Zadar was “feeding time” as he jokingly called it, when he sets up on one of the Old Town’s picturesque squares and sells his landscapes. “There’s still fun to be had here, away from the crowds,” he said. And then he showed me how.
The night ended close to three in the morning, at a bar miles away from the Old Town. A huddle of locals in the corner sang along to Croatian pop music from the 1980s. Somewhere along the way, I had changed out of my T-shirt and into a Croatian soccer jersey bearing the number 10, which is worn by local Zadar hero Luka Modric. Mr. Matanovic had stopped at a store along the way to buy it for me. He had also given me two of his paintings to mail back home.
Though Zadar has an airport, it can be easier to fly into Split. Reliable bus service connects Croatia’s major cities and top attractions, but renting a car gives you the freedom to go where the tour buses don’t.
You could come away from Zadar thinking the food is limited to mediocre takes on Italian classics: most of the spots catering to tourists don’t appear to be trying very hard. But head to one of the local konobas for seafood to experience another side to the cuisine. (Your best bet is pointing at something on another table that looks good.) There are also some seriously good pasta and pizza spots, including 4 Kantuna, where the quality of the food is at odds with the relatively low prices. Just make sure to reserve a table in advance: it’s popular for a reason.
If I wasn’t limited by the logistical nightmare that is a trip to 52 places in 52 weeks, I would have come to Zadar at another time. In July it’s packed with vacationing European families. But if you’re not limited to when the children are out of school, word has it that shoulder season — either in May-June or September-October — is the time to go, when the sun’s still shining but the crowds are notably thinner.
My adventures in dodging vacationing families continued a couple of days later, when I connected with Joe Orovic, a Croatian-American journalist (and New York Times contributor), who lives just off the mainland on the tiny island of Iz, along with 300-odd other people. In the second half of July, the only way to escape the crowds in Zadar, Mr. Orovic, told me, was to leave it.
So that’s what I did. I made my way to the ferry port. From there, a slow but beautiful ride took me to Dugi Otok — literally, “Long Island” — where I met Mr. Orovic and the boat he had borrowed from a neighbor.
We ended the day on Mr. Orovic’s home island, a speck encircled by isolated coves. On our way in, we bumped into his wife, Tina Rokov, who was taking underwater photos and cleaning up some of the plastic that had washed ashore. Their dog, an elderly mutt, watched from the safety of her boat. Afterward, we sat at the dockside cafe, drinking cold beers and watching people somersault off the jetty into the refreshing sea.
On a tip from Mr. Orovic, I went in search of the Zrmanja River Canyon, about 30 miles inland from Zadar. I ended up in Obrovac, a small town along the river where I was too late to join any of the scheduled boat rides up the canyon.
Of course, tourism isn’t only — or even primarily — about the tourists. Crowds like the ones I saw in Zadar can change a place and its people. Mr. Orovic, who sees the bonanza that happens on the mainland every summer, was worried about what it means for the future of young Croatians.
