WASHINGTON — The House Judiciary Committee on Monday subpoenaed the former top White House aide Rob Porter to testify about President Trump’s efforts to impede the Russia investigation and asked a court to expedite a ruling on whether Donald F. McGahn II, the former White House counsel, must testify, pushing forward in its expansive inquiry into whether to impeach Mr. Trump.
The moves are the latest intensification of a multipronged effort by the Democrat-led House to explore Mr. Trump’s conduct in office with an eye toward determining if he obstructed justice and committed impeachable offenses. They unfolded as a growing chorus of Democratic lawmakers have come out over the past several weeks in favor of impeachment, and as the party’s progressive base clamors for more aggressive action in the face of insistence by Speaker Nancy Pelosi that the move is premature.
Mr. Porter was a key witness to Mr. Trump’s repeated attempts to thwart the special counsel’s investigation, including the president’s efforts to get Mr. McGahn to falsely deny a New York Times article that revealed his order to fire the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.
The Judiciary Committee went to court this month to enforce its subpoena of Mr. McGahn after the Trump administration asserted that top presidential aides were “absolutely immune” from its subpoenas. In its legal filing on Monday, lawyers for the House argued that the former White House counsel was the “most critical fact witness” in the committee’s examination of whether the president obstructed justice, including when he instructed Mr. McGahn to remove Mr. Mueller and then to lie about whether the president had done so, and later, to issue a statement lying publicly about it.
“We have made clear that Don McGahn’s testimony is the most crucial because of his central role in witnessing the president’s multiple acts of obstruction of justice,” Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York and the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said in a statement about the legal filing, which characterizes as “urgent” the panel’s need to hear from Mr. McGahn.
Mr. Porter, one of the highest-profile witnesses sought by the House, is referred to many times throughout the Mueller report’s second volume, which focuses on obstruction of justice. Mr. Mueller declined to determine whether Mr. Trump criminally obstructed justice but suggested in his report that others could use the evidence he gathered to make that call.
“This will help the committee determine whether to recommend articles of impeachment against the president or other Article I remedies,” Mr. Nadler said in announcing the subpoena of Mr. Porter.
The White House is all but certain to try to keep Mr. Porter, a former aide in the Senate and to a federal judge, from complying with the order to appear on Capitol Hill, just as it has stonewalled previous attempts by the House to secure information from other top aides to Mr. Trump.
If he did speak publicly, Mr. Porter could most likely provide a rich account of Mr. Trump’s conduct. His job as staff secretary, which included controlling every piece of official paper the president saw, entailed near-constant presence around Mr. Trump. He kept notes of his time at the White House, which the Mueller team referred to in footnotes of its report.
And unlike other witnesses that the judiciary panel has sought to compel to testify, such as Hope Hicks, the former White House communications director, and Corey Lewandowski, Mr. Trump’s first campaign manager, Mr. Porter was not an unquestioning Trump loyalist. He sometimes moved to prevent the president from taking actions that he considered ill advised or poorly considered, and made it his business to try to impose some order on a freewheeling West Wing led by a president who shunned policy deliberation and spoke openly with his staff about his whims.
In asking to speed up the resolution of Mr. McGahn’s subpoena, Mr. Nadler was trying to remove an impediment to his committee’s inquiry. But the move could also serve to reassure restive Democrats and activists that the elaborate legal strategy Democratic leaders are pursuing against Mr. Trump is progressing quickly, and that it should be allowed to run its course before any decision is made about whether to bring impeachment articles against him.