Soccer|Point. Smile. Click. Repeat.
Point. Smile. Click. Repeat.
Selfies are supplanting the signature as a sports collectible, and players on the U.S. women’s soccer team, who interact with their fans as much as any team in the world, are getting very, very good at taking them.
Modern soccer demands an increasingly diverse toolbox of skills. Players in every position now are expected to be smooth with the ball, to make explosive runs — and, if you’re a member of the United States women’s soccer team, to take dozens of well-framed selfies in a row at great speed.
Stick around after any of the games on the team’s current World Cup victory tour, which continues with two games against Portugal — on Thursday in Philadelphia and on Tuesday in St. Paul — and it will not be hard to spot a quintessentially 21st-century sight.
The postgame stadium railing will be stocked several people deep for that night’s selfie session, wherein fans in the stands pass their phones down to the players on the field, who take on the responsibility of snapping a photograph meant to be cherished.
The ritual has become a normal aspect of the game-day experience, in some small way at least, for athletes across most sports, with the athlete-produced end products destined for Instagram and Twitter. But the American women have become some of the most active, enthusiastic selfie practitioners in sports, in part, they say, because of the team’s traditionally tactile, up-close approach to fan interactions. Every happy fan, they understand, represents another building block in the growth of their game.
Once upon a time all of these fans would be clamoring for autographs. Some still do, and the team’s staff members make sure to have permanent markers on hand after the final whistle to facilitate those requests.
The movement, the American players warned, is not without its hardships. Ask any of them about the quirks of navigating the postgame selfie line, for example, and you may hear the issue of photo perspective discussed with a similar tinge of regret.
Defender Emily Sonnett noted that selfies have the potential to take longer than autographs, especially if fans are doing the framing. Lost seconds here and there add up when there’s a large crowd.
That is one reason the selfie line has developed into its current form at United States women’s games, with the players, in the interest of efficiency, often reaching up to grab fans’ phones and taking the photos themselves.
Some interactions are smoother than others. Some are derailed before they begin.
“I just try not to drop it,” Dahlkemper said.
The top players on the American team are acknowledged, even among their teammates, to be among its finest front-facing camera operators.
After a World Cup warm-up game this year in Alicante, Spain, an enormous crowd of fans congregated in the front rows of the elevated stands. What followed was a master class in stadium selfie line management.
Alex Morgan went left, Carli Lloyd went right, and the two proceeded to shuffle down the line with their backs to the railing. The fans, meanwhile, stretched their phones out toward the field, waiting for them to be grabbed by one of the players.
The dexterity on display was world class. The task demanded as much composure and coordination as any soccer drill: smile-click-pass, smile-click-pass, swiftly, again and again and again, until every fan had a picture.
The players go through this, in part, because many of them were once on the other side of the railing. Mewis in her youth cherished an autographed picture of the former striker Cindy Parlow. (“I kept it framed for, like, way too long into my 20s,” she said.) Sonnett still owns a Frisbee that bears the signatures of Hope Solo, Marta, Lloyd and many other star players.
Whether at United States matches or anywhere else top women’s players take the field, the players realize they are spiritual ambassadors for women’s soccer.
Yet there are pragmatic concerns behind their openness, too.
Being a member of the team, then, means interacting with fans, and interacting with fans these days means taking selfies.
Sonnett, who rated herself “a soft 8” in her iPhone shooting skills, had three quick tips for any stadium selfie-snapping athlete: First, do the best you can to raise the angle (in some cases, this is a lost cause). Second, turn away from direct sunlight, lest you end up with a white photo. Third, if you’re not exactly sure whose phone you’re holding, reach your arm out superfar and get the whole group of people to increase the chance that the person is in the frame.
Even then, it’s not exactly art, especially when others are waiting. “You kind of have to tell them it’s good enough,” Sonnett said.