The renovated store will include a memorial to the victims and should be ready by the holidays, Walmart said.
The Walmart in El Paso where a gunman targeted Mexicans in a shooting rampage this month is expected to reopen later this year — and when it does, the store won’t be recognizable to customers and employees, the company said on Thursday.
The store, which is on the East Side of the city, will be stripped down to its shell and overhauled during the next three to four months, according to Walmart, which says the store will have a new layout, flooring, fixtures and merchandise.
A memorial to the 22 people killed in the Aug. 3 shooting will be included in the renovation of the store, which draws local residents as well as customers from Ciudad Juárez on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande.
While Walmart has faced criticism as one of the nation’s largest gun retailers, the El Paso store where the mass shooting took place did not sell firearms, Randy Hargrove, a company spokesman, said.
The store was packed when the shooting began, sending panicked shoppers and employees running for their lives. A 21-year-old man, who wrote in a manifesto that he was responding to the “Hispanic invasion of Texas,” surrendered to the Texas Rangers and admitted to the shooting, the authorities said.
The violence has thrust Walmart into the position of having to decide the future of the building. It’s a familiar quandary at the site of each mass shooting, like the Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut, the Pulse nightclub in Orlando and the Century Aurora theater in Colorado.
Mr. Hargrove said on Thursday that the company had encouraged feedback from its employees on the store’s future and intended to keep them deeply engaged.
Laura C. Wilson, the editor of “The Wiley Handbook of the Psychology of Mass Shootings” and an associate professor of psychology at the University of Mary Washington in Virginia, said it was fairly common for survivors to want to demolish a building or space where gun violence took place.
Communities have taken different approaches to mass shooting sites.
In Newtown, Conn., for example, the elementary school where 20 first graders and six educators were killed in a 2012 mass shooting was razed and a new school was built on a different part of the property.
In Virginia Beach, officials still have not decided the fate of a municipal building where a city engineer who had quit his job killed 12 people in May. The city conducted a survey of residents and city employees on what to do with the building, with the largest percentage of respondents favoring demolition, The Virginian-Pilot of Norfolk, Va., reported.
In Orlando, Pulse, an L.G.B.T.Q. nightclub where 49 people were killed in 2016, reopened in another location. A permanent memorial is planned for the site of the shooting, which is home to a temporary tribute.
Twenty years after a shooting at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo., claimed the lives of 12 students and a teacher, the community still has not reached a consensus on what to do with the building, where trespassers have continued to make incursions despite a security perimeter.
Professor Wilson said it was important to remember that people affected by mass shootings respond differently.
Seven of the Walmart shooting victims were Mexican citizens, and Walmart said the memorial would reflect the cultural diversity of the community.
“Our goal is to establish a memorial that honors the victims, recognizes the binational relationship between El Paso and Ciudad Juárez and celebrates the strength of the El Paso community,” Mr. Hargrove, the Walmart spokesman, said on Thursday.
