A classic story lends itself to a new tale of endangered languages.
In multiple ways, “The Little Prince” by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry is one of the most accessible books on Earth. It’s not just that Saint-Exupéry’s tale of a pilot’s encounter with a regent from another planet speaks to children from cultures across the globe. The book, originally in French, has also been translated into well over 200 languages.
“The Miracle of the Little Prince,” a documentary from Marjoleine Boonstra, seizes on that bit of trivia to start a broader discussion on dying languages. Her focus is on translators who have adapted Saint-Exupéry’s into languages that could face the risk of being lost. Those are Tibetan; Tamazight, from the Berbers of North Africa; Sami, a group of dialects spoken by indigenous Scandinavians; and Nahuatl, an Aztec language in Central America.
We learn how, as a children’s book, “The Little Prince” is useful for teaching a younger generation Tamazight, which Lahbib Fouad, a translator, says was mainly written on stones and rocks. The most interesting scenes in “The Miracle of the Little Prince” deal with the problems that vex the translators. Tamazight does not have a word for “tap” or “well” (as in a source of water), for instance, so an equivalent must be found. The majority of Nahuatl speakers, we’re told, are between 80 and 90. The best scene finds four of them discussing the best words to use. The back-and-forth testifies to the richness of what is being lost.
For most of the 20th century in El Salvador, Nahautl speakers were intimidated by the government from using the language. The Sami, too, were often treated as second-class citizens in Scandinavian countries, and Tashi Kyi and Noyontsang Lamokyab, the two Tibetan translators we meet, live in exile.
These sentimental discussions come across as pandering, a way for the movie to at once pad its running time (this could have been a short) and to avoid wading into the linguistic weeds. “The Miracle of the Little Prince” seems to have been made from the supposition that too many discussions of grammar or syntax might bore viewers. Even so, the platitudes are worse. A stronger movie might have dug more deeply into the languages it wishes to save.
Not rated. In French, Tibetan, Tamazight, Sami and Nahuatl, with subtitles. Running time: 1 hour 29 minutes.