“Preparation trumps youth,” said the winner, Bob Long, who “hated” to think that he couldn’t complete the Mongol Derby, a grueling contest across the steppes of Mongolia.
Bob Long, 70, just became the oldest person to finish what Guinness World Records calls the longest multi-horse race in the world. He also came in first.
Mr. Long, an amateur rider from Boise, Idaho, beat out 43 competitors this year, riding about 100 hours in about seven and a half days, on 28 different horses, by his tally.
At the outset, Mr. Long was not a favorite to win, said Tom Morgan, this year’s race director and the creator of the competition for the Adventurists.
Each year, Mr. Morgan said, he spends months plotting the route, enlisting 300 to 400 Mongolian hunting families to work the race and about 1,500 horses to carry contestants across high passes, huge valleys, wooded hills, river crossings, wetland, dunes and open steppe in extreme temperatures.
It costs about $13,700 to enter, which includes a custom-made saddle, access to a medical response team and veterinarians to care for the horses, among other expenses.
But Mr. Long is now “a legend,” he said.
On Tuesday, Mr. Long had just returned to Boise after several long-haul flights from Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia. Reached by telephone, he said that he was getting used to sleeping in a bed again and that his gastrointestinal system was reacquainting itself to American food.
Mr. Long, who retired as the chief technology officer for a health care technology company, said he was inspired to enter the competition after watching “All the Wild Horses,” a film about the race.
“It took me about 15 minutes to decide that I could do that,” he said. He “hated” to think that he couldn’t.
Mr. Long had grown up riding in Wyoming, which he said had similar open landscape to the steppes of Mongolia, and he prepared physically and psychologically for the race.
“In January I couldn’t spell endurance,” he joked.
Over the course of several months, he trained with previous winners of the race, practicing riding four or five horses a day as far as each could go, and learned how to change horses efficiently.
It was this training that Mr. Long said put him in good stead for the race, even against younger competitors.
“Preparation trumps youth,” he said.
Each time he was ahead during the race itself, he gave his horse a blue ribbon that he’d brought from home. He handed out flavored lip balm, colorful stickers and barrettes to the children in the homes where he stayed throughout the race. And he made little baggies with a pocketknife and two cigarettes to give to each of the herdsmen.
“It didn’t take long for them to stand in line to help me,” he said.
On the third day of the race, Mr. Long took a shortcut and pulled ahead of the other riders.
But he was familiar with the solitude of the wilderness from his childhood.
The Mongolian herdsmen awarded him a horse, which his daughter wants to name “Derby.” But he was not sure how to bring it back. So he said he left the herdsmen enough money to take care of it for a year.
Mr. Long said that he was thinking about reaching out to Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper, who received a horse from his Mongolian counterpart earlier this year, to see if he might give his horse a lift home.
Next week, he will ride in Wyoming to scout a location for his parents’ ashes, which he’s placed in bronze boots, so they can see the Tetons, and be close to his brother, who was killed in an airplane crash.
