Dai Fujikura’s new work for shamisen, a three-stringed, fretless Japanese lute, premieres on Saturday.
In the late 1960s, not long before his groundbreaking “November Steps” for shakuhachi, biwa and orchestra, the avant-garde composer Toru Takemitsu struggled to reconcile Japanese and Western music.
As evidence of their incompatibility, he pointed to sawari, the noisy buzz that gives the shamisen — a three-stringed, fretless Japanese lute — its characteristic timbre. In contrast to the European ideal of sonic purity, Takemitsu suggested, Japanese music embraces the expressive noise that lives inside every musical sound.
On Saturday, the International Contemporary Ensemble, or ICE, and the shamisen player Hidejiro Honjo will premiere Mr. Fujikura’s Shamisen Concerto as part of Lincoln Center’s Mostly Mozart Festival. The wide-ranging concert also features the cimbalom (a Hungarian dulcimer) and kamancheh (a bowed Iranian string instrument).
It’s an apt concept for the group, whose virtuosic players offer composers an ever-expanding sonic palette, and in whose hands a flute or cello may sound as unfamiliar and surprising as a shamisen.
Mr. Fujikura’s concerto draws on his 2014 solo shamisen piece “Neo,” a propulsive seven-minute tour de force that shifts between rhythmic grooves as it builds relentlessly toward its climax. The piece was commissioned and premiered by Mr. Honjo, who over the past few years has pursued collaborations, such as a concert last year with ICE, designed to push the shamisen into new musical territory.
In the new 20-minute, single-movement concerto, Mr. Fujikura uses the ensemble to complement and enhance the shamisen, rather than as a foil placed in dramatic conflict with the soloist. But there are still connections to the traditional concerto form; early on, the shamisen breaks into a cadenza-like solo of dizzying rapidity that evokes prog-rock guitar as much as Paganini.
Half a century after Takemitsu’s aesthetic crisis and two decades after the founding of Yo-Yo Ma’s transcultural Silk Road Ensemble, composers seem more comfortable using non-Western instruments — less anxious, perhaps, about the specter of exoticism. This has led to an exponential growth, driven largely by performers, in the number of concertos featuring solo instruments not found in Western orchestras. The didgeridoo, duduk, sitar and oud — even the waterphone — are just a few instruments that are enriching the concerto repertoire. In Sofia Gubaidulina’s Triple Concerto, the bayan (a Russian button accordion) colors the ensemble with a tenebrous rustle.
For Chinese instruments like the pipa, erhu and sheng, the number of concertos from the past 30 years tops 300. Wu Man, a founding Silk Road Ensemble member who has championed the pipa, a four-stringed lute, points to the Boston Symphony Orchestra’s 1979 performance in Beijing of Wu Tsu-Chiang’s pipa concerto “Little Sisters of the Grassland” as the moment that whetted China’s appetite for concertos.
In China now, Ms. Wu said recently, “every player wants to play concertos” rather than give solo recitals. Ms. Wu has collaborated with both Chinese and non-Chinese composers in creating new pipa concertos. In her estimation, this diversity is a boon to the instrument.
“Different composers all have different concepts of how to use the pipa, of what the character of the instrument is within an orchestra,” she said. Lou Harrison’s pipa concerto, for instance, which Ms. Wu premiered in 1997, sounds to her neither Chinese nor American.
Harrison, despite his unorthodox use of the pipa, knew the instrument well. Mr. Fujikura, on the other hand, knew virtually nothing about the shamisen before researching the instrument when he was composing “Neo.” Although he was born in Japan, in 1977, he has lived in the United Kingdom since he was 15 and has a greater affinity for the pop music of British singer-songwriter David Sylvian and the film music of Ryuichi Sakamoto than for traditional Japanese instruments like the koto and sho.
Composing his concerto, even after “Neo,” brought some surprises. The use of the left-hand pinkie finger, Mr. Fujikura learned from Mr. Honjo, is forbidden, at least traditionally.
But sawari? It’s indispensable.
Saturday at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , mostlymozart.org.