Three New York restaurateurs — David Chang, José Andrés and Christina Tosi — pleaded with the developer Stephen Ross to cancel a fund-raiser for President Trump.
On Friday afternoon, as Stephen Ross, the billionaire real estate developer and the principal owner of the Miami Dolphins, prepared to host a high-priced fund-raiser for President Trump at his home in the Hamptons, it appeared that some celebrity chefs had failed in their efforts to persuade Mr. Ross to call it off.
This week, José Andrés of Mercado Little Spain, David Chang of the Momofuku restaurants and Christina Tosi of Milk Bar took to the internet to condemn Mr. Ross, the chairman of the real estate company that owns Hudson Yards, where Mr. Andrés and Mr. Chang have recently opened restaurants. Mr. Ross has a stake in Ms. Tosi’s dessert chain.
They were following the lead of Equinox and SoulCycle, which distanced themselves from Mr. Ross, the chairman of their parent company, after fans started a boycott movement with the Twitter hashtags #CancelEquinox and #CancelSoulCycle. Calls to boycott Mr. Chang’s restaurants, in which Mr. Ross is an investor, have been fewer and further between, but the week’s events underscored how perilous today’s polarized political climate can be for restaurants and other business with well-connected investors and developers.
Despite his frustration with his Hudson Yards landlord, Mr. Andrés said in a Friday afternoon phone call that he did not intend to cut his ties with Mr. Ross or distance his businesses from him. “If we are going to start tomorrow breaking with everybody that has relationships or supports people we don’t agree with, we will be living in anarchy,” Mr. Andrés said.
On Wednesday, he posted a video to Twitter imploring Mr. Ross to cancel the Trump fund-raiser.
Mr. Andrés has sparred with the president before; after Mr. Trump made disparaging comments about Mexican immigrants in 2015, Mr. Andrés pulled out of a deal to open a restaurant in the Trump International Hotel in Washington. The parties settled a lawsuit in 2017.
“He is destroying our democratic norms,” Mr. Chang said of Mr. Trump.
A representative for Mr. Chang said Friday that the chef wouldn’t comment further.
A Tuesday article in The Washington Post revealed plans for the Friday fund-raiser, where tickets cost $5,600 to $250,000.
Mr. Ross is the chairman of Related Companies, one of the two private real estate companies behind Hudson Yards, a mammoth $25 billion retail and residential development that opened in March on the West Side of Manhattan.
In addition to his longstanding friendship with Mr. Trump, Mr. Ross also has a financial stake in the president’s business empire. Shortly after the 2016 election, Mr. Ross’s Related Companies bought an $80 million stake in Ladder Capital, one of Mr. Trump’s biggest creditors.
