EL PASO — Representative Will Hurd of Texas, the only black Republican in the House, announced Thursday that he would not seek re-election next year, adding to a wave of departures that has unsettled party leaders as they hope to reclaim the majority in 2020.
Mr. Hurd, who is also the only Republican to represent a district along the southwestern border, is the sixth House Republican and the third Texan in the past 10 days to announce retirement. After the 2020 election, Senator Tim Scott, Republican of South Carolina, will be the only black Republican incumbent in Congress.
“Two centuries ago, I would have been counted as three-fifths of a person, and today, I can say I’ve had the honor of serving three terms in Congress,” Mr. Hurd said Thursday in a statement. “I will keep fighting to remind people why I love America: that we are neither Republican nor Democrat nor independent.” He did not say what he planned to do next. Before serving in Congress, Mr. Hurd was an undercover C.I.A. officer.
His announcement on Thursday made clear that the Republicans’ path to reclaiming the majority in the House and diversifying their party’s membership was becoming increasingly difficult. Two of 13 female incumbents — Representatives Martha Roby of Alabama and Susan W. Brooks of Indiana, who is a leader in candidate recruitment — and a handful of moderates are not planning to run again.
In the past few days, Representatives K. Michael Conaway of Texas, Rob Bishop of Utah and Paul Mitchell of Michigan also announced their plans to retire, while Representative Rob Woodall of Georgia made his decision known in February.
FiveThirtyEight’s composite of polling posted this week reported that on average, 46.1 percent of people say they would vote for Democrats in next year’s congressional elections, against 40 percent who favor Republicans.
Mr. Hurd, whose district sprawls from San Antonio to El Paso and is larger than some states, has held onto his seat by a winnowing margin, defeating his opponent, Gina Ortiz Jones, in 2018 by a little over 1,100 votes. He has overcome the geographical and electoral perils of Texas’ 23rd District by building a reputation as a dedicated legislator willing to work across the aisle, which made his decision even more devastating for state and national Republicans.
That often meant breaking with President Trump and the Republican Party. Mr. Hurd, who has voted just over half of the time for positions held by Mr. Trump, like building a wall along the southwestern border, instead speaks of a border guarded by fiber optic cables, sensors, radar, drones and increased staffing.
Mr. Hurd was also one of only a handful of Republicans to join Democrats last month in condemning Mr. Trump’s attacks on four freshman Democratic congresswomen of color. And he had also been growing more vocal about his frustration with the current direction of the party.
Ms. Ortiz Jones, who lost to Mr. Hurd in 2018 and has declared her intention to run in 2020, said in a statement that she respected Mr. Hurd’s “decision to serve in a new capacity” and vowed to fill his void.
