From photography and editorials to personal narratives and podcasts, a list of the 10 contests for teenagers we’re running this school year. Plus, new contests for middle schoolers!
For 10 years now, The Learning Network has been running contests that offer students a chance to share their ideas and opinions with the world.
Thanks to enthusiasm from schools about these opportunities to spotlight student voice, this year we’re offering more opportunities than ever before.
For 2019-20, we’ll be running 10 contests, including two new additions to our usual lineup. In September, you’ll find our first-ever personal narrative essay contest, and in the spring we’ll be inviting students to write about STEM concepts.
We are also excited to announce that our review contest, and possibly others, will now be open to middle schoolers. Please stay tuned for details.
As each contest goes live, we will add a link here, on this page, but you can learn more now simply by clicking the “Rules and Guidelines” for each.
To download a PDF version of this contest calendar, click here. To learn more about our contests in general, scroll to the bottom of this post. If you have any questions, please write to us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or post a comment.
Take a photograph that depicts some aspect of teenage life that you think may be misunderstood, overlooked or largely unknown, and, in a short artist’s statement, tell us why. Rules and guidelines here and winners here.
Write a short, powerful story about a meaningful experience from your life — in 600 words or fewer. Rules and guidelines here and winners here.
Draw an editorial cartoon on a topic you care about. Rules and guidelines here and winners here.
Review a book, movie, restaurant, album, theatrical production, video game, dance, TV show, art exhibition or any other kind of work The Times critiques. Rules and guidelines here and high school winners here and middle school winners here.
Write an essay matching something you are studying in school to anything that was published in The Times in 2019 or 2020, and tell us why you made the connection. Rules and guidelines here and winners here.
Produce a 15-second video about the meaning of one of our Words of the Day. Rules and guidelines here and high school winners here and middle school winners here.
Explain a complex and interesting science, math, engineering or technology concept to a general audience. This contest is inspired by Trilobites, the Science Times column that does just that. Rules and guidelines here and winners here.
Write an editorial on an issue that matters to you. Rules and guidelines here.
Make an original podcast of five minutes or less that informs and entertains listeners. Rules and guidelines here.
We ask, “What interested you most in The Times this week?” each Friday for 10 weeks. In a short comment, tell us what you’re reading and why. Rules and guidelines here.
Why do we run so many contests? We believe in student voice. We want young people to be active content creators, not just consumers. And we’re proud to offer places where they can create for an authentic audience of students, teachers, parents and other readers from around the world.
In general, our contests are open to students ages 13 and up. This year, however, we’re excited to announce that our review contest will be open to all middle schoolers — a first for us. In fact, we may open up many of our spring contests to middle schoolers as well. But as internet privacy laws in the United States and around the world change, we’ll be experimenting with different age ranges and new submission forms this school year, so please stay tuned for the details.
On the day each contest begins, we will add a link here, on this page, to the contest announcement so students and teachers can submit entries.
The work students send us is always considered by our staff and other experts, whether Times journalists, outside educators from partner organizations, or professional practitioners in a related field. For example, we have members of the Times podcast team help judge our podcast contest, Opinion writers and editors help judge our editorial contest, and professional cartoonists help judge our editorial cartoon contest. Judging for our contests is blind. That means we see only the entries themselves, and not student names or schools when we make our decisions.
About a month after the contest closes, we’ll announce the winners, runners-up and honorable mentions. We often celebrate dozens of students for each contest. For our 2018 editorial contest, for example, in which we had nearly 11,000 submissions, we honored 120 students.
Winners get their work published on The Learning Network. Some may also be featured in a special section of the print New York Times.
Our contests are also an integral component of our free school-year writing curriculum, which offers daily writing activities, mentor texts, and related lesson plans to prepare students for each contest. Learn more here.
If you’re a return visitor, you may have noticed that we have dropped our decade-old poetry contest this year. We may bring it back in the future, but we needed to take a break this school year while we experiment with new contests and age ranges.
Want to make sure you don’t miss a contest announcement? Sign up for our free weekly newsletter, view our calendar on the web or subscribe to it in your calendar app so you see everything we’re offering in 2019-20.
We can’t wait to see what students create this school year!