“Preparation trumps youth,” said the winner, Bob Long, who “hated” to think that he couldn’t complete the Mongol Derby, a grueling contest across the steppes of Mongolia.
Mr. Long, an amateur rider from Boise, Idaho, beat out 43 competitors this year, riding about 100 hours in about seven and a half days, on 28 different horses, by his tally.
At the outset, Mr. Long was not a favorite to win, said Tom Morgan, this year’s race director and the creator of the competition for the Adventurists.
Each year, Mr. Morgan said, he spends months plotting the route, enlisting 300 to 400 Mongolian hunting families to work the race and about 1,500 horses to carry contestants across high passes, huge valleys, wooded hills, river crossings, wetland, dunes and open steppe in extreme temperatures.
But Mr. Long is now “a legend,” he said.
On Tuesday, Mr. Long had just returned to Boise after several long-haul flights from Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia. Reached by telephone, he said that he was getting used to sleeping in a bed again and that his gastrointestinal system was reacquainting itself to American food.
Mr. Long, who retired as the chief technology officer for a health care technology company, said he was inspired to enter the competition after watching “All the Wild Horses,” a film about the race.
Mr. Long had grown up riding in Wyoming, which he said had similar open landscape to the steppes of Mongolia, and he prepared physically and psychologically for the race.
It was this training that Mr. Long said put him in good stead for the race, even against younger competitors.
On the third day of the race, Mr. Long took a shortcut and pulled ahead of the other riders.
Mr. Long said that he was thinking about reaching out to Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper, who received a horse from his Mongolian counterpart earlier this year, to see if he might give his horse a lift home.
Next week, he will ride in Wyoming to scout a location for his parents’ ashes, which he’s placed in bronze boots, so they can see the Tetons, and be close to his brother, who was killed in an airplane crash.
