Experts discuss the problems that have led to fertilizer runoff.
Catherine Kling is right: “Those who cause the pollution should be required to pay for the cleanup.” But a focus on regulations, penalties and farmers is misguided.
The causes of pollution are many, and a half century of federal policy bears a large portion of the blame. So do decades of trade policy, land-grant universities whose research encouraged the use of fertilizers, agribusinesses that developed and sold the fertilizers, states that permitted excessive applications of manure and American consumers who have come to expect an excess of cheap food.
Farmers, who have done what the markets and policymakers have asked of them, are ever more aware of the need to do things differently. Increasingly, they embrace no-till farming, cover crops and other methods that help them and the environment. They deserve support as they adapt and change.
The writer is a food systems consultant.
Catherine Kling suggests that the federal government’s hands are tied when applying the Clean Water Act to agriculture. In fact, the Environmental Protection Agency has refused for decades to use its authority to prevent water pollution from factory farms, which concentrate thousands of animals and their waste, severely threatening water quality.
Further, big meat and poultry companies often push responsibility for managing waste from company-owned animals onto overburdened contractors. These same companies also steer farm policies that prioritize the overproduction of corn and soybeans, driving down the price of the crops fed to factory farm animals and ramping up the negative impact of crop production on water quality.
We need regulators at all levels to stand up to the meat industry and rein in factory farms.
The writer is the director of the Food and Water Program at Food & Water Watch.
Relying on states to regulate farm runoff is not going to be very effective, because state regulations and their enforcement will vary.
What is needed is a revision to the Clean Water Act that requires farmers to minimize runoff and that provides them with the services of the Army Corps of Engineers, to help farmers treat runoff on-site, through the use of wetlands at the edge of fields, for example.
The writer formerly worked in the Office of Research and Development at the Environmental Protection Agency.