Opinion|Where Went My Empty Nest?
Where Went My Empty Nest?
Welcoming your children back home after college is great, but as a parent, the adjustment can also be jarring.
Parenting is rewarding, but it is also challenging. It is a full-time, rest-of-your life job.
You always think — hope — that whatever difficulty you are facing with one period of a child’s life and development will simply be solved when he or she grows out of that phase. Soon, they’ll be potty trained, or be able to retrieve their own snacks, or walk home from school alone, or whatever.
But, what one soon discovers is that one phase of difficulties is only replaced by the difficulties of the next. Parenting doesn’t necessarily get easier, it is simply transformed. There are new joys, but also new headaches.
And, I find that the headache part is the part parents feel tremendous shame disclosing. Our modern, parenting-book, social-media-sharing culture seems to dictate that the only thing that one can say about parenting is that “it is the most important and fulfilling thing I’ve ever done.” That is the only way that one is allowed to signify that one loves his or her children and has made the sufficient level of sacrifice.
I find those constraints ridiculous and impossible. It is possible to love your children complete and simultaneously be exhausted by them. For many parents, that is the truth, and there is nothing shameful about acknowledging that.
You enjoy the good times, vacations and the family game nights or pizza-and-a-movie nights, but, at least for me, the years wear on and the fatigue of it all slowly begins to set in. It is easy to forget that you owe it to yourself to have a separate personal life, that you were a fully formed independent adult before them and you will have to be again when they are gone.
It wasn’t until the younger two were seniors in high school that it dawned on me that I had not been on an actual vacation in over 10 years. Sure, I traveled — for work, with my daughter to her fencing tournaments, to professional conferences, to take the children to visit their grandparents — but, none of that was particularly relaxing or designed to be.
I believe that in my head, at least for the last four years my children were in high school and in my house, I had a countdown clock in my head: I just had to hold out and maintain them as my priority in life for a little while longer and then they would go away to college and my life would finally begin.
That day finally came four years ago when my twins went away to college. I was now officially an empty nester. 
People often ask me if I was sad that the children had gone away, expecting me to say how lost and lonely I was. I didn’t. I told them how free I felt, how I felt that I was entering a new life of my own, and I felt absolutely no guilt about that.
I traveled. I reconnected with old friends and made new ones. And, I was able to work as long and as hard as I liked and never had to worry that there were children at home who needed me there.
But, now that the children have graduated and moved back into my house as they search for jobs and eventually first apartments, I will say the thing that we as parents are not supposed to say: What happened to my empty nest? The very definition of home has changed. Mine will always be their family home, their spiritual home, but it cannot be their primary home. This is now my primary home, alone.
