Torres, a 22-year-old infielder, has put up impressive power numbers while avoiding the injuries that befell so many of his teammates.
LOS ANGELES — To understand how much of an anchor Gleyber Torres has been for the Yankees this season, look at the team’s opening day lineup on March 28.
Eight of their nine hitters in that lineup have spent time on the injured list this season, some — like outfielder Giancarlo Stanton and first baseman Luke Voit — more than once. Miguel Andujar, a promising young third baseman, had season-ending surgery in May. Troy Tulowitzki, the starting shortstop that day, retired in July.
The only one of those nine hitters who has avoided the I.L. entirely is Torres, who has appeared in all but 12 of the Yankees’ 132 games, including Sunday’s 5-1 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers.
At 22, Torres’s accomplishments already stand out in franchise history: Mickey Mantle and Joe DiMaggio are the only other Yankees to make multiple All-Star teams before turning 23. Last week, Torres joined DiMaggio as the only Yankees under 23 to hit 30 home runs in a season.
Torres has indeed been better than his rookie season, mostly because of improved discipline at the plate and an ongoing effort to reduce his mental mistakes. After going 0 for 3 on Sunday, he is batting .287, and his .900 on-base-plus-slugging-percentage ranks among the team leaders.
Despite missing a handful of games with a core ailment, Torres still smashed 12 home runs — three against his favorite opponent, the Baltimore Orioles — in August. It raised his season total to 32, which, entering Sunday, was first in baseball among full-time middle infielders.
Still, Torres, with 56 career home runs and counting, has insisted that he is not a power hitter, but one simply looking to make contact.
Torres’s ability to play shortstop, his primary position in the minor leagues, helped the Yankees weather the absence of Gregorius, who was recovering from elbow surgery. Torres then slid over to second base, where he played last season, when Gregorius returned in June. Although some advanced metrics rate Torres’s defense at both second base and shortstop as below average, Yankees coaches disagree with that assessment.
Torres showed off his defensive versatility in Sunday’s win when he shifted from second base to shortstop after Gregorius left the game with a bruised right shoulder after being hit with a pitch. Boone said after the game that X-rays on Gregorius’s shoulder were negative, and that the shortstop had sustained a bone bruise. That will likely lead to more time at shortstop for Torres.
Torres’s best trait, however, is his bat. And among his biggest refinements this season has been his ability to make good contact. He was swinging more this season but missing the ball less. Entering Sunday, his strikeout rate has fallen to about 20 percent — a five-percentage-point drop, the 10th largest improvement in the major leagues, since last year.
It has helped that Torres has a potent swing, has become an even more aggressive swinger early in at-bats and has been quick to adjust his plan at the plate when needed. Torres, who was a highly regarded prospect from a young age in his native Venezuela, has not sought out drastic changes in his approach, choosing instead to attack the margins of his game.
The little things Boone was referring to with Torres involve his control of the strike zone, his baserunning and his defense. Boone applauded Torres, who plays with a natural ease, for becoming more attentive to the smaller details and fundamentals of the game. In a 5-3 loss last week to the Oakland Athletics, Torres’s footwork on a throw was lazy, resulting in a throw that went over first baseman Mike Ford, allowing a run to score. Torres corrected that mistake on later plays.
In Saturday’s 2-1 loss to the Dodgers, Torres missed a ground ball hit toward him when playing second base, and as a base runner he was doubled off first base on a fly ball hit to center field. Torres said he was trying to steal second and was confused because he didn’t hear his teammate Brett Gardner make contact.
Despite the recent miscues, Torres’s bat has helped the Yankees overlook some of them. He was 9 for 20 with three home runs through the first five games of the Yankees’ road trip through Oakland, Los Angeles and Seattle.
To overcome injuries and pitching struggles this season, the Yankees have received contributions from unexpected sources: Urshela, for example, but also the outfielders Mike Tauchman and Cameron Maybin. But they are undoubtedly a better team when their stars, such as catcher Gary Sanchez, Judge and Torres, play like stars. After battling injuries and ineffectiveness, Sanchez and Judge started to get into a groove in recent weeks.
Torres, of course, has been there all along.