Politics|Tom Steyer Missed the Debate. He Has $100 Million To Disrupt the Race Anyway.
Tom Steyer Missed the Debate. He Has $100 Million To Disrupt the Race Anyway.
The former investor is an unlikely populist. But he is spending his fortune to try and get money out of politics.
DES MOINES — As Tom Steyer, the billionaire former hedge fund investor and impeachment impresario, made his first trip to Iowa as a 2020 candidate this month, he embarked on the usual political circuit.
He delivered a soapbox speech at the state fair (“We have to break the corporate stranglehold on our democracy,” he said), visited the butter cow (“Not my first butter cow,” he corrected one fairgoer; he had been there last year) and professed his desire to see farm animals.
What was unusual for a man who has never held elected office and who has been running for president for only a few weeks was that people kept recognizing him along the way.
“Hey, it’s the YouTube guy!” one woman shouted as Mr. Steyer strode past. He also heard from several fans of his TV ads, including Catherine Rondema of Portland, Ore., who said she liked his commercials so much that she had timed her Iowa fair visit to hear him speak.
Mr. Steyer has spent $12 million on digital and television ads in only six weeks — more than any other Democratic presidential candidate has spent all year.
Whether Mr. Steyer can become something more than the billionaire buying the ads about how “our democracy has been purchased” is an open question.
White, male, wildly wealthy and, at 62, older than the next-generation candidates in the field, Mr. Steyer would seem an unlikely messenger for a Democratic Party that is passionately debating racial and gender diversity, generational change and inequalities in American society. But his status as a virtual one-man “super PAC” is already upending the carefully laid strategies of Democratic rivals who must now grapple with the fact that they are unlikely to have the airwaves to themselves.
“I am the outsider in this race,” Mr. Steyer said in an interview. He described Senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Bernie Sanders of Vermont as “part of the establishment” and asked whether the front-runner in the polls, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., really understood what this moment called for.
“The question really is for anybody running, including Vice President Biden, are you aware of how much has to change?” Mr. Steyer said, outlining a two-pronged agenda that would begin with rule changes to curb corporate power followed by significant action to address climate change. He has spent more than $7 million on television so far, according to ad trackers, concentrated in the early voting states of Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Nevada.
He has paid up to $10,000 for one 30-second broadcast spot in Boston, even though the New Hampshire voters he is targeting are a small fraction of the audience. No target audience appears too small. In Iowa, he is saturating viewers of Black Entertainment Television in Cedar Rapids seven day a week with spots as cheap as $11.
His rivals have accused him of simply buying his way in. “The Democratic primary should not be decided by billionaires,” Ms. Warren said on Twitter the day Mr. Steyer entered the race.
Activists and Democratic officials have generally been muted in their criticism of a top party financier who has spent hundreds of millions of dollars in the past decade. Many privately acknowledged having received Mr. Steyer’s funds in the past and said hopes for his money in the future had kept them silent.
The Steyer campaign has floated a $100 million budget, which is more than the top five Democratic candidates — Mr. Biden, Mr. Sanders, Ms. Warren, Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., and Senator Kamala Harris of California — raised in the second quarter combined.
Mr. Steyer has already outspent his opponents online in a fraction of the time they have been running: pouring $1 million into Google and YouTube ads and $3.9 million on Facebook, peaking at $215,000 a day on the social network.
Mr. Steyer is adding to his ranks, too, hiring state directors in far-flung and often unstaffed states like Vermont, Utah, Alabama and Oklahoma.
“You underestimate my brother at your peril,” said Jim Steyer, who is one year older. He said that when Tom Steyer was considering running for California governor or senator, Ms. Harris and Gavin Newsom, now the governor, would use him as a back channel to find out about his brother’s plans. “People like Gavin and Kamala, they were always afraid of Tom,” he said.
One big unknown is whether Mr. Steyer will use his financial might to obliterate his opponents with negative ads. Those who have worked with Mr. Steyer describe him as fiercely competitive and used to getting his way.
Mr. Steyer himself said he would not rule out negative ads. “Look, there’s something I really care about doing, and I’m going to try really hard to do it,” he said.
Of course, Mr. Steyer’s own record at the company that made him rich, Farallon Capital Management, is likely to receive fresh scrutiny. The company has faced accusations of tax sheltering, and its investments in coal and private prisons could prove problematic. In the interview, he pledged to release his tax returns, though he would not commit to a date other than saying that it would happen before the Iowa caucuses in February.
For Mr. Steyer, his 2020 run is actually the culmination of a decade of political groundwork as he has reinvented himself from investor to political activist to candidate.
He has spent millions of dollars pressing for the impeachment of President Trump in ads that promoted himself and his group Need to Impeach, while building up an eight-million-strong email list (his campaign must technically rent the list, but that is little more than an accounting concern). And he constructed an environmental advocacy group, NextGen America, with nationwide chapters.
“He’s built an infrastructure that can be turned into working for a presidential campaign,” Kevin Mack, chief strategist for Need to Impeach, said.
Mr. Steyer has some experience in retail politicking, having fielded questions at town-hall-style events held by Need to Impeach across the country. Still, he can be stilted.
At the state fair, Mr. Steyer was pushed by an Iowa farmer, Kyle Gilchrist, about how a $15-an-hour minimum wage would work in rural areas. “I respect you’ve built a 37-million — billion — whatever it is,” Mr. Gilchrist said. “I’m a poor man from Van Buren County.” Mr. Gilchrist said he still baled hay himself. The billionaire lifted the farmer’s T-shirt sleeve to inspect his biceps, nodding in approval.
Mr. Steyer is not a self-funded politician in the centrist mold of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York. In some ways, Mr. Steyer is a liberal occupying the same structural reform space as the progressive leaders, Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders. He has embraced decriminalizing the border and expanding the Supreme Court and, as a private citizen, proposed a “wealth tax” on assets of the superrich last fall, before Ms. Warren did.
If the idea of a wealthy mogul running as an unbought outsider against a rigged system sounds familiar, that is no accident.
“Mr. Trump had a point,” Mr. Steyer said. “I think that’s why he got elected. Because the system is broken. It turns out he’s the biggest stooge there is.” Mr. Steyer’s ads have also argued that, as a billionaire, he has standing to take on Mr. Trump on the economy.
When Mr. Trump came to the Iowa State Fair in 2015, he arrived on his own private plane and brought along a helicopter for joy rides. Mr. Steyer says he only flies commercial for environmental reasons. He also refuses bottled water.
“Personal choice is not going to solve this problem,” he acknowledged, speaking of climate change.
His other personal choice — spending $100 million to try to be president — is why he found himself speeding across the Iowa fairgrounds in the early August heat to catch some 4-H farm animals before his scheduled commercial flight. He broke into a light jog as his son, staff members and a couple of journalists followed in a slow-motion chase.
“Run, Forrest, run,” someone shouted as Mr. Steyer pumped his arms.
When Mr. Steyer arrived, the barn was empty. “Doggone it,” he muttered to no one in particular.
With that, he and his staff were off to the airport.