A federal judge dismissed a lawsuit that accused the consulting firm McKinsey & Company of intentionally filing false statements in several bankruptcy courts to win lucrative contracts to work on big corporate restructurings.
It was the firm’s most notable victory in its multijurisdictional fight with Jay Alix, a retired restructuring specialist who has accused McKinsey of repeatedly defrauding the bankruptcy courts from 2001 onward.
Mr. Alix filed the suit under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, which allows private citizens to file claims if they feel that they have been harmed by a criminal enterprise.
McKinsey’s chairman for North America, Gary Pinkus, said the firm was pleased that a federal court had dismissed Mr. Alix’s lawsuit. In addition to that case, he said Mr. Alix had filed objections to McKinsey’s work as an adviser to six bankrupt companies, and three bankruptcy courts had found that he did not have standing.
Mr. Alix said the ruling on Monday was “based on a technicality,” not on the merits of his allegations, and cited a passage where the judge acknowledged his “good reasons” for bringing the case.
But it was not the end of the battle. Several bankruptcy judges have recently said that Mr. Alix’s accusations should be handled by the Department of Justice, not the courts, which are limited in their scope and resources. In a hearing in July, a Justice Department official acknowledged that it was already investigating McKinsey’s bankruptcy practices.
Clifford J. White III, the director of the United States Trustee Program, the Justice Department division that polices the bankruptcy system, said in an interview that it was “a core duty since time immemorial” for his office to watch for possible conflicts of interest in bankruptcy, and to file objections when it found them.
“That’s our institutional role,” he said. “The Bankruptcy Code depends on voluntary disclosure, and when you find out there has not been voluntary disclosure, there needs to be a firm remedy.” He emphasized that he was speaking about the program’s mandate in general and not about its scrutiny of McKinsey.
In all of the litigation, McKinsey has argued that Mr. Alix has sought to push McKinsey out of the market for corporate restructurings, which would put the firm he founded in 1981, AlixPartners, in a better competitive position.
Mr. Alix’s complaints have centered on the Bankruptcy Code’s requirement that professional firms get court approval before they can be hired to advise companies in bankruptcy. When they apply, they must provide a sworn affidavit of their “disinterestedness” and list all of their connections to other parties in the case. The requirements are meant to prevent hidden investments and sweetheart deals in bankruptcy, where billions of dollars worth of assets change hands.
Three years ago, Mr. Alix complained to the Justice Department that McKinsey had been leaving all the names of its connections out of its applications, making it impossible to check for conflicts of interest.
Last year, he filed the racketeering lawsuit, accusing McKinsey of running a pay-to-play scheme, steering law firms to its clients in need of restructuring if those firms in turn would make exclusive referrals to McKinsey. He said that was pushing AlixPartners out of the market for bankruptcy business, and that McKinsey was concealing its connections. McKinsey has denied wrongdoing.
In dismissing the lawsuit, Judge Jesse M. Furman of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York said that Rico lawsuits required plaintiffs to show a strong, direct connection between their own harm and the defendants’ unlawful acts. He said that Mr. Alix was not able to show a direct connection, because many steps must be taken by various parties in the process of deciding which firms will work on bankruptcies.
“Of the several steps between McKinsey’s alleged Rico violations and AlixPartners’ injuries, at least three are sufficient to render the link far too indirect,” Judge Furman wrote.