The two had been accused of assaulting a handcuffed 18-year-old. Now, the plea deal will result in probation.
In 2017, two New York Police Department detectives faced more than 40 sexual-abuse charges and 25 years in prison after they were accused of handcuffing an 18-year-old woman and raping her in the back of a police van.
Over the course of nearly two years, the case slowly unraveled as lawyers in the case disclosed cellphone records and other evidence that punched holes in the woman’s inconsistent timeline and description of events that night, forcing prosecutors to discard her testimony and indict the officers on lesser charges.
On Thursday morning, the two detectives, Edward Martins and Richard Hall, pleaded guilty to bribery and official misconduct charges in a deal that called for five years probation — and no jail time.
After negotiations had stalled between prosecutors and defense lawyers, the judge in the case intervened on Thursday morning, leading to the plea deal ahead of the detectives’ scheduled September trial, officials said.
Eric Gonzalez, Brooklyn’s district attorney, said in a statement that while he “would have preferred to see them serve prison time,” the plea will send a message that sexual misconduct between officers and people in custody will not be tolerated.


But the woman’s attorney, Michael David, said the defense worked to misinterpret her testimony and to shame her.
According to initial testimony, on Sept. 15, 2017, the two plainclothes detectives from Brooklyn South Narcotics arrested the 18-year-old woman for carrying a small amount of pot, then handcuffed her and led her to the back of a police van.
The woman, whom The New York Times has not identified because of the nature of the original charges, told prosecutors that a routine drive to a Brooklyn precinct became her worst nightmare as the detectives took turns sexually assaulting her. Details about the allegations, released just as the #MeToo movement was gaining traction, pushed legislators in Albany to pass a common-sense law making it a crime for police officers to have sex with people in custody.
The two men, who prosecutors said did not report the incident to their superiors, originally faced more than 40 charges that included kidnapping, rape and sexual assault.
But as the case progressed, details emerged that cast doubt about her testimony to investigators and a grand jury, including evidence from cellphones and security cameras that did not match her original statements. The woman had said the detectives drove along the Belt Parkway, the Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge and past a location she said knew by heart, her grandmother’s home in Bay Ridge.
The cellphone records showed they never left Coney Island.
Advocates for victims of sexual assault have said it is not uncommon for rape victims to make inconsistent statements because of shame or trauma after an attack.
But other details muddied her story as well, including what she was wearing that night — sweatpants, not the miniskirt that she had said helped to facilitate the attack — and her description of the van, which had bucket seats, not the bench seats she had described.
In light of the new revelations, the district attorney dropped the most severe charges in March.
Prosecutors, who said they had DNA evidence to prove that a sexual encounter took place, recalibrated and sought a second indictment that included bribery and misconduct charges.
Mr. Bederow, Mr. Martins’s attorney, said the case should not have dragged on for nearly two years. He said prosecutors used his client as a scapegoat at a time when the #MeToo movement was forcing a reckoning for high-powered men in the world of Hollywood and politics.
Peter Guadagnino, Mr. Hall’s attorney, said the detectives’ reputations have been irreparably tarnished, no matter their plea. Sentencing is set for Oct. 10.
