LOS ANGELES — There would seem to be far worse outcomes in life than growing up to be Bill Hader. He’s a beloved former cast member of “Saturday Night Live,” as well as the co-creator and star of the dark HBO comedy “Barry,” about a hit man who’s trying to go incognito in an acting class.
And he’s about to appear in one of the biggest films of his career, “It Chapter Two,” playing the adult version of Richie Tozier, the trash-talking teenager (played by Finn Wolfhard in the original 2017 film) who is part of a group of friends who must regularly confront a murderous incarnation of evil in a Maine town. The sequel, which also stars Jessica Chastain and James McAvoy, is directed by Andy Muschietti and will be released on Friday.
Yet, in a late August interview at an organic cafe in Pacific Palisades, Hader, 41, was not exactly in a celebratory mood. He has a dry, deadpan manner, and he was already worried about how his performance in “It Chapter Two” would be measured against the work of his co-stars. Rather than exulting in the Emmy Award he won for acting in the first season of “Barry” or the 17 nominations the show recently received for its second season, he was stressing about the work that lay ahead in Season 3.
Putting aside his own day-to-day anxieties, Hader talked about the bigger fears he was forced to confront as an actor, artist and human being on “It Chapter Two” and “Barry.” These are edited excerpts from that conversation.
When we spoke in 2018, before the debut of “Barry,” would you say you felt some uncertainty about whether the show would succeed?
Oh my God, more than uncertainty. I was terrified. I’ve never had my own thing that wasn’t associated with other friends from “S.N.L.,” and I was on the poster and the lead character. If it didn’t work, it’s all me.
Is it safe to say now that it worked?
It helps when your story is about someone’s evolution in some way, then you have something to write about, and if you can figure out Barry’s story, it’s weird how everyone else’s stories start to fit in around that.
Were you a fan of Stephen King’s novels growing up?
Oh, definitely. Coming of age in the ’80s and ’90s, Stephen King was the first adult author we read. I specifically remember my grandfather taking me into a bookstore in Tulsa, Okla., and I had to get “The Red Badge of Courage” for school, and he said, “If you want to get something for yourself — —.” I went back to the young adult section, and he went, “No, no, no, you can go to the fiction section,” and I was like, whoa. They had “’Salem’s Lot,” and the cover had these two eyes looking out at you, and I went, well, this seems cool. I felt so immersed in it that I read it over a whole weekend.
His stories really spoke to being that age, even if they didn’t have characters that age — of angst and big emotions and revenge and creepy stuff.
Hader with James Ransone in the horror sequel.Credit...Brooke Palmer/Warner Bros.
Did you have to audition for the role?
No. I just had a lunch with [Muschietti]. We spoke the same language of movies we loved. I said, “My kids will probably visit,” and he goes, “O.K., when your kids come, I’ll make sure that the clown is not around, because there’s stuff that’s just not appropriate for them to see.” I thought that was very sweet.
What happened when they visited you?
Since you didn’t meet Finn until that table read, did you go in thinking about how to create continuity from his performance to yours?
I watched the first movie again on the plane and I was like, we kind of are the same. We’re just gangly smartasses. There’s not a lot I have to do.
Were you looking around the plane to see if anybody caught you watching the previous installment of the movie you were about to make?
Do you think there were any specific qualities that Andy hoped you would bring to the role?
I’m a comedian and I know a lot of comedians, and that thing of masking your pain through being a contrarian, it’s a way of distancing yourself and being cynical. But at the heart of all those people is a spurned romantic. It’s a weird idealist in there. Andy gave us a lot of room to mess around.
As a director, did you come out of an experience like that wanting to do something even more ambitious?
I will say watching Andy work really gave me confidence when I was directing that “ronny/lily” episode of “Barry” — how he, in a very pleasant way, would stand his ground on something and acknowledge, “I know this is going to be hard, but it’ll be great if we can do this.” I found myself doing that during that shoot.
Whose idea was it to have Stephen Root, who plays Barry’s handler, Fuches, rub super glue into Barry’s open wound?
Oh, yeah, that was mine. I had to Google that.
The way that came about was, I had [Lily, Barry’s young target] biting [Fuches’s] face, and [Fuches] stayed there, and the writers were like, “This is funny, but why doesn’t he just grab her and pull her off?” and I was like, well, he’s in shock. They went, “That doesn’t really work.” So, I thought, what if his hands are stuck to the steering wheel? 
By its nature, “Barry” has a lot of violence in it, and “It Chapter Two” has some extremely brutal scenes as well. Does it all make you uncomfortable at some point?
It’s hard for me. I remember being a teenager and just loving monster movies. But then as you get older, what you’re scared of changes into very real-life things. You lose people in your life, and it’s brutal in a different way.
I remember being at “S.N.L.” when I saw “28 Weeks Later.” I watched the opening sequence and I had a whole panic attack. I was like, I can’t handle this right now, because I had, like, real-life stress.
“Barry” deals with violence and its effect on people. Everybody has something that would make you snap or, in defending yourself, you might surprise yourself at your ability to do something that you find abhorrent.
I don’t know if the fascination with that is a cultural thing or if it’s just inherent in humans. It’s stylizing a thing that, at some unconscious level, you’re afraid of.
Did you happen to see the videos of you that went viral recently, in which your face transforms into the actors you’re impersonating — Tom Cruise, Al Pacino — as you’re doing impressions of them?
Oh, the deepfake thing? I didn’t watch that, but I’ve heard about it. I’m not mad at whoever made the videos — I’m sure it was very sweet and kind of innocuous. But I just think the technology itself could be bad if it fell into the wrong hands. It feels very strange.
Are you the kind of person who is generally uncomfortable to watch your own work?
Oh, I have to do it. On “Barry” I have a full-on mental breakdown every time we watch the first cut of everything. It’s like flooding, which is a technique, like, if you’re afraid of spiders, they put you in a room full of spiders.
Do you feel like, maybe in an unknowing way, you’ve like brought this on yourself? Your biggest fear is to see yourself act, and you put yourself in something where you have no choice but to watch yourself learn how to act?
Judd Apatow said that. I wouldn’t watch “Trainwreck” forever, and Judd just couldn’t understand that. On “Barry,” I let Jeff Buchanan, the editor, pick the takes, because I would be like, “Not that one. Not that one. Not that one. Do I have any other facial expressions other than, like, I’m angry?” I get so very, very hard on it.