Even in deep blue New York, there are limits to trolling President Trump.
New Yorkers have been finding more and more ways to protest President Trump, from stripping his name off buildings he once built to holding demonstrations outside his Midtown Manhattan home/office.
The latest effort: an online petition signed by more than 290,000 people seeks to officially rename one block of Fifth Avenue — where, you guessed it, Trump Tower is located — as President Barack H. Obama Avenue.
Sounds like a simple enough request, considering how unpopular Mr. Trump is among the city’s residents. It’s not.
The local community board has a longstanding moratorium against renaming streets.
Mr. Powers also cautioned against losing focus of more important matters.
The petition to rename this part of Fifth Avenue was started a few months ago by Elizabeth Rowin, 56, an artist and retired legal secretary from Los Angeles who is currently in New York accompanying her husband, a filmmaker.
A wide range of people have been honored by having their name added to a street sign in the city.
City officials said there was a longstanding practice of reserving that honor for people who are deceased.
Two former mayors had their names added to public structures — but not streets — during their lifetime. In 2010, Queensboro Bridge was renamed after Ed Koch, who died three years later. In 2015, the Municipal Building across the street from City Hall was named after David Dinkins.
Last month, the City Council voted to add names to 86 streets and public spaces in the city. Among those honored were Audre Lorde, the state’s first female and first black poet laureate, in Staten Island; Police Officer George Scheu, in Queens, and rapper Christopher “Notorious B.I.G.” Wallace of Brooklyn.
One street on Staten Island was also named for the Wu-Tang Clan rap group; nearly all of its members are still alive. A City Council spokeswoman said groups and organizations can be honored before they are defunct.
Renaming usually requires the support of local residents and the City Council member, before it is presented to the 51-member New York City Council for a vote. To streamline the process, the names are collected into a single bill presented to the Council once a year for a vote.
