Live|Do Older People Have a Different Smell?
Do Older People Have a Different Smell?
Even scientists who study scent are divided.
During an extended period of travel last year, my husband and I lent our house in the Ozarks to an older couple who were having work done on their own house.
We returned after a month away to a spotless house and two hostess gifts. But there was also a distinctive smell in the air: slightly stale and sweet, like the musty first whiff of strawberries in a cardboard box.
I mentioned my question to a group of women writers, ranging from 40 to 70, and got drastically different responses. The younger women said yes, there’s an odor associated with aging. But to the older women it sounded like ageism and a few took offense.
At 52, I felt a little prickly about it myself, but also in need of information. If there was anything I could do to improve my personal scent, now and in the future, I wanted to know. So I consulted two scientists from a renowned research lab and ran into the very same split.
Johan Lundstrom, a 46-year-old biologist with the Monell Chemical Research Center, says his studies confirm what Japanese researchers found in 2001: An unsaturated aldehyde called 2-nonenal is more concentrated on the skin of older people, often producing a distinctive grassy, waxy or fatty odor.
But George Preti, a 74-year-old analytical organic chemist, also with the Monell Chemical Research Center, says his studies did not match the results found by either the Japanese group or Dr. Lundstrom’s team. Dr. Preti’s team used upper back and forearm samples and submitted them to gas chromatography and mass spectrometry, concluding that “no method of analysis” revealed the presence of 2-nonenal in older subjects.
“I know what George told you,” Dr. Lundstrom said. “He’s wrong. His study was too narrow. He’s just sensitive about this topic because he’s old,” he said in a tongue-in-cheek manner.
Universally, studies show that in blind “smell tests,” the odor of middle-aged men is judged to be the worst — more offensive than samples from younger individuals and older ones. (Middle-aged women, despite all our fears to the contrary, smell the best.) Chemical analysis bears this out, with lower levels of sebaceous secretions in the very young and very old.
Dr. Lundstrom’s study affirmed the existence of “old people smell” but stated that on average participants found it “neutral” and “not unpleasant.” He believes the odor is perceived as negative largely due to context. It’s similar, Dr. Lundstrom says, to the smell of fresh manure: Smelled in a stable, it’s perceived as natural. But in one’s bedroom it becomes disturbing and bad.
The bias in Japan is clear. They have a name for older person odor — kareishu — and it has a definitively negative association. A Japanese company called Mirai Clinical sells a $16 persimmon soap bar that promises to eliminate the “offensive” smell.
Dr. Lundstrom endorsed the Japanese findings but was leery of the industry around kareishu; he said expensive creams and soaps will not provide a fix.
Instead, he’s advised his own aging parents to stay active, air out their house frequently and wash linens and clothing regularly, even if they don’t appear dirty. Other factors are harder to control, such as genetic predisposition and general health.
Dr. Preti — despite his conviction that older people smell less and better than younger ones — made many of the same recommendations.
The scientists agree that people with chronic diseases are more likely to give off odor, no matter what their age. Dr. Preti attributed this more to diet, metabolism and self-care, Dr. Lundstrom to the possibility — which he is in the process of investigating — that ongoing inflammation leads to odorous cell decay.
Both researchers mentioned that the sense of smell tends to decrease as people age, so systems of self-monitoring — such as breathing into cupped hands, or sniffing under our arms — often fail around the seventh decade of life.
Nonenal and its sweeter-smelling cousin, nonanal, are aldehydes that were discovered in the 1920s. They’ve been used in small concentrations by the scent and flavor industries ever since.
“Nonanal, which is also found on the skin of older people, is called aldehyde C-9 in the perfume industry, and it was one of the magic ingredients that made Chanel No. 5,” says Craig Warren, an odor consultant and former vice president and research director of the fragrance science division of Internationals Flavors and Fragrances.
A new method for odor masking may provide the key. Dr. Warren works with an Illinois-based company called Belle Aire Creations that has developed technology to bind a chemical masking product with a distinctive odor, forming a larger molecule that is nonvolatile — meaning it will no longer escape from a surface and into the air.
It’s possible that the topic is too sensitive for an American company, Dr. Warren says. The manufacturers of feminine hygiene spray have received complaints of sexism, so health and beauty corporations may be leery of provoking older consumers.
For now the best advice for combating age-related odor is simply to take care of yourself and your home: exercise, stay healthy and hydrated, eat clean food, open windows, launder clothing and sheets.
And don’t worry about it.
I recently stopped by the home of the friends who had stayed at my house to return a few things they’d forgotten. They made tea and as we talked I noticed the same funky, sweet strawberry smell. But in their homey, pillow-strewn living room, it did not bother me.
Context, I thought. In that respect, Dr. Lundstrom was right.
Ann Bauer is a Minneapolis-based essayist and playwright.