Politics|Is ‘Bernie or Bust’ the Future of the Left?
Is ‘Bernie or Bust’ the Future of the Left?
The Democratic Socialists of America figure out what it means to oppose Donald Trump.
The Democratic Socialists of America voted to endorse the Democratic presidential nominee only if it is Senator Bernie Sanders.
ATLANTA — Three years ago, the Democratic Socialists of America had 5,000 members. Just another booth at the campus activities fair, another three-initialed group an uncle might mention over lunch.
Today, dues-paying D.S.A. members exceed 56,000. Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a rising star of American politics, is one. So are a couple of dozen local elected officials across the country. Senator Bernie Sanders, a current presidential candidate, is not, but he may as well be: He identifies as a democratic socialist and enjoys a totemic status with the group’s members.
Mr. Sanders’s popularity during his unsuccessful 2016 run for the Democratic presidential nomination helped swell D.S.A.’s ranks. But a very different figure is primarily responsible for the group’s staggering growth: President Trump, who recently associated “radical socialism” with the “destruction of the American dream.” In fact, the majority of current D.S.A. members signed up in the last two years.
Most of the roughly 1,000 D.S.A. delegates who gathered at the biennial convention last weekend to set organization policy doubtlessly share Ms. Svart’s resoundingly negative view of the president. And nearly as many would agree with her that Mr. Sanders, an independent senator from Vermont, is the one to beat him. The group endorsed Mr. Sanders in March.
The lopsided passage of the resolution, known by that pithy nickname, prompted happy whistles in the ballroom of the Westin Peachtree Plaza, one of Atlanta’s few union hotels. The silent, raised-arm, wiggling-hands of American Sign Language applause, which over the convention’s three days crested throughout the room like ocean waves, was unusually ecstatic.
An attendee’s tattoo of Karl Marx.
Support for Mr. Sanders helped the D.S.A grow.
Charles Lenchner, a D.S.A. delegate who supports Mr. Sanders but opposed the Bernie-or-Bust resolution, concurred. “Defeating Trump is the most important priority for a progressive or leftist,” he said.
The vote does not mean D.S.A. members cannot vote for a non-Sanders nominee in November 2020, of course, nor even that D.S.A. cannot mobilize swing-state votes for such a nominee, as it did in 2016 when it did not endorse Hillary Clinton.
Yet the vote was a quintessential reflection of this charged moment for left-wing activists as well as the singular role Mr. Sanders plays in the minds of many members.
“Bernie” — over the weekend, he was always referred to by just his first name — “is a uniquely unifying figure in D.S.A.,” said Thea Riofrancos, of the Providence chapter.
Delegates at the convention voted by raising cards.
And Winnie Wong, a Sanders campaign adviser who said she was attending the convention as a rank-and-file member and observer, not a delegate, in turn credited the D.S.A. for helping popularize Medicare for all, a policy it endorsed at its 2017 convention.
“I am extremely happy that the activist base of the D.S.A. is energized around making sure we move the goal posts,” she said.
While no large signs or ubiquitous stickers actually stated that Bernie Would Have Won — the line is, perhaps, so very 2017 — there was no mistaking the undercurrent of continued bitterness around the 2016 race.
It is a crucial part of D.S.A. ideology to treat the last general election less as President Trump’s victory and more as Mrs. Clinton’s loss.
Khalid Kamau, a city councilman from South Fulton, Ga.
“We walked out,” the councilman said, “and then the people that we represented stayed home” on Election Day.
Not that the primary was the exclusive talk of the convention. Oscar Wilde quipped that the problem with socialism was that it occupied too many evenings, but few of the convention goers, whose median age appeared to be around 27, seemed to share his objection.
There was a new governing board to elect. The more than 30 candidates represented one of many informal D.S.A. caucuses, which include Socialist Majority, North Star, Bread and Roses (basically Marxist), Build (which considers itself a “project”), Emerge and Libertarian Socialist (“No President 2020”).
Robert’s Rules of Order governed the voting sessions, in which the delegates voted on a host of resolutions. Practically everything required someone to second it. Majorities carried the day, unless the vote was on whether to suspend the rules, which required a two-thirds majority.
Linda Sarsour, an activist, spoke at the convention.
But if most delegates would have admitted that the emphasis on procedure lapsed into self-parody, some argued that it stemmed from an authentic desire to accomplish things. The contrast with Occupy Wall Street’s general assemblies, which sought to establish consensus rather than decisive victors and losers, was unmistakable.
D. S.A. started in 1982, a rare group in the faction-happy left-wing firmament created from a merger rather than a split-off. Its purpose was to move the Democratic Party toward “the left wing of the possible,” in founder Michael Harrington’s phrase.
The possible has never seemed more probable. Of “the squad,” the four first-term congresswomen in the House of Representatives who have been elevated to the Republican Party’s main foils, two — Ms. Ocasio-Cortez and Rashida Tlaib — are D.S.A. members. A news conference Saturday featured more than a dozen local elected officials from Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, North Dakota and Oregon.
The group’s most concrete successes have come at the local level, where supporters say the energy created by national spectacles — the Sanders campaign, the Trump presidency — has been harnessed: to help pass a paid sick leave law in Austin, Tex., and a rent-control law in New York State; to elect a judge in Houston, a state representative in Maine, a state senator in Colorado.
Denise Joy said she had won her race for City Council in Billings, Mont., on a platform to fund housing and infrastructure. Her priorities recalled the early 20th century “sewer socialism” that ruled cities like Milwaukee, which is the site of next year’s Democratic National Convention.
If inside the ballroom Mr. Harrington’s frank involvement in mainstream politics held sway, just outside on the mezzanine, the whimsical spirit of Occupy reigned.
Literature available at the convention.
A delegate from Berkeley, Calif.
(Just Hate Nazis).
The group DSAMedics offered free sundries: vitamin C powder, several flavors of tea, earplugs, tissues, condoms.
For all the attention “Bernie or Bust” drew, much of the conversation centered on the “Pass the Hat” resolution, which would have drastically redistributed dues away from the national organization by giving every chapter $100 per month (it failed).
Support for a ‘capitalist’?
Shahid Buttar, a Bay Area lawyer who ran against Speaker Nancy Pelosi in last year’s primary and is running against her again next year, said that while he supports Mr. Sanders, he believes he can defeat Ms. Pelosi head-to-head in California’s top-two primary system with either Mr. Sanders or Ms. Warren atop the ticket.
Whether or not that belief is confirmed next year, it was plain that D.S.A. constitutes a true movement, and of some mass.
Itzhak Epstein voted at the convention.
Itzhak Epstein, a D.S.A. member since 1985, expressed a combined pessimism of the intellect and optimism of the will when asked if he was surprised the group had grown so large.
