WASHINGTON — President Trump on Friday abruptly dropped his plan to nominate Representative John Ratcliffe, Republican of Texas, as the nation’s top intelligence official after questions by Republicans and Democrats about his qualifications and concern over whether he had exaggerated his résumé.
Mr. Ratcliffe, a vocal supporter of Mr. Trump, had come under intense scrutiny since the president declared on Sunday on Twitter that the lawmaker was his pick to succeed Dan Coats, who is stepping down as director of national intelligence on Aug. 15. The selection generated scant enthusiasm among senators of both parties, who would have decided whether to confirm him.
Mr. Trump, in his post announcing that Mr. Ratcliffe would not be his nominee after all, spoke bitterly of the attention that Mr. Ratcliffe’s overstated claims about his experience as a federal prosecutor quickly received from the news media.
“Our great Republican Congressman John Ratcliffe is being treated very unfairly by the LameStream Media,” he wrote.
The announcement was another reversal for the president and underscored the recurring dysfunction in the White House selection and vetting process that has plagued the administration. Mr. Ratcliffe joined a long list of Trump administration appointees who have had to pull their names after the president announced his plans to put them in powerful posts without a full picture of potentially disqualifying details.
Mr. Trump promised to announce a new nominee soon. Pete Hoekstra, the American ambassador to the Netherlands and a former chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, is one of the leading candidates for the post, according to two people briefed on the discussions. He wants the position, they said, and his long service on Capitol Hill and work helping create the job of director of national intelligence could make him more palatable to senators.
As soon as Mr. Ratcliffe was named, his qualifications came under scorching examination, including that he had embellished his credentials as a former federal prosecutor in East Texas, portraying himself as having deep experience putting terrorists in prison and shaping the George W. Bush administration’s counterterrorism policy.
In fact, while he was given the responsibility of coordinating any terrorism matters that arose for his office — a role every district was required to assign to someone — there were no significant national security prosecutions in that jurisdiction during his tenure, according to former colleagues.
Mr. Ratcliffe, who also briefly served as an interim United States attorney, also exaggerated his role in a major crackdown on the employment of undocumented immigrants by a poultry producer, taking all the personal credit for what was actually a multistate, multiagency operation.
In a statement on Twitter, Mr. Ratcliffe said he had chosen to withdraw.
Speaking to reporters on Friday afternoon on the White House lawn, Mr. Trump said that he had given Mr. Ratcliffe the choice of continuing, but had told him that it was going to be rough because news organizations were treating him “very harshly and very unfairly.” He also defended the White House vetting process as “very good,” while making a backhanded nod to the news media.
Even so, aides to Mr. Trump have said that he is often undeterred by information that would typically be seen as disqualifying.
There was a White House meeting on Friday to discuss the fate of the nomination, according to two people familiar with the matter. Vice President Mike Pence advocated sticking with Mr. Ratcliffe, while others were critical of what they saw as Mr. Ratcliffe’s inflation of his résumé.
Mr. Trump indicated that he believed the criticism of Mr. Ratcliffe’s experience was going to continue, and that it was time to move on.
Past announced selections for senior jobs who withdrew from consideration after negative information came to public light include Mr. Trump’s first nominee for labor secretary, Andrew F. Puzder; his pick to lead the Department of Veterans Affairs, Dr. Ronny L. Jackson; his picks for secretary of the Army and secretary of the Navy; Heather Nauert, his earlier choice to serve as United Nations ambassador; and two political allies, Stephen Moore and Herman Cain, whom Mr. Trump wanted to serve on the Federal Reserve board.
As the list of failed choices has grown, observers questioned the rigor of the White House vetting process.
“This administration does not always conduct a very detailed personal vetting interview,” Mr. Kelner said.
The backtrack on Mr. Ratcliffe heightens scrutiny on what will happen with Sue Gordon, Mr. Coats’s No. 2. Mr. Trump had decided not to allow her to rise to the role of acting director, according to people familiar with his plans.
Ms. Gordon is the principal deputy director in the Office of the Director of National Intelligence and has served more than 30 years in the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies.
Bypassing her may upset some of the senators who had expressed doubts about Mr. Ratcliffe.
Senator Richard M. Burr, a North Carolina Republican who is chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, had reacted tepidly to Mr. Ratcliffe’s prospective nomination and said on Friday that he respected the decision to withdraw. He sounded an implicit note of support for Ms. Gordon’s role atop the Office of Director of National Intelligence, or O.D.N.I.
“As the White House determines its next nominee, I’m heartened by the fact that O.D.N.I has an experienced and capable leadership team to help see it through this transition,” Mr. Burr said.
But Mr. Trump recently blocked Ms. Gordon from personally delivering an intelligence briefing after she arrived at the White House, according to a person familiar with the matter. A spokeswoman for the intelligence director’s office, Amanda J. Schoch, said Ms. Gordon was not blocked from attending any recent briefing, but she declined to comment about what happened inside the Oval Office.
Opposition in the White House to letting her serve as acting director has raised the question of whether she will be ousted as part of a leadership shuffle at the intelligence director’s office that will be more to Mr. Trump’s liking.
A federal statute says that if the position of director of national intelligence becomes vacant, the deputy director — currently Ms. Gordon — shall serve as acting director.
But there appears to be a loophole: The law gives the White House much more flexibility in choosing who to appoint as the acting deputy if the No. 2 position is vacant, said Robert M. Chesney, a law professor at the University of Texas at Austin who specializes in national-security legal issues.
Ms. Gordon will retire if told by the White House that Mr. Trump wants someone else in the deputy’s role who could then rise to fill the vacancy created when Mr. Coats departs, according to officials.
The White House requested this week that the office provide a list of senior officials who worked for the agency, according to a senior administration official — a move that was interpreted as another sign that it is looking beyond her for people who could be temporarily installed in the top position.
Mr. Trump and his allies have made clear that they believe a broad reorganization of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence is needed. Administration officials and House Republicans also have said they would like someone at the agency who will work well with Attorney General William P. Barr, who has ordered a review of the intelligence agencies’ support for the F.B.I. as the bureau sought to understand Moscow’s covert efforts to tilt the 2016 election, including any links to the Trump campaign.
The White House has bypassed the legally prescribed usual order of succession to appoint acting officials at several agencies, including the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and the Department of Justice and Homeland Security. It has obtained the approval of the Justice Department’s Office of Legal Counsel to not follow succession statutes by instead invoking the complex Federal Vacancies Reform Act.
Under the Vacancies Reform Act, a president may generally pick someone other than a No. 2 official to serve as acting head of an agency so long as that appointee is a sufficiently senior official at the same agency or is serving in a Senate-confirmed position in the broader executive branch.
Mr. Chesney said that certain language in the 2004 law that created the Office of the Director of National Intelligence was written restrictively and in a way that he said strongly indicated Congress did not intend for the Vacancies Reform Act to be available for filling the position of director. But a provision of the law suggests that the act can be applied to the position of deputy director.
However, he also flagged an alternative, less obvious interpretation the administration might be weighing, under which Mr. Trump might claim that he could use the Vacancies Reform Act to directly install some other senior official in the office as acting director. While Mr. Chesney said that maneuver would require what he portrayed as a dubious reading of the law, it would clear the way for what he viewed as a “happy result” — letting Ms. Gordon remain in place as the deputy.
