WASHINGTON — After they wooed him in Taormina, Italy, in 2017, President Trump snubbed world leaders by dropping out of the Paris climate accords. When they reached consensus in Charlevoix, Canada, a year later, Mr. Trump abruptly refused to sign their joint statement and escalated his trade war with personal insults.
And as the NATO allies gathered last summer in Brussels, summit organizers avoided another Trumpian eruption only by prewriting the meeting’s formal policy agreement and keeping it from the American president until the last minute.
Now, as President Emmanuel Macron of France prepares to host Mr. Trump and other leaders from some of the world’s leading democracies in the south of France this weekend, the United States’ closest allies have all but given up on the idea that the Group of 7 summit will produce the kind of unity and consensus about global issues that has been its hallmark for more than four decades.
With ominous signs of a global economic slowdown and vexing political turbulence in hot spots around the world, Mr. Trump arrived on Saturday morning in Biarritz, France, with a blunt tariff club in his hand. And that poses a challenge to the United States’ trading partners.
The leaders of France, Germany, Britain, Italy, Japan, Canada and the United States will meet amid escalating alarms over the health of the global economy, which is slumping under the weight of Mr. Trump’s multifront trade wars. In the decades after World War II, such a slowdown typically spurred American presidents to help lead a global response to prevent or mitigate recessions.
But Mr. Trump’s willingness to use tariffs as leverage over allies as well as adversaries has severely strained the relationships with other leaders. On the day he was to leave Washington for the summit, Mr. Trump significantly escalated his tariff war, responding to China’s retaliation with another increase in his own levies on Chinese goods.
“China should not have put new Tariffs on 75 BILLION DOLLARS of United States product (politically motivated!),” the president tweeted on Friday.
Meanwhile, his disdain for multilateral institutions like the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the World Trade Organization has undermined the expectation of cooperation and collaboration in any combined effort to confront China or other countries.
American officials say Mr. Trump is eager to contrast the economic success of his policies with those in slumping economies like Germany and France during a session that he called for on the global economy Sunday morning. But his fellow world leaders are not expected to hold back either.
Manufacturing output is contracting worldwide, driven by slowdowns in Europe, the United States, China and Japan. Trade activity is also falling, as Mr. Trump and China escalate their tariffs on each other. Germany’s economy shrank in the spring.
The trade war has chilled business confidence, capital investment and hiring across major economies. Morgan Stanley researchers said this week that they expected global growth to fall at the end of the year to its lowest levels since the 2008 financial crisis ended. Central banks around the world, including the Federal Reserve, are cutting interest rates or signaling plans to inject more stimulus into their economies with monetary policy.
Mr. Trump frequently revels in other countries’ economic stumbles, casting them as competitors for a limited amount of prosperity worldwide. He has criticized the Fed, including on Friday morning, for not cutting rates more aggressively to match the low rates of Europe.
But economists warn that Mr. Trump is wrong to dismiss the threat to the American economy from his trade war. Trade plays a smaller role in American growth than in many other rich countries, but several indicators administration officials cited last year to show a “booming” American economy have all worsened, including plunging business investment and slowing factory output.
“I don’t think the U.S. can be an island of strong growth while the rest of the world is tanking,” Mr. Rajan said.
Mr. Macron, as this year’s host of the G7 gathering, is not counting on the United States to be a constructive part of other discussions. He has invited several leaders from African nations to be part of sessions on the challenges facing that continent. And the leaders of India, Australia, Chile and Spain will participate in conversations about the environment, terrorism, nuclear weapons and other issues.
French officials conceded that there is no hope that Mr. Trump joins the group in expressing its concern about climate change despite news that fires in the Amazon rain forests could accelerate the planet’s environmental crisis. A few seemingly anodyne statements that diplomats from the seven countries prepared in advance will be released at the end of the summit, a European Union official said, among them a document on the partnership between African nations and the G7 countries and one on biodiversity.
For his part, Mr. Trump has already vented his frustration about France’s imposition of a tax on companies like Facebook. (He called it “foolishness” and risked insulting the G7 host by threatening tariffs on French goods, including wine, in response.) Beyond trade, disagreements about how to contain Iran’s nuclear ambitions remain stark.
That may be difficult, in part because of the presence of another larger-than-life personality: Boris Johnson, the new British prime minister.
Mr. Johnson and Mr. Trump are temperamental allies and the American president sees an opportunity for a bilateral trade deal with Britain if Mr. Johnson succeeds in breaking his country away from the European Union. The result could be what Mr. Chollet called “a bad buddy movie,” with Mr. Johnson and Mr. Trump together sticking it to their colleagues.
But Mr. Johnson may also have reason to keep his distance from Mr. Trump, who is deeply unpopular in Britain.
Mr. Westmacott said that the G7 still provided an opportunity for some of the world’s most important leaders to discuss serious problems facing their countries — if Mr. Trump and Mr. Johnson decided to let that happen.
