Two years ago, I met a French tourist who explained that when he visits a new city, he makes a beeline for a local shop and buys every edition of George Orwell’s “1984” he can find. I was inspired: What an elegant way to explore, support small businesses and dignify hoarding! More than 30 million copies of “1984” have been printed worldwide since the novel was published in 1949, and 35 of those copies are now mine. They are American, British, French, Indian, Italian, Mexican and Spanish; four are hardcovers, 30 are paperbacks and one is somehow both, or neither.
I have loved “1984” for a long time. For most of my childhood, my family’s phone number ended in 1-9-8-4. Boyfriends and crank callers alike adored that, and I answered for “ ... Orwell?” as chirpily as I answered for myself. We lived in Orange County, the conservative stronghold in California where, as Ronald Reagan liked to say, “good Republicans go to die.” I first read “1984” in those suburbs, where my middle school’s vice principal explained, gently, that I wouldn’t be permitted to return to class until I recited the Pledge of Allegiance as written. 
I’m drawn to “1984” now in the context of what I can and cannot preserve. (The novel made headlines in 2009 by vanishing from some users’ Kindles; Amazon issued refunds for the unauthorized e-texts it deleted, but the coincidence was indelible.) As I request it from and talk about it with strangers around the world, I crave the assurance that what I have known and seen will not disappear, that what is true can’t be erased. I want to hang on to every descriptor I get, to sock away every bookseller who tells me what the text they hand me means to him or her.
To browse my “1984” shelves is to see one book with a dragonfly’s eyes. A Signet Giant edition — 35 cents in the mid-’50s — depicts Winston in profile and foregrounds his love interest, Julia, heavy-lidded and seductive with a uniform unzipped to her sash (and a prominent ANTI-SEX LEAGUE button on her chest). A Penguin Modern Classic printed in the ’70s features William Roberts’s “The Control Room, Civil Defence Headquarters,” a painting commissioned as British propaganda in World War II. A crisp New Delhi paperback — reproduced faithfully and purchased from a family-run shop in India, where Orwell’s work is in the public domain — offers a regional take on the window where Winston hears a prole, singing, in the courtyard outside. My 1995 Italian printing has an inscription that translates: Dear Raffa, these are pages that open a new world to you. In a 2003 Penguin introduction, Thomas Pynchon speculates that Orwell’s appendix on “The Principles of Newspeak” — written in the past tense, in our own English — might hint at an eventual happy ending, in a world that replaces Big Brother’s.
I won’t pretend my reptilian brain doesn’t get a hit of pleasure from each edition that joins the hoard. But I also see my completism as an honest attempt to recover from the conviction that you know everything, or even anything. As in life, motifs and motivations in literature are notorious for moving in and out of focus as eras and perspectives change. To collect a single book — to follow it through generations and across borders, to consider the forms and languages in which other readers have presented it — is to commit your attention to its legacy. If you’re patient, the patterns that emerge are worth the wait.
Orwell argued that in varying proportions, four motives compel all writers: “to get your own back on the grown-ups who snubbed you in childhood,” “to share an experience which one feels is valuable and ought not to be missed,” “to find out true facts and store them up for the use of posterity” and “to push the world in a certain direction.” That has always resonated with me as a writer; it now resonates with me as a collector. When you’re an amateur Orwell enthusiast and a recovering research chief, letting details of any kind slip through your fingers feels like a personal failure. In those contexts, all silence seems sinister.
Just over 25,000 copies of George Orwell’s “1984” were printed in the first pressing of its first British edition. One of those is mine; the woman who sold it to me swaddled it in paper and Bubble Wrap and advised me to keep it in the darkest corner of my home. I, in turn, was tempted to pull it out of my tote bag for strangers in the street. I took it for a walk across the Thames and through a climate protest in Oxford Circus. I took it to a pub and to a war correspondents’ club. By the time my husband and I flew home from London, it had become our version of a child’s stuffed animal. “I put George under my seat,” my husband whispered as we settled into the cabin. “I thought someone might squash him in the overhead bin.” Orwell wasn’t precious about his work, and he wanted it to be read widely. I think it would please him to know that the edition he lived to see is traveling, just as he did.