Over the last two years, major changes to immigration policy have been made with little notification given to the federal workers charged with carrying them out, beginning with a travel ban imposed by President Trump in his first weeks in office, and the “zero tolerance” approach that led to family separations last summer.
But an ICE official said that the department had not been notified in advance about the change and questioned the agency’s ability to assume that role.
Bryan Cox, a spokesman for ICE, said in a statement this week that the agency “reviews each case on its own merits and exercises appropriate discretion after reviewing all the facts involved,” as it does for all requests for deferred action.
In letters reviewed by The New York Times, Ms. Bueso, her family and other deferred action applicants were told that requests would be considered only from people who are in the military, and that the authorities would “commence removal proceedings” against those who did not leave the country.
“Stopping this therapy will dramatically shorten her life span,” said Paul Harmatz, the pediatric gastroenterologist who was involved in the original trial and has been treating Ms. Bueso since 2003 at the U.C.S.F. Benioff Children’s Hospital in Oakland, Calif.
The clinical trial had struggled to find patients, and without Ms. Bueso’s participation, Dr. Harmatz said, it would not have taken place. The breakthrough that came from the trial has helped people with the disease live longer than 30 years, he said. Before the drug, they rarely survived past 20.
“We oppose any actions that could prevent people from accessing the health care they need,” the hospital said.
Her family lives in a middle-class neighborhood in Concord, Calif., in a house her parents bought and renovated to accommodate their daughter’s wheelchair. They did not expect to leave the country, having won permission to stay every time they applied for an extension.
When Mr. Lawler, the family’s lawyer, told them about the government’s decision last week, Ms. Bueso began to shake uncontrollably.
