It took nearly a century for sailing to hold an Olympic event for women. At the 1988 Games in Seoul, an American pair walked away with the first women’s sailing gold medal, in the double-handed 470 class. In the years since, sailing has continued to lag behind most other sports at the Games in gender parity.
Pressured by mandates from the International Olympic Committee to have an equal number of male and female athletes at the 2020 Tokyo Games, World Sailing added more roster spots in women’s events to reach that goal. And then the organization voted last fall for full gender equity — in the number of athletes and the number of medals — for the 2024 Olympics in Paris.
Sailing, which in 2020 will award two more medals to men than women, attained equity for 2024 in part by adding races that had not been part of the sport before: a mixed two-person offshore race and a mixed kiteboarding relay.
The offshore event will meet two of the I.O.C.’s goals for 2020: increased broadcast appeal and gender equality. The teams will be filmed by autonomous onboard cameras over the three days along the coast of the host country, a coverage technique similar to those used at marquee professional ocean races like the Vendée Globe and the Volvo Ocean Race. The offshore event would allow live coverage in any time zone.
One such competitor, Charline Picon, won a windsurfing gold for France at the Rio Games nine months after having a baby. The team allowed her to stay outside the athletes’ village, and her family helped take care of the child. Chiellino said French sailors’ children would soon be able to use team doctors and physiotherapists. He said he also was seeking money to provide nannies for athletes with children.
According to the I.O.C., projections show just under 50 percent female representation for the Tokyo Olympics, with about a third of the sports not achieving equal participation.
The World Sailing vote for the 2024 program was contentious. Some council members argued against new events that required the elimination of classes like the men’s Finn dinghy, which had been sailed in every Games since 1952.
Still, Andersen, the World Sailing president, said he saw the I.O.C. agenda as an opportunity to update his sport.
