With wry songs full of black humor, his band became an underground favorite in the 1990s, and a new group, Purple Mountains, was set to tour.
David Berman, the reluctant songwriter and poet whose dry baritone and wry, wordy compositions anchored Silver Jews, a critically lauded staple of the 1990s indie-rock scene, died on Wednesday. He was 52.
His death was announced by his record label, Drag City, which released music by Silver Jews and Berman’s latest band, Purple Mountains.
A law enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymity because he wasn’t authorized to speak on the matter said that Berman was found on Wednesday in an apartment building in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn, and pronounced dead at the scene.
A spokeswoman for the city’s medical examiner said that Berman had hanged himself, and ruled it suicide.
As the sole constant member of Silver Jews, which sometimes included well-known musicians like Stephen Malkmus of Pavement, Berman released six albums using the band name, beginning with “Starlite Walker” in 1994 and continuing through “Lookout Mountain, Lookout Sea” in 2008, before disbanding the group the next year.
In time, Berman came to be nearly as well known as a poet. His book, “Actual Air,” published in 1999, became a minor hit.
David Craig Berman was born in Williamsburg, Va., on Jan. 4, 1967. His mother, a homemaker, became a schoolteacher after his parents divorced when he was 7. His father, Richard Berman, was a labor lawyer for the United States Chamber of Commerce who went on to become a high-powered and widely feared lobbyist for the tobacco, oil and soft-drink industries, and would later serve as a foil in Berman’s songwriting and other creative pursuits.
“My father is a despicable man,” Berman wrote in 2009 while announcing that he was disbanding Silver Jews. Citing his father’s attacks on environmentalists and unions, Berman described their estrangement and how it led to his search for meaning in Judaism, and away from music.
