Thursday: The consent decree stemmed from a Los Angeles case. Also: A foiled possible mass shooting, and North West’s summer camp.
The cycle has become familiar: Images emerge of migrant children being held in cramped, dirty facilities, without hygiene products or adult caregivers.
Those conditions are challenged in courts, and judges order officials to fix them.
At the heart of those court orders is a 22-year-old consent decree known as the Flores agreement.
It was the result of a class-action lawsuit filed on behalf of five girls who had been held at a dingy, overcrowded converted motel in Pasadena, alongside adult strangers, surrounded by a barricade of razor wire.
My colleague Miriam Jordan, who’s based in Los Angeles and covers immigration, spoke to one of the plaintiffs, as well as the lawyers who — with an unexpected nudge from the television legend Ed Asner — took up the cause of migrant children as their lives’ work.
Almost 35 years ago, an influx of Central American families was making their way to the southern border, fleeing violence, including government death squads in El Salvador.
Among them was Alma Yanira Cruz, who was then 12 and heading for L.A. to join her mother when she was taken to that overcrowded motel that was converted into a detention center.
She was strip searched and denied visits with relatives.
At the time, two public-interest lawyers, Carlos Holguin and Peter Schey, were working in what was then the central hub of a growing immigrant-rights movement in L.A.
Ed Asner had heard about Ms. Cruz’s case and called on the lawyers to intervene.
After years of legal back-and-forth, the settlement was reached in 1997.
What effect has it had?
The agreement set the minimum standards for the treatment of the nation’s youngest and most vulnerable new arrivals — standards that exist today.
They could no longer be held in hard-core detention facilities. Instead, the agreement requires them to be released quickly to a family member or guardian, or transferred to a licensed care facility and not a jail.
A later interpretation limited the time most children can spend in detention to no more than 20 days.
Why is it important to know about now?
Although the Obama administration in 2014 tried and failed to get out from under the Flores agreement’s limits, the current White House has been pushing to eliminate the agreement.
And on Wednesday, the Trump administration unveiled a new rule that would allow families who illegally cross the border to be detained indefinitely. Officials said the effort will help avoid having to either separate families or release them while they wait for their cases to be heard.
Critics say it’s purposefully brutal treatment of families fleeing gang violence, abuse and poverty aimed at reducing the flow of immigration.
A federal judge would still have to approve the new rule.
Has your love for California made it tough for you to recognize all the other states?
Now, thanks to the good people of our Past Tense team, who get to look through The Times’s photo archives, you can put your skills to the test.
