The San Francisco school board is reconsidering a decision to destroy a series of historic Depression-era murals depicting slaves and a dead Native American, following widespread complaints that the move amounted to censorship.
A proposal released by the board on Friday no longer calls for painting over the 13 frescoes at George Washington High School called “The Life of Washington” by the artist Victor Arnautoff. Instead, the proposed resolution calls for the artwork to be covered with panels or other “material, means or methods.” The measure, which the board will consider on Tuesday, also says the murals would be digitized for art historians to access.
The resolution appears to be a compromise: the murals would survive, but would not be visible at the school.
“The Life of Washington” frescoes were painted in the mid-1930s and funded by the Works Progress Administration, a New Deal agency that provided jobs for the unemployed, including artists, during the Great Depression. Arnautoff, who was a Communist, depicted Washington in a critical light, showing him as a slave owner and a leader of the nation that annihilated Native Americans.
In June, the board voted unanimously to paint over the frescoes, saying the images were offensive to Native Americans and African-Americans, some of whom pass the paintings on their way to class.
That might have been the end of the murals, but the controversy exploded into a national and international story, with historians, politicians, educators, artists and others arguing that the board was whitewashing an important artwork, and history itself. In the last few days, the local branch of the N.A.A.C.P. joined the opposition.
“Where we all agree is that the mural depicts the racist history of America, especially in regards to African-Americans and Native Americans,” he said in the release.
It is unclear how the other six members of the board will respond, but the fact that the president submitted the resolution indicates that the murals have a good chance of being saved.
Amy Anderson, a local parent and teacher who had led the charge to eliminate the murals, said on Friday that she believed the artwork was damaging to students.
The other side is equally determined. Mr. Golinger, of the coalition to save the murals, said that the group could live with a covering like a curtain that could be easily pulled back, but would object to anything like a wall. His organization was working to place the issue on a ballot for city voters, and may still attempt to do so, he said.
