OTTAWA — Canada’s federal ethics commissioner found on Wednesday that Prime Minister Justin Trudeau had violated an ethics law in his handling of a corporate criminal case — a conclusion that could imperil Mr. Trudeau’s bid for a second term just months before national elections.
In a long-awaited report, the commissioner, Mario Dion, said Mr. Trudeau had used his office “to circumvent, undermine and ultimately attempt to discredit” the former justice minister and attorney general, Jody Wilson-Raybould, by improperly pressuring her to seek a civil penalty against SNC-Lavalin, a major engineering company, rather than a criminal conviction.
This, the commissioner said, broke a longstanding tradition of isolating the justice system from political influence.
In the case at the center of the controversy, the Montreal-based SNC-Lavalin was charged with bribing officials in Libya to win contracts there, and defrauding the Libyan government when Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan dictator, held power.
The prime minister said that in arguing for a civil penalty he was not trying to strong-arm Ms. Wilson-Raybould, but was acting out of concern for thousands of jobs in Canada. A criminal conviction would bar SNC-Lavalin from bidding on government contracts, a significant part of its business.
Although Mr. Trudeau faces no direct penalty as a result of the ethics commissioner’s finding, its release just weeks before campaigning begins for the October elections gives his adversaries plenty of ammunition. It also rekindles an issue that drew criticism from his own supporters and caused his Liberal Party to plummet in the polls, though it had largely recovered over the summer.
Royce Koop, a professor of political science at the University of Manitoba in Winnipeg, said Canadians generally respected nonpartisan officials like Mr. Dion, adding to the power of his findings. But Professor Koop said the timing of the report — in the middle of summer, when many Canadians’ minds are on vacation rather than politics — may work against it as a defining issue in the October vote.
Mr. Trudeau came to office in 2015 with great fanfare, as a new face with a new approach to politics — what he called “sunny ways.” He created a gender-balanced cabinet. He promised to push for protections against climate change while also protecting Canada’s energy industry. He said the country should reconcile with its Indigenous population, correcting historical wrongs.
But after Ms. Wilson-Raybould accused the prime minister and members of his staff of trying to push her on the case, his reputation took a hit.
Mr. Trudeau’s political opponents argued that his treatment of Ms. Wilson-Raybould showed that he was an old-fashioned politician who plays back-room politics even if those rooms are no longer filled with smoke.
Jagmeet Singh, the leader of the New Democratic Party, which is to the left of the Liberals, was similarly critical of the prime minister.
Some women, whose votes helped ensure the Liberals’ victory in 2015, have said that Ms. Wilson-Raybould’s accusations that he tried to improperly pressure her — even bully her — undermined his claim that he is a feminist.
The controversy has also soured relations with some Indigenous people who were elated when Ms. Wilson-Raybould, a former First Nations regional chief from British Columbia, was appointed to the cabinet.
Mr. Trudeau has steadfastly refused to apologize and has characterized the dispute as a difference of opinion.
On Wednesday, though, Mr. Trudeau acknowledged that he failed to properly balance judicial independence with the need to save jobs, and he promised that systems were being developed to prevent a recurrence.
Still, Mr. Trudeau said that he disagreed with the ethics commissioner’s view that any contact between a prime minister and the attorney general was inappropriate.
Ms. Wilson-Raybould did not agree to pursue a civil penalty in the SNC-Lavalin case — the criminal case is still proceeding — and she was eventually moved to a less prestigious cabinet position. She later left Mr. Trudeau’s cabinet altogether, and was thrown out of the Liberal caucus by the prime minister.
Another prominent woman in Mr. Trudeau’s cabinet, Jane Philpott, quit in solidarity with Ms. Wilson-Raybould, and was also removed from the party, further damaging the prime minister’s standing with women. Both women are seeking re-election as independent candidates.
In an attempt to deflect criticism of the prime minister, Gerald Butts, a close friend of Mr. Trudeau, resigned as his top political adviser at the height of the dispute. Mr. Butts has since joined Mr. Trudeau’s campaign as an adviser.
The ethics commissioner, Mr. Dion, found that Mr. Trudeau and his staff made four efforts to “bend the will” of Ms. Wilson-Raybould. He concluded that because Mr. Trudeau’s worries over jobs were “inextricably linked to SNC-Lavalin’s private interests,” any discussion by the prime minister with Ms. Wilson-Raybould was improper and against the law.
Various versions of events were presented at parliamentary hearings this year and in statements from Ms. Wilson-Raybould, Mr. Trudeau and his aides.
While Mr. Scheer, who will be Mr. Trudeau’s main challenger in the election, has repeatedly called for Mr. Trudeau’s resignation, on Wednesday he said that no longer makes sense this close to the election.
“I believe Canadians will make the right choice and get rid of a scandal-plagued prime minister,” Mr. Scheer told reporters.
Amanda Bittner, a political scientist at Memorial University in St. John’s, Newfoundland, called the controversy a “power scandal” and, as such, is “usually seen as worse, for example, than a sex scandal or other morality issue.” But she said that center and left-of-center voters may overlook it if they believe it will help bring Mr. Scheer and his Conservatives to power.
Mr. Trudeau’s continued avoidance of an apology after admitting he made mistakes also puzzled Professor Koop.
