Swedish pop was dominated by roving bands in garish costumes until Abba changed everything. Benny Andersson now leads one of those groups.
STOCKHOLM — Catherine King was easy to spot at a recent gig for Benny Anderssons Orkester: She stood right by the stage, in front of a large Australian flag she had tied to the safety fence. King, 49, had traveled from her home in Tasmania to catch four concerts on the Swedish tour.
Benny Andersson, the bearded pianist who bopped along behind his keyboard, was a key architect of Abba’s sound, writing and producing a string of unimpeachable earworms with his bandmate Bjorn Ulvaeus.
But the gigs by the large ensemble he has been leading since 2001 do not cater to the “Mamma Mia!” constituency.
Andersson, 72, sees his group, which goes by BAO (pronounced “bah-oh”), as part of the tradition of the hardworking “dansbands” that entertained Swedes for generations. Dansbands, whose popularity peaked in the 1970s and 1980s, would roam the country and play mainly pop, rock, disco and the cheesy easy-listening known as schlager with one goal in mind: Get people to dance. Many wore fantastically garish matching costumes.
Like most dansbands, BAO tours by bus, in this case a comfortable but not ostentatious double-decker. The extra room is needed because Andersson’s crew is supersize: 15 members — including string and horn sections and two singers — compared with four to six in a regular dansband.
BAO’s sets are puzzlingly diverse, as if someone had grafted together the playlists of 20 genres on Spotify. Attending four tour stops last week, I took in 16 hours of music — like Wagner’s “Ring” cycle, only more upbeat — and heard waltzes, big-band jazz, pop tunes, polkas, boogie, chansons, rockabilly, glam-rock stomps and traditional folk tunes. The band basically went through all the styles Abba smoothly integrated into its signature hits.
“They capture the Swedishness of the music,” Jan Ryden, 55, said of BAO, at the end of the show in Eskilstuna, 90 minutes west of Stockholm.
No musical stone was left unturned. A classical section included a riotous version of Bach’s “Badinerie” that featured virtuosic solos by Janne Bengtson on the flute and Kalle Moraeus on the banjo. It comes as no surprise to learn that the first is in the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra, and the second is among Sweden’s foremost multi-instrumentalists.
With recording solo projects, composing musicals, writing a suite for a Swedish royal wedding, and helping to oversee his former band’s legacy, Andersson’s post-Abba career has been extraordinarily fruitful. Yet it’s clear that BAO is special to him.
So in addition to releasing a series of popular albums, he gathers the troops for some live dates every few years. This summer, the group played eight outdoor venues across Sweden, ranging in capacity from 3,000 to 7,500. The tour ended on Aug. 3.
The al fresco bit is crucial, because a BAO gig is as much community celebration as it is concert. Attendees picnic as the long summer days slowly turn to dusk. A square wooden dance floor, festooned with multicolor lights, is set up right in front of the stage.
The dance floor is a wonderful equalizer — nobody batted an eyelash when Prime Minister Stefan Lofven, a longtime BAO fan, busted some moves at the concert in the small town of Trosa — and a nod to the tradition of the “folkpark,” where many dansbands plied their trade.
Folkparks, which flourished in the first half of the 20th century, were places where Swedes could dance to live music and enjoy carnival-type attractions. All of Abba’s members played them in the 1960s — Andersson and Ulvaeus even met at one — and they continued in the band’s early days, before switching to arenas worldwide. Nowadays, folkparks can seem old-fashioned, and there aren’t many left.
After a show in Leksand, in central Sweden, BAO spent the night in a mom-and-pop hotel — no fancy palaces for Andersson, who partakes in snacks and buffets like everybody else.
On the way to Eskilstuna the following day, the group stopped for lunch at a restaurant attached to a bakery that produces wheels of crispbread the traditional Swedish way — by hand, in wood-burning ovens. When the bakery was in danger of closing a few years ago, Andersson became an investor. “It was a part of our culture that I didn’t want to see disappear,” he said.
This is all of a piece for a man attuned to the ideas of tradition and community. He often switches to the accordion — the first instrument he learned — onstage. When not playing his own music he often collaborates with folk ensembles like the all-female Systerpolskan. He also supports educational initiatives aiming to preserve ancient instruments and musical techniques.
And yet Andersson is not stuck in the past. He has recently been working on a 360-degree virtual show featuring holograms of Abba as it was in 1979. For the project, the band recorded its first new tracks in nearly four decades.
The songs are ready, but the high-tech “Abbatars” are not, and the grand reveal has been delayed. According to Andersson, a video for the new song “I Still Have Faith in You” is expected to be released in the coming months, as a teaser for the full experience.
Preservation, fellowship and transmission are important to the musician, and the children of some BAO members often travel with the band. The 23-year-old daughter of Moraeus, the versatile instrumentalist, oversees the kids’ brigade in charge of selling the merchandise. She and the bassist’s teenage sons occasionally join in on fiddle. Bengtson’s 15-year-old daughter sits in the horn section for a few numbers, playing the trumpet.
Until recently, the band members used to jam on the bus or at the hotel after their shows, and the new generation has picked up the baton: The three young fiddlers offered an impromptu session in the hotel’s dining room after the Leksand gig, with the adults beating the rhythm by stomping their feet.
