We’re covering a United Nations warning about global food supplies, President Trump’s trip to Ohio and Texas, and a series of fatal stabbings in California.
Land and water resources around the globe are being exploited at “unprecedented rates,” a new United Nations report warns, threatening the ability of humanity to feed itself.
The report, which was prepared by more than 100 experts from 52 countries, was released in summary form today. It warns that climate change will exacerbate the dangers, as extreme weather threatens to disrupt and shrink the global food supply.
Food shortages could also increase a flow of immigration that is already redefining politics in North America, Europe and other regions. From 2010 to 2015, the number of migrants from El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras who traveled to the U.S. increased fivefold, coinciding with an unusually dry period that left many without enough food.
What’s next: Addressing the crisis would require a major re-evaluation of land use and agriculture as well as consumer behavior, the report suggests. Proposals include increasing the productivity of land and eating less meat.
Go deeper: Sign up for our Climate Fwd: email newsletter to receive our latest stories and insights about climate change.
As President Trump traveled on Wednesday to the sites of two deadly mass shootings, a day intended as a show of compassion was peppered with attacks against Democratic rivals, local officials and the news media.
Mr. Trump visited privately with victims, law enforcement officials and hospital workers in Dayton, Ohio, and in El Paso, where a total of 31 people were killed last weekend. He was greeted by protesters in both cities.
The Daily: In today’s episode, our correspondents discuss the president’s trip.
Related: Democratic candidates accused Mr. Trump of stoking racial divisions, with Beto O’Rourke and Elizabeth Warren calling him a white supremacist.
Explainer: A racist manifesto linked to the El Paso shooting has heightened calls for Congress to enact a federal domestic terrorism law. We answered questions about how such a measure would work.
Another angle: Congressional Democrats insisted on Wednesday that any gun-related legislation moving through the Senate be accompanied by a House bill requiring background checks on all gun purchasers. Mr. Trump said he was open to such a measure, which the National Rifle Association and many Republicans oppose.
Wanda Vázquez, the former secretary of justice, took the oath as the territory’s governor on Wednesday after its Supreme Court ruled that her predecessor, Pedro Pierluisi, was sworn in last week on unconstitutional grounds.
Mr. Pierluisi’s 120 hours in office made him the shortest-serving governor in modern Puerto Rican history. He had replaced Gov. Ricardo Rosselló, who resigned after huge public protests.
What’s next: Ms. Vázquez, a career prosecutor who has never held elected office, had said she didn’t want the job but would fulfill her constitutional duties. Protesters say she is unqualified.
A man fatally stabbed four people and wounded two others in Southern California on Wednesday in what appeared to be a series of random attacks, the authorities said.
A 33-year-old suspect was arrested at a convenience store in Santa Ana, about 30 miles southeast of downtown Los Angeles. A security guard at the store was among the dead.
The details: The police said that they didn’t yet know the motive but that the suspect was also thought to be responsible for several robberies.
Scotland, the setting of the ’90s-era novel-turned-film about addiction, is finding out what happens as opioid abusers hit middle age.
Overdoses are more common there, by some measures, than in the U.S., and the way Scotland is responding may provide answers for other countries grappling with the same issue.
Immigration raids in Mississippi: Almost 700 migrants were arrested in what federal officials said might be the largest worksite enforcement action in a single state.
Canadian murder suspects: After a two-week hunt, the bodies of two teenagers suspected of killing three people were found in Manitoba, the authorities said.
Trump and Blagojevich: President Trump said that he was “strongly considering” commuting the 14-year prison sentence of Rod Blagojevich. The former Illinois governor, a Democrat, tried to sell the Senate seat vacated when Barack Obama became president.
Hong Kong travel warning: The U.S. issued an advisory urging visitors to “exercise increased caution” because of protests in the semiautonomous Chinese territory. Times journalists will hold a free group call with readers today at 8 p.m. Eastern to discuss the situation. Here are details.
Snapshot: Above, security personnel patrolling the Spanish Steps in Rome this week. Sitting on the steps is subject to a fine of 400 euros, or about $450, under a new ban on a variety of activities “not compatible with the historic and artistic decorum” of the city’s tourist attractions.
What’s that smell?: The observatory at One World Trade Center, one of New York’s top tourist destinations, has an official fragrance, pumped through the air vents. (It smells of trees, with some citrusy notes.) Reviews are mixed.
Late-night comedy: The hosts all watched the presidential visits to Ohio and Texas.
Credit...David Malosh for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Simon Andrews. Prop Stylist: Paige Hicks.
Cook: A peanut butter sandwich with sriracha and pickles is delicious and divisive.
Listen: “All Mirrors,” the first single from Angel Olsen’s fourth album, is a sharp turn into a more theatrical, melodramatic presentation, our critic writes.
Watch: What to watch after “Fleabag”? Our TV critic offers suggestions.
Read: “Chances Are…,” the latest by the Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist Richard Russo, debuts on our hardcover fiction and our combined print and e-book fiction best-seller lists.
Smarter Living: “There’s a lot wrapped up in the word ‘no’ for women — beginning with the fact that women are expected to say yes (and feel guilty when they don’t),” writes our gender editor, Jessica Bennett. So, following the example of a professor at New York University and two colleagues, she’s starting a “No Club,” and inviting you to join.
And we have guidance on how to find a good laptop for under $500.
About 60,000 rubber ducks will take a plunge into the Chicago River today in a race to raise money for Special Olympics Illinois.
Racing ducks are different from the bathtub variety: They are made with a weighted bottom.
The toy had its origins in the mid-1800s, about the time the American engineer Charles Goodyear figured out how to make rubber malleable. The first rubber ducks were meant as chew toys and didn’t float.
The Russian-American sculptor Peter Ganine gets credit for the design of the rubber ducks we know now, patenting his in 1949 and selling 50 million of them. Disney and “Sesame Street” helped.
Even Queen Elizabeth II is said to have a rubber duck (complete with crown).
Melina Delkic helped compile this briefing. Mark Josephson, Eleanor Stanford and Chris Harcum provided the break from the news. Victoria Shannon wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about President Trump’s trip to Dayton and El Paso.
• Here’s today’s Mini Crossword, and a clue: Painter of a melting clock (four letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• The Times’s paid subscriptions reached a new high, 4.7 million, in the second quarter of this year. Nearly 3.8 million are digital and include our news, crossword and cooking apps.