The former White House press secretary’s move reinforced the strong ties between the conservative network and the Trump administration.
Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the former White House press secretary, will join Fox News as a contributor next month, reinforcing the strong ties between the conservative cable network and the Trump administration.
Ms. Sanders, who left the administration less than two months ago, will make her debut on Sept. 6 on “Fox & Friends,” the network said in a statement. In her new role, she will provide political commentary and analysis across Fox properties, including Fox News and Fox Business Network as well as digital and radio outlets.
Ms. Sanders is among nearly two dozen people who hold or have held positions both in the Trump administration and at Fox News. The others include Bill Shine, the former deputy White House chief of staff and former co-president of Fox News; Heather Nauert, a former Fox News anchor and former under secretary of state; and Hope Hicks, President Trump’s former communications director, who is now the chief communications officer at Fox Corp.
The path from White House spokesperson to television news is well-worn. George Stephanopoulos joined ABC News after working in the administration of President Bill Clinton, for example, and Jay Carney joined CNN after leaving the Obama administration.
As press secretary, Ms. Sanders became one of the most recognizable faces of the administration. She was known for her confrontations with White House reporters, a style that endeared her to Mr. Trump.
“We’ve been through a lot together. She’s tough and she’s good,” the president said after announcing her departure in June. “She’s a warrior,” he added, kissing her affectionately on the side of the head.
Ms. Sanders also effectively killed the daily briefing from the White House lectern, ending decades of tradition.
Before joining the White House, Ms. Sanders, the daughter of the former Arkansas governor and Fox News host Mike Huckabee, had worked in a variety of roles in Republican politics.