Increasingly, the court risks becoming identified as the president’s lap dog.
Last February, in declaring a national emergency that he said authorized him to spend money that Congress had refused to give him on his border wall, President Trump predicted, “We will then be sued.” But not to worry, he went on: “And we will possibly get a bad ruling, and then we will get another bad ruling, and then we will end up in the Supreme Court, and hopefully we will get a fair shake and win in the Supreme Court, just like" the Muslim travel ban.
And guess what: he was right.
The news cycle moves at supersonic speed in the Age of Trump. It’s hard to remember, through the din of the president’s insulting the city of Baltimore and one of its members of Congress, Elijah Cummings, that not even a week ago, after the close of business last Friday, the Supreme Court permitted the Trump administration to violate a federal statute and quite likely the Constitution itself.
The court did this in response to a request the administration styled as an emergency. The court acted without a public hearing, without a signed opinion and over the dissenting votes of the four liberal justices. As a result, although the case is still on appeal to a federal appeals court, the administration can now sign contracts for 100 miles of a 30-foot-high steel wall in five locations where Congress prohibited construction, using money that Congress refused to allocate for that purpose.
To be sure, it was a victory for the president, as he promptly tweeted. But it was a cheap victory — and cheap doesn’t mean free. There will be a price to pay, if not by the administration in its relationship with Congress, then certainly by a Supreme Court moving closer to an identity as the administration’s lap dog.
In responding to a lawsuit brought by the Sierra Club, which said that construction would imperil a fragile landscape that its members enjoyed for recreational purposes, the administration claimed it had “express statutory authority” for the transfer under the 2019 appropriations act. Whether the administration reads that law correctly is at the heart of the case, although in deciding whether the administration was entitled to a stay, the justices did not need to resolve that question and didn’t do so.
Nonetheless, it’s worth unpacking the statutory issue to understand the constitutional dimensions of a case that does not, on the surface, present a constitutional question. Section 8005 of the Defense Department appropriations act did authorize some transfers but set two requirements that must be met: the move must be in response to “unforeseen military requirements,” and can occur “in no case where the item for which funds are requested has been denied by Congress.” In granting the injunction, the District Court found that the supposed need for the wall was not unforeseen and that the congressional refusal to grant the president’s budget request operated as a denial.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit agreed with that interpretation and strongly suggested that without statutory authority, the administration was venturing into unconstitutional territory. It declined to grant a stay pending the administration’s appeal. In doing so, the appeals court cited Article I of the Constitution, Section 9, Clause 7: “No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law.” In other words, if the expenditure is not “made by law” — authorized by Congress — it violates the constitutional separation of powers.
The Ninth Circuit, having refused to grant a stay, will hear the administration’s appeal on the merits in the fall; final briefs are due in October. That’s not fast enough, the administration told the Supreme Court. With the end of the fiscal year approaching on Sept. 30, it explained, appropriations authority will expire along with the chance to go ahead with the projects this year even if the administration eventually wins on appeal. Perhaps sensing a weakness in the statutory argument, Solicitor General Noel Francisco also argued strenuously that the Sierra Club lacked standing to bring the lawsuit in the first place.
There is much that’s highly questionable about the court’s behavior in this case. When a court confronts the question of whether to grant a stay, the issue comes down to what courts call a “balance of the equities.” Which side will suffer the most from a suspension of the judgment, the winning side or the side that failed to make its case and wants another chance? Which side is most likely to suffer irreparable injury? In this case, the Sierra Club argued that if construction goes ahead, the damage will be done; the government will have won on the ground even if it ultimately loses in court. As for the administration’s claim of imminent harm, it can always try again in the next fiscal year.
What’s most troubling about the court’s action is that even if five justices found the administration’s argument attractive or even compelling, the court’s unconditional surrender (even issuing the stay on the precise date the administration requested, July 26, and not a day later) was simply unnecessary. In the only signed opinion the court issued, Justice Stephen Breyer explained how the court could have permitted the government to enter into construction contracts in time for the fiscal year deadline while keeping the injunction in place to block actual construction.
Justice Breyer’s proposal was, he said, “a straightforward way to avoid harm to both the government and respondents while allowing the litigation to proceed.” I’m assuming that his three liberal colleagues, Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan, would have agreed to this common-sense compromise if the offer could have peeled off a necessary fifth vote from the other side. That no fifth vote was forthcoming, that the majority rushed to give the administration everything it asked for, tells us all we need to know about the Supreme Court at this moment — and sadly, frighteningly, tells President Trump the same thing.