Samba Zine champions queer culture in a country rattled by political divisions and forest fires.
One Monday afternoon in mid-August, the megalopolis of São Paulo, Brazil, fell into darkness.
The cause could have been forest fires burning more than a thousand miles away in the state of Rondônia, but the miasma could have stood as a metaphor for the way the country’s president, Jair Bolsonaro, has cast a shadow in his nine months since taking office: increasing deforestation, using polarizing rhetoric and seeming to promote homophobia and transphobia.
That same day, Juliano Corbetta, an editor, said he was sitting in his São Paulo apartment, looking at a photograph of a male model wearing only a diamanté-studded thong (with a rhinestone heart applied to the model’s right buttock, for flair). Mr. Corbetta was evaluating the image for inclusion in his new publication, Samba Zine, which features only L.G.B.T.Q. Brazilian individuals, communities and causes.
Samba Zine is also produced by L.G.B.T.Q. Brazilian photographers, stylists, makeup artists and more. The magazine will be released in late September, will then publish twice a year, and will initially come with a footwear and T-shirt collaboration with the Brazilian brand Fiever, with proceeds from the items going to a São Paulo L.G.B.T.Q. support group called Casa 1.
While Samba Zine has fashion-driven editorials (brands shown are not solely Brazilian) and is beautifully produced, its real gravity springs from its sense of openness and optimism. Many compositions show subjects with relaxed, smiling dispositions, including the gay artist Samuel de Saboia, the bisexual actor Pedro Alves and the transgender singer Liniker.
“For me, it was a moment with my girls,” Liniker said in an audio message. “Celebrating our life and showing that we are alive.” There is skin, but it is far from suggestive.
Though there is a palpable momentum behind queer Brazilians’ expanding presence and visibility, there were roadblocks to Mr. Corbetta’s vision of celebrating them in glossy pages in a country with a history of racism, homophobia and transphobia.
More than a few subjects dropped out at the 11th hour, perhaps nervous about blowback for appearing in a queer-centric project. Mr. Corbetta said this was part of it, but that the trepidation is overarching. “Unless there are more people that are publicly out there, there will always be fear,” he said.
Samba Zine, whose first issue is 200 pages, has no advertising, in the traditional sense. Instead, brand partners, including Luxottica and the Brazilian underwear label Mash, provided funding and their products are featured “organically” in photo spreads.
Mr. Corbetta said that he was not given any restrictions from the brands (though he did note that in meetings where he is seeking sponsorship, he will often be asked “‘How gay is this going to be?’ That question needs to go extinct,” he said).
Mr. Alves, the actor, said in an email that “there are ad campaigns in the country with gay couples, trans individuals, drag queens. This would have been unthinkable years ago. Companies know the importance of ‘pink’ money.” There is a slowly growing nationwide acceptance, but, statistically, Brazil remains a dangerous place for L.G.B.T.Q. people.
Brazil’s Supremo Tribunal Federal ruled in June to include homophobia and transphobia as part of the country’s policies that outlaw racism. This came after the gay rights association Grupo Gay da Bahia, the oldest of its kind in the country, reported 420 community deaths by homicide or suicide in 2018.
Well over 100 queer Brazilians have been murdered in 2019. Marielle Franco, a lesbian councilwoman in Rio de Janeiro, was the victim of a high-profile 2018 assassination that still has the city roiling. Samba Zine, and its message, may be a hard sell beyond its immediate audience.
