STOCKHOLM — An Iranian journalist who traveled to Sweden with the foreign minister of Iran last week and fled during the trip is trying to claim asylum in Europe over fears of arrest.
The journalist, Amir Tohid Fazel, said in an interview that he had managed to slip away from the delegation that accompanied Mohammad Javad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister.
He stopped to change clothes and discard the sim card in his phone, then hailed a taxi that took him to a police station, where he asked for asylum.
Mr. Fazel’s defection last week while on a Nordic tour in Mr. Zarif’s press pool surprised some in the Iranian news media who saw him as an ally of the conservative political elites aligned with the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps. He once worked for a news outlet seen as the official mouthpiece of the Revolutionary Guards, a powerful paramilitary wing of the Iranian armed forces.
Mr. Fazel, 41, worked as a political editor for the conservative state-owned news agency Mowj, and many fellow Iranian journalists mentioned his links to hard-line factions as they reacted on social media to the news of his defection.
Roozbeh Mirebrahimi, an Iranian journalist and scholar who now lives in New York, asserts that Mr. Fazel was present when Mr. Mirebrahimi was interrogated in the office of the Tehran prosecutor. He was later imprisoned in the infamous Evin prison in Tehran, where he was held for months in 2004. Mr. Mirebrahimi detailed the accusations in a book and recent Facebook post.
Mr. Fazel’s attempt to seek asylum was first reported on Monday in a short account aired by SVT, a Swedish broadcaster.
Mr. Fazel said that when he left Iran for the trip he had not planned to defect. But he was contacted on social media by a colleague from his office in Tehran who said four people dressed as civilians had gone to the news agency with an arrest warrant. The friend told Mr. Fazel to make sure his family was not at home.
He was referring to the long-simmering tensions between hard-line and reformist factions of the political elite who have very different views for the future of the country. Even within those groups, there are deep fractures.
Mr. Fazel said his reporting on the dual citizenship of high-level officials in Iran had gotten him into trouble. Iran does not recognize dual citizenship.
He said a member of Parliament had provided him with a list of officials in the government of President Hassan Rouhani — seen as a reformer — who are also citizens of countries deemed hostile to Iran. These include Britain, the United States and Canada. Iranian hard-liners have regularly raised the issue in Iran’s Parliament, prompting heated debate, and soon after one of these exchanges, the lists were widely reported.
Mr. Zarif — accompanied by a sizable press contingent — traveled to Sweden last week to meet with his counterpart and the country’s prime minister, as well as other politicians, business leaders and academics. He gave a talk at the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute on international law and unilateralism.
Iran has been one of the world’s most repressive countries for journalists for the past four decades, according to Reporters Without Borders, an advocacy group.
Iranian journalists must know how to navigate the deeply fractured political system and know the boundaries of their reporting, said Rouzbeh Parsi, head of the Middle East and North Africa program at the Swedish Institute of International Affairs.
“Newspapers have to figure out how far they can push the envelope,” he said.
When a publication is seen to have overstepped that boundary by some contingent of the government, it can be closed, and its journalists risk arrest.
Mr. Parsi said that dual nationality is an issue regularly highlighted by hard-line members of Parliament and their allied news outlets, because they say it opens up the government to subversives. Some have used the allegations to undermine Mr. Rouhani’s government.
Mr. Fazel said a member of Parliament had given him and other journalists a redacted list of 70 names. “He wanted it published because we are getting close to parliamentary elections,” Mr. Fazel said.
It is unclear if Mr. Fazel would be entitled to seek asylum in Sweden. He said migration officials had told him the claim might be processed in Finland because that was the first European country the delegation had visited.
Iran’s foreign ministry did not respond to a request for comment.
Mr. Fazel said it was his growing disillusionment with the government, including what he called rigged elections and double standards, that had motivated him to publish the list. Now, he worries for his family.
“I’m terrified for them,” he said, his voice breaking.
He said it had become increasingly difficult to anticipate the actions of the government and who might run afoul of any particular faction.
“It’s impossible to predict the agenda of the Iranian power elite,” he said.