Opinion|I Helped Expose the Lead Crisis in Flint. Here’s What Other Cities Should Do.
I Helped Expose the Lead Crisis in Flint. Here’s What Other Cities Should Do.
The fight against lead in water is a fight for our kids.
Dr. Hanna-Attisha, the author of “What the Eyes Don’t See: A Story of Crisis, Resistance, and Hope in an American City,” is a pediatrician and professor in Flint, Mich.
Four years ago, with my white coat on, I stepped out of my pediatric clinic and held a news conference. Lifting a baby bottle filled with water from Flint, Mich., I shared my research: Lead was increasingly in the blood of Flint’s children. The powers-that-be tried to silence me initially, but persistence, activism, teamwork and science prevailed. Since then, Flint has been on a slow but sure path toward recovery.
Flint is an extreme case but not unique. A troubling number of cities across the country — Pittsburgh, Chicago, Portland, Ore. — are struggling with elevated lead in their drinking water. It’s one of the legacies of the profit-driven and largely unaccountable lead industry that thwarted science, fought regulations and forced its use in our gasoline, paint and plumbing.
Now Newark, a city with three times the population of Flint, is facing a similar problem of lead in its drinking water. Because of weak sampling requirements in the federal Lead and Copper Rule, we may never know when Newark’s corrosion control treatment started to fail, but data showing lead was present in drinking water first appeared in 2016 — and that in itself is troubling.
Newark’s water samples reveal lead levels that aren’t “borderline” numbers or wait-and-see numbers. The amount of lead in Newark’s water is among the highest of any municipal system of its size across the country. Some levels in the city are in the hundreds of parts per billion. And now there is a concern that the lead-clearing filters are not working as well as they should.
What can Newark citizens expect? If they’ve paid attention to drinking-water crises of the past 20 years in our country, they’ll see politicians who are in denial, utilities that don’t want to be held accountable, health officials who demand “proof of harm” before taking action and victims who are dismissed and even blamed.
The most telling example of what can go wrong — desperately wrong — can be learned from taking a close look at the Washington water crisis in the nation’s capital.
And you thought I’d be telling you all about Flint, right?
Nothing was done about the biggest villains in the Washington water crisis, either. All of them escaped conviction or consequences. Nobody went to jail. Nobody lost their job. Many were promoted.
It was weeks before I got a good night’s sleep again. Knowing such lies were possible while children were being poisoned kept me awake at night — and motivated me each day in Flint. What I learned about the Washington crisis — how much lead was in the water, what it took to expose the truth — made me determined the same thing wouldn’t happen to Flint kids.
What keeps me awake now?
Flint and Washington and Newark are all viewed as black cities and have a shared history of segregation, redlining, race riots, white flight, economic decline, violence, a pernicious drug epidemic and a loss of local control. Newark’s water crisis, like Flint’s and even Washington’s, is an obvious case of environmental racism, a case of blindness to the people, places and problems we choose not to see.
If we stop believing that the government can protect us and keep all children safe, not just the privileged ones, what do we have left? Who are we as a country?
Studying the Washington crisis is what drove many of us in Flint to do better. We knew that we needed to get an emergency declared, water and filters distributed along with pre-mixed formula for infants, and all the lead pipes replaced. Knowing the Washington water crisis history led us to fight for accountability and for long-term resources and interventions to preserve the promise of Flint children.
So that’s the history lesson that I want to pass on to Newark. Stay woke and keep fighting. Our public health protections fundamentally tell us how much or little we value our children. Beyond drinking water, the stories of Flint and Washington also shed light on the deteriorating infrastructure and environmental injustice in our cities. It’s not enough to be aware of injustice; we need to take action — even when it’s hard or scary or may seem impossible. And especially when everyone else wants you to stay silent.
And that gives Newark, and the rest of the nation, an opportunity to write an even better story, one governed by transparency, equity, science, prevention and centered around our most valuable resource: our children.
