A handful of new skin care companies are targeting men on their own turf.
When a new men’s personal care company called Huron recently asked CrossFit Union Square in Manhattan to test its products, some of the men there didn’t have much basis for comparison.
A few told Matt Mullenax, the 33-year-old founder of Huron, that they had never used a face wash. Eric Brown, one of the gym’s owners, said he doubted most could list five brands. And the products available in the gym’s locker rooms are sufficiently unmemorable that Mr. Brown couldn’t name them — and he’s the one who buys them.
Huron is one of a handful of new companies hoping to change that — and cash in — by targeting men in untapped (at least for the beauty industry) places. For Huron, which began selling its products at the end of July, that’s CrossFit gyms; for a start-up called Bravo Sierra, it’s military bases. Neither is the sort of spot one associates with discovering a new moisturizer, but then again, many men don’t have a place to do that.
While a tiny fraction of men hunt for face masks (a growing category) at specialty retailers, the rest still stick to the essentials, mostly from legacy brands like Irish Spring, introduced in 1970, and the 81-year-old Old Spice.
Besides function, men prioritize convenience, so the marketing tactics of newcomers like Huron and Bravo Sierra make sense, said Larissa Jensen, a beauty industry analyst at the research marketing company NPD.
“They’re putting products in the hands of men where they are,” Ms. Jensen said.
In some ways, these companies are following in the footsteps of Hawthorne, a three-year-old “grooming solutions” company whose sales grew 1,000 percent in the last year, according to company figures.
With a roughly 20-question online quiz (90 percent of customers take it on their phones), Hawthorne matches customers with products, solving what Brian Jeong, 30, a founder, calls “an accessibility problem” for men. Eighty percent of its customers are from outside New York and California.
There’s reason to listen to him: Hawthorne recently closed $8 million in funding. Investors include Imaginary, run by the Net-a-Porter founder Natalie Massenet, and Nick Brown, who at his previous firm invested early in companies like Goop.
“Guys want to be spoken to on their own terms and on their own turf,” Mr. Jeong said.
Those terms, for the record, are “clueless” — a box the majority of customers check on Hawthorne’s. (Though often not without overestimating their knowledge first. A good number check “expert” and have to go back and downgrade themselves once they see the level of detail in subsequent questions, Mr. Jeong said.) A recent Hawthorne marketing email explained how to use hair conditioner.
Each of the company’s three products — the minimum Huron thinks any man needs — costs less than $20. This is already a big jump for men who have only ever used Irish Spring bar soap as an all-in-one body wash, face wash and shampoo, Mr. Mullenax said.
Or so Mr. Mullenax hopes. His theory is that men who care about performance when it comes to their bodies can be convinced they need something better than drugstore brands for their skin.
Mr. Mullenax knows this audience: He is a longtime CrossFitter who couldn’t discern a real difference between the products at CVS, but on the premium end “the native Ohioan in me couldn’t stomach paying $65 for face wash,” he said. One of Huron’s other advisers is Jason Khalipa, a 2008 CrossFit Games champion who owns a string of boxes, as the gyms are called, in the San Francisco area.
“They told us they needed something they could open with one hand,” said Benjamin Bernet, 42, a founder of the company. Mr. Bernet is a personal care industry veteran; he was part of the Kiehl’s team that put the brand in Equinox in 2009, long before every luxury gym had fancy bathroom products.
Why focus on the military?
The company’s name, Bravo Sierra, is military speak for, er, BS — a beauty industry norm the founders say they want to avoid.
“I don’t think this is an industry where honesty has been a core tenet,” Mr. Guilbert said.