Sudan’s top general was sworn in Wednesday as the leader of a joint military-civilian body created to rule Sudan during a three-year transition period toward democratic elections.
Gen. Abdel-Fattah Burhan was sworn in before the country’s top judge and will lead the 11-member Sovereign Council for 21 months, followed by a civilian leader appointed by the pro-democracy movement for the next 18.
The long-awaited move came after more than four months of tortuous negotiations between the ruling military council and the pro-democracy movement after the army’s removal of the longtime autocratic president, Omar al-Bashir, in April.
The new Sovereign Council was established under a power-sharing agreement between the military and the protesters, following pressure from the United States and its Arab allies, amid growing concerns the political crisis could ignite a civil war.
General Burhan, 59, chaired the military council that took over the country after Mr. al-Bashir’s ouster amid nationwide protests against his three-decade rule.
The Sovereign Council includes five military members and five civilians appointed by the Forces for Declaration of Freedom and Change, which represents the protesters. An 11th member, a Coptic Christian judge, was appointed by the two sides.
According to the official news agency, nine members were sworn in before the country’s top judge and Burhan on Wednesday. The remaining member, Mohammed Hassan al-Taishi, will be sworn in later.
The SUNA news agency said the council had held its first meeting in the capital, Khartoum, after the members took the oath of office.
Sudan has also been convulsed by rebellions in its far-flung provinces for decades, and the power-sharing agreement calls for the government to reach a peace agreement with the rebels within six months.
The council commended the commitment of the Sudanese people to a peaceful transition, and welcomed the parties’ pledge to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms. It called for a swift resumption of negotiations to peacefully end conflicts in Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue Nile.
Among the military members on the council is Gen. Mohammed Hamadan Dagalo, who served as deputy head of the disbanded military council.
General Dagalo, also known as Hemedti, has consolidated power since Mr. al-Bashir’s overthrow, and is the commander of the paramilitary Rapid Support Forces. Protesters accuse the R.S.F. of leading the crackdown against them that started with the brutal breakup of their sit-in camp in Khartoum in June.
The civilian members include two women and a journalist.
The power-sharing agreement, signed Saturday, includes a protest movement-appointed cabinet and a legislative council with a majority from the Forces for the Declaration of Freedom and Change, the main protest coalition. The legislative body is to assemble within three months.
The pro-democracy movement appointed a well-known economist, Abdalla Hamdok, to lead the transitional cabinet in a sign that overhauling Sudan’s ailing economy would be a top priority for the new administration.
They were calling for justice for those killed in the uprising that started late last year, initially over bread and fuel shortages, but which shortly turned to calls for Mr. al-Bashir’s ouster. At least 250 people have been killed since December.
Upon his arrival from the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, Mr. Hamdok told reporters that the transition period “requires all efforts” to “unite” the Sudanese and build a strong country.
Mr. Hamdok said his government would work achieve “sustainable peace” with armed groups. Overhauling the economy will also be a top priority for the government, he said.
“The slogan of ‘Freedom, peace and justice’ will be the program of the transitional period,” he told a news conference.
Mr. Hamdok, who has served as deputy executive secretary of the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa since November 2011, was sworn in Wednesday. He holds a doctorate in economics from the University of Manchester in Britain, and was a senior official at Sudan’s Finance Ministry in the 1980s, before the Islamist-backed military coup in 1989 in which Mr. al-Bashir took over power.
Mr. Hamdok is responsible for forming a cabinet of not more than 20 ministers, but the military will nominate the defense and interior ministers.
