Business|Video Games Aren’t Why Shootings Happen. Politicians Still Blame Them.
After two mass shootings over the weekend that killed 31 people and wounded dozens more, powerful Republicans, including the president, blamed an old bogeyman: video games.
“We’ve watched from studies, shown before, what it does to individuals, and you look at these photos of how it took place, you can see the actions within video games and others,” added Mr. McCarthy on a different Fox show.
“It is too easy today for troubled youth to surround themselves with a culture that celebrates violence,” Trump said.
We must stop the glorification of violence in our society. This includes the gruesome and grisly video games that are now commonplace. It is too easy today for troubled youth to surround themselves with a culture that celebrates violence. We must stop or substantially reduce this, and it has to begin immediately. Cultural change is hard. But each of us can choose to build a culture that celebrates the inherent worth and dignity of every human life. That’s what we have to do.
Armed with little and often unconvincing evidence, politicians have blamed violence on video games for decades. Their rhetoric quickly ramped up in the 1990s, after games like Wolfenstein 3D and Doom popularized the genre of violent first-person shooting games. Since then, video games have been blamed for shootings at Columbine High School in 1999 and at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in 2018, and many others in between.
Researchers have extensively studied whether there is a causal link between video games and violent behavior, and while there isn’t quite a consensus, there is broad agreement that no such link exists.
Chris Ferguson, a psychology professor at Stetson University, led the committee that developed the policy statement. In an interview Monday, he said the evidence was clear that violent video games are not a risk factor for serious acts of aggression. Neither are violent movies, nor other forms of media.
The Supreme Court has also rejected the idea. In striking down a California law that banned the sale of some violent video games to children in 2011, the court savaged the evidence California mustered in support of its law.
Shortly after Mr. Trump’s address, the hashtag #VideogamesAreNotToBlame began trending nationally on Twitter, with most tweets mocking the idea that video games were to blame for either of the shootings.
If video games did indeed cause some mass shootings, one might expect such events to be common in Japan or South Korea. Both countries spend more per capita on video games than the United States, according to Newzoo, and have huge video game communities. Japan is home to video game makers like Nintendo, Sega and Sony, while South Korea has a highly developed competitive video gaming industry.
But Japan and South Korea — both of which have very strict laws limiting gun ownership — have among the lowest rates of violent crime in the world, and mass casualty events are quite rare.
Mr. Trump’s administration studied the issue previously and came to no significant conclusion about connections between mass shootings and violent video games.
After last year’s shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, the Trump administration convened a federal commission on school safety. The commission’s final report downplayed the role of guns in school shootings. Instead, it called for improving mental health services, training school employees in firearm use and rolling back rules developed during the Obama administration that were aimed at ensuring minority children weren’t unfairly disciplined by schools.
The commission’s 180-page report devotes a chapter to what it calls “violent entertainment,” including video games. After hearing from a variety of researchers and other experts, the commission officially recommended that state and local educational agencies have internet safety measures in place, and the enforcers of voluntary ratings systems — such as the Motion Picture Association of America’s practice of assigning ratings like “PG-13” and “R” to movies — should review and improve their policies.
It made no specific recommendation in regards to video games.
Law enforcement officials were investigating whether it was written by the shooter. They were interviewing the suspect, Patrick Crusius, a 21-year-old white man who lived about a 10-hour drive from the Walmart where the shooting took place.
Video games are, however, mentioned in the manifesto. “Don’t attack heavily guarded areas to fulfill your super soldier COD fantasy,” it advised, referring to the popular Call of Duty franchise of games in which players usually embody the roles of soldiers.
