Company culture comes from the top — it’s the only way to create change in our current system.
This week in NYT Parenting, Alexis Ohanian, the co-founder of Reddit and Initialized Capital, writes about how important parental leave has been for him and his family. He describes how pivotal those early days were, not just because his wife, Serena Williams, nearly died giving birth and needed additional care — but because extended family leave gave him time to deeply bond with their daughter, Olympia. As Nathaniel Popper pointed out in an article for us in June, when dads take full advantage of parental leave, it is better for their kids, their parenting abilities and their marriages.
I know the tone of the note is sassy, and not appropriate for many workplaces. (And guess what? I didn’t actually delete all the emails.) Furthermore, many leaders may not be able to fully step away during leave for a variety of reasons, and in those cases, Brody said, they should be transparent with their workers about the privileges they have, like access to night nurses, that make this work possible.
But for me, the tone of my note signaled to everyone who worked with us that for just a few months, work was not my priority — and that it shouldn’t be. I’d also made clear to my reports that I trusted them to handle anything that came up, and that my leave could be an opportunity for them.
The more that public figures like Anna and Alexis use their platforms to talk about the importance of leave for their families, and their businesses, the more the private sector can move toward the humane policies that working families deserve.
P.S. Forward this email to a friend. Follow us on Instagram @NYTParenting. Join us on Facebook. Find us on Twitter for the latest updates. Read last week’s newsletter, which is about managing fear and anxiety after mass violence.
Want More on Alexis Ohanian and Working Parents?
In his piece for us, Alexis mentions torturing his daughter Olympia’s favorite doll, Qai Qai. In case you missed it, The Times’s Caity Weaver goes deep on whether Qai Qai is America’s most important doll (spoiler: obviously).
We also have a new guide from Robin Shulman about pregnancy discrimination. Know your rights.
To get my toddlers to agree to (and stand still for) sunscreen application, I have them pretend that the sunscreen gives them wild animal powers. I slather it on, they “become” whatever animal they’ve chosen and I pretend to be scared. They love it.
— Katie Ostrove, Wynnewood, Pa.