Tania and Syngin were fighting. It was mid-June and sultry, with the afternoon temperature snaking toward 80 degrees. They hadn’t slept much the night before — blame work, blame sex — and now, in the front seats of a lumbering Chevy Suburban, having already missed a couple of turnoffs along a New York highway, they began to argue about the future. Did Syngin have a plan? Could Tania stop yelling?
“Are you just too young for me?” she seethed.
America — American women between the ages of 25 and 54 in particular — will meet Tania and Syngin in November, when the seventh season of “90 Day Fiancé” begins. A flagship show for the TLC network and a social media miracle, the show and its endless spinoffs pull in water-cooler-worthy ratings. Lady Gaga and Mindy Kaling are fans. The “Vanderpump Rules” gang holds watch parties.
“90 Day Fiancé,” which premiered in 2014, follows couples as they navigate the K-1 visa process, in which an American citizen petitions for a foreign beneficiary to enter the United States. Once that beneficiary touches down, the couple has 90 days to marry. Otherwise, the foreign national must leave.
Unlike most reality shows, which rely on artificial constructs or manufactured theatrics, the stakes here — marriage or potential deportation — are inherent and existentially huge. It’s a social experiment show, like “Love Island” or “Survivor.” But these couples run the experiment on themselves.
From what I observed, visiting the production offices and shadowing a field crew, “90 Day Fiancé” isn’t any more misleading than your average reality series. It doesn’t manufacture events, as in the “Real Housewives” franchise, or create artificial contests, as in “The Bachelor.” Its stars mostly lack glamour, wealth, a discernible skill set. They can’t sing, they can’t dance, they can’t bake.
So how to explain the fascination? Think of “90 Day Fiancé” as the right show for a wrong time, a guilty pleasure that invites viewers to offload their confusion, mistrust and guilt around immigration onto the sometimes shirtless backs of a few messy foreign nationals and the Americans who debatably love them.
IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES, as currently practiced, depends on narrative. If you are not from one of the 30-odd countries that receive visa waivers and you want to come here, legally, you will have to tell a story about what you do or whom you love or what you are running from. And you will have to make some judge or consular official or case officer believe it.
That formula has created a hit for TLC, where it is often the top-rated ad-supported cable show in its time slot, especially among women 25-54, a demographic coveted by advertisers. Unlike “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” or competition shows, “90 Day Fiancé” is an anti-fantasy, with a cast it is impossible to envy. Sitting on your couch, posting the occasional meme, it is easy to believe that you would never be so stupid, so deluded, so dishonest. It is easy to believe that a green card is something the rest of the world desires.
On Twitter, on the Reddit forums (particularly the uncensored one), even on the show’s own Facebook site, fans portray the foreign partners as scammers and gold diggers. (The Americans?  Some Redditors take it upon themselves to investigate the foreign partners, delving into online histories, which looks a lot like nativism.
A K-1 Visa, according to Lenni B. Benson, a professor at New York Law School and an expert on immigration, is popularly associated with marriage fraud. “It is not true in the majority of cases,” she wrote in an email.
Each year, 30,000 to 40,000 people apply for the visa and the vast majority are approved. The application process can take six to eight months, longer under the current administration, and costs around $2,000. A couple has to stay married for two years before conditions on the foreign partner’s green card are removed, and the American petitioner has to support his or her partner until a work permit is approved. Which is to say that if a K-1 marriage is a scam, it’s an involved, expensive multiyear one.
Maybe the fans tweeting fraud memes are deeply attuned to other valences of American immigration. Maybe not. The series, according to its producers, is avowedly apolitical. But in emphasizing cultural difference, in editing for drama (a producer had shared a personal motto: “If someone’s gonna tweet about it, include it”), in celebrating conflict, “90 Day Fiancé” has its own politics.
To explore the difference between the stories that most potential immigrants want to tell — stories of compatibility and benefit — and the stories “90 Day Fiancé” tells — of incongruity and discord — I visited the production offices, sat in on casting sessions and then, last April, drove to Kennedy International Airport in a caravan of black Suburbans as Tania — plus producers, camera and sound operators, and assistants — prepared to meet Syngin and begin their 90 days.
TANIA IS AN AMERICAN CITIZEN. Syngin is from South Africa. They are both attractive, both charismatic, both 29, and neither has much more money than the other. They met at a Cape Town bar in 2017 — she was there with another guy, Syngin was the bartender — and spent eight months living and traveling together. In the shambolic, schadenfreude-baiting world of “90 Day Fiancé,” they looked like a best-case scenario.
They were, as Orstein would describe them at the rooftop party, “a love couple.” I asked him what the opposite of a love couple was: A drama couple? A comedy couple? A disaster couple? They are all love couples, he responded.
Tania had applied for the K-1 Visa a year ago, providing an affidavit of financial support. Syngin had undergone a thorough background check and submitted to a consular interview. They received approval at the beginning of April and Syngin booked a flight.
On the day of Syngin’s arrival, crew members crowded into a room at the Time New York Hotel, while Tania scattered rose petals on the bed, “like a scene from a movie,” she said, and created a “sex shrine” — condoms, lingerie, some toys the crew had already filmed her purchasing — on a chair in the corner. She dressed in the shower stall, concealing her mic pack under a body-con mini. Then she and two girlfriends left for the airport. In the arrivals hall, they scattered more petals (a custodian tried to sweep them up, a producer had the custodian sign a release form) and took photos and Jägermeister shots.
Tania had told me that she wouldn’t notice the cameras, that they wouldn’t change anything she said or did, and I wasn’t sure I believed her, but then Syngin was at the other end of the hall, calling, “My sugar! My sexy sugar!” and dropping his bags and cantering toward her like some roan stallion and she was laughing and sobbing and Terminal 2 filled with their pheromones as they kissed and clutched and I believed her absolutely.
Flushed, giggling, they went back for his unattended bags and exited through the main door. Outside Tania turned to a producer. “Do you want us to redo that?” she asked.
EVEN A LOVE COUPLE needs a story. “If everything was smooth sailing, and everything was happiness and perfect and there was no opposition, I don’t know if that would make for a powerful story,” Howard Lee, TLC’s president, said at the network’s Midtown Manhattan offices last October. In April — at the airport and afterward at the hotel, where the cameramen filmed Syngin chucking Tania onto a bed, twice, and in Times Square, where Tania unveiled a banner she had made for him — and during a second set visit two months later, I watched producers try to craft one.
In fairness, I rarely saw the producers fake anything. Yet reality was often massaged — sometimes lightly, sometimes more deep-tissue — with leading questions and retakes.
By June, with Tania about to return from studying herbal medicine in Costa Rica, the dynamics had shifted. Syngin, it turned out, liked her best friends fine. The shed hadn’t been much of a problem, either. But Tania, quick and birdlike, with a high-pitched nervous laugh, and Syngin, blithe and unhurried, with a signature hair flip that will probably inspire drinking games, had different plans for their shared future. Well, Tania had plans; Syngin did not.
The producers fanned that something, encouraging Syngin to revisit a heated phone conversation. On the drive, after Tania had pulled into a parking lot and Syngin had loped off in search of tea and crew members had adjusted the fritzing GoPro batteries, the couple delivered. In the two following cars, the field crew listened, unembarrassed, as the fight grew increasingly heated. Finally the couple stopped speaking and I started wondering about potential hashtags.
Tania had been wondering the same. “I’m like, wow, I probably sound so crazy,” she said later, holding Syngin’s hand at an Italian restaurant with a maritime theme. The drive, which should have taken about two hours, had taken nearly five, and the crew had detoured for a meal before further shooting. “I just imagine what they’re going to pull,” she said.
From the first days of filming, with Syngin asking for his cue, with Tania checking in on retakes, they had been savvy about what the show would ask of them. In two months, they had grown even savvier, answering on-camera questions in complete sentences, preparing responses in advance, satisfying the producers as quickly as possible. They signed onto the show, Tania said, because they wanted to share their story. But they didn’t know how that story would be edited. They have dreams, Tania said, of living off the land, of practicing permaculture and natural medicine. “Will those parts show through or are we just going to look like a party couple?” she asked.
The couple living off the land — the obstacles, the livestock — sounded like surefire spinoff material.
“That’s what I say,” Tania said.
WHAT THIS STORY — party couple or permaculturalists — will mean in the larger conversation around immigration often worried Tania. The daughter of Venezuelan immigrants and a social justice advocate (she recently worked with Democracy Spring), she recognizes her own story — indeed any K-1 story — as a privileged one. “I know a lot of undocumented people who are like struggling for themselves and their families right now, literally fighting for their lives, fighting for their rights,” she said.
“It’s just a whole messed-up system,” she concluded.
A waiter took their plates away. They picked food out of one another’s teeth. They were a “love couple” again. But even a “love couple” can signify in troubling ways.
Back in October, I asked Howard Lee, the TLC president, if the show, which began in the Obama administration, had changed in the last couple of years. “We don’t get into the politics of all of that in the series,” he said.
In July, after months of news stories about family separations and detention centers and inflammatory rhetoric, I asked him if the show ever would become political. If he and the producers truly believed that these were love stories and not instances of immigration fraud, shouldn’t they show that?
“The stories are what they are,” he said.
The subject of immigration has polarized Americans, on and off, for centuries. Now and as the 2020 elections near, it is polarizing us again. And the incredible popularity of “90 Day Fiancé” suggests that stories that signal immigration as a joke, as a crime, as a dubious privilege, are the stories that some Americans want to hear.