The letter, written by Sherrod Brown of Ohio and signed by nine other senators, demanded that Google convert its more than 120,000 temporary and contract workers to full-time employees.
Most of Google’s contingent workers are technically employees of staffing agencies, although the company acts like the employer in most cases — deciding when they work and what they do and assessing the quality of their work, according to current and former temps and contractors.
They have said they joined Google hoping to land a full-time job. When they encountered sexual harassment or pressure to perform unpaid overtime from Google employees, they were reluctant to speak up for fear that they would be labeled troublemakers and not receive full-time jobs.
Ms. Naughton said Google worked with staffing companies that had a particular expertise and could offer a “career path to employees.” She added that using contingent workers was a common practice in almost every industry in the United States and the government.
She did not directly address any of the senators’ policy demands. Mr. Pichai did not respond to the letter.
Though Silicon Valley companies are among the richest in the world, they have embraced employing temps. And while the pay for engineers and executives in Silicon Valley continues to rise, a growing faction of workers at many of those companies are not sharing in the success.
Temps and contractors account for 40 percent to 50 percent of workers at most technology firms, according to estimates by OnContracting, a site that helps people find tech contracting positions.
By keeping a large portion of their work forces contingent, companies like Google save money and maintain flexibility to decrease their head counts should business conditions change.
Younger tech companies like Uber and Lyft have built giant businesses that depend largely on the work of independent contractors, not employees.
Some Democrats are seizing on the issue as another sign of inequality in the country. That has put Google in their cross hairs.
Pete Buttigieg, the Democratic mayor of South Bend, Ind., who is also running for president, highlighted the widespread use of contingent labor at Google when laying out his economic plan to give more power to workers.
Mr. Brown has also been a vocal critic of the growing use of so-called “alternative work arrangements” by companies. In his letter to Google’s chief executive, Mr. Brown said the company was using temporary and contract workers for more than short-term and nonessential work.
In addition to the other demands, Mr. Brown encouraged the company to eliminate noncompetition clauses and prohibit mandatory nondisclosure agreements about the terms and conditions of employment, including in contracts between temps and their staffing agencies.
He also said Google should accept liability for workplace violations that occurred with temps or contractors — instead of passing responsibility onto staffing agencies.
“Adopting these policies will extend the economic security of Google employment to all individuals who contribute to the company’s success,” Mr. Brown said.
The other senators who signed the letter were Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut, Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts, Patty Murray of Washington and Brian Schatz of Hawaii.