The Illinois, Minnesota and Wisconsin public health departments are investigating these cases and at least 20 additional emergency admissions that doctors suspect are related to vaping some substance, possibly even illegal street drugs or adulterated liquids laced with T.H.C., the ingredient that produces marijuana’s high.
Most of the patients were having difficulty breathing when they arrived at the hospital. Some patients also reported chest pain, vomiting and other ailments. The cases have ranged in severity, with some patients suffering severe lung damage that required weeks of treatment in the intensive care units.
Initially, Dr. Gummin said, doctors suspected that the patients were suffering from an infectious disease. But the patients’ failure to respond to antibiotics led the doctors to believe they had been harmed by a toxic substance. A common practice among their patients was vaping.
One hypothesis, said Dr. Gummin, is that the teenagers had purchased a nicotine or cannabis-derived vaping product that had been used once, and then refilled with dangerous substances that would be hard to detect. The Wisconsin Department of Health Services reported 12 confirmed and 14 suspected cases of vaping-related illnesses, including severe lung damage in people who reported recent vaping or “dabbing,” which is vaping marijuana oils, extracts or concentrates.
The Wisconsin health officials also said that patients reported using open-tank systems and devices with interchangeable cartridges. Open systems allow users to concoct their own brews of vaping liquids, if they want.
Dr. Emily Chapman, chief medical officer for the Children’s Minnesota hospital system, said that in the last month or so, it had treated four cases of acute, severe lung damage — including respiratory failure — in teenagers who had been vaping. Although the hospitals’ patients have each shown improvement, Dr. Chapman said, it’s not clear if they will fully recover.
Dr. Chapman also said she was concerned about how much of the public believes that vaping is safe.
The F.D.A. is studying whether there is a direct relationship between the use of e-cigarettes and the risk of a seizure or other neurological problems. The agency has received 127 reports of seizures or other neurological symptoms, beginning in 2010.
