WASHINGTON — The Trump administration on Wednesday unveiled a regulation to allow it to indefinitely detain migrant families who illegally cross the border. The rule replaces a decades-old court agreement that mandates a level of care for migrant children and limits how long the government can hold them in custody.
For more than a year, the White House has pressed the Department of Homeland Security to find a way to eliminate the agreement, known as the Flores settlement, which limits the time children can spend in detention and establishes minimum standards for the holding facilities for families and children. Immigration hard-liners inside the administration say the move is crucial to halting the flow of migrants across the southwestern border.
The administration’s goal with the new rule is deterrence, and its message to families fleeing Central America is blunt: Come here and we will lock you up. Critics say it is the latest in a series of policies by President Trump meant to close off the United States from the rest of the world.
“One of the things that will happen, when they realize the borders are closing — the wall is being built, we are building tremendous numbers of miles of wall right now in different locations — it all comes together like a beautiful puzzle,” Mr. Trump said Wednesday.
The new regulation will require approval from a federal judge, and administration officials said they expected it to be immediately challenged in court. But once in effect, it would specifically abolish a 20-day limit on detaining families in immigration jails, a cap that Mr. Trump has repeatedly complained has led to the “catch and release” of families from Central America and elsewhere into the United States.
It will also establish new minimum standards for the conditions in the detention centers where families will be housed.
“What this will do is to substantially increase our ability to end the catch and release challenges that have fueled this crisis,” Kevin K. McAleenan, the acting secretary of homeland security, said on Wednesday in a news conference. He said the regulation “restores integrity to our immigration system” and would provide high standards for the care of children.
Administration officials said that the effort to allow families to be detained indefinitely was an attempt to avoid having to either separate families or release them while they waited for their cases to be heard. But immigration rights advocates denounced the new regulation, accusing Mr. Trump and his administration of purposely treating families and children poorly in hopes of reducing the flow of immigration.
The administration first proposed the rule last fall, allowing the public to comment on the potential regulation. It is scheduled to be published Friday in the Federal Register and would take effect 60 days later, though administration officials concede that the expected court challenge will probably delay that happening.
Withdrawing from the consent decree has been a personal objective for Stephen Miller, the architect of Mr. Trump’s immigration policy. The New York Times reported in April that Mr. Miller berated the former acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Ronald D. Vitiello, for not finishing the rule more quickly. Mr. Vitiello later had his nomination withdrawn by Mr. Trump, who said he was not tough enough for the job.
If the new rule goes into effect, the administration would be free to send families who are caught crossing the border illegally to a family residential center to be held for as long as it takes for their immigration cases to be decided.
Mr. McAleenan said families would be detained until they were either released after being awarded asylum or deported to their home countries. Some families might be awarded parole to leave the facilities while the courts decide their fate, he said.
Almost 475,000 members of families have crossed the southwestern border in the past 10 months, Mr. McAleenan said, a number he said was three times the previous record for a full year. He said the number of apprehensions of families crossing illegally was up 469 percent from the previous year.
Enacting the regulation would send a powerful message that bringing children to the United States was not “a passport” to being released from detention, Mr. McAleenan said.
“The new rule will restore the integrity of our immigration system and eliminate a major pull factor fueling the crisis,” he said.
The 20-day limit that Wednesday’s regulation would eliminate has been in place since 2015, a legal outgrowth of a 1997 court-ordered consent decree resulting from a federal class-action lawsuit that claimed that physical and emotional harm was done to immigrant children held for extended periods in the detention facilities.
The Obama administration, in its own effort to reduce surges of migrants crossing the border, also tried to change the rules putting limits on the time families could be detained. Since Mr. Trump became president, Department of Homeland Security officials have repeatedly said that limiting the detentions of entire migrant families has been a major factor in the surge of Central American families who crossed the border this year.
In an attempt to get around the Flores agreement, the Trump administration began separating children from their parents last summer. The children were sent to the custody of the Department of Health and Human Services while the adults were imprisoned while awaiting trial on their violation of immigration laws.
A fierce political backlash forced Mr. Trump to publicly abandon the separation policy, though immigration advocates said some families continued to be separated after that announcement. Officials have said children are separated from their parents now only when there is a concern for their safety.
Democrats have argued that the rules established by the Flores settlement were vital to ensuring the well-being of detained children, especially after reports of children being kept in overcrowded cells and sometimes going without showers, toothpaste or hot meals.
The Trump administration’s new regulation, which is several hundred pages long, would eliminate a requirement that federal detention centers for immigrant families be licensed by states, most of which had no such licenses. Instead, under the regulation, the three centers built to house hundreds of immigrant families — in Dilley and Karnes City, Tex., and Leesport, Pa. — would have to meet standards set only by ICE, which runs them.
But critics of the administration have long argued that the facilities were unsuitable for children for long periods of time. Lawmakers and others who have visited the facilities have described hourslong waits in the heat for medical care, spoiled food and limited education opportunities for children who remain in detention for long periods.
And the recent examples of horrible conditions at overcrowded Border Patrol detention centers have underscored their concerns about the residential centers. A report by the department inspector general described conditions at the Border Patrol stations that included standing-room-only cells, as well as children being detained without showers or hot meals.
Under the terms of the consent decree, the regulation must be approved by the federal judge currently overseeing the long-running case, Dolly M. Gee of the United States District Court for the Central District of California. The government will have seven days to file a brief in her court seeking her approval of the regulation.
