The move came as Republican leaders have blamed video games for mass shootings, despite a lack of evidence. Democrats have pushed Walmart to stop selling guns, but it does not plan to do so.
As Walmart scrambles to respond to a shooting at a supercenter in El Paso that killed 22 people last weekend, the retailer announced that it would remove video game displays and other signs or videos that show violence.
The move came as Republican leaders including President Trump and Dan Patrick, the lieutenant governor of Texas, have drawn a link between deadly shootings and video games, despite researchers’ conclusions that there is no strong connection.
Walmart has also faced pressure from Democratic politicians and supporters of gun control to end or limit its sale of guns. But there has been no change to the retailer’s gun sales policy, said Randy Hargrove, a spokesman for Walmart.
It also said employees should make sure that “no movies depicting violence are playing in the Electronics section” and that “any hunting season videos that may be playing in Sporting Goods” should be turned off.
Also this week, ESPN and ABC decided to postpone coverage of an invitational for players of Apex Legends, a battle royale-style video game, at the X-Games in Minneapolis out of respect for the victims of recent shootings.
He joined a long list of politicians who have blamed video games for mass shootings. But there has been extensive research into whether a causal link between video games and violent behavior exists, and it has yielded a broad agreement (though not a total consensus) that there is no strong evidence of a link.
On Friday, at least four Democratic presidential candidates, including Senators Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders, called on Walmart to stop selling guns.
Federal investigators are treating the shooting in El Paso, in which 22 people were killed by a gunman who the authorities say was a white man driven by xenophobia, as an act of domestic terrorism.
The day after the massacre, another shooting in Dayton, Ohio, killed nine people.
At a Walmart in Southaven, Miss., last month, a disgruntled former employee killed two supervisors in an attack that ended in a shootout with the police in the parking lot.
And on Thursday, a man with a loaded rifle and 100 rounds of ammunition walked into a Walmart in Missouri, alarming shoppers before he was detained by an armed off-duty firefighter and arrested by the police.
“We will work to understand the many important issues that arise from El Paso and Southaven, as well as those that have been raised in the broader national discussion around gun violence,” Doug McMillon, Walmart’s chief executive, said in a statement on Facebook on Tuesday.
“We will be thoughtful and deliberate in our responses, and we will act in a way that reflects the best values and ideals of our company,” he added.
Walmart is the largest retailer in the United States, as well as the largest private employer. The company does not provide breakout data on the profits or revenues that come directly from weapons or video games, Mr. Hargrove said.
Walmart does not sell military-style weapons similar to the AK-47-style rifle used by the gunman in El Paso, or the AR-15s used in other mass shootings. It offers hunting rifles and shotguns at about half of its 4,000 supercenters, and handguns only in Alaska.
Two weeks after the deadly school shooting in Parkland, Fla., in 2018, the company announced that it would not sell guns to anyone under 21.