The Los Angeles Opera, which Mr. Domingo helped found, will launch an inquiry into allegations reported by The Associated Press.
The opera star Plácido Domingo was placed under investigation on Tuesday by the Los Angeles Opera, which he helped found and has led since 2003, after The Associated Press reported that multiple women had accused him of sexual harassment over the years.
Mr. Domingo occupies a unique position in the opera world. After shooting to fame as a star tenor — then reaching a far broader global audience as one of the Three Tenors, alongside Luciano Pavarotti and José Carreras — he also became a conductor; founded the prestigious young artist competition Operalia; and began adding managerial positions, becoming the general director of Washington National Opera and then the Los Angeles Opera, a position he still holds. He also continues to have a prolific singing career in baritone roles.
These activities have made him one of the most influential figures in opera.
The Los Angeles Opera said in a statement that it would engage an outside counsel to investigate what it called “the concerning allegations” against Mr. Domingo.
The A.P. spoke with eight singers and one dancer — all but one of whom were quoted anonymously — who said that Mr. Domingo had used his power to pursue them sexually. They described him as calling them repeatedly and making dates, often under the guise of offering professional advice. One accuser told the news agency that Mr. Domingo had stuck his hand down her skirt, and three others said that he had forced wet kisses on their lips, in a dressing room, a hotel room and at a lunch meeting.
She told the news agency she eventually told him to stop calling her, adding that she was never hired again in Los Angeles after Mr. Domingo got power over casting.
Ms. Wulf said she laughed, thinking it was a joke, but later the situation repeated itself. “I remember thinking, ‘That is not acceptable,’” she said.
Mr. Domingo did not inappropriately touch her, Ms. Wulf said, but he made her so uncomfortable that she hid in her dressing room and asked a colleague to walk her to her car so she did not have to risk encountering him. She said she did not report Mr. Domingo’s behavior because she felt that doing so would damage her career.
She said she kept saying no to Mr. Domingo until he stopped, about two and a half years later.
At the Salzburg Festival in Austria, where Mr. Domingo is scheduled to sing in concert performances of Verdi’s “Luisa Miller” this month, Helga Rabl-Stadler, the festival’s president, said that he would perform as planned.
The Met, which fired its former music director, James Levine, in 2018 amid allegations of sexual misconduct — and which just last week quietly settled a rancorous lawsuit he had filed against the company — said in a statement that it takes “accusations of sexual harassment and abuse of power with extreme seriousness.” The statement noted that Mr. Domingo, as a guest artist, had never been in a position to influence casting decisions there.
Washington National Opera merged with the Kennedy Center in 2011, the year Mr. Domingo departed. The company’s current general director, Timothy O’Leary, and Deborah F. Rutter, the president of the Kennedy Center, said in a joint statement that the allegations against Mr. Domingo had all predated the center’s takeover of the company.
“The Kennedy Center did not receive any documented complaints about Mr. Domingo’s behavior prior to W.N.O.’s affiliation with the Kennedy Center, and we have not received any since then,” the statement said.
The company said that ticket holders would be able to exchange their tickets to the canceled Domingo concert for other performances this season, or request refunds.