Some of President Trump’s re-election ads have repeated his inflammatory claims about an “invasion” on the southern border — language that is under scrutiny after the El Paso shooting.
WASHINGTON — President Trump’s re-election campaign has harnessed Facebook advertising to push the idea of an “invasion” at the southern border, amplifying the fear-inducing language about immigrants that he has also voiced at campaign rallies and on Twitter.
Since January, Mr. Trump’s re-election campaign has posted more than 2,000 ads on Facebook that include the word “invasion” — part of a barrage of advertising focused on immigration, a dominant theme of his re-election messaging. A review of Mr. Trump’s tweets also found repeated references to an “invasion,” while his 2016 campaign advertising heavily featured dark warnings about immigrants breaching America’s borders.
Divisive and often false claims about undocumented immigrants have been a cornerstone of Mr. Trump’s political strategy for years, from the “build the wall” chants at his 2016 campaign rallies to his warnings about a migrant caravan ahead of the 2018 midterm elections.
In his re-election campaign, Mr. Trump has spent an estimated $1.25 million on Facebook ads about immigration since late March, according to data from Bully Pulpit Interactive, a Democratic communications firm that is tracking the digital advertising of presidential candidates. Those ads represent a significant portion of the roughly $5.6 million that Mr. Trump has spent on Facebook advertising during that period.
There is no evidence that Mr. Trump’s Facebook ads directly influenced the author of the manifesto, who wrote that his views “predate Trump” and posted the document on 8chan, an online forum known as a haven for extremists. But Mr. Trump, through his speeches, tweets and campaign ads, has elevated the idea of an “invasion,” once a fringe view often espoused by white nationalists, into the public discourse.
Some other Republican candidates have echoed Mr. Trump’s language in their own ads. “Let’s call this what it is — an invasion of our country,” read a recent Facebook ad for Tommy Tuberville, a former Auburn football coach who is running for Senate in Alabama. Other Republicans who have used the word “invasion” in Facebook ads include a candidate for governor in West Virginia and a candidate for Senate in North Carolina.
For the writer of the manifesto, the concept of an “invasion” had an additional, racist meaning: He promoted a conspiracy theory called “the great replacement,” which claims that an effort is underway to replace white people with nonwhite people.
Stoking fear about immigrants has been central to the Trump campaign’s advertising strategy since it first began airing political commercials during the 2016 race.
The campaign’s first ad of that election focused on “radical Islamic terrorism” in the wake of the mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., and showed footage of people seemingly flooding across a border. (The footage was from Morocco, not the United States.) Mr. Trump also proposed a “total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States” after the attack.
The use of alarmist language and imagery about immigrants has a history in the modern Republican Party that dates back to the divisive political battles over illegal immigration in the 1990s. One of the most infamous depictions of migrants as a threat came from a 1994 ad from Gov. Pete Wilson of California that showed a group of people rushing through a border crossing. “They keep coming,” the announcer said.
Mr. Trump’s takeover of the party gave those kinds of messages a higher platform and a larger mouthpiece as conservative media outlets like Fox News amplified his words.
The president and fellow Republicans warned of waves of violence, drugs and crime that awaited the country if it were led by Democrats, who were portrayed as supporting policies that would weaken national security. That effort did not have the desired effect, as Republicans lost control of the House.
Customs and Border Protection recorded more than 144,000 arrests at the southwestern border in May, the highest monthly total in 13 years. Arrests declined by 28 percent in June and were expected to continue to fall through July, according to officials in the Department of Homeland Security.
Over the same period, no Democratic candidate spent more than $2.1 million on Facebook ads, according to Bully Pulpit; only Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. topped $2 million through Saturday.
Mr. Trump’s spending on immigration ads exceeded the entirety of what one of the best-funded Democrats — Senator Kamala Harris of California — spent on Facebook during that period.
Nick Corasaniti contributed reporting from New Jersey, and Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Jeremy W. Peters from Washington.