This is what happens when our nation’s leader normalizes hate.
Ms. Murguía is president of UnidosUS.
SAN DIEGO — Like most Americans, I watched, devastated, as the news began to unfold Saturday morning. Another deadly mass shooting. This time in El Paso, and soon after Dayton, Ohio. In El Paso, 22 lives were taken; dozens more families and communities have been left to suffer in its wake.
The violence in El Paso is not about immigration policy. It is about promoting the hate, fear and division sown by President Trump. In the past three years, Mr. Trump has systematically sought to paint a hateful portrait of Hispanics. “When Mexico sends its people, they’re not sending their best,” Mr. Trump said when he announced his presidential candidacy in 2015. “They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists.” In 2016, he accused an Indiana-born judge presiding over cases against Trump University of being biased because of his Mexican heritage.
As president, he has only amped up his rhetoric: He has referred to Latinos as “animals,” and likened immigration along the southern border to an invasion. Every hateful word he utters about us, every time he laughs when his supporters joke about physically harming us dehumanizes Latinos and reveals his true nature.
For the past several years, Mr. Trump hasn’t just talked the white nationalist talk, he’s walked the walk. He has tried to limit our right to vote, restrict our access to housing and health care, prevent us from being counted in the census, and he has turned his back on our fellow Americans in Puerto Rico. Rather than focus on the many issues critical to the American public, he has refined his attacks on Latinos and immigrants and wielded his executive power to fulfill his deeply bigoted views.
Trump’s three-part strategy has been made pretty clear: Dehumanize Latinos with hateful rhetoric; strip away federal protections that safeguard our rights; and promote policies that marginalize our families and stoke division, fear and violence. We should have spent the last two and a half years working to advance our country. Instead, we had to focus on protecting the progress we have made — while also responding to the administration’s cruel actions that traumatize children, inflict pain and break down communities.
Mr. Trump has not done this alone. He has a powerful group of enablers among Republican leaders in Washington, some of whom on the campaign trail called his vile language “bigoted,” “offensive” and “un-American” but who today can’t seem to find their voices or their backbones. Their silence in the face of increased hate and violence amounts to complicity.
For years we have dreaded this day. What we saw Saturday in El Paso is directly connected to the continuing, hate-driven rhetoric and policies coming out of the White House. Violence is a terrifying but not unexpected outcome when our nation’s leader tries to normalize hate.
It is no wonder that gun violence was a top-five issue for the first time ever in the poll of Latino voters we released today. Latinos are fearful for their families and their country, and they have every reason to be.
But our poll also showed overwhelming support from Latino voters for a candidate who pledges to restore our American values, specifically a candidate who remembers that diversity is our nation’s strength, and who will work to unite all Americans. Latino voters are also pragmatic, solution-focused and would rather have elected officials work in a bipartisan manner than have them dig in on partisan policies. This gives me hope: I truly believe that the vast majority of our fellow Americans want this as well and reject the fear, hate, division and violence that has marred our great nation.
UnidosUS, the organization of which I am president, believes it is long past time for a thoughtful dialogue that involves all communities who have been pitted against each other. Such a dialogue would seek to not only challenge hateful rhetoric but also to elevate the values of our pluralistic society and advance equal opportunity for all. And I can assure you that if other communities are willing to join us, Latinos are prepared to lead the way.
Janet Murguía is president of UnidosUS, formerly the National Council of La Raza, a Latino civil rights and advocacy organization.