Opinion|Has Trump Kept His Promises?
Has Trump Kept His Promises?
He deserves at least some credit for convincing people that he’s doing what he said he’d do.
Mr. Bernstein, a political scientist, is a columnist at Bloomberg Opinion.
I’m very tempted to begin with a joke about the missing platform plank about buying Greenland. It is fair to say, however, that Mr. Trump is good at convincing people that he’s doing what he said he would do. But it’s not true at all that “few” politicians keep or even try to keep their promises. In fact, it turns out that most politicians, and most presidents, actually try hard to do in office what they said they would do on the campaign trail.
The best recent example of this before Mr. Trump is the Affordable Care Act. Barack Obama campaigned on it as a top priority and wound up supporting a law that looked an awful lot like what he (and other leading Democratic contenders in 2008) sketched out during the race. There are, of course, some well-known counterexamples — George H.W. Bush famously broke his “no new taxes” pledge — but over all, there’s plenty of evidence that politicians try to keep their promises.
Mr. Trump is very good at framing his actions with respect to his promises, but whether he is actually better or worse than most presidents at doing what he said he would do is a complicated question. It’s especially hard to assess Mr. Trump on this because his pre-election comments were all over the place on topic after topic. Should we judge him on his promise to end Middle Eastern wars — or his comments that the United States should “take out” the families of terrorists and “take” Iraqi oil? On getting rid of Obamacare (well, he tried) or on having a “beautiful” health care plan (he hasn’t actually had one, although he did at times support congressional Republican plans that didn’t do the things he said his nonexistent plan would do)?
And what of the (often implicit) nonpolicy promises that politicians make? Mr. Obama, for example, promised to reach out to Republicans — but also promised to be a mainstream liberal Democrat who considered many liberal programs simply common sense. That constrained him in office when he basically stuck with that pledge; it didn’t really buy him anything from Republicans, and it frustrated Democrats who thought bipartisan negotiations were futile and longed for partisan action.
He is, however, unusually good at pointing out explicitly when he is acting in accord with his campaign rhetoric. That’s a real skill, and he deserves at least a bit of credit for it.
1. Andrea Binder at The Monkey Cage on Hong Kong and rich folks in China.
2. Karl W. Smith at Bloomberg Opinion on running federal budget deficits.
3. Amelia Thomson-DeVeaux at FiveThirtyEight on predicting recessions.
4. Brian Rosenwald on talk radio and the Republican Party.
5. And Fred Kaplan on Trump and Greenland.
Jonathan Bernstein (@jbview), a political scientist, is a columnist at Bloomberg Opinion, where he also writes a regular newsletter.
This article is part of David Leonhardt’s newsletter. David is on a break until Labor Day. While he’s away, two outside writers are taking his place. This week’s author is Jonathan Bernstein (@jbview), a columnist at Bloomberg Opinion. You can subscribe to Jonathan’s regular newsletter, and you can sign up here to receive David’s newsletter each weekday.
