Monica Puig accused her coach of dropping her abruptly on the eve of the U.S. Open. Then he arrived in New York working with Sloane Stephens.
Monica Puig’s United States Open lasted only one day, ending in a 6-3, 6-3 defeat against Rebecca Peterson of Sweden on Monday. But the seeds for the loss were planted a week ago, she said, when her coach, Kamau Murray, abruptly told her that he would be unavailable to continue working with her.
What Murray didn’t tell her, according to Puig, was that he would be in New York with another player, Sloane Stephens.
Coaching changes are common in women’s tennis, but the rift between Puig and Murray stands out because of its timing. Most changes are at the behest of the player, who acts as the general manager of her team, and generally occur during lulls in the circuit rather than as a player is preparing for a Grand Slam event.
With Murray back in her corner on Tuesday night, Stephens also lost her first-round match, to the qualifier Anna Kalinskaya, 6-3, 6-4. Though the loss added to a disappointing season for her, Stephens said she took away positives from the early exit, particularly in her refreshed attitude and her comfort with Murray back by her side.
While the timing of the split was unfortunate for Puig, a Murray-Stephens reunion was not a surprise. Murray had worked with Stephens from 2016 to 2018, guiding her to the 2017 U.S. Open title, though the two were “on a break” this year, according to Murray.
After Murray began to work with Puig this year, Stephens hired Sven Groeneveld. But after continuing a disappointing year with a lopsided loss in Cincinnati, Stephens dumped Groeneveld and reunited with Murray. The problem, Puig said, is that Murray did not make that clear to her. After her loss on Tuesday, Stephens expressed frustration with Puig’s comments.
Stephens, who was recently elected to the WTA player council, said she was open to a direct discussion with Puig.
With only days to prepare for the Open, Puig hired Dusan Vemic to help her get ready.
Puig said she had relocated to Chicago to be near Murray’s training center there, but that now she planned to move to Miami. Once ranked as high as No. 27, Puig reached the peak of her career in 2016, when she won the gold medal at the Rio Olympics. She said she was open-minded about how to rediscover that form.
