
Richard A. Friedman makes an important point. He claims that studies of mass murderers illustrate that they are not necessarily mentally ill but tend to be merely well armed and filled with hate.
Many years ago I read “The Psychology of Dictatorship,” by Gustave Gilbert, who was the American military’s chief psychologist at the trial of the top Nazis after World War II and administered Rorschach tests before the trial. I was certain that those of the most bestial, unrepentant Nazis would reflect depraved fantasies. To my surprise most of the Rorschach responses were bland, repetitive and without sadistic content. What these sadists did every day caused them no great conflicts.
It seems that you can be the cruelest sadist without being crazy.
The writer is a clinical psychologist and the author of three books about the Holocaust.
Nonsense! Outside of diagnoses in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, many things might make someone “abnormal.” Mass murderers are not like you and me; they are outside of the norm. They may not have a D.S.M. label, but they are tortured souls who have been brought up with hate and rigid thinking.
Their developmental history is not normal. Their worldview is not normal. A label such as “mental illness” may not apply in the usual sense, but tortured and deviant mental development does.
The writer is a psychiatrist.
Richard A. Friedman’s evidence-based refutation of the eagerly embraced narrative of mental illness as the cause of most mass murders should be required reading for our political leaders.
Though my professional work is devoted largely to trauma healing for survivors of such mass murders — and of wars, state-sponsored torture and climate-related disasters — I have known and treated a number of violent extremists, including mass murderers.
What characterizes most, as Dr. Friedman understands, is not mental illness but immersion in ideologies — and often communities — that promote a rigid separation between their own enlightened, entitled state and others toward whom their rage will be directed. This fearful, rigid objectification allows violent extremists of many political and religious persuasions to cavalierly murder those whom they do not consider to be fully human.
We need to counter this way of thinking and acting by offering convincing and emotionally stirring narratives and examples of inclusion, by promoting mutual understanding and building community.
Pointing the finger at “mentally ill monsters,” as President Trump has done, shirks our responsibility to address our differences and perpetuates, under the false flag of psychiatric diagnosis, the fearful, separatist worldview that feeds the violence.
Richard A. Friedman is absolutely right in maintaining that “mass murderers” cannot and will not be contained by any amount of mental health services. The problem here is not about mental health. To contend that is a distraction from the underlying problem.
The problem is that there will always be people as “sane” as you and me who are full of rage and hate and have easy access to a weapon of mass destruction to express their frustration. We must make such weapons less accessible.
Are we to assume that people in other civilized countries that are not faced with mass murders do not struggle with issues of rage and anger? Of course not. They just do not have the easy access to weapons that we afford our own calculating killers.
We need to stop asking questions about motives and make guns less accessible. The motive really doesn’t matter. As long as guns are easily accessible, there will always be someone who feels entitled to kill innocents as an expression of discontent with the status quo.
The writer is a United Church of Christ minister and a pastoral counselor.
Few of the recent mass murderers would have been flagged as potentially violent. They are not crazy, but they have guns. If they did not have access to rapid-fire assault weapons, many of their victims would be alive today. No one, mentally ill or not, should own these kind of weapons.
Your article about mass shooters’ hatred of women fills an important gap in our understanding of the motivation of these lethal men. But this hatred does not stand alone or apart from white nationalism. Misogyny — along with homophobia — features prominently in that ideology, as it did in its Nazi and fascist precedents.
Thus it should not be viewed as idiosyncratic, found only in the specific cases cited in your article, but inherent in the broader set of ideas that drives multitudes of right-wing extremists.
The author is professor emerita of history and women’s and gender studies at the University of Maryland, College Park.
The Times suggests that the El Paso shooter was inspired by conservative media use of “invasion” to describe illegal entry on the southern border but provides no evidence. It also suggests that those who refer to an invasion are motivated by a desire to preserve a white culture.
“Invasion” is properly used to describe illegal border crossings. We refer to a home invasion, and nobody objects. We refer to invasion of privacy, and nobody objects. The dictionary defines “invasion” as “an unwelcome incursion into another’s domain,” which certainly describes the caravans breaching the border.
As for motivation, most people who oppose illegal immigration are not concerned with racial purity or dominance. They oppose illegal immigration because it is — surprise — illegal, is unfair to those seeking legal entry, and is bringing immigrants who may or may not possess the skills needed in the American economy. Most opponents of illegal immigration would object if a million Canadians crossed the border illegally every year.
The Times should shave with Occam’s razor, which informs us that the simplest explanation is generally the right one.
Apologists for the vile behavior of President Trump simply refuse to acknowledge that his irresponsible and inflammatory rhetoric — and that of a number of right-wing commentators and Republican politicians — has inspired attacks by white supremacists on immigrants, blacks, Jews, Muslims and others.
It is true that the president didn’t invent bigotry, and that hate crimes have plagued our society for a very long time. But no reasonable person can fail to notice that he and his coterie of race baiters have raised the temperature considerably. Then again, most of his supporters are die-hard climate-change deniers.
