The cause was pneumonia following treatment for lung cancer, her son, David Russell, said.
Dr. Russell with her husband, William, in the lab. Together they established the “mouse house” at Oak Ridge, Tenn., an extensive colony of mutant mice bred to show the effects of radiation exposure.
In studying embryos, Lee Russell, as she was known, identified the stages at which specific body parts develop. She also found a pattern of when deformities would occur.
Other scientists had discovered decades earlier that chromosomes determined sex, but they had done so in lower-level organisms, like mealworms. Dr. Russell was the first to find that the Y chromosome determines maleness in mammals, setting off a scramble among scientists to see if this was the case in humans too, which it was. The discovery opened up new avenues of research in genetics and genetic abnormalities.
So significant were Dr. Russell’s findings that in 1994 she received the prestigious Enrico Fermi Award from the Department of Energy, the department’s highest research honor.
Liane Brauch was born on Aug. 27, 1923, in Vienna, the oldest of three children. Her father, Arthur, was a chemical engineer and her mother, Clara (Starer) Brauch, was a singing teacher.
Lee was 14 when Germany invaded. The family, which was Jewish, was able to escape by surrendering their home and Mr. Brauch’s business and leaving behind all their belongings.
They fled to London, survived the Blitz and in 1941 moved to New York, where Lee studied chemistry at Hunter College, graduating in 1945.
She had planned to go to medical school, but after a summer job at the Jackson Laboratory, an independent biomedical research institution in Bar Harbor, Me., she changed her mind.
Her husband died in 2003. In addition to her son, Dr. Russell’s survivors include her daughter, Evelyn Russell; two stepsons, Jack and Jim Russell; a stepdaughter, Ellen Gilmore; and four stepgrandchildren.
In addition to their scientific work, Dr. Russell and her husband were deeply involved in environmental causes in Tennessee. In 1966 they helped start Tennessee Citizens for Wilderness Planning, a conservation organization.
