A warm offer on a cool train, heading out after Hurricane Sandy and more reader tales of New York City in this week’s Metropolitan Diary.
The Q clattering through Brooklyn had lulled my 7-year-old to sleep. Her red curls were spread across my lap, and her legs were piled onto the adjoining seat.
It was hot and humid, and she was wearing her pale pink shorts with silver butterflies. The train was air-conditioned, and her bare legs caught the eye of an older woman sitting near us.
A moment passed. The woman looked over again and gently took my daughter’s feet and brought them to the seat next to hers, allowing the scrunched little legs a nice stretch.
Satisfied, the woman covered her eyes with her hand and joined my daughter in dreamland.
It was four days after Hurricane Sandy. I had moved to New York just three months earlier. I was living in a shabby one-bedroom in Kingsbridge in the Bronx, and I had serious cabin fever. As soon as the trains started to run again, I decided to go into Manhattan.
The train was more crowded than I had ever seen it. I bailed at 72nd Street and decided to walk down Broadway. I texted some friends in Park Slope and made plans to meet for lunch.
I kept walking on Broadway until I got to Chambers Street. It was the first time I had seen a significant portion of the downtown area, and the power was still out. I walked across the Brooklyn Bridge for the first time that day, too. I remember it being wickedly cold.
Later, when it was time to go home, I lined up for a shuttle bus outside Barclays Center. A young woman approached me and asked if I wanted a free ride to Manhattan. The mayor had imposed a minimum of three riders per vehicle, and she said that she and her friend needed a third.
I agreed, and followed her around the corner. Her friend, it turned out, was her father’s personal driver. I got a limo ride across the Manhattan Bridge and had them drop me off at the New York Public Library.
We made small talk along the way. I explained that I had moved to the city to study architecture history. The young woman pointed out random buildings and asked questions about them. I did my best to answer.
When they dropped me off, she asked for my card. It was the first time that had ever happened to me, too.
In 1968, my husband was transferred from his company’s Chicago office to headquarters in New York.
We settled in Bayside and began adjusting to our new life in Queens. Learning the shopping habits of the local residents was one of the challenges.
I was in line at the Waldbaum’s deli counter one day waiting my turn. An older woman next to me placed her order.
“A quarter pound of the Nova from the belly under the paper,” she said.
I knew I had a ways to go to live like the natives.
Visiting New York as a young girl, the city felt like home in a way that nowhere else had. It made me feel empowered and powerful. At 5, I asked my parents to walk 10 paces behind me through Midtown. That’s how I strode into the city as an adult: never expecting to leave.
But one of the many things this city gave me was love, and love is taking me to California.
It’s not easy preparing to leave a home that you built, slowly, for so long. And it’s not the home I expected. New York isn’t the Broadway lights, the Statue of Liberty or bagels or Katz’s or Central Park.
It’s the businessman who shouted a garbled ‘blerg!’ and grabbed me as I nearly stepped, texting, into an oncoming Toyota.

It’s the woman at 125th Street who, recognizing my distress about running late for work, yanked me onto a crowded No. 4 train, forcing other passengers to make room.
It’s the first kiss with the woman who would be my wife on Barrow Street, after stumbling out of Henrietta Hudson in the early morning.
Sure, New York is rats and bad landlords and subway delays. But what I’ll remember most about my home, when I’m away, is the kindness.
Stay kind for me, New York.
I saw him about halfway across the pedestrian pathway on the Williamsburg Bridge. He seemed to be loitering as I approached. It was late, and there was no one around except him and me.
I knew I was about to be mugged. Steeling myself, I gripped my keys between my fingers and prepared to fight back.
He was gesturing toward Manhattan. He was right. It was gorgeous. Clouds seemed to ring the skyline, and the buildings were aglow in the moonlight.
“It’s beautiful,” he said again.
I put my keys back in my pocket.
