Tali Warburg and Jeffrey Goldstein were married Aug. 17 at the Hotel Commonwealth in Boston. The groom’s father, Edward S. Goldstein, who received a one-day marriage designation from Massachusetts, officiated, incorporating Jewish traditions.
In September, Ms. Warburg, 27, is to begin work in Boston in corporate strategy for Optum, a health care services division of the UnitedHealth Group. She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from Yale.
The bride is a daughter of Tamar R. Warburg and Philip N. Warburg of Newton, Mass. Her father is an environmental lawyer and a senior fellow at the Boston University Institute for Sustainable Energy. Her mother is the director of sustainability at Sasaki Associates, an international architecture and planning firm based in Watertown, Mass.
Ms. Warburg is the granddaughter of James P. Warburg, an economic adviser to President Franklin D. Roosevelt and author of several books on international relations and economics. Her great-grandfather, Paul M. Warburg, was an expert in international finance and one of the leading proponents for the creation of the United States Federal Reserve System. He served as a member and vice governor on the inaugural Federal Reserve Board.
In September, Mr. Goldstein, 29, is to begin his third year of a dual degree program, where he will spend the fall semester studying for a master’s in public administration at Harvard, and the spring semester studying for an M.B.A. at Dartmouth. Previously, he worked in Washington for the Obama administration as deputy chief of staff and special assistant to the chair of the White House Council of Economic Advisers. He graduated from the University of Michigan.
The groom is a son of Joanne F. Goldstein and Edward S. Goldstein of Newton, Mass. The groom’s mother is the director of special projects for the New England Regional Council of Carpenters, a labor union based in Boston. His father, who is retired, worked in Boston as a business adviser to Martha Coakley, then the Massachusetts attorney general.
Though they grew up less than a mile apart, the couple met in 2015 through mutual friends in Washington.