COVINGTON, Ky. — On Friday night, all anyone at Covington Catholic High School was talking about was that their star Colonels basketball team had unexpectedly lost to the rival St. Xavier Bombers, 55-45.
For the “Colonel Crazies,” as locals call them, identity is wrapped in state championship titles, and their all-male brotherhood.
But by Saturday afternoon, the Northern Kentucky school off the Dixie Highway had been ripped out of its overwhelmingly white, heavily Catholic, and largely Republican world and thrust into a national firestorm that touched seemingly every raw nerve in this polarized country — race, President Trump and the behavior of young white men.
Videos surfaced of dozens of Covington students in front of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington after the March for Life, chanting as they do at games, wearing “Make America Great Again” hats and appearing to be in a standoff with an elderly Native American man.
Nathan Phillips, the Native American man, said he had stepped between the students and the Hebrew Israelites to defuse the tension.
By Sunday, after Covington Catholic High School and the Diocese of Covington apologized in a joint statement, the students were being threatened and their private information was being posted online. Some families said they were even receiving death threats.
The community south of the Ohio River began to see itself as facing a politically motivated siege. Families and churches swiftly circled to protect their young men.
Bill Gerdes first heard about what happened when the students pulled into the school’s parking lot after the drive back from Washington. His son, who participated in the March for Life, had filmed the incident.
Covington is famous for its community’s fierce devotion. To cheer on their classmates at sporting events, students at times paint their faces and bodies blue.
A video on the school’s YouTube channel also depicted some students with their faces and bodies painted black.
After the video emerged on social media and The New York Times contacted the diocese for comment, the school’s video was removed from YouTube. The diocese did not respond to request for comment.
At first on Saturday, the high school and the Diocese of Covington said they were investigating.
But as more details emerged, families and community members grew angry at how they were being treated.
In nearby downtown Covington, at Sunday evening Mass, the priest at the Cathedral Basilica of the Assumption said how difficult it was to see loved ones in the media, and he asked the community to pray that the “very difficult situation” would become clear.
After Mass, a parishioner complained that the bishop had “jumped the gun” in apologizing for the students’ behavior.
The school last faced negative scrutiny a month ago, when a 2018 graduate and basketball star, the son of a former Cincinnati Bengals player, was charged with sodomy and rape.
This also is not the first time the greater Cincinnati area’s male Catholic school community has had to grapple with allegations of racism. Last winter, young men from Elder High chanted “P.F. Chang” and “‘Hey No. 2, open your eyes” at a multiracial Asian player from St. Xavier, perhaps the most prestigious of the all-male Catholic high schools in the region. An African-American player on the team was also taunted.
In the greater Cincinnati area, which has Catholic roots going back nearly 200 years, loyalty to the local Catholic schools runs deep. People wear sweatshirts from the region’s many religious schools. In offices on Monday mornings, social talk oftens turns to the results of the weekend’s high school football games between the region’s many all-male Catholic schools.
And each year, students join other Catholic high schools in the area who routinely send busloads of students to the March for Life in Washington, often canceling class so that students can go.
Historically, ahead of the march, the Diocese of Covington publicly prints the name of every Catholic who opposes abortion rights in a multiple-page ad for The Cincinnati Enquirer, listed by parish or school, and includes the names of minors.
A parent at a neighboring Catholic school, Michael Schwartz, recalled his frustration when his son’s school printed his name, even though his son had decided not to attend.
While much of the local fervor has turned to absolving the students of any wrongdoing in the past few days, a few pockets of the Catholic school community hope the incident can be an opportunity for growth. Father Richard Millbourn, who teaches religious studies at St. X, as St. Xavier is commonly called, plans to discuss the episode with his students in the weeks ahead.
Parents like Mr. Gerdes, whose son filmed the controversy, maintain that the students were innocent victims who actually helped de-escalate the situation. Though school administrators initially said they would consider expelling the students, Mr. Gerdes now believes the tide has turned in their favor.
