After facing months of vocal resistance, Amazon executives delivered a counteroffensive during a hearing Wednesday before the City Council, the second to delve into a deal that would bring new corporate offices to Queens with 25,000 jobs in exchange for as much as $3 billion in state and city incentives.
At the start of the hearing, Amazon’s vice president for public policy, Brian Huseman, made a glancing reference in his prepared testimony to the fact that the company still has some say in whether it expands in New York City.
Opponents of the deal and their allies on the City Council also raised the possibility of the deal unraveling, asking officials whether the city could opt out of the agreement.
“The mayor and the city could go to Amazon right now and say, ‘If you work with I.C.E., the deal is off; if you continue to be anti-union, the deal is off,’” said Councilman Jimmy Van Bramer, who represents the neighborhood of Long Island City, where the campus would be located.
“We’re not looking to blow up the deal, but we are certainly looking to ensure that Amazon lives up to all of its obligations,” said James Patchett, the president of the city’s Economic Development Corporation. He acknowledged that most of the details of the deal — a nonbinding agreement between the city, state and Amazon — had yet to be worked out.
The company said it remained committed to the plan to come to New York City, and in recent weeks has been mounting an aggressive effort at public relations to win support on the ground in Queens.
Still, executives have expressed frustration in private at their treatment in New York, comparing it to the open-arms welcome they have gotten in Virginia, where the company announced plans to locate another large corporate campus.
The deal with the city and state is not set in stone and could be undone by either party. And Amazon has yet to close on the purchase of a parcel of privately owned land that it would need for its new campus, according to a person with direct knowledge of the transaction.
But Amazon seems more intent on weathering the storm of negative attention than packing its bags.
Lobbyists and public relations experts enlisted by the company tried to ensure that the hearing on Wednesday went more smoothly than one in December, when Mr. Huseman and Holly Sullivan, who led the national search for a new corporate campus, faced withering questioning and a roomful of opponents.
On Wednesday, a protest by opponents of the deal on the City Hall steps by local groups and the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union and the Teamsters was followed by a rally organized by Amazon in support of the company. The rally also included unions — Local 32BJ of the Service Employees International Union and the Building and Construction Trades Council.
Indeed, much of the three-hour hearing revolved around Amazon’s approach related to labor unions. Council members spoke of their own family connections to unions as they excoriated the executives for Amazon’s treatment of its workers, especially in the sprawling distribution centers for home deliveries; one such center is on Staten Island.
“Would you agree to neutrality if workers at Amazon wanted to unionize?” the speaker of the Council, Corey Johnson, asked early on.
“No, sir,” Mr. Huseman said.
The answer incensed several Council members who brought it up several times.
Mr. Huseman, a mostly soft-spoken Oklahoman, parried questions more effectively than during the first hearing but grew animated after repeated questions about unionization.
At several points, Council members used comments Mr. de Blasio made in his State of the City speech about money being in the “wrong hands,” and the scourge of “Reaganomics,” to attack the deal. Amazon’s chief executive, Jeff Bezos, is the world’s wealthiest person.
Members of the Council also criticized the modest scope of Amazon’s announcement that it would hire as many as 30 residents of public housing for a customer service call center. The New York City Housing Authority is home to more than 400,000 people.
“That idea came from conversations with the community advisory committee,” Ardine Williams, the company’s vice president of human resources, said, referring to gatherings organized by the state as part of the development process.
After the hearing, Mr. Huseman made a point of shaking hands with Mr. Van Bramer and several other Council members.
