Carol Channing, who died on Tuesday at 97, was a Broadway legend, an actress who toured well into her 70s and remained a cultural fixture long after that. 
Lee Roy Reams performed with Ms. Channing in several shows, including “Hello, Dolly!” Ms. Channing originated the role of Dolly Gallagher Levi on Broadway and reprised it several times. Mr. Reams said she was a performer who tried to never — never, ever — miss a show.
When she injured her arm on a tour of “Dolly” in the 1990s, Mr. Reams said, she performed in a sling, switched out periodically to coordinate with her costume. When that tour went through Reno, Nev., he said, both of them lost their voices, so they went on anyway and talked through their songs. And when the show was in Denver, she hurt the ball of her right foot. A doctor said she could not go on for at least two to three weeks.
That night, Ms. Channing went onstage in a pair of flats, which had been covered in spats to match her costume. No one seemed to mind: The reviews were raves.
The next day, Mr. Reams arrived at the theater to find Ms. Channing back in her original costume, high-heeled boots and all.
“She wore her heeled boots from that point on,” he said.
“To Carol, every night was opening night,” she said.
After several years of shooting for the documentary, when that process was finally complete, Ms. Berinstein said she wanted to take Carol and her husband, Harry Kullijian, out to dinner.
“I had these restaurants in mind that were really special,” Ms. Berinstein recalled.
She said Ms. Channing ordered a turkey sub.
Joshua Ellis, Ms. Channing’s publicist for many years, said that part of his job was to monitor what they called the Channing Art, which were file cabinets filled with hundreds of pictures of Ms. Channing with famous people, including actors, politicians, athletes — anybody. When a celebrated person died, his office was to send copies of Ms. Channing with that person to news outlets including The New York Times, The New York Post and The Daily News.
“She was larger than life onstage and offstage,” Mr. Ellis said. “It wasn’t like you came back stage and somehow she was diminished in size. Some actors are quite big onstage but kind of small offstage. She was big all the time.
“And I truly believe she would do absolutely anything to publicize whatever show she was in,” he said.
He recalled that she was once asked to make a presentation to 5,000 Brownies, the junior Girl Scouts, in Central Park. He remembered wondering what she would possibly have to say to thousands of little girls who probably had no idea who she was. It was 9 a.m. on a roasting hot Saturday when she took the stage.
Gerard Alessandrini, the creator of “Forbidden Broadway,” a long-running musical revue that spoofed Broadway shows and stars, said that Ms. Channing was a regular at their performances, during which she would delight as actors parodied her onstage.
In fact, Ms. Channing did impressions herself, and early in her career was known for her Marlene Dietrich, Mr. Alessandrini said.
“One night Marlene Dietrich came to see her do it, and Marlene Dietrich got up and walked out,” Mr. Alessandrini said.
Ms. Channing, he said, never responded that way.