Also this week, the latest on the government shutdown and Democrats’ plans to address climate change.
Happy 2019, everyone! While many of us are back to work, parts of the federal government are still closed.
The shutdown has not affected the Energy Department, since that agency’s funding has already been approved by Congress. But the Interior Department is struggling with mounting garbage and dirty bathrooms at national parks that are being kept open with minimal staffing. And the Environmental Protection Agency, which had been operating through Friday, has now furloughed thousands of workers.
Just before the furloughs, the E.P.A. issued a major regulatory announcement: a plan to weaken standards that were designed to keep mercury pollution from coal-fired power plants out of the atmosphere. The proposal could also hamper the government’s ability to enact future pollution regulations.
And what about the effects that the Trump administration’s policies are already having? I hope you made some time over the holidays to read this tremendous investigation by my colleagues Eric Lipton, Steve Eder and John Branch detailing the impacts on communities across the country as the administration eliminates dozens of Obama-era environmental rules.
The committee has its critics, including incoming Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, who has championed the idea of a “Green New Deal” that would, among other things, transition the country to 100 percent renewable energy and provide a universal jobs guarantee. In a tweet this week, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez commended the creation of the select committee but she said the panel would be weakened without subpoena power or a mandate to develop Green New Deal legislation. “There is still time to strengthen it,” she wrote.
Notably, one solution that doesn’t seem to be up for serious consideration from the panel is a carbon tax. That could be because, as Justin Gillis asserts in this thought-provoking opinion column, it’s too politically toxic at the moment. On the other hand, the idea is getting new traction in some quarters, including from Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona, who co-sponsored legislation at the end of 2018 with Senator Chris Coons, Democrat of Delaware, to tax emissions and return the proceeds to American households as a dividend.
Expect this issue to heat up in the next Congress.
A new year is a time to look back and to look forward. So, in that spirit of reflection, we reviewed our “One Thing You Can Do” series, looking for some New Year’s resolutions. These individual actions are not a substitute for broader systemic change, but they can still help you lower your personal contribution to global warming.
New Year’s resolutions often mean doing more, like working out more or saving more for retirement. But one common thread we found was that if you want to lower your climate footprint, you can find some success in simply consuming less. And it will save you money, too.
Take, for example, your cellphone. Most of us hold onto them for only two years, but as we noted in November, producing a common smartphone released the equivalent of 178 pounds of carbon dioxide, about as much running a modern refrigerator for a year. That is one of the biggest reasons that the global carbon footprint of smartphones is projected to increase by 730 percent this decade.
While some companies are making strides in reducing the environmental impact associated with producing our favorite mobile devices, hanging onto your phone for longer than two years is one way to make a difference.
The process of creating all of that fabric has a significant environmental impact, including on the climate. One thing you can do is to buy less clothing; spend the new year shopping in your closet instead.
Also spend more time searching through your cupboard this year. January is a great time to use up the contents of your fridge and cabinets before food spoils and you have to throw it out.
Globally, we throw out about a third of the food we buy, and if food waste were its own country it would be the third-largest greenhouse gas emitter behind China and the United States, according to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.
Reducing food waste is a great way to cut your greenhouse gas emissions, and it can help reduce your grocery bill at the same time.
But while you’re thinking about the best ways to cook up holiday leftovers, don’t do it in front of the refrigerator. Make sure to shut the fridge door when you’re not pulling things out — keeping the door shut is the most effective thing you can do to lower your fridge’s energy consumption.
Eduardo Garcia, Henry Fountain and Julia Rosen contributed reporting.
