The Upright Citizens Brigade, facing substantial financial pressures, announced on Wednesday that it would be closing its East Village location in Manhattan, a month after laying off several staff members. That will leave the comedy theater with three venues: Its struggling flagship in Hell’s Kitchen, which opened last year, and two locations in Los Angeles.
“The cost of operating two venues in Manhattan has become too high, and after extensive consultation, the UCB4 has decided an exit is necessary,” Michael Hartney, the artistic director for the New York theaters, said in an email to the U.C.B. community. U.C.B.4 refers to the theater’s founders: Amy Poehler, Ian Roberts, Matt Walsh and Matt Besser, who turned a barely available art form in New York City into an institution, and then some.
Pat Baer, the longtime technical director for U.C.B., said in a post on Twitter that he was losing his job.
As an alternative, U.C.B. will be partnering with SubCulture, a 130-seat Bleecker Street venue where U.C.B. will host shows on Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights — for three evenings of programming as opposed to the full seven at the East Village U.C.B., where the last show will be on Feb. 9. Shows at SubCulture, a venue that opened five years ago, will begin on Feb. 15.
U.C.B. East, or as it is affectionately known among performers — The Beast — opened in 2011, six years after U.C.B. had opened a location in Los Angeles.
By this time, longform improv had attracted a significant following in New York. U.C.B. East gained a reputation for giving up-and-coming comedians a space to experiment, but irked some performers by not paying them, even though classes at the theater are an expensive proposition.
When U.C.B. moved from its Chelsea location to Hell’s Kitchen in 2017, the theater, in addition to high rents, faced a crowded marketplace from other improv schools like the Magnet Theater and the People’s Improv Theater.
A spokeswoman for U.C.B. said that location was in no danger of closing and that the East Village theater decision was made strictly because of property-tax issues related to that venue.