Opinion|Is It Time to Move for Impeachment?
Is It Time to Move for Impeachment?
David Leonhardt enumerated the ways that President Trump is “unfit for office” and offered scenarios for what comes next. Readers offer their suggestions.
When Richard Nixon resigned, we as a country were still capable of being shocked by corruption, obstruction of justice and abuse of power. During the Vietnam War, I remember how outraged we were when we discovered that the government had been lying to us about what was really happening, about the number of deaths. 
Impeachment cannot — and indeed, should not — go forward unless there is broad public support for it. But the capacity to be shocked and outraged, or even to understand the danger of leaving Mr. Trump in office, is just not there, either in voters, or in Congress. That’s what really worries me.
David Leonhardt lays out a clear and compelling case for why President Trump is unfit for office. Unfortunately, fitness for office wasn’t what got him elected and isn’t what’s kept him in power. Corrupt politicians in other countries use any means necessary to remain in office because the alternative is jail or worse.
Mr. Trump ran for president not to serve the public, but to serve himself. The power of executive privilege, freedom from prosecution and the possibility of self-pardon no doubt motivate him to cling to power under increasing financial and legal peril.
So here’s a deal for a president who fashions himself as a deal maker: Republican and Democratic leaders offer a pardon to Mr. Trump and his family, allowing them to retain their freedom and wealth, in exchange for his resignation. As distasteful as a pardon may be, it pales in comparison to the harm Mr. Trump can do by remaining in office.
I believe that a majority of the electorate agrees with David Leonhardt’s observations. However, I fear letting President Trump off the hook, either by impeachment, after which Mike Pence could likely pardon him, or by negotiating his resignation in return for some sort of leniency for his crimes. The notion of his walking free following his despicable presidency is revolting.
So far, he’s made a lavish living by dodging the law and common decency, and should not be rewarded for his deviance. Better to vote him (and Mr. Pence) out of office in 2020 so that legal punishment is still available. That may mean we need to endure him for longer, but letting the Trump presidency off the hook by either of the above expedients would be profoundly unsatisfying and damaging to the country and the rule of law.
The problem with David Leonhardt’s analysis is that it suggests that the Republican leadership will return to a fact-based universe, instead of the fact-free one that now prevails. The one where climate science is ignored, where the economic inequities caused by trickle-down are treated as fiction, where every day President Trump takes us all on an excursion into a fantasy land concerning immigration. It is here that the Republican Party has willingly chosen to reside.
Those who have shut their eyes, turned their backs and held their noses for the past two years will not go easily into battle with Mr. Trump. No matter the damage he has done to party or country, they have shown no discernible backbone. While Mr. Leonhardt’s heart is in the right place, I fear that his head may unfortunately be in the clouds.
Fort Lee, N.J.
David Leonhardt has written the most articulate, well-documented and soundly crafted argument for the removal of Donald Trump from the presidency. This article should be printed and mass distributed all over America, much as Thomas Paine’s “Common Sense” once was. I wasted no time sending it to my members of Congress.
Should David Leonhardt’s powerful, comprehensive indictment of President Trump not be enough to persuade Republicans in Congress that he must be removed from office, I suggest they ask themselves these questions. Would they ever put their children on a plane piloted by someone with little previous flight experience, someone who had refused to read the plane’s instruction manuals, someone who had just locked his co-pilots out of the cockpit?
Would they be comfortable if he had said in recent weeks that he felt at “war every day,” had seemed to be more and more suspicious of those around him, including, perhaps, even members of his own family, and had a history of hair-trigger rage against those who defied him? And how would they feel if he had begun to make increasingly rash and dangerous decisions?
The terrifying truth is that all of our children, and all of us, Republicans and Democrats alike, are already on that plane. And as Mr. Leonhardt urgently warns, Republicans had better figure out soon what they are going to do about it.
The writer, a physician, is a former assistant clinical professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School.
Did Mr. Leonhardt miss the immense natural disaster that was Hurricane Maria? It took almost a year to restore power to all of Puerto Rico, and this certainly proved that President Trump was unfit to lead at a time of disaster.
David Leonhardt’s article captured the essence of what are perceived as wrongful acts. What I think was missing is the serious issue of President Trump’s stability, mental balance and irrational behavior. This, I believe, is what presents the most clear and present danger in his presidency.
A 2017 book by Dr. Bandy X. Lee and colleagues, “The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump,” outlines very clearly and persuasively the real threat of Mr. Trump’s power as our president.
David Leonhardt makes a persuasive case that ample grounds exist for the impeachment of President Trump. But he is far less persuasive in suggesting that the impending impeachment and resignation of President Richard M. Nixon in 1974 is a “relevant precedent,” providing grounds for hope that Mr. Trump will be removed or resign.
In 1974, unlike this year, the Democrats had 56 votes in the Senate, plus an independent who caucused with them. Accordingly, only 10 Republican votes were needed to remove Nixon from office. Among the senators likely to provide such votes were liberal Republicans (admittedly an extinct species) like Clifford Case, Jacob Javits and Lowell Weicker, as well as middle-of-the-road Republicans like Howard Baker, Robert Packwood and Bob Dole.
Especially following the departures of Senators Jeff Flake and Bob Corker, one searches in vain among the Republicans now in the Senate for even a handful, much less the 20 whose votes would be required, who show any signs of measuring up to their 1974 predecessors.
One point that David Leonhardt didn’t mention in his cogent case for impeaching President Trump is that many Republicans in both houses of Congress might well prefer Mike Pence — who is, after all, one of them — to Donald Trump, who is decidedly not.
Thanks to David Leonhardt for so neatly summing up the voluminous case against President Trump. My only quibble is that he actually understates the urgency for removal. When Mr. Trump says, as he did the other day, that the current government shutdown could last months if not years, I could not avoid the queasy feeling that his insistence on a demonstrably useless border wall is, in fact, a smokescreen — that the shutdown itself is his actual endgame.
It is well known that Mr. Trump thrives on chaos, and the shutdown raises that chaos to a new and alarming level. Our systems of law, transportation, tax collection, health care and security (Homeland and otherwise) all risk severe disruption the longer the shutdown lasts. While this could ultimately leave the country vastly weaker and more vulnerable, it would seem to play into Mr. Trump’s — not to mention Vladimir Putin’s — hands.
As we all wait to see when, or indeed if, spineless Republican lawmakers will finally respond to this clear and present danger, it will be interesting to see if long lines at the airport can succeed where principle, ethics and patriotism have so obviously failed.
