LONDON — It’s late night in a British home. In the darkness, the flashing colors of a video game light a teenager’s face, his gaze fixed on the screen.
Tapping into the anxieties of people growing up in a digital world — and their parents — the campaign says that what society often sees as a weakness or character flaw can be considered a strength in the army.
“We understand the drive they have to succeed and recognize their need for a bigger sense of purpose in a job where they can do something meaningful,” Maj. Gen. Paul Nanson, who is in charge of recruitment and initial training, said in a statement.
The recruitment drive is part of a 10-year effort by the British Army to maintain its operations around the world and develop its capability for the future. But as European nations face an increasing threat from Russia, Britain and its NATO allies have grappled with falling numbers of military personnel and tight budgets.
In 2012, the British Army entered into a 10-year recruitment and marketing contract worth 495 million pounds, or about $623 million, with Capita, a London-based outsourcing company. But the number of new recruits has fallen short of the targets by 21 percent to 45 percent every year since 2013, a report from Parliament’s National Audit Office said last month.
Capita, which has been heavily criticized for its performance in government contracts, received a £26 million penalty in 2017 for the poor recruiting results. But the army also expanded the contract to £677 million and agreed to lower the recruitment targets.
With the slogan “Your Army Needs You,” the new ad campaign reaches back over a century to the well-known World War I recruiting phrase “Your Country Needs You,” printed on posters showing Field Marshal Lord Kitchener, wearing a mustache and a stern expression and pointing a finger at the viewer.
That image inspired the Uncle Sam “I Want You” posters in the United States in 1917, and was part of a long series of recruitment posters during and after the world wars.
The British Army’s image as both a force and an employer has faded over the decades — the Iraq war was unpopular, troop strength is down, and other job opportunities have swelled, with unemployment at historic lows.
In addition, health checks, assessments and interviews can drag on for a year before recruits begin training, the National Audit Office report said.
To compete for young talent, the military has used an array of advertising pitches and emotional appeals.
But the campaigns have invited criticism that the army was trying to exploit young people at times of stress rather than offering them opportunities. Last summer, The Guardian reported, the army paid for ads on social media that were aimed at 16-year-olds as they were receiving the results of national exams to determine whether they could advance in school.