During a news conference on Friday, President Trump insisted that most furloughed federal employees supported his wall, that Mexico is paying for it and that it would stop a horde of terrorists from crossing the border. None of that was true.
Most federal workers, even those with rent owed and bills due, would gladly forgo their paycheck as a measure of support for his $5.6 billion border wall, President Trump said on Friday.
But there also was sunshine amid the gloom. Mr. Trump spoke of a stunningly positive jobs report and a stock market that soared, at least for a day. Lower gas prices? One person to thank.
The news conference was freewheeling, and the president seemed in high spirits, even with the government shuttered in many places. “Should we keep this going or not?” he said.
Here are some takeaways and fact-checks.
Now, he said, steel might be the preferred material, suggesting that would also help a resurgent steel industry in the United States, and could be preferable for its see-through and more aesthetic qualities.
"Dead" is an exaggeration. Steel production has been in decline, as has the number of employees in the industry. But the metals industry still employed over 360,000 workers and produced 80 million tons of raw steel in the year before Mr. Trump took office.
Mexico paying for the wall?
China paying tariffs?
After suggesting that terrorists were pouring into the country over wall-less portions of the border, Mr. Trump turned to Kirstjen Nielsen, the homeland security secretary, for specifics. She said there were 3,000 such terrorists “that we know about,” but said she could not divulge other information because it was classified.
Mr. Trump said that the government would have to use its powers of eminent domain to take private land to build the wall when owners would not agree to sell. He said that’s how interstates, schools and other public buildings have been constructed.
Many in his base disagree, especially in Texas where private property rights are often paramount.
