The threats began at the strike of noon, when Aleksey Krasovskiy, a Russian film director, started getting phone calls and messages about “Holiday,” a movie he was working on.
He said that one tidbit — that he was planning to make a comedy about the siege of Leningrad, a 900-day blockade of the city during World War II that led to the deaths of about one million civilians — was popping up repeatedly in calls and messages, as well as on blogs, in newspapers and on political television shows. Without having seen the movie, media outlets accused “Holiday” and Mr. Krasovskiy of mocking Russian history and dishonoring veterans.
Mr. Krasovskiy expected the harassment, which began in mid-October, to last only a couple of days, but it continued for more than a month. One Russian lawmaker said on Twitter that he hoped the film would never see the light of day and that he would do everything in his power to shut it down. A top official in United Russia, the party of President Vladimir V. Putin, said he would ask the culture minister not to grant the film a distribution license, according to Tass, a state news agency.
Rather than risk being censored, Mr. Krasovskiy decided not to apply for the license.
On Jan. 2, he posted “Holiday” on YouTube, with instructions on making a donation to “pay” for a viewing. Production cost nearly $60,000, Mr. Krasovskiy said, and the money came largely from his own pocket, with help from a crowdfunding campaign and the movie’s cinematographer, Sergey Astakhov.
“Holiday” has since garnered nearly one million views and earned about $52,000. It has subtitles in Russian and Italian, with French and English forthcoming.
And what is it? It is certainly not in the style of “The Death of Stalin,” another black comedy that was denounced by the Russian authorities and banned from theaters. Though “Holiday” is witty, it has almost no “ha-ha” moments, let alone belly laughs.
The film features six actors — a family of four and two not entirely welcome guests — and all of the action takes place in a Leningrad apartment. It is set on New Year’s Eve as the blockade is in full swing, but somehow, the family appears well off, something they strive to hide and then to justify in the presence of their guests. Margarita Voskresensky, the matriarch, complains to her husband, Georgiy, a biologist of some value to the government, about having to cook a chicken without the help of their housekeeper.
Liza, Margarita’s daughter, strolls in wearing a fur coat, for which Georgiy reprimands her, saying someone could rob or murder her for it. “I’m cold in my other fur coats,” Liza answers. In one telling scene, a starving girl brought home by Margarita and Georgiy’s son, Masha, is tasked with slicing the bread; she turns a sheet of newspaper into a small tray for the loaf, so not a single crumb will be lost as she slices it.
On YouTube, commenters said that corrupt officials in Russia must have recognized themselves in the film’s main characters.
“This movie is an allegory for today’s regime,” wrote a user calling himself Andrew Usac, “in which officials are going crazy from greed, measuring themselves with yachts, cars and villas.” Meanwhile, he added, Russians were “tightening their belts, economizing on even the basic necessities,” and “working without a break until death just to feed themselves.” The comment had been liked 2,400 times on Tuesday.
Mr. Krasovskiy said he believed that misinformation had been spread about his movie as a form of distraction. In September, about a month before Mr. Krasovskiy began receiving the threatening calls, Russians took to the streets to protest a planned increase to the retirement age. More than 1,100 people were detained, according OVD-Info, a rights organization. “This way people are not agitated by the actual problem but are mad at a crazy producer who shot a horrible movie and offended veterans,” Mr. Krasovskiy said.
