Five children on their way to Walt Disney World and two adults were killed in a fiery multivehicle crash in northern Florida on Thursday, the authorities said. At least nine others were injured.
The crash occurred on Interstate 75 near Gainesville, Fla., at about 3:40 p.m., when a tractor-trailer and a car collided in a northbound lane, according to the authorities. The vehicles careered through a guardrail into southbound traffic, striking a van carrying the children and another tractor-trailer.
“Once the semis struck, they both caught on fire, as well as the passenger car,” Lt. Patrick Riordan, of the Florida Highway Patrol, said on Friday morning at a news conference.
It is unclear what caused the vehicles to collide. The crash is under investigation.
About 50 gallons of diesel fuel spilled onto the highway, intensifying the flames and releasing plumes of black smoke. A fifth vehicle struck either some of the injured or some debris, he said.
The van had been carrying nine children and three women from the Avoyelles House of Mercy church in Marksville, La., according to a statement by Kevin Cox, superintendent of the Louisiana district of the United Pentecostal Church International.
Cierra Bordelan, 9; Brieana Descant, 10; Cara Descant, 13; Joel Cloud, 14; and Jeremiah Warren, 14, were killed.
“It’s a heartbreaking event,” Lieutenant Riordan said.
One of the five children who died was the granddaughter of the church’s pastor, Eric Descant, who was not in the van but is now in Gainesville, Mr. Cox said.
The drivers of the tractor-trailer that was heading north, Steve Holland, 59, and the tractor-trailer heading south, Douglas Bolkema, 49, were killed, according to the Florida Highway Patrol.
Heather Harper, executive assistant to Mr. Cox, confirmed that the children were bound for Walt Disney World, which is about a two-hour drive from Gainesville.
Lieutenant Riordan said that investigators had notified the National Transportation Safety Board about the fatal crash, per protocol. But Dolline Hatchett, a spokeswoman for the N.T.S.B., said Friday night that it could not investigate the crash as its investigators are furloughed because of the partial government shutdown.
She said the N.T.S.B. would have determined the probable cause of the crash and made recommendations on how to prevent such accidents from happening again. That work will take place if and when the shutdown and the furloughs end, Ms. Hatchett said.
Nine others, including four children, were injured in the crash, according to the Florida Highway Patrol. One adult was critically injured.
Medical staff members expected the remaining children to recover, according to Mr. Cox.
The fire, which shut down a major thoroughfare in North Florida for several hours, was extinguished by Thursday evening, Alachua County Fire Rescue said. Some lanes on Interstate 75 remained closed for repairs as of Friday morning.