A winter storm that slammed some parts of the Midwest and that officials say contributed to the deaths of at least nine people moved east on Sunday, causing travel disruptions and power failures.
Much of the snow was winding down in the Midwest, Dan Pydynowski, a meteorologist with AccuWeather, said. “There is still some light lingering snow around St. Louis and parts of central Illinois,” he said, adding that it was expected to stop by late Sunday evening.
But as the Midwest dug itself out, the storm continued east on Sunday. The system delivered snow to Baltimore; Washington, D.C.; Delaware; parts of New Jersey; and the mountains in Virginia. Mr. Pydynowski said the snow would continue across southern New Jersey until very early Monday morning before ending.
As of early Sunday afternoon, O’Hare International Airport in Chicago reported 35 delayed flights and four cancellations, according to the flight tracking website FlightAware.com. But the airport showed signs on Monday morning of returning to normal operations: Only one flight had been canceled so far, according to the site.
In Washington on Sunday, Ronald Reagan National Airport reported 53 delayed flights and 70 cancellations. The weather was still causing issues there on Monday, with 25 delays and 18 cancellations, according to FlightAware.com.
The storm also caused power failures, with more than 45,000 customers in Missouri and more than 24,000 in Kansas reported without power, according to the tracking site PowerOutage.us. In Virginia, more than 33,000 customers had lost power. As of early Sunday afternoon, more than 100,000 customers were without power in North Carolina, prompting the state’s governor, Roy Cooper, to declare a state of emergency. On Monday morning, the number had dropped to about 48,000 customers in North Carolina without power.
The storm created wintry conditions that led to the deaths of at least nine people, including a state trooper in Illinois, according to the authorities. Missouri got up to 17 inches of snow in the central part of the state, according to the National Weather Service.
Meteorologists expected the storm to die down by early Monday morning, but not before leaving two to four inches of snow in parts of Atlantic City.
