A manager for R. Kelly turned himself in to the authorities in Georgia on Friday on charges that he threatened a man who accuses the R&B singer of holding his daughter captive.
The manager, Henry James Mason, 52, of Mableton, Ga., was wanted on a warrant for terroristic threats and acts against Timothy Savage, whose daughter Joycelyn is believed to be living with Kelly. Savage told the police that after he tried to contact his daughter, Mason told him over the phone that he would do “harm” to Savage and his family and threatened to kill him.
Mason surrendered to the Henry County Sheriff’s Office, near Atlanta, and was released on $10,000 bond on Friday. In a statement released by his lawyer, Mason denied that he had “engaged in any acts of bullying, harassment, or aggressive acts.” He said he had, in fact, tried to help Timothy Savage and his wife, Jonjelyn, re-establish a relationship with their daughter.
The police report was filed last May, but a storm of controversy has surrounded Kelly in recent weeks, after “Surviving R. Kelly” aired on Lifetime. The documentary series chronicled decades of allegations against Kelly, including that he operates a so-called sex cult in which he physically and emotionally abuses women and keeps them from their families.
Timothy and Jonjelyn Savage, who both appeared in the documentary, say that Joycelyn is among those women. But Kelly’s representatives say that the women who live and travel with him are doing so voluntarily, and that he has not abused any of them. Last year, TMZ released a video in which Joycelyn said she was happy living with Kelly and was there of her own volition.
“They were perfectly consensual relationships,” Kelly’s lawyer, Steven Greenberg, said last week.
Timothy Savage said Mason’s call wasn’t the last time he was warned about speaking out against Kelly.
According to the Henry County police, another Kelly associate, Don Russell, sent Savage a text early in the morning on Jan. 3, the day the first episode of “Surviving R. Kelly” aired on Lifetime. Russell sent Savage the text message, at about 5 a.m., saying that “it would be best for him and the family if the documentary does not air,” according to a police report.
The police said on Friday that detectives were reviewing the call. Russell, who has not been charged with a crime, declined to comment about the call on Friday.
Kelly is not facing criminal charges, but prosecutors in Atlanta and Chicago, where Kelly has had homes, began looking into accusations against him after the documentary aired.
Kelly has been dogged for years by accusations but has never been convicted of a crime. He was acquitted in Chicago on child pornography charges in 2008, in a case that involved a tape that prosecutors said showed him having sex with a 13-year-old girl. But the girl in the video did not testify and Kelly’s lawyers argued that her identity could not be proven.
He has also settled lawsuits against him going back to the 1990s. Tracy Sampson, a woman who said she was an intern at Epic Records in 1999, told Dateline in an interview to be aired Friday night that Kelly sexually abused her beginning when she was 16. She said she sued Kelly and reached a $250,000 settlement.
Mr. Greenberg told Dateline that every woman who had come forward to accuse Kelly of misconduct was lying.
The documentary, which followed years of reporting on R. Kelly’s treatment of women, led to calls for RCA, Kelly’s record company, which is a division of Sony Music Entertainment, to drop him. On Friday, RCA did just that.