SAN JOSE, Calif. — Sidney Crosby had two goals and three assists, and Henrik Lundqvist of the Rangers pitched a first-half shutout to lead the Metropolitan Division to a 10-5 victory over the Central Division in the N.H.L. All-Star championship round on Saturday night.
Crosby, selected the most valuable player, finished the night with four goals and four assists in two games on the same ice where he won the Conn Smythe Trophy and Stanley Cup three years ago for Pittsburgh. He assisted on Michael Barzal’s goal against Devan Dubnyk just 22 seconds into the championship game and then made it 5-0 in the closing seconds of the first half off a pass from Barzal. Crosby helped seal the game with a goal in the second half that made it 6-2.
Lundqvist stopped 11 of 13 shots in his two games to give the Metropolitan Division its second title in four years of the three-on-three All-Star format and the $1 million prize shared by the winners of the four-team divisional tournament. He made big saves against Gabriel Landeskog and Claude Giroux in his 10 minutes one night after winning the save streak competition in the skills challenge.
Barzal, of the Islanders, finished the final with two goals and three assists, and Kyle Palmieri of the Devils had a goal.
The first time the All-Star Game came to San Jose, in 1997, the hometown favorite Owen Nolan capped the night by calling his shot and pointing to the spot where he completed a hat trick that delighted the Shark Tank.
Sharks fans did not have as much to cheer for in the return, even though their three All-Stars started the night on the ice together for the Pacific. The Central blitzed the Pacific early for its first win in four years in this format, scoring seven goals on nine shots against John Gibson in the first half of the period in a 10-4 victory.
Gibson, who plays for the rival Anaheim Ducks, drew derisive chants from the fans who later called for Marc-Andre Fleury of the Vegas Golden Knights to take over.
Landeskog had a hat trick and an assist, and Roman Josi had three assists and a goal for the Central.
Pekka Rinne and Dubnyk combined to stop 23 of 27 shots, with Dubnyk providing one of the biggest highlights with a glove save that robbed Connor McDavid on a breakaway.
The Metropolitan won the second semifinal, 7-4, against the Atlantic as Kris Letang scored the tiebreaking goal with 3 minutes 38 seconds to play.