MOSCOW — A man wearing a black V-neck sweater walked up to a moody painting of a mountain range on display at the renowned Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow.
He leaned forward as if to admire the artist’s brushwork. Then he reached up, lifted the painting off the wall, and sauntered out of the exhibition, swinging the painting from his right hand.
The work, titled “Ai Petri, Crimea” and painted by Arkhip Kuindzhi in 1908, had been insured for $182,000, according to a spokeswoman for the museum.
The painting, which was on loan from the Russian Museum in St. Petersburg, was not lost for long. On Monday, a day after it was taken, police recovered it undamaged in a construction site outside Moscow and arrested a 31-year-old man, according to the Russian news agency TASS.
Zelfira Tregulova, director general of the Tretyakov, said the incident was a result of art exhibitions attracting a rougher clientele. “We’re losing the culture of visiting, of interacting with art,” she told a news conference on Monday.
Ms. Tregulova said that while some Western museums had added armed guards to exhibitions, Russia still tended to depend on grandmotherly types to keep an eye on visitors. The museum will add motion detectors and might consider inspecting departing visitors, she said.
The episode is the latest in a string of bold art thefts across Europe. Last weekend, thieves stole a door from the Bataclan concert hall in Paris that featured a mural attributed to the British street artist Banksy and thought to be a tribute to the victims of the 2015 terrorist attack at the venue.
In November, three men walked into the Dorotheum auction house in Vienna, cut a landscape painting by Renoir from its frame, and walked out. A 59-year-old Ukrainian man with a history of art theft was arrested in December over the crime, but the artwork has yet to be recovered, according to Harald Sörös, a spokesman for the Vienna police.
“It’s amazing what you can achieve by acting confidently,” Mr. Ratcliffe said.