MELBOURNE, Australia — When Andy Murray announced that he planned to retire from tennis this year because of chronic hip pain, the news generated the expected plaudits and empathy from the rivals who had shared a locker room with him for years.
The most distinct voices in the chorus of praise, however, were female. In interviews and news conferences and on social media over the years, Murray established himself as a champion for equality and for women’s tennis. In doing so, he became an ally to the WTA tour, whose players have long felt unappreciated and undervalued by many in the men’s side of the sport.
Murray has said he would like to play until Wimbledon this summer, but after a first-round loss Monday to Spain’s Roberto Bautista Agut and now weighing another hip operation, he left open the possibility that he may have played the last match of his career.
In more than a decade as a top-10 player, Murray has used his prominent position to be an advocate for women in tennis in ways large and small. After being taught the game by his mother, Judy, Murray became the most high-profile men’s player to hire a female coach when he added Amélie Mauresmo to his team in 2014. He also has made a point of correcting reporters when they omit women from statistics, like at Wimbledon in 2017 when he interrupted a reporter who prefaced a question by saying that Sam Querrey was the first American player to reach the semifinals there since 2009.
“Male player,” Murray interrupted.
Serena Williams, one of the women the reporter had overlooked, praised Murray during a television appearance.
But more than his public pronouncements, Murray has won over female players by acknowledging and validating them in a way few other male players have. The Swiss player Timea Bacsinszky said that Murray was a rare men’s pro who would greet her and her team around tournaments and show his appreciation for her efforts.
Murray prepared last month for a tournament in Brisbane by hitting with Naomi Osaka, the reigning United States Open champion. Osaka said she rued the news that her new practice partner could be leaving the sport soon.
King, who helped the women’s tour get off the ground in the early 1970s, knows how valuable that kind of support has been, and how rare it still is at times.
And when Italy’s Stefano Travaglia stepped down from his seat on the 10-player council at the end of last season, the council appointed Ukraine’s Sergiy Stakhovsky, a well-known lightning rod, to fill it. Stakhovsky has been dismissive of women’s tennis and its players in recent years, ridiculing the concept of equal pay and making homophobic remarks about the women’s tour.
Stakhovsky’s comments have repeatedly drawn Murray’s rebuke, both publicly and privately. But they also have left women’s pros feeling little support from men’s players when debates around equal prize money have flared up, as they do periodically.
“Not a lot of warmth coming from that side or that perspective,” Maria Sharapova said.
Andrea Petkovic said allies were crucial to the women’s game as it seeks to maintain the level of equality it has achieved, and as it seeks to close remaining gaps. And that is why she said she would miss Murray as well.
“Like Andy Murray,” DeGeneres suggested.
