United States securities regulators have sent Nissan Motor a request for information, the Japanese automaker said Monday.
The action by the Securities and Exchange Commission adds to regulatory scrutiny of Nissan and its former chairman Carlos Ghosn, who is accused of financial misconduct.
“We have received an inquiry from the Securities and Exchange Commission and are cooperating fully,” a spokesman for Nissan said in an emailed statement without providing further details.
The company’s statement followed a report by Bloomberg News that the commission was investigating Nissan’s disclosures on executive pay.
Nissan’s response sent its shares tumbling sharply. They recovered before closing down 0.8 percent.
Mr. Ghosn, 64, has been accused by the Japanese authorities of underreporting his compensation to the tune of $80 million while chairman and improperly shifting personal losses onto Nissan’s books in 2008. He denies all the charges and has been in a Tokyo jail since his initial arrest in November.
The confirmation of an inquiry by United States regulators is yet another blow to Mr. Ghosn, who became one of the auto industry’s most celebrated executives starting in the 1990s as he turned around the French carmaker Renault, led its purchase of a large stake in Nissan and then broadened the alliance to include Mitsubishi Motors, turning it into the world’s largest carmaker. Since his arrest, he has been removed as chairman of all three companies.
While Nissan is listed in Japan, investors in the United States can buy its shares indirectly. The company has also raised money from American and European investors through the bond markets. An investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission could result in a fine, putting a dent in Nissan’s financial resources at a difficult time.
Any action by the commission could also prompt other regulators to take a closer look at Nissan as well as at Renault and Mitsubishi, its partners in a global alliance that Mr. Ghosn ran.
Representatives of Renault and Mitsubishi did not respond to requests for comment. A spokesman for the commission also did not respond.
The carmakers have moved quickly to distance themselves from the unfolding crisis.
This month, Mitsubishi joined Nissan in accusing Mr. Ghosn of financial wrongdoing, saying that he pocketed compensation of nearly $9 million through the two automakers’ joint venture.
Renault announced new leadership last week after the French government, its largest shareholder, called for Mr. Ghosn to be replaced.
Tokyo courts have twice denied Mr. Ghosn bail, which his lawyers are appealing. Motonari Otsuru, Mr. Ghosn’s lead lawyer, did not respond to a request for comment on Monday.