The Forward, the 121-year-old Jewish publication that started as a Yiddish-language daily newspaper for those who had fled persecution in Europe, announced on Thursday that it planned to stop publishing print editions this spring.
In addition to the move away from print, The Forward cut nearly 30 percent of its staff, including the editor in chief, Jane Eisner, and the executive editor, Dan Friedman.
Once known as The Jewish Daily Forward, the publication first put out supplements in English in the 1980s and started a weekly edition in English in 1990. Since 2017, The Forward has been a monthly magazine. It will continue to publish in both languages online after it stops appearing on newsstands.
The Forward reaches more than two million readers a month online, the publisher said. The English print edition has 16,000 subscribers; the Yiddish version has fewer than 1,000.
Ms. Eisner had been the editor since 2008. Before that she spent 25 years at The Philadelphia Inquirer, working as a reporter and editorial page editor. Under her leadership, The Forward broke several high-profile stories, including a 2017 investigation saying that Sebastian Gorka, a former national security spokesman for the Trump administration, was a member of Vitezi Rend, a Hungarian nationalist group with a history of Nazi collaboration. Ms. Eisner also interviewed President Barack Obama in the Oval Office in 2015.
The Forward was co-founded by the Belarus-born writer Abraham Cahan, who served as its editor for 43 years. For many decades, the Nobel Prize-winning author Isaac Bashevis Singer published his short stories and serialized his novels in its pages.
The publication “came to stand for the idea that the redemption of the Jews could be found in America and the ideas of social democracy. It fell in love with the way its utopian ideas could be pursued in America,” Seth Lipsky, a former editor in chief of The Forward, said in an email.
At its height in the 1920s, the publication had a circulation of more than 250,000, with editions printed around the country. “It was huge,” said Mr. Lipsky, who wrote “The Rise of Abraham Cahan” and founded The New York Sun, a New York City daily broadsheet that lasted from 2002 to 2008.
Mr. Lipsky said he was not worried about The Forward leaving print for something less palpable. “All of us in one way or another are approaching this rendezvous,” he said.
At a time when print advertising has decreased and newsstands sell more candy bars and lottery tickets than newspapers, The Forward is not alone in making the shift to a digital-only format. Condé Nast recently put an end to the regular print editions of Glamour, Teen Vogue and Self, and Hearst Magazines made the venerable Seventeen magazine into an online-only publication.