New York|They Won Senate Seats. Now Comes the Hard Part: Adjusting to Albany.
They Won Senate Seats. Now Comes the Hard Part: Adjusting to Albany.
A large class of first-time lawmakers must grapple with the ways and wiles of the Capitol before shaking things up.
ALBANY — If the 2019 legislative session seemed to begin with a breath of fresh air, it may be because of the newcomers: The New York State Senate this week welcomed 17 new members, all but two of them Democrats.
Several were swept in amid a blue wave that saw incumbents — Democrats and Republicans alike — unseated in the primaries or the general election, giving Democrats control of the Senate for the first time in a decade.
But before the new senators can get down to the people’s business, there are some logistical hurdles to overcome. They must learn how to navigate, both literally and metaphorically, the corridors of a State Capitol fabled for its traditions, secrets and, often, impenetrability.
Figuring out legislative house rules? Slow down. Let’s start with figuring out where to park.
The Times followed four of the new senators on Tuesday and Wednesday — the first day of the legislative session — to see how they were adjusting to a state lawmaker’s life.
The walls in Senator Zellnor Myrie’s office were bare, which made the furniture all the more prominent. There was a stately chair and a sprawling desk, behind which Mr. Myrie still had not ventured.
Mr. Myrie, a Democrat who represents parts of Brooklyn, was touring his office for the first time, after a morning meeting with various county election officials — he will chair the Senate’s elections committee — and an interview with a job candidate for his staff.
Before winning his general election in November, Mr. Myrie said, he had been to Albany five or six times. He found the Capitol’s layout overwhelming.
Mr. Myrie, 31, is one of a cohort of young new senators. Senator Julia Salazar of Brooklyn is 28; Senator James Skoufis of the Hudson Valley is 31. Walking the halls, Mr. Myrie said he was acutely aware of his youth.
Mr. Myrie had not really considered office décor, but at least one piece was settled: the nameplate outside his door.
His mother was traveling to Albany for his swearing-in on Wednesday.
Senator Rachel May had trouble finding parking.
Ms. May, a Democrat who represents the Syracuse area, was a few minutes late to her first tour of her office because she could not get into the parking garage for lawmakers near the Capitol.
“Somehow the magic words ‘incoming senator’ didn’t quite work,” she said with a laugh.
Ms. May, who coordinated sustainability education at Syracuse University before running for office, at times seemed almost surprised to realize the influence she could wield in state policy. She had hoped to take the train to Albany most weeks, she said, because it was a low-carbon alternative to driving, but only a few trains ran each day from Syracuse.
Then she perked up as she remembered that she could talk to her fellow legislators about improving infrastructure upstate.
Senator Anna Kaplan was still unwrapping presents as the sun went down. Ms. Kaplan, a Democrat, was elected to represent Nassau County, where she had sat on the town council in North Hempstead.
Ms. Kaplan’s rise to senator caps a personal saga, which includes fleeing her native Iran as a Jewish teenager during a repressive time. Considering that back story, and her surprising win in November, Ms. Kaplan was emotional on Tuesday.
Ms. Kaplan said that she said a prayer when she entered her office Tuesday and promptly filled shelves with photographs of her husband and two college-age daughters, one of whom is set to graduate from nearby Union College in Schenectady.
Like other newly empowered Democrats, Ms. Kaplan has an ambitious agenda that includes gun control and more funding for public schools. But on Tuesday, at least, Ms. Kaplan was giving herself a moment or two to reminisce.
The Capitol is full of historical treasures, from the imposing grandeur of its architecture to artifacts stashed, half in shadow, in the corners of the legislative galleries.
Ms. May and her husband, as well as her brother and sister-in-law, took advantage of the mostly empty Capitol to play tourist, admiring an old desk near the entrance to the Senate chambers — “doesn’t look very comfortable” — and strolling the steps of the so-called Million Dollar Staircase, the reddish-gold opulence of which can inspire even seasoned legislators to stop in awe.
“I thought we were downsizing,” Ms. May joked to her husband.
Mr. Myrie stood outside the Senate chamber, waiting for his turn to be sworn in by Chief Judge Janet DiFiore. His father stood facing him, and his mother was seated on a couch to his left.
Afterward, Mr. Myrie said he had succeeded in avoiding choking up — barely.
Bob Antonacci, a Republican, knew he was heading to Albany at a rough time for his party. After decades of almost uninterrupted rule of the Senate, the Republicans got clobbered in November, losing their majority, their committee chairmanships and the bigger suites of offices in the Capitol.
Not that Mr. Antonacci, who represents the Syracuse area, plans on spending too much time in the building.
On Wednesday, however, Mr. Antonacci, 54, was surrounded by his wife, Michele, and their two children, and seemed to be enjoying the bustle of opening day. He was amiably chatting with well-wishers and colleagues on both sides of the aisle.
As for his hopes for the G.O.P., Mr. Antonacci said, “We can rebuild. We can rebrand.” But he conceded that sitting in the minority is not optimal. And while he said he does not care about perks — “Give me the broom closet,” he said. “It is what it is.” — he still thought that coming to Albany was the right move.
“You have got to go where the policy is made,” he said.
After the session ended, dozens of people crowded the office of the new Senate majority leader, Andrea Stewart-Cousins, for a reception and a chance to schmooze with senators. Ms. Kaplan, who with her family was led by an aide from the Senate chamber to the reception, looked shocked at the line winding against a wall.
“You don’t have to wait in line,” the aide told her.
“Oh, I like that!” Ms. Kaplan said.