Opinion|In Memoriam: What Would Gary Gutting Do?
In Memoriam: What Would Gary Gutting Do?
The influential philosopher and educator, who died Friday, exemplified the spirit of engagement, uncompromising thought and civility we need today.
Mr. Catapano is the editor of The Stone.
When Americans lament the loss of civility in public discourse, the nobility of purpose in education and the ability to reach across contentious political and ideological divides — or just flat out wonder why we all can’t get along and learn from one another — they are talking about the loss of people like Gary Gutting.
Gary was actively involved with The Stone from its inception in 2010. His first essay, “Philosophy and Faith,” appeared on Aug. 1, 2010, and stirred a broad and energetic debate; his last, a response to readers of his December essay on affirmative action, was completed at home after a recent stay at the hospital, and published a few weeks ago, on Jan. 3. It was, fittingly, not a manifesto, but a conversation.
In his prolific output in the nearly nine years between those two pieces, Gary fearlessly and calmly entered some of the nation’s most contentious debates — over religious belief and atheism, racism, politics, the morality of patriotism, the purpose of education.
Gary’s devotion to The Stone and its mission of making philosophy useful and meaningful to the broader public was, like him, unwavering, reliable, consistent, marked by an unmistakable clarity of language and a respect for the reader of any background. In my view, he practically invented the prevailing form of the philosophical op-ed. Over time, the phrase “a Gary Gutting piece” became part of my own editorial vocabulary.
The most bitter cultural arguments in American intellectual life were comfortable places for Gary — perhaps he saw them as opportunities. And I believe that he entered them not so much to establish the dominance of his own view — as a believer in God, in humanistic education, or in the promise of the United States — but to help put the debates on sane ground, to level them through reason and friendly engagement, to be a peacemaker and to advance the invaluable work of civil public discourse and argument.
I was honored to play the role of Gary’s editor, nominally a position of some authority, but to be honest — and I must be if I am to pay proper respect on the profoundly sad occasion of his death — I was more his student. Over the years, as Gary’s involvement in The Stone waned and he returned to his students and writing books, I often found myself considering the merit of a certain idea or argument, or wondering about the philosophical soundness of a particular essay. I would quite literally ask, sometimes out loud, “What would Gary do?” I would then think hard about that and try to act accordingly. But when I got stuck, I would write or call him for guidance — a session, I might call it. The pleasure of those calls came not just from having my thinking clarified and gently set right by a person wiser than me, but also from hearing once again his reassuring, friendly, articulate Midwestern tenor, and what seemed to be his endlessly renewable excitement about people and ideas.
A very small selection of Gary’s work is below, in memory of a great thinker and friend, and in hopes that new readers will take something useful away from time spent with the letter and spirit of his life’s work.
Funeral services for Professor Gutting will be held at 3:30 p.m. on Friday, Feb. 1, at the Sacred Heart Basilica at the University of Notre Dame.
Who Needs a Gun?
Philosophy — What’s the Use?
Is Our Patriotism Moral?
Is Voting Out of Self-Interest Wrong?
Peter Catapano is an editor in Opinion.
