Where Are America’s Winters Warming the Most?
1. This graph compares the yearly average winter (December – February) temperature in the continental United States to the 20th century average U. S. winter temperature. The graph originally appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com.
On Wednesday, Jan. 23, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern Time to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. On the afternoon of Thursday, Jan. 24, we will reveal more information about the graphs at the bottom of this post. Students, we encourage you to post an additional comment after reading the reveal. How do the original New York Times article and the moderators’ comments help you see the graphs differently? Try to incorporate the statistical terms defined in the Stat Nuggets in your response.
Last year on May 8, 2018, “What’s Going On In this Graph?” featured a graph that showed summers in the United States are getting warmer. This week’s graph shows that winters are getting warmer, too. Do you find these graphs convincing evidence that we are experiencing climate change? Search online for other evidence that would help you understand what is happening in our environment.
This graph came from the New York Times article “Where are America’s Winters Warming the Most? In Cold Places.” The data used to construct this graph were collected by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), an agency of U.S. Department of Commerce. Its mission is to understand and predict changes in climate and to conserve marine ecosystems and resources. To see NOAA’s maps on climate, go to their global maps collection.
Here is a sample of the student headlines that grab your attention while capturing some of the main ideas of this graph: “You Thought This Winter Was Cold? Check This Graph” by Nathan of Virginia, “Is Earth on the Hot Seat?” by Kero K. and Jon I., “Dreaming of a Green Christmas” by Isaac, and “Doomsday Deviation” by Michael, Harper, Joseph, and Owen.
You may want to think critically about these additional questions.
■ Using the data provided in the graph, you can make a new graph to show the distribution of the 118 differences from the 20th century average. Draw an axis with a scale that ranges from -6 to +5 degrees Fahrenheit and then add a dot for each difference. It is fine to round the differences to the nearest whole number.
Now, describe the distribution — its center, variability and any unusual differences. What information is lost by displaying the data this way?
Which of the two graphs (the one you made or the one above) is a better way to display the data? Explain your answer.
■ A change of more than 3oF is considered extreme. How many years have varied more than 3oF from the century average. Have there been more extreme increases or more extreme decreases? When have these extreme changes occurred? Write a headline that captures the main ideas of your findings.
■ The country has not warmed uniformly. As seen in these heatmaps, regions are warming at different rates.
Which regions are warming faster — northern latitudes or southern latitudes? Coastal regions or interior regions? Which regions are warming slower?
■ Just like “What’s Going On In This Graph?”, New York Times articles allow readers to respond. Go to the 49 responses to “Where are America’s Winters Warming the Most? In Cold Places” and read what people say from around the country. Summarize what you have learned from these responses. What do you now think?
Below in the Stat Nuggets, we define and explain mathematical terms that apply to this graph. Look into the archives to see past Stat Nuggets.
Keep noticing and wondering about warmer winters. We continue to welcome your responses.
Next week’s graph about big companies, including those in high tech and social media, is released today — Thursday, Jan. 24. Join us on Wednesday, Jan. 30, for live moderation between 9 a.m. - 2 p.m. Eastern Time when you can share what you notice and wonder and your catchy headline.
The mean or average is a measure of the center of a quantitative data set. It is calculated by adding together all data values and dividing by the number of values. The mean need not be rounded and may not be a value in the data set.
In the Warmer Winters graph, the mean 20th century winter temperature (excluding Alaska and Hawaii) was 33.2 degrees Fahrenheit. It is the average of the 20th century average winter temperatures and was calculated by adding all average winter temperatures for the years 1900 – 1999 and dividing by 100.
A benchmark is a point of reference or standard against which values can be compared.
In the Warmer Winters graph, plus or minus 3 degrees from the 20th century average winter temperature are the benchmarks. Temperatures more than 3 degrees below the average are considered extremely cold and temperatures more than 3 degrees above the average are considered extremely warm.
The graphs for “What’s Going On in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms. Hessney wrote the “reveal” and Stat Nuggets with Roxy Peck, a professor emerita at California Polytechnic State University San Luis Obispo, and moderated online with Kathy Dickensheets, a math teacher from Pittsburgh, Pa.