WASHINGTON — Vice President Mike Pence on Tuesday declared the United States’ “unwavering support” for planned mass protests in Venezuela against President Nicolás Maduro, the most explicit backing yet by the Trump administration as opposition leaders try to unseat Mr. Maduro.
The declaration, the first in which Mr. Pence used a video to directly urge Venezuelans to take action, came after months of statements by senior Trump administration officials, including several strongly worded ones from the vice president, that said Mr. Maduro’s rule was illegitimate.
The call for mass street protests against Mr. Maduro originated with the head of the National Assembly, Juan Guaidó, an opposition leader. Mr. Guaidó was sworn in to office on Jan. 5 and soon invoked an article of Venezuela’s Constitution that transfers power to the leader of the National Assembly, the nation’s legislative body, in the event that the presidency becomes vacant. The assembly has declared Mr. Maduro’s re-election last year illegitimate and called for new elections.
Members of Congress from Florida met with Mr. Trump on Tuesday and discussed Latin America policy, including on Venezuela.
Mr. Trump and other top American officials, including Mr. Pence and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, have consistently used harsh terms to criticize Mr. Maduro, a leftist politician who has exercised authoritarian powers and guided his country into an economic collapse that has led millions of Venezuelans to leave for neighboring countries.
The New York Times reported in September that the Trump administration held secret meetings with rebellious Venezuelan military officials to discuss overthrowing Mr. Maduro, though American officials eventually decided not to help the plotters.
Mr. Maduro made a surprise visit to the General Assembly and railed against the United States in a 50-minute speech, calling Americans “imperialists.” He and Mr. Trump did not meet.
Beforehand, Mr. Trump had said that he was willing to meet with Mr. Maduro if the opportunity presented itself. “We’re going to take care of Venezuela,” he said.
Many citizens of Latin America recall a long history of the United States’ supporting coups in the region by right-wing military leaders who then quashed democratic processes and rule of law to maintain power for years and sometimes decades.
In November, Mark Green, the head of the United States Agency for International Development, said in an interview that his agency was trying to provide help for the millions of refugees who have fled the economic collapse in Venezuela.
The United States announced several times last year that it was giving millions of dollars in aid to the country’s neighbors, notably Colombia, to help the refugees. At least $96 million intended mainly for food and health aid has been dedicated to the effort. Some observers have argued that the United States should be providing more aid.