President Trump and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi made separate comments about the possibility of funding for a wall at the southwestern border. Their remarks came as bipartisan border security talks began on Capitol Hill.
WASHINGTON — President Trump proclaimed on Thursday that without funding for his wall at the southwestern border, the panel of lawmakers negotiating a broad compromise on border security would be “wasting their time,” issuing what appeared to be an ultimatum even as lawmakers pleaded for a chance to reach a deal that would head off another shutdown.
And in an interview with The New York Times on Thursday, the president indicated that he was prepared to move forward without lawmakers, saying that he had “set the stage for doing what I’m going to do.” He declined to directly say whether he planned to declare a national emergency to build a wall.
The comments came as 17 House and Senate lawmakers from both parties struggled to reach a bipartisan border deal before Feb. 15, when much of the government again runs out of money. Republican leaders, especially in the Senate, have made it clear that they do not want to suffer through another debilitating shutdown, and senators asked the president to give them room to work.
“I think it would be more worthwhile and effective if the president would allow some space for these negotiations to occur and not be doing commentary at this point,” said Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine.
But it was the president’s commentary throughout the day on Thursday, on Twitter and in the Oval Office, that prompted several lawmakers to plead for him to tone down his messaging.
Senator Richard C. Shelby of Alabama, the chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee and a member of the negotiating group, known as a conference committee, asserted that without outside reaction — not just from the president, but other “outside forces” — a solution could be reached within days.
“If the speaker, the president and everybody, the leaders of our parties in the Senate, would let us, the appropriators, do our job, we could do this,” Mr. Shelby said.
Democrats released formal details on Thursday of their opening bid in negotiations, outlining nearly $56 billion in spending for the Department of Homeland Security without any mention of walls or fencing. The proposal also blocks the construction of physical barriers on wildlife refuges on the border, the only mention of such barriers.
“They have to choose the best way to use the money,” she said of the committee, adding that a bipartisan consensus could hopefully be reached without outside interference.
But the president, who has vacillated between hard-edge demands for border wall funding and a softer tone on alternatives to a wall, returned to his hard-line posture that a wall had to be included in a final bill. He repeated his false claim that construction of new expanses of border wall had already begun.
The tone of Mr. Trump’s remarks, coupled with a string of morning tweets, prompted a mixture of bewilderment and concern among lawmakers trying to reach a deal but unsure of what the president will sign.
“I do think the president’s tweet underscores the single most important question as to whether this negotiation can be successful: how free the Republicans are to negotiating in good faith and to what extent they can proceed to do that,” said Representative David E. Price, Democrat of North Carolina and a member of the negotiating committee.
A path to a final compromise on border security and funding the Department of Homeland Security “still appears uncertain because of what he said and because of how he operates,” Mr. Price said in an interview.
For some lawmakers, the president’s assessment about the success of the negotiations was simply realistic.
But some lawmakers remained optimistic that a deal could be reached before Feb. 15, with the president’s approval. The scope of the bill is likely to be narrow to maintain consensus, without the addition of immigration law changes or the inclusion of a measure to raise the government’s statutory borrowing limit.
Other members of the committee, including Mr. Shelby, have also raised the possibility of bringing in experts to outline what exactly is needed at the border.
