The making of Sheila Pree Bright’s photo-mural of black women who had lost their sons gave a group of mothers a chance to tell their stories.
The past informs the present in the work of Sheila Pree Bright, who has been photographing the Black Lives Matter movement since 2014. As an artist who draws connections between today’s young activists and their civil rights forebears, she seemed a natural choice to be among 11 socially conscious artists selected to create murals highlighting Atlanta’s past, present and future in time for the Super Bowl, when the city will be in the spotlight.
Her realization that a single event can resonate in unexpected ways led her to seek out mothers whose children have died at the hands of the police.  News accounts said Nicholas tried fleeing in a customer’s car and was killed when the police said he drove at them. No charges were filed against the officer who shot him.
Ms. Bright and Ms. Thomas recognized something more than a photo shoot was needed. The two women had a shared vision to bring together a group of mothers who didn’t have a chance to tell their stories. They organized a three-day retreat, inviting about a dozen mothers from Atlanta and three other cities, including Samaria Rice, the mother of 12-year-old Tamir Rice from Cleveland; Oscar Grant’s mother, Wanda Johnson; and Eric Garner’s mother, Gwen Carr. Ms. Thomas called her friends and invited a chef to prepare meals. The women were treated to massages and given plaques to acknowledge their activism. It became a bonding experience.
Ms. Bright photographed the women in Atlanta’s Vine City neighborhood, where Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Mr. Bond once lived. She spread rose petals on the ground, a visual nod to “The Rose That Grew from Concrete,” a poem by Tupac Shakur. She also invited another Atlanta native, the civil rights icon Dr. Roslyn Pope, to join the mothers for the portrait. Dr. Pope wrote “An Appeal for Human Rights,” the 1960 manifesto that inspired the Atlanta Student Movement’s efforts to end segregation.
She and Ms. Thomas know the project will also put the spotlight back on an athlete — and activist — who will not be on the field, Colin Kaepernick.
Fayemi Shakur is a writer and visiting lecturer at Rutgers University-Newark.
Follow @nytimesphoto and @7fayemi on Twitter. You can also find us on Facebook and Instagram.