WASHINGTON — President Trump wanted to talk. He initially invited A. G. Sulzberger, the publisher of The New York Times, to an off-the-record dinner. Mr. Sulzberger countered with a request for an on-the-record interview that included Times reporters. The White House accepted.
Mr. Trump held forth from the Oval Office about the investigation into what he called his “unimportant” business dealings in Russia before he became president; his contact with Roger J. Stone Jr., an informal adviser of many years; his relationship with his top intelligence officials; a handicapping of the 2020 presidential race; and a personal assessment of his first two years in office.
He showed no worries toward Russia or the special counsel.
On all matters related to the special counsel’s investigation and questions about his business ties to Russia, Mr. Trump calmly took a nothing-to-see-here approach.
He said he never directed Mr. Stone, who was indicted last week, to correspond with WikiLeaks to gain information about hacked Democratic emails.
Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, has assured Mr. Trump’s lawyers that he is not a target of the inquiry by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, the president said. And he added that he was not engaging in witness tampering when he suggested that the father-in-law of Michael Cohen, his former lawyer and fixer, should be investigated.
Mr. Trump said at first that he “didn’t see” Mr. Stone’s indictment, which indicated that a senior campaign official was directed by an unnamed person to contact Mr. Stone about additional WikiLeaks releases that might prove damaging to the Clinton campaign.
He’s made up with his intelligence officials.
On Tuesday, top United States intelligence officials released their annual “Worldwide Threat Assessment,” which concluded that North Korea was unlikely to give up its nuclear stockpiles, Iran did not appear to be taking steps to make a nuclear bomb and the Islamic State would continue its aggression in Syria. All those assertions directly contradicted Mr. Trump’s foreign policy positions.
The president was initially displeased. “Perhaps Intelligence should go back to school!” Mr. Trump tweeted Wednesday. He also said then that he was not happy with either the director of national intelligence, Dan Coats, or the C.I.A. director, Gina Haspel.
By Thursday, all was forgiven, the president said. He said the intelligence officials assured him, “Sir, our testimony was totally mischaracterized.” The president said that after he read the testimony, he felt they were on the same page.
He also presented reporters a printout of a tweet sent during the interview — “sometimes I dictate tweets,” he said — that featured a photo of his earlier meeting with intelligence chiefs.
In an interview with The New York Times, President Trump indicated that he would most likely take action on a border wall on his own after talks with Congress end in two weeks, among other subjects.
The president, who has recently tempered his criticism of Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s negotiation skills, used stronger language on Thursday, saying that he had gotten along with her in the past, but no longer.
“I think she’s doing a tremendous disservice to the country,” Mr. Trump said.
He’s carefully sizing up the 2020 competition.
The president has been keeping an eye on potential Democratic challengers in 2020 — “they’ve really drifted far left” — taking particular note, approvingly, of Senator Kamala Harris of California. Ms. Harris has been credited with a strong rollout that included numerous news appearances nationwide and a town hall-style meeting in Iowa broadcast on CNN.
The president also expressed confidence that he would not have a serious rival in the Republican primary race.
He loves his job and says he’s accomplished a lot, but regrets how much money it’s cost him.
Mr. Trump said that he was planning to run for re-election, and that there would be no point at which he had decided he had accomplished enough.
“It’s a very big job,” he said, “and there’s a lot to do.” But Mr. Trump also suggested that the presidency had been “more of a burden on me than other presidents,” and accused his predecessors of artificial achievements that did not amount to the work he had done to produce a healthy economy.
“I don’t know if I should love doing it, but I love doing it,” he said.
He said that he would be focusing on national security “very much” should he win a second term. Later, he again reminisced about his life as a businessman and mused about the money he has lost since assuming the presidency.
