Two weeks before Valentine’s Day, the Sweethearts candy shortage is acute.
Many distributors have already sold out. And what candy remains is left over from last year — before its manufacturer, the New England Confectionery Company, or Necco, closed its factory doors.
So now how are we supposed to communicate the important things — like “So Fine” and “Fax Me” — to our loved ones on Valentine’s Day? What does “Be Mine” even mean if it’s not stamped in red vegetable dye on a lump of sugar, corn syrup, dextrose and glycerin?
This year, Sweethearts fans like Ms. Pake may be forced to turn to Brach’s, the Illinois-based candy company whose conversation hearts have been a Valentine’s Day mainstay for decades. Brach’s hearts come in many flavors and are generally a little thinner and softer than Sweethearts, and they are laser-printed rather than stamped.
Ms. Pake used to keep Sweethearts in a glass dish in her kitchen, and in a wooden box at her office. She left them for her husband, Bruce, to find at home, like little love notes.
“To me they’re sort of a nice combination of being sweet, crunchy and powdery at the same time,” she said. But she knows that hers is a contentious opinion. Some people say Sweethearts taste chalky or medicinal, and even Mr. Pake does not like them, she said.
Candy hearts have a long history, and so does Necco. It was one of the oldest candy companies in the United States, and its famous Necco Wafers — sugary disks that were first manufactured during the 1800s — could travel so well that they were shipped to American troops overseas during World War II. Sweethearts appeared around the turn of the 20th century, and in the decades since, Wafers and Sweethearts (which were made from similar, but not identical, ingredients) have earned reputations as quintessential American candies. Before the factory closed, Necco was producing billions of Sweethearts every year.
The company’s blog has covered Necco’s ups and downs and helped to raise the alarm about the Sweethearts shortage. In January, Sweethearts devotees started emailing the distributor about the candy on a daily — and then an hourly — basis, Mr. Hoeck said.
But this is not the first time people have panicked about Necco products. The factory in Revere, Mass., struggled to stay afloat for years, and in March, The Boston Globe reported that it was in danger of closing. This led to what CandyStore.com called “The Great Necco Wafer Panic” of 2018, in which customers rushed to buy the small sugary disks in bulk.
Then, as now, CandyStore.com got hundreds of emails, Mr. Hoeck said. Some people offered to pay surge prices for wafers, and one woman offered her car in exchange for a shipment, he said. The online distributor ran out of both Wafers and Sweethearts last year.
In the meantime, Brach’s was ramping up production of its conversation hearts to meet any extra demand for this Valentine’s Day, said Hans Becher, the general manager of seasonal confections at Ferrara Candy Company, which owns Brach’s.
And for those whose hearts belong to Necco, there may yet be some hope.
In a statement in September, Kirk Vashaw, Spangler’s chief executive, said the company looked forward to announcing that it would bring Sweethearts back in time for Valentine’s Day 2020. But that statement appears to have been removed from the Spangler website (a version can be seen here), and representatives for the company did not respond to multiple recent requests for comment.
It did, however, leave consumers with a “three-heart response” on its website last week.
