Remember how we said we’d be trying out some new things in the newsletter? Today, we’re going to let images do most of the talking.
This month, the San Francisco Art Institute and U.C. Santa Cruz will host an exhibition featuring archival photographs of Black Panthers by Pirkle Jones and Ruth-Marion Baruch, many of which were first shown 50 years ago at the de Young Museum.
Some of them, though, haven’t been exhibited before — and I’m excited to say we have an exclusive preview.
The original 1968 exhibition drew more than 100,000 visitors, according to The Times’s obituary for Mr. Jones — it included now-iconic images of young black men and women, clad in leather jackets and berets, solemnly holding guns or waving flags.
I was struck by how these pictures contain a kind of quiet normalcy. They show Black Panthers doing the things members of any community might do. Activists read on a lawn, their feet splayed casually. A woman kisses a little girl on the cheek at a rally.
Kat Trataris, who manages exhibitions, events and partnerships for the institute, said the latter was among her favorites.
Free Huey rally at Bobby Hutton Memorial Park (formerly DeFremery Park) in Oakland.Credit...Pirkle Jones/Regents of the University of California, Courtesy of University Library at UC Santa Cruz.
Still, Ms. Trataris said images of Black Panthers should continue to spark debate. The party rose in response to police violence and economic inequality that disproportionately affected black people. Those aren’t problems that have been fixed.
In the new exhibition — which was largely put together by students, and guest curated by the artist Leila Weefur — work by young, local black artists will be shown alongside the photographs. That’s meant to “augment the conversation that’s been happening over the last 50 years,” Ms. Trataris said.
As for Mr. Jones and Ms. Baruch, they were at home in a Bay Area arts scene that has changed over the decades, but hasn’t stopped welcoming misfits.
At the Black Panthers’ free breakfast for children program, St. Augustine’s Episcopal Church (merged with Trinity Church in 1975). Commissioned by the Swedish magazine Vi.Credit...Ruth-Marion Baruch/Regents of the University of California, Courtesy of University Library at UC Santa Cruz.
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| 