President Trump and congressional leaders emerged from a meeting to negotiate an end to the government shutdown with messages signaling that a deadlock remained over the president’s demand for a border wall.
WASHINGTON — President Trump threatened on Friday to keep the federal government partly closed for “months or even years” if he did not get $5.6 billion for his wall at the southern border, and he warned that he was considering declaring a national emergency to build it without congressional approval.
Mr. Trump and Democratic leaders emerged from a two-hour meeting in the White House Situation Room without a deal to reopen government agencies that have already been shuttered for two weeks, and the two sides offered sharply contrasting views of where they stood. By day’s end, the two sides appeared to be still locked in a stalemate.
Democrats called the meeting “contentious” while the president and Republican leaders in the House called it “productive.” And while Mr. Trump announced that he had assigned Vice President Mike Pence to lead a “working group” to negotiate with Democrats over the weekend, Democrats said the phrase “working group” was never discussed.
Over the past two decades, there were large declines in apprehensions along the southwestern border with Mexico. In April 2017, apprehensions hit the lowest point over that time period, and in 2018 they have since increased to levels similar to those under President Barack Obama.
Friday’s effort to jump-start talks was an early test of the new political dynamic in Washington, where Democrats have just taken control of the House for the first time in eight years. Mr. Trump, trying to seize control of the narrative, followed the session with his rambling Rose Garden appearance. There, he said he told Democrats he wants $5.6 billion for the wall — a figure that is a nonstarter for Democrats, who insist he will get no funding for the barrier at all.
Ever the real estate developer, Mr. Trump offered his vision for what the wall would look like, saying it would be either solid concrete or solid steel, though “steel is actually more expensive,” he said.
But if Mr. Trump is showing no signs of backing down, the pressure may be building on Republicans in Congress. Two Republican senators have said they want votes to reopen the government, and more than a half-dozen House Republicans joined Democrats on Thursday night to do just that.
The president was asked if he was still “proud to own” the shutdown — a reference to a comment he made last month during a televised Oval Office meeting, when he said he would be proud to shut down the government over border security.
The White House later said it has scheduled a meeting for Saturday morning with aides to House and Senate leaders; it was unclear whether Mr. Pence and the others would be involved.
Behind the scenes, there were some indications that a search for a way out of the impasse was underway. Some conservative commentators, including Sean Hannity of Fox News, who is close to Mr. Trump, may have signaled a path out, suggesting that the president resurrect the old Democratic notion of twinning wall funding with protections for the young immigrants brought illegally to the country as children who are known as Dreamers.
Such immigrants are currently protected by Deferred Action for Childhood Arrival, or DACA, a program created by President Barack Obama that Mr. Trump has moved to rescind. On his way to the White House meeting, Representative Kevin McCarthy, the Republican leader, seemed open to such a deal.
Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee, has also suggested that Democrats could give Mr. Trump an additional $1 billion to fortify ports of entry rather than a border wall.
But while Mr. Trump said DACA was raised during the White House session, one Democratic aide, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss the private talks, said it came up only fleetingly. And in the news conference, Mr. Trump made clear that he did not want to address the DACA issue — which is now the subject of several lawsuits that are working their way through the federal courts — until the Supreme Court renders a final decision on whether Mr. Trump’s order to rescind the program can stand.
Mr. Trump also raised the issue of ports of entry for immigrants, but again, he eventually stuck to his demand that any strengthening of controls at such ports needed to be complemented with a wall.
The president said he invited Democrats to send negotiators to meet over the weekend with three high-ranking officials — Mr. Pence, Ms. Nielsen and Jared Kushner, his son-in-law and senior adviser — to negotiate a deal to strengthen security along the border. Democrats told reporters after the meeting that they implored the president to first reopen the government so they could negotiate without holding federal operations and employees hostage.
On Thursday, under Ms. Pelosi’s leadership, the House passed a two-bill package to reopen the government. The first measure combines six bills that have already garnered bipartisan support in the Republican-led Senate; they would reopen nearly all of the shuttered agencies and fund them through Sept. 30, the end of the fiscal year.
For his part, Mr. McConnell has refused to take up the House package, insisting that he will not bring anything to the floor that Mr. Trump will not sign. Democrats argued in the meeting that Mr. McConnell should at least pass the cluster of appropriations bills while continuing to negotiate over border security. But Mr. Trump again rejected that idea on Friday.
Mr. McConnell has largely absented himself from the talks, insisting that it is up to Democrats to resolve the impasse, and one person familiar with Friday’s meeting said that Mr. McConnell said very little. But he is beginning to face pressure from Republicans who are seeking re-election in 2020 and are targeted by Democrats.
Two senators from Democratic-leaning states, Cory Gardner of Colorado and Susan Collins of Maine, have already expressed misgivings over their leaders’ intransigence. Mr. Gardner called on his party to end the shutdown, even if it meant not funding the wall, and Ms. Collins — who took a leading role in ending a previous shutdown — said she would support measures to fund the government in already approved appropriations bills.