Politics|He Disparaged the Police on Facebook. So They Arrested Him.
He Disparaged the Police on Facebook. So They Arrested Him.
WASHINGTON — Like lots of Americans, Robert Frese is not shy about expressing his views on the internet. Last year, in a comment on a newspaper’s Facebook page, he said a New Hampshire police officer who had given him a traffic citation was “a dirty cop.” The police chief, Mr. Frese added, was a coward who had covered up the matter.
The police officers might have looked the other way. They might have responded, explaining their positions and letting readers decide who was right. They might have filed a civil suit for libel, seeking money from Mr. Frese.
Instead, they did a fourth thing, one that seems at odds with the American commitment to free expression, particularly where criticism of government officials is concerned. They arrested Mr. Frese, saying he had committed criminal libel.
Mr. Frese himself has faced two prosecutions. The first, in Hudson, N.H., was prompted by his negative statements about a life coaching business. It ended in a guilty plea and a $1,488 fine, with $1,116 of it suspended.
The second, in Exeter, N.H., concerned his recent statements about the police there. It was dismissed after the state attorney general’s office expressed doubts about the constitutionality of the prosecution.
Brian Hauss, an A.C.L.U. lawyer, said the New Hampshire law and others like it violated the First Amendment.
The defendant in the case is Gordon MacDonald, New Hampshire’s attorney general. A spokeswoman for his office declined to comment, but a memorandum on Mr. Frese’s case from a lawyer in his office appears to set out his basic position.
The problem with the prosecution of Mr. Frese, Ms. Lahey wrote, was that the authorities had no reason to think he believed his statements were false. The Exeter Police Department dropped the prosecution after getting Ms. Lahey’s memo.
Letting government officials prosecute their critics for supposed misstatements is a dangerous business. But not every criminal libel prosecution concerns official conduct, and people who have studied the matter say criminal libel prosecutions may have a role to play in vindicating damaged reputations.
Professor Volokh, an authority on the First Amendment, said narrowly written criminal libel laws were constitutional. A 1964 Supreme Court decision, Garrison v. Louisiana, struck down a state criminal libel law, but only because it did not require proof of actual malice in cases concerning public officials. The majority opinion, from Justice William J. Brennan Jr., suggested that criminal laws that included an actual malice requirement were permissible.
Mr. Hauss, the A.C.L.U. lawyer, said the Garrison decision did not address the argument that criminal libel laws are unconstitutionally vague.
I asked Professor Volokh whether criminal libel laws were good policy.
