WASHINGTON — President Trump threatened Turkey on Sunday with harsh economic sanctions if it attacks Kurdish forces in Syria after American troops withdraw from the country in the coming months.
Mr. Trump’s tweets marked the first public threat toward Turkey, a NATO ally, over the Kurds and seemed to offer a blanket of protection for the group, a band of American-backed militias that the Turkish government sees as terrorists.
Mr. Trump’s announced pullout from Syria without guaranteeing safety for the Kurds, who have helped American forces fight the Islamic State, had received sharp criticism from lawmakers. But his tweets Sunday threatened to upend Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s attempt to reach a deal with Turkey to protect them, something Mr. Pompeo had been optimistic about when talking to reporters in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, earlier Sunday.
After speaking with his Turkish counterpart, Foreign Minister Mevlut Cavusoglu, Mr. Pompeo had said he was “optimistic that we can achieve a good outcome,” though details were being worked out.
Ibrahim Kalin, a spokesman for President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, reiterated in a response to Mr. Trump’s tweets that Turkey considered the Kurdish fighters terrorists. “Turkey expects the US to honor our strategic partnership and doesn’t want it to be shadowed by terrorist propaganda,” he wrote.
Turkey, which has said it is planning an assault on Islamic State and Kurdish forces in northeastern Syria, contends that the Kurdish fighters in Syria are part of a front for the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party, or P.K.K., a Kurdish insurgency in Turkey.
In his tweets Sunday, Mr. Trump also mentioned striking the Islamic State from an “existing nearby base” if the group reappears after the American withdrawal, something analysts have feared if American forces hastily leave the country.
How long have American troops been in Syria and what is their mission? Here’s a look back at the military’s recent involvement there as the White House attempts to withdraw U.S. forces.
In December, President Trump made an extraordinary declaration about U.S. involvement in Syria: “We have won against ISIS. Now, it’s time for our troops to come back home.” Ignoring advice from his generals and advisers, Trump said that the U.S. would leave Syria. Defense Department officials said that they were ordered to do it within 30 days. [explosion] Then came a flurry of criticism, even from inside his own party. “I believe it is a catastrophic mistake.” “This is very disappointing.” “It needs to be reconsidered.” Then, the resignations. First, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis quit. And America’s chief diplomat in the fight against ISIS, Brett McGurk, soon followed. Now, the timeline for a full withdrawal is unclear. “I never said we’re doing it that quickly.” He went on to say that the U.S. will leave at a proper pace while continuing to fight ISIS, a shift from — “They’re all coming back, and they’re coming back now.” The nearly eight-year-long war in Syria has left hundreds of thousands of people dead. [explosion] So, how did we get here and what are U.S. forces doing in Syria? In 2011, uprisings rippled through the Middle East. Leaders fell in Tunisia, Libya and Egypt. And after months of anti-government protests in Syria, the U.S. had a message for President Bashar al-Assad: “This morning, President Obama called on Assad to step aside.” He didn’t and the conflict escalated. In 2012, Obama warned Assad against using Syria’s stockpile of chemical weapons against his own people. “That’s a red line for us, and that there would be enormous consequences if we start seeing the use of chemical weapons.” A year later, Assad’s army launched a chemical attack on a Damascus suburb, killing 1,400 people. [screaming] In response, the U.S. debated airstrikes, but they were avoided when Syria agreed to give up its chemical weapons. But a new threat was also emerging — ISIS. In 2014, the U.S. began supporting rebel groups to fight extremists, while also conducting airstrikes as part of an international coalition. These efforts expanded and the U.S. troop numbers grew from hundreds to the low thousands. In 2016, U.S.-supported fighters took control of the ISIS stronghold of Manbij — and in 2017 their de facto capital, Raqqa. There are now around 2,000 American forces in Syria who are largely fighting alongside the Kurdish groups. This has been a problem for America’s ally Turkey, which has a long-standing conflict with the Kurds. U.S. troops have had run-ins with Assad’s forces as well as groups backed by Russia and Iran. Since taking office, Trump has ordered two strikes on areas controlled by Assad in response to chemical weapons attacks. “We are prepared to sustain this response, until the Syrian regime stops its use of prohibited chemical agents.” U.S. officials and allies dispute the claim that ISIS has been defeated. They warn that an American departure will weaken U.S. influence in the region and may embolden Russia, Iran and Turkey, who are also on the ground. The other worry? The move may inspire some ISIS fighters to return to Syria.
The Pentagon has suggested positioning Special Operations troops in nearby Iraq, where they could attack in Syria if needed. There is heavy fighting in Syria around the town of Hajin, where Islamic State militants still hold some territory. The areas they control have been reduced to a few villages, after the group once held a swath of land roughly the size of Britain.
Mr. Trump’s tweets are just one more wrinkle in a process racked with conflicting statements and uncertain timelines after the president announced a pullout of Syria within 30 days late last month.
His decision prompted the resignation of two top administration officials, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and Brett McGurk, the special presidential envoy to the coalition fighting the Islamic State.
Mr. Trump later agreed to give the military about four months to withdraw. And a week ago, the national security adviser, John R. Bolton, said the withdrawal was conditional, insinuating that American troops could potentially be on the ground even longer.
On Friday, a vaguely worded statement from the American military headquarters in Baghdad, which oversees the fight against the Islamic State, said the withdrawal of the roughly 2,000 American troops in Syria had already begun. Military officials later clarified that only equipment had left the country and not troops.