CARACAS, Venezuela — President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela faced the most direct challenge to his hold on power on Wednesday, when an opposition leader stood in the streets of the capital and declared himself the legitimate president, cheered on by thousands of supporters and a growing number of governments, including the Trump administration.
Mr. Maduro responded furiously by cutting diplomatic ties with the United States. He gave American diplomats 72 hours to leave the country, ordering them out with a derisive “be gone!” and accusing the Trump administration of plotting to overthrow him. The United States said it would ignore the deadline.
The fast-moving developments convulsed Venezuela, a once-prosperous country that has been devastated by years of political repression, economic mismanagement and corruption. But they also appeared to give new momentum to the opposition leader, Juan Guaidó, the 35-year-old National Assembly leader who stepped onto the national stage just recently.
Mr. Maduro immediately dismissed Mr. Guaidó’s claim to the presidency, calling it part of an American-led conspiracy to topple him. Demonstrating his continued grip on power, he signed an order expelling American diplomats on the balcony of the presidential palace.
Mr. Maduro’s reaction came a few hours after Mr. Trump, in a White House statement, formally announced his recognition of Mr. Guaidó as the interim leader of Venezuela.
“The people of Venezuela have courageously spoken out against Maduro and his regime and demanded freedom and the rule of law,” Mr. Trump said.
A senior American official briefing reporters in Washington warned that if Mr. Maduro used force against opponents, the United States could impose new sanctions, and did not rule out the use of military force to stop him. It was not the first time the Trump administration has warned of a “military option” for Venezuela.
Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Paraguay, Peru, Ecuador, Guatemala and the Organization of American States have also recognized Mr. Guaidó as the country’s leader.
While Venezuelan state media ignored Mr. Guaidó and his supporters in the streets, there was scant evidence of large-scale repression of opposition supporters by the police and armed forces, as has happened in the past.
Still, the challenge to Mr. Maduro’s authority by Mr. Guaidó raised the possibility of violent confrontations, chaos and confusion in the days ahead. Immediately after Mr. Maduro ordered American diplomats expelled, Mr. Guaidó announced that they could stay.
The escalating showdown began with Mr. Guaidó’s declaration to an enormous crowd of supporters in a downtown square in the Venezuelan capital, Caracas, on Wednesday.
He also told supporters to brace for a fight.
The opposition, after years of division, has largely united behind Mr. Guaidó. He called for the protests and has offered to lead a transitional government and hold new elections if Mr. Maduro stepped down.
The demonstrations are part of a renewed push to oust Mr. Maduro by Venezuela’s opposition, which was left largely powerless and divided after a burst of antigovernment activism in 2017 was crushed by security forces. The opposition was hoping that a significant turnout on Wednesday would help persuade the nation’s military to break ranks with the president, which would be crucial to removing him.
Opposition leaders also hope the effort to force out Mr. Maduro, who was sworn in for a second term on Jan. 10, has a better chance of succeeding now because his government is collapsing under the weight of an economic crisis and is more isolated than ever.
The armed forces have been a bastion of support for Mr. Maduro, who has nurtured their loyalty by giving officers lucrative contracts and assigning them to important government and state company posts.
Mr. Maduro and his allies had called for rival demonstrations on Wednesday, accusing opposition leaders, whom he calls “terrorists,” of trying to sell out Venezuela to the United States. Supporters of the government turned out, though the groups were much smaller.
Iris Varela, a minister in Mr. Maduro’s government, dismissed the opposition leader’s actions on Wednesday as insignificant.
As reports surfaced on social media of some government forces trying to suppress the opposition marches, the head of the Organization of American States, Luis Almagro, wrote on Twitter in Spanish condemning those actions.
The National Guard — a branch of the armed forces — clashed with demonstrators in the Caracas neighborhood of El Paraíso, blocking their way and throwing tear gas canisters at some marchers. Most shops in the city were shuttered, and many residents did not go to work. The Associated Press reported that at least seven people were killed in protests across the country.
“Maduro needs to go. Simple as that,” said Ruben Grabados, a 71-year-old businessman, adding that he understood the risks of marching after the 2017 crackdown on demonstrations that left more than 100 people dead.
Mr. Maduro may find it harder to weather this challenge to his legitimacy than he has in the past, analysts say, noting the growing international condemnation of his government and overt support for Mr. Guaidó.
Discontent has deepened across Venezuela’s socioeconomic classes as hyperinflation has rendered wages virtually worthless. Citizens of what was once one of the region’s wealthiest nations, endowed with plentiful oil, have starved to death and died from preventable diseases.
More than three million Venezuelans have left the country in recent years, and those who stayed have struggled to find food and medicine while contending with water shortages and rampant crime.
Other notable differences include the youth of the politicians now leading the quest to oust Mr. Maduro, and the careful messaging they have deployed.
The opposition’s new leader, Mr. Guaidó, is an industrial engineer little known at home or abroad until this month, when he was sworn in as president of the National Assembly. His appointment reinvigorated that opposition-dominated legislative body, which had become ineffectual and deeply unpopular in recent years.
Mr. Guaidó says an interim government would distribute humanitarian aid, take steps to turn the economy around, and convene free and fair elections. He has argued that doing so would not violate the Constitution because Mr. Maduro, whose re-election last year was denounced as rigged, had “usurped” the presidency.
Past antigovernment demonstrations were dominated by rage and indignation, but Mr. Guaidó and his allies have tried to strike a hopeful, conciliatory tone. They have taken pains to urge members of the military to abandon Mr. Maduro, arguing that doing so would constitute not a coup, but adherence to their oath to uphold the Constitution.
But a National Assembly representative, William Barrientos of Zulia State, said in an interview that many officers had privately approached the opposition to express their desire for change.
