The rally in eastern Caracas, where at least 500 people converged in a square ringed by police officers, was peaceful and orderly, and there was no immediate indication that the opposition leader, Juan Guaidó, would be taken into custody, as many had feared.
At the same time, President Nicolás Maduro, who had been furiously describing his adversary as the lackey of an American-backed coup plot, appeared to take a more conciliatory approach, calling for dialogue.
Alluding to reports of clandestine meetings that had taken place between opposition members and people in Mr. Maduro’s orbit, he even expressed a willingness to attend such meetings himself. “If I have to use a hood or go naked, however I have to go,” Mr. Maduro said at a news conference.
It was not immediately clear why he seemed to be taking a softer tone. But Mr. Maduro’s call for dialogue appeared to signal that the standoff between the government and Mr. Guaidó may be shifting.
Opposition lawmakers and analysts said Mr. Maduro may sense that loyalty to him among the security forces may be slipping as support for Mr. Guaidó grows.
President Nicolás Maduro used state television to sell his message. Juan Guaidó, the opposition leader and self-declared president, took to social media. Here’s how these two leaders are trying to control the country — and the narrative.
This is Nicolás Maduro, president of Venezuela. And this is Juan Guaidó, self-declared president of Venezuela. Two leaders, both trying to control the country and the narrative. Here is how they’re doing it. Venezuela’s state television is controlled by Maduro’s government. So the opposition has been relying on social media to get its message out. On January 23rd, the opposition called for a large anti-Maduro protest, and shared the images of flooded streets and squares online as proof of its popular backing. But state TV aired images of pro-Maduro crowds and speeches from his supporters. Guaidó is advocating for a peaceful and democratic overhaul of the system. During the protests, he tweeted this video of a previous speech he gave in front of the National Assembly. While Maduro is leaning on the establishment, with state TV broadcasting general after general voicing their support for him. And airing the approval of the country’s highest court. The list of countries recognizing Guaidó as the new president of Venezuela has expanded. “It is clear that Nicolás Maduro is not the legitimate leader of Venezuela. So the United Kingdom believes that Juan Guaidó is the right person to take Venezuela forward.” Guaidó retweeted world leaders, including those from the U.S., the European Council and Argentina, and thanked them for their endorsements. On pro-Maduro state TV, the support for Guaidó was denounced as interventionism. And the super power behind it? And some countries seemed to agree. Russia, China and Turkey, among others, have vowed to stand by Maduro. The fight over who will run Venezuela continues with both leaders trying to control the message.
William Brownfield, a former American ambassador to Venezuela who is regarded as among the foremost experts on its government, said it was notable that Mr. Guaidó had not been arrested.
Mr. Guaidó began his remarks at the rally by requesting a minute of silence for “victims of brutal repression,” referring to demonstrators who have been killed or wounded in violent protests that flared throughout the past week in Venezuela. The United Nations human rights office said earlier Friday that the death toll stood at 20 or more.
“We have awakened from the nightmare, brothers and sisters,” said Mr. Guaidó, the 35-year-old leader of the National Assembly, the opposition-dominated legislature that has been rendered largely powerless by Mr. Maduro.
Over the past few weeks, Mr. Guaidó has emerged as the most direct challenge yet to Mr. Maduro, whose longtime stewardship of Venezuela has plunged the country into a prolonged bout of repression and severe economic decline.
Mr. Guaidó urged supporters to demonstrate peacefully and to distribute copies of an amnesty law the assembly had passed that encourages members of the armed forces to switch their loyalty to him.
But he also said his arrest was a real possibility. “If they dare to kidnap me, I ask you to continue on the path and move forward in a nonviolent manner,” he said.
The rally was held two days after Mr. Guaidó declared himself Venezuela’s legitimate president during a day of nationwide protests that challenged and infuriated Mr. Maduro and his loyalists.
Mr. Maduro called his adversary an American puppet, broke relations with the United States, gave its diplomats 72 hours to leave and ordered Venezuelan diplomats in the United States to return home by this weekend.
The Trump administration and several other countries in the region quickly recognized Mr. Guaidó as Venezuela’s legitimate leader, depicting him as a democratic savior trying to rescue what was once one of Latin America’s most prosperous nations. They say Mr. Maduro was elected fraudulently and should resign.
But Mr. Maduro received an important reassurance on Thursday, when the country’s defense minister pledged that the armed forces would remain loyal to him.
At the same time, Russia, an ally of Mr. Maduro that has provided his government billions of dollars in aid, warned the United States not to meddle in Venezuela’s affairs, effectively placing Venezuela in the middle of a new contest of wills between the Kremlin and Washington.
Mr. Guaidó had largely stayed out of public view after his self-declaration as president, amid speculation that Mr. Maduro’s security forces could take him into custody.
Ms. Valera, who attended the rally at the Simón Bolivar Plaza in Caracas, the capital, said opposition politicians were continuing to hold discreet talks with military leaders and remained hopeful that they would soon build enough support to get large factions to switch sides.
Damelys González, 75, was among those who turned up at the plaza, holding a Venezuelan flag in one hand and a cane in the other.
Despite Mr. Guaidó’s call for peaceful demonstrations, violent and sometimes deadly protests have flared repeatedly over the past week.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, who has implored all nations to recognize Mr. Guaidó as the legitimate leader of Venezuela, planned to press his case on Saturday at a meeting of the United Nations Security Council in New York.
In a possible sign of Mr. Pompeo’s need for experienced experts to deal with the Venezuela crisis, he announced on Friday that he had appointed Elliott Abrams as a special envoy. Mr. Abrams, a policymaker who served in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush, pleaded guilty to withholding information from Congress during the Iran-contra scandal.
The appointment was notable partly because of tensions between Mr. Abrams and Mr. Trump, who had rejected him for a deputy secretary of state job in 2017. Mr. Abrams had criticized Mr. Trump during the 2016 presidential campaign.
Mr. Pompeo also said at a news conference in Washington that he was evaluating the security situation at the embassy in Caracas daily. While Mr. Pompeo had said he would ignore Mr. Maduro’s deadline for all diplomats to leave, the State Department has decided to withdraw most employees and leave only a core team.
“We will make sure we protect our folks on the ground and take all appropriate measures,” he said.
At least 50 Marines were on standby at an undisclosed location in case they are needed to reinforce the embassy in Caracas. They were put on alert Thursday, an American military official said.
Mr. Brownfield, who served as ambassador in Caracas from 2004 to 2007, said the crisis in Venezuela had left Mr. Maduro confronting “the most complicated set of problems” he has ever faced.
