WASHINGTON — Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, facing fallout from a lawsuit that claims she fired an aide who said she was sexually assaulted by a supervisor at the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, resigned on Wednesday as the foundation’s chairwoman.
At the same time, Ms. Jackson Lee, a Texas Democrat in her 13th term, also elected to step aside temporarily from an important House Judiciary subcommittee chairmanship.
The congresswoman made the decision to step aside from both roles as pressure was growing within her own party to account for the claims in a Jan. 11 lawsuit brought by a woman who worked in her congressional office and who said she was sexually assaulted by a Black Caucus Foundation supervisor. Ms. Jackson Lee has adamantly denied that she fired the woman for retribution after the woman indicated she wanted to pursue legal action.
Other liberal advocacy groups are asking the congresswoman to step aside from leadership positions as the case unfolds. The National Alliance to End Sexual Violence said it could not continue to work with Ms. Jackson Lee as the lead sponsor of legislation reauthorizing the Violence Against Women Act. And fellow Democratic lawmakers had been prepared to try to force her from her chairmanship of the Judiciary Committee’s crime, terrorism, homeland security and investigations subcommittee.
The woman, who worked for Ms. Jackson Lee from November 2017 to March 2018 and identified only as Jane Doe in the complaint, said that she was fired from her job as a special assistant and director of public engagement as retaliation after she told Ms. Jackson Lee’s chief of staff that she planned to pursue legal action against the foundation, which the congresswoman then chaired. Lynne Bernabei, a lawyer for the woman, said that the woman wished to remain anonymous to limit fallout from the case.
In a statement, Ms. Jackson Lee’s office highlighted her long record supporting workplace safety and nondiscrimination laws, including a measure applying those standards to Congress. Citing the legal proceedings, her office said it could not discuss specific details of the case but asserted that she would be cleared of any wrongdoing.
“The congresswoman is confident that, once all of the facts come to light, her office will be exonerated of any retaliatory or otherwise improper conduct and this matter will be put to rest,” the statement said.
Ms. Jackson Lee is only the latest lawmaker affected by sexual impropriety cases since the #MeToo movement reached Capitol Hill. Among those accused directly of sexual misconduct are Senator Al Franken, a Minnesota Democrat, and Representative John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, one of the longest serving Democrats in the House, who were forced to step down last Congress. So did the Republican representatives Trent Franks of Arizona, Patrick Meehan of Pennsylvania, Tim Murphy of Pennsylvania, Joe Barton of Texas and Blake Farenthold of Texas.
But Ms. Jackson Lee’s case most resembles that of Representative Elizabeth Esty, a Connecticut Democrat who did not seek re-election last year over what she called her failure to protect women on her staff from sexual harassment and threats of violence from her former chief of staff.
As laid out in the complaint, the case dates to October 2015, when the woman, then 19 and a student at Howard University in Washington, spent the fall semester as an intern at the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, an influential nonprofit linked to the Congressional Black Caucus that promotes African-American career advancement through internships, seminars and policy research.  The woman could not remember parts of what occurred during the encounter, the filing says.
The woman spoke with the internship coordinator the next day, who denied they had sex. When she met with representatives of the foundation, they placed him on leave. A foundation official, speaking under the condition of anonymity to discuss the ongoing legal case, said the foundation fired him after the 2015 incident for drinking with a minor. 
The woman initially pursued legal action, but did not bring a lawsuit at the time, and police did not bring charges, according to the complaint.
About two years later, after she graduated from Howard, the woman was hired by Ms. Jackson Lee’s office, where she helped manage the congresswoman’s communications and drove her around the capital, among other duties. When it appeared that Ms. Jackson Lee might hire the former internship coordinator to work in the office, the woman told her chief of staff, Glenn Rushing, that she had a “prior situation” with the prospective colleague, the complaint says. Mr. Rushing indicated he would not be hired.
A short time later, the woman saw a text message to Ms. Jackson Lee from A. Shuanise Washington, the foundation’s chief executive, saying that she had learned of the woman’s position with the congresswoman and had some “background on her” to share with the congresswoman, the complaint says. The woman saw the text messages as a “clear reference” to the earlier claims she had made to the foundation.
In March 2018, the woman told Mr. Rushing that she planned to resume legal action against the foundation and asked to speak with Ms. Jackson Lee about it. The meeting never took place, and the woman claims Ms. Jackson Lee refused a personal request to speak. Two weeks later, she was fired.
Mr. Rushing told the woman it was because of budgetary constraints, but she asserts in the complaint that Ms. Jackson Lee was conspiring with the foundation to retaliate after speaking with Ms. Washington, the foundation’s chief executive, about what had transpired at the foundation. She claims the firing has caused emotional, financial and career damage.
But the foundation official said that Ms. Washington, who has since left her position there for unrelated reasons, denied asking for the woman to be fired or punished. On the contrary, the official said, she reached out by text with the intention of simply telling Ms. Jackson Lee that her employee was a former Congressional Black Caucus Foundation intern. The two never actually spoke, the official said.
Ms. Bernabei, the woman’s lawyer, defended her client: “The justifications they have provided along the way, they are not credible, and they are shifting,” Ms. Bernabei said in an interview.
In a statement, the foundation pledged to cooperate fully with an investigation of the claims.
Still, the foundation’s board, which counts several high-profile corporate executives and members of Congress among its members, began moving last week to remove Ms. Jackson Lee, as first reported by Politico. Ultimately, the members decided to try to afford her a graceful exit and warned her late last week that if she did not step down, they would be forced to vote to remove her.
When the Judiciary Committee met Wednesday morning to vote on subcommittee chairmanships and make other organizational decisions, Ms. Jackson Lee preemptively offered up an arrangement to give up the chairmanship she was in line for while the case proceeds, Democrats in the room said. Representative Karen Bass, Democrat of California and the chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus, will fill the subcommittee slot in the meantime.
The statement from the National Alliance to End Sexual Violence portends other potential difficulties for Ms. Jackson Lee, who has long counted the support of women’s rights and other liberal activists.
Ebony Tucker, a spokeswoman for the group, said Ms. Jackson Lee has been “a strong ally” but that the group could not “support her continued lead sponsorship” of the Violence Against Women Act reauthorization.
“We begin and end all of our work with supporting survivors and support Jane Doe and many others who have been unsupported in their attempts to speak out,” Ms. Tucker said in a statement.