WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Tuesday granted the Trump administration’s request to allow it to bar most transgender people from serving in the military while cases challenging the policy make their way to the court.
The vote to lift two injunctions blocking the policy issued by lower courts was 5 to 4, with the Supreme Court’s five conservative members in the majority.
Lawyers questioning the new policy said there was no need to enforce it while the cases challenging it moved forward.
“The government has presented no evidence that their doing so harms military readiness, effectiveness or lethality,” the brief said.
In granting stays of injunctions issued by Federal District Court judges in California and Washington State, the justices in the majority may have been influenced by the complaint by the administration that lower courts have been able to frustrate its policies by the issuance of injunctions applying to the entire country.
The administration also asked the justices to hear immediate appeals from the two trial court rulings blocking the policy before the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, rules on whether to affirm one of them. But the court turned down those requests without comment.
Advocates for transgender rights welcomed the court’s decision not to hear the appeals from the trial courts, which could have led to an expedited decision on the administration’s policy.
“In declining to hear these cases, the Supreme Court saw through the administration’s contrived efforts to gin up a national crisis,” said Jennifer L. Levi, the director of the Transgender Rights Project of GLBTQ Legal Advocates and Defenders.
The transgender policy — announced on Twitter by the president and refined by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis — is complicated, and there is some dispute about its precise effect and timing. Broadly speaking, transgender people already serving openly may continue to serve once the injunctions are lifted. But those who seek to transition or serve openly after that happens risk discharge.
“This case satisfies that standard,” Mr. Francisco wrote.
He told the justices that prompt action was required to ensure that the Supreme Court could rule before its term ends in June. The alternative, he said, was to defer Supreme Court arguments in the matter to the term that starts in October, with a decision probably not coming until 2020.
Kerri Kupec, a Justice Department spokeswoman, welcomed the Supreme Court’s revival of the policy.
In a statement released Tuesday, a Pentagon spokeswoman said that the program was not a complete ban and that transgender troops would be treated with respect and dignity.
Some veterans groups said the Supreme Court’s move would complicate the jobs of military commanders who lead transgender service members.
Aaron Belkin, the director of the Palm Center, a research and advocacy group that focuses on sexuality and the military, said the military officials retained discretion over personnel policies.
“While it is unfortunate that the Supreme Court has allowed military discrimination to be reinstated, it’s critical to understand that the military is not required, and has no need, to reinstate the transgender ban, which would cause destabilizing whipsaws in personnel policy,” Mr. Belkin said.
Jody Davis, a transgender woman who is trying to join the Ohio National Guard, said she found it absurd that she may not be able to, since she had already served for eight years.
She joined the National Guard at 17 and became a sergeant in an armor crew. Now 48 and a nurse, she wants to rejoin the Guard as a part-time officer and social worker.
“It’s ironic,” she said. “I’ve already proved myself, and now they say I’m disqualified.” As part of her yearlong effort, she lost 53 pounds and submitted reams of medical records.
