It’s Friday. Happy birthday, Alicia Keys!
Weather: Sunny and chilly, with highs in the mid 30s. Expect clouds and some sun over the weekend.
Alternate-side parking: in effect until Feb. 4.
New Yorkers have long been fascinated with record-setting real estate and ostentatious displays of wealth.
In the modern era, the most expensive homes in the city were bought and sold at a scale that was, in a way, understandable. Prices ticked up by a million here, a couple million there.
Then things started to accelerate. By 2006, a home on East 75th Street sold for $53 million.
That record was shattered in 2012 when a penthouse on Central Park West was sold to a Russian oligarch for $88 million, soon to be topped by a $100 million sale.
Then along came Kenneth Griffin.
On Wednesday, Mr. Griffin, a hedge fund billionaire, purchased a penthouse in a building under construction on Central Park South for $238 million, making it the most expensive home in America.
To put this in context, I turned to Jonathan Miller, an analyst who tracks luxury real estate sales.
New Yorkers who think this means their own homes are suddenly worth a lot more, though, are in for a rude awakening, Mr. Miller said.
These top-end prices don’t really have anything to do with the rest of the housing market, he said. They’re luxury purchases for the wealthiest of the wealthiest.
He predicted a big jump in asking prices for fine apartments, but that doesn’t mean there are buyers for them.
Settlement in case that brought change to Rikers: The city will pay $3.3 million to the family of a young man who committed suicide after being held in solitary on Rikers Island for about two years without being tried or convicted.
Technically free, and still waking up inside a prison: A lawsuit claims that mentally ill inmates are being detained beyond their sentences.
Can you name a single M.T.A. board member? Try it.
35, and still cool: Indochine, a French-Vietnamese restaurant in NoHo, is “like a great French movie star — or a good cheese — it’s barely changed in any way that matters,” a critic notes.
A Times reporter found $90 in the subway. Is it yours? Contact him with corroborating details.
Goodbye to the Half King: The bar, gallery and gathering place for photographers on Tenth Avenue is closing on Saturday after 19 years.
Valentine’s Day is coming — and the Bronx Zoo is offering an unusual way to celebrate.
For just a few bucks, you can “symbolically name” one of its giant Madagascar hissing cockroaches for Valentine’s Day. The fee will be a donation to the zoo. And, let’s face it, it’s fun to zig while everyone else is zagging on this holiday.
For $15, you will get a printed certificate “to cherish for years to come,” the zoo said in a news release.
For $55, you can give your loved one a roach pin and beanie hat, presumably to flaunt in front of friends and co-workers, who will have to settle for commemorating the day with the standard roses and chocolates.
How did the Madagascar hissing roach get the honor of being the official Bronx Zoo Valentine’s Day mascot? Good question.
It’s Friday — have you started your Valentine’s Day planning?
It was a typical summer morning in Brighton Beach. I was crossing Ocean Parkway. There was an island in the middle.
I had crossed the street there without incident maybe 1,000 times since moving to the area seven years ago. This time, I swear, the curb rose up to trip me. I went flying, skinning my knee pretty badly when I hit the ground.
There were people around, but only one asked whether I was O.K. I assured her I was fine and asked her to hold my coffee while I tied my shoe.
After I had dusted myself off, the woman asked me again if I was O.K. I said I was, I thanked her and we parted ways.

