Book Review|In This Novel, One Sister Is a Nurse. The Other Is a Murderer.
In This Novel, One Sister Is a Nurse. The Other Is a Murderer.
226 pp. Doubleday. $22.95.
Korede knows that bleach masks the smell of blood, that the cabinet under the kitchen sink should be “filled with everything required to tackle dirt and grease” and that scrubbing helps her think. Korede is an ace cleaner. Which is good, because by the time her younger sister, Ayoola, calls her for the third time to say, “Korede, I killed him,” someone is going to have to roll up her sleeves. Again.
“My Sister, the Serial Killer” is less a murder mystery — it devotes little attention to why Ayoola is killing her boyfriends, other than that she seems to find it remarkably easy to do thanks to a sharp knife she stole from her father — and more a study in the strange complexity of sibling bonds. Ayoola is a tease. Korede, the head nurse at St. Peter’s Hospital, is a dab hand with the multi-surface cleaner and the rubber gloves. Despite their differences, Ayoola and Korede are allies and codependents — sisters-in-arms in the fight to survive in a city that strives to suffocate women at every turn.
Before his untimely death (it may or may not have been an accident), Ayoola and Korede’s father was a master of the dodgy deal, selling refurbished cars to a dealership as brand-new and building his smart new ranch house on the proceeds. He beats his daughters, tries to pimp them out to important friends and colleagues and brings home his mistress despite his wife also being there at the time. When she screams, he looks at her with indifference.  The girls’ mother reaches for the Ambien.
Although Tade feels affection and respect for his head nurse, he quickly forgets her when Ayoola crooks her little finger at him. For Korede’s sister, the doctor is just another man to play with. He sends her orchids. She sends him a text: “I. Really. Prefer. Roses.” “All he wants is a pretty face,” she tells Korede. “That’s all they ever want.” Despite this, Korede keeps looking after her sister, steering her away from social media because she should still be mourning her latest dead beau if she doesn’t want to raise suspicions about how he passed away.
Muhtar was badly injured in a car accident. He’s been in the hospital for five months, and it helps that he is in a coma. But then he wakes up and begins to remember what Korede has told him. All of a sudden the story takes a different turn.
“My Sister, the Serial Killer” is a bombshell of a book — sharp, explosive, hilarious. With a deadly aim, Braithwaite lobs jokes, japes and screwball comedy at the reader. Only after you turn the last page do you realize that, as with many brilliant comic writers before her, laughter for Braithwaite is as good for covering up pain as bleach is for masking the smell of blood.