A couple of years ago, the choreographer Miguel Gutierrez found himself in a strange situation that really shouldn’t have been so strange: He was at a reception with a group of dance and performance artists, and the conversation was flowing — from Spanish to English and back again.
It also served as the catalyst for his new piece, “This Bridge Called My Ass,” for which he’s assembled a cast with two common points: They come from that experimental space. And their heritage is Latin American.
In “This Bridge,” Mr. Gutierrez, who is Colombian-American, explores how being a queer, bicultural, multilingual, first-generation immigrant relates to his experience as an interdisciplinary artist. Named after “This Bridge Called My Back,” an anthology of third-wave feminist essays and poetry by women of color, the production considers the metaphor of a bridge: How do all of his different sides meet?
The resulting work opens at the Chocolate Factory on Jan. 9 as part of American Realness, the annual festival, now in its 10th year, highlighting provocative new dance and performance works. “This Bridge” is an intimate spectacle: a mix of the untamed and the tactile, the sensorial and the formal. Along with Mr. Gutierrez, the cast features Alvaro Gonzalez, John Gutierrez (no relation), Xandra Ibarra, Nibia Pastrana Santiago and Evelyn Sanchez Narvaez. Stephanie Acosta, a Cuban-American artist, serves as its dramaturg and assistant director.
“This Bridge” even includes an over-the-top telenovela, or a Spanish soap opera, written by Mr. Gutierrez, which exaggerates his performers’ personalities.
Mr. Gutierrez, 47, started thinking about these issues when he was a student and discovered two formative books: “This Bridge Called My Back” helped him find a voice for his own rage and passion when he was part of the group Queer Nation; and Sally Banes’s “Terpsichore in Sneakers,” which chronicled artists from the 1960s collective Judson Dance Theater, got him pondering the perceived division in dance between identity and personal exploration on the one hand and abstraction and formalism on the other.
In the opening section, which is improvisation based, the dancers work with materials, including a ladder, stools and clamps, as well as pieces of fabric, which they drape over their bodies and carry throughout the space. At times, it really does feel like a bridge is being built and torn down over and over again. All the while, the dancers show their skin, their flesh, their sweat.
Ms. Acosta, the dramaturg and assistant director, is in the studio constantly. “This Bridge” is something that she hasn’t seen before, she said, both in terms of its cast and its subject matter. And then there’s the question of language.
What brought him back into the fold was what many New Yorkers grapple with: “I had to pay the rent,” he said, with a laugh.
But there was something else, too. He was part of the creative team behind “Variations on Themes From Lost and Found: Scenes From a Life and Other Works by John Bernd” (2016), about the East Village choreographer and dancer who died of AIDS in 1988.
