As live television productions of classic Broadway musicals turn to more contemporary fare, some original creators have the chance to get involved. So it will be with “Rent,” which airs on Jan. 27 on Fox and is co-directed by Michael Greif, who oversaw the pathbreaking show’s premiere at New York Theater Workshop, then on Broadway.
Jonathan Larson’s 1996 musical, about Lower East Side artists living in the shadow of AIDS, was immortalized when its creator died of an aortic aneurysm just before its opening night Off Broadway.
Sara Krulwich, the theater photographer for The New York Times, had unusual access to the cast and creators in the wake of that tragedy, as well as in subsequent triumphs, following “Rent” to Broadway, a Pulitzer Prize and a national tour.
In anticipation of the television version (which stars Tinashe, Vanessa Hudgens and Brandon Victor Dixon), The Times reached out to the subjects featured in Ms. Krulwich’s early photographs. Most of the images haven’t been published, and depicted in many of them are behind-the-scenes players, now-acclaimed Broadway stars and aspiring performers who never made it into the show.
Here they describe what the pictures conveyed, then and now, after so many seasons of love.
Opening night excitement with the traditional “Gypsy Robe” worn by Gwen, whose solo was our musical compass every night. This was my first dressing room on Broadway, which I shared with my sister Daphne Rubin-Vega. The joy on my face was the realization that we were a part of something very special.
The original concept for the signature wall was that celebrities would be brought back and asked to sign. After those first previews, I’d watch friends and family watch those celebrities sign the wall while we all waited in the alley. It seemed wrong, contrary to the spirit of the show, that there was some sort of dividing line between those who could and couldn’t tell the company and Jonathan what they felt. So one night, during the second act, I wrote, “I teach 7th grade English, I hope all my students will come see this show” and signed a fake name. That night, EVERYONE in the alley signed the wall, and it was like that ever after.
I think this is a moment of pure disbelief. I’m sure I had no idea what winning the Pulitzer Prize even meant.
I’d not thought of that day since, well, likely that day, and yet now I remember it like it was a hell of a lot more recent than 22 years ago! Funnily enough, meditation was only ever (and only continues to be) a part of my life when connected to acting preparation. For many years now, I’ve worked as an acting coach both on set and privately, and I always try to impress upon students that gaining an authentic understanding of what it feels like to be being grounded and centered and self-possessed is as important as knowing what it means to break down a scene or walk in a particular character’s shoes.
It will be so interesting to see how this 2019 incarnation shakes out. So, so many things are radically different about our world today. I truly hope it resonates with kids today as it did with my generation.
P.S.: I didn’t book the gig, but that probably owes less to meditation and more to the fact that I can’t belt above middle G!
My brother Jonathan and I were extremely close. As children, we always watched the Tony Awards. He even practiced acceptance speeches in our living room for the awards he one day hoped to win. I dislike public speaking; however, I believed I knew what he would want to say and it was important to me to be the one to convey his message. I told myself that if I were called up to the stage, I could handle my own discomfort because it meant that he’d won a Tony and realized his dream.
“Rent” was the first Broadway musical I cast. We spent months and months in auditions and couldn’t find anyone for any role until the days each of the original cast walked in. Once it became clear that the run might not have an end date — and if it did, it was far away — we saw over 4,000 people at the first Broadway open call. We started creating binders to track everyone who had come in to audition for the show as a reference guide. We started with four binders, and by the time “Rent” closed on Broadway, we had over 60 binders full of schedules, headshots and resumes.
Working on “Rent Live” was an exciting way to return to that original search — not caring about names or celebrity, just looking for raw talent.