Senator Kamala Harris of California kicked off her campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination with a rally in Oakland, Calif. In her speech, she announced her candidacy and criticized current immigration policies.
OAKLAND, Calif. — Senator Kamala Harris of California officially kicked off her campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination on Sunday at an outdoor rally where she warned that the nation and the world were at “an inflection point” in history and called on all Americans to “speak truth about what’s happening” in the Trump era.
Ms. Harris, 54, who became the second black woman to serve in the United States Senate when she took office in 2017, has joined an increasingly crowded field of Democratic candidates that lacks a front-runner. The pack is the most diverse in history, with Ms. Harris among four women currently serving in the Senate or House who are now running for the Democratic nomination.
In her remarks and at other recent events, she stressed unity and fighting for people, and her support for policies that are currently popular among Democrats, like “Medicare for all” and combating climate change. But she also laid out a vision of America and cast the 2020 election as a historic one.
Senator Kamala Harris, Democrat of California, is a former prosecutor and was elected to the Senate in 2016. Ms. Harris has struck a balance between campaigning as a progressive fighter and defending moderate aspects of her record.
Among those at the rally were Lyndsey Schlax, 38, a school administrator, who attended with her husband and two sons.
Violet Sinnarkar, 20, from San Jose, who is currently a junior at the University of California-Berkeley, said many people she knew on campus were not fans of Harris. “They think she’s a cop,” Ms. Sinnarkar said about Ms. Harris’s years as district attorney of San Francisco and some past remarks praising law enforcement.
While Ms. Harris’s work as a prosecutor has drawn some criticism, she sought to frame her record as focused on helping regular people.
“In my whole life, I’ve only had one client: the people. And fighting for the people meant fighting on behalf of survivors of sexual assault. A fight not just against predators, but a fight against silence and stigma,” she said.