Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, an outspoken advocate for women’s causes and electing more women to office, is herself entering the 2020 race for the White House, becoming the latest candidate to join what is expected to be a crowded Democratic primary to take on President Trump.
In an appearance Tuesday on “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert,” Ms. Gillibrand, Democrat of New York, said she was forming an exploratory committee to raise money and travel the country for her run. She is scheduled to start campaigning within days, with plans to spend the weekend in Iowa.
“I’m going to run for president of the United States because as a young mom I am going to fight for other people’s kids as hard as I would fight for my own,’’ she said.
Ms. Gillibrand, 52, has emerged as one of the most forceful critics of the Trump administration in the last two years. She has voted against nearly every significant nominee Mr. Trump has put forward, and rallied opposition to his congressional agenda. In the last two months, as she publicly considered a campaign, she has spoken repeatedly about the need to restore the “moral compass” of the nation.
But Ms. Gillibrand, a former corporate lawyer, has been criticized by opponents as a politician without a firm ideological bearing of her own, having transformed from a pro-gun, conservative upstate congresswoman with deep ties to Wall Street financiers to a crusading liberal who rails against guns and refuses corporate political action committee money.
Ms. Gillibrand’s 2020 announcement was widely expected after weeks of presidential buildup, in which she secured office space for a headquarters in Troy, N.Y., and expanded her political staff.
“The first thing I would do is restore what’s been lost: the integrity and the compassion of this country,” Ms. Gillibrand told Mr. Colbert when he asked about her Day 1 priorities.
Ms. Gillibrand is not the first woman or even the first one in the Senate to announce her bid; Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts formed an exploratory committee two weeks ago.
Other senators expected to enter the race soon include Cory Booker of New Jersey and Kamala Harris of California, while Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and former Representative Beto O’Rourke are weighing candidacies.
Ms. Gillibrand has registered little support in early presidential polls, but she is still widely seen as a formidable candidate. Fiercely competitive and a prolific fund-raiser — she had more than $10.5 million in the bank as of late 2018 — she has invested heavily in recent years to build up a small donor network online, as well.
But nothing would be accomplished, she said, without taking on “the systems of power,” including “institutional racism” and corruption in Washington.
Ms. Gillibrand appeared nervous as the interview began, gripping Mr. Colbert’s hand just before making her announcement. At the end of the segment, Mr. Colbert gave her a gift basket of items to take with her on the trail, including a ticket to Michigan to ensure she campaigns there.
She has lined up with the left flank of her party on policy positions, embracing economic populism, but she is not expected to run a campaign as explicitly ideological as rivals like Ms. Warren and, if he runs, Mr. Sanders.
Instead, Ms. Gillibrand is expected to lean on her ability to connect with audiences on a personal level.
Her presidential announcement comes almost a decade to the day she was appointed to represent New York in the United States Senate — in what was then a surprise pick by former Gov. David A. Paterson, who elevated Ms. Gillibrand over some better-known rivals to replace Hillary Clinton when she became secretary of state.
At the time of her appointment, Ms. Gillibrand had just won re-election to her second term in the House after seizing her Albany-area seat from a Republican incumbent in 2006. She has moved steadily to the left politically since then, abandoning her former positions on guns and immigration, in particular, as she has become one of the Democratic Party’s most reliably liberal voices.
In the Senate, she has taken on some big fights, including her successful push to repeal the “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy in the military and her continuing battle to remove sexual assault cases in the armed forces from the military chain of command. 
In late 2017, she was the first Democratic senator to call for the resignation of Senator Al Franken of Minnesota as he faced multiple accusations of sexual misconduct. Her decision — which was quickly echoed by other senators, both men and women — led to a backlash from some Democratic activists and donors who were angered that Mr. Franken was forced to resign while a president accused of harassment by multiple women remained in office.
Ms. Gillibrand’s stance on Mr. Franken came on the heels of saying that, in retrospect, President Bill Clinton’s sexual relationship with an intern would have been cause to resign, even though the Clintons had championed her early in her career.
The back-to-back episodes cemented her reputation as a woman willing to buck powerful men in her own party.
Born in Albany to a political family, Ms. Gillibrand was greatly influenced by her grandmother, Dorothea Noonan, known as Polly, a powerful figure in the political machine of the longtime mayor of Albany, Erastus Corning.
Ms. Gillibrand began her career as a Manhattan lawyer in the 1990s, and has said she was inspired to get into politics by listening to Mrs. Clinton, then the first lady.
She eventually ran for Congress, in 2006, in what was seen as a long-shot race against an entrenched incumbent, John E. Sweeney. The district was 93 percent white, and Republicans vastly outnumbered Democrats.
She easily secured re-election in 2008 in a House race that was the most expensive in the nation that year.
While some 2020 candidates are expected to make explicit their appeal in Middle America, Ms. Gillibrand, at least among the Democrats from coastal blue states, can point to her initial representation of a heavily Republican and more rural House district as a sign of her experience, if not electability, with such voters.
Last November, she won election to the Senate for the third time after she pledged during the campaign’s final weeks that she would serve her full six-year term.
Ahead of her impending presidential candidacy, Ms. Gillibrand met last Saturday with a group of two dozen women for a listening session at the home of the author Letty Cottin Pogrebin.
Among the pointed questions the senator was asked: How would she become known in the rest of America?
