Iowa’s two Republican senators on Saturday condemned Representative Steve King’s remark questioning why white supremacy is considered offensive, the latest blowback from party leaders who remained largely silent over the years as the G.O.P. congressman made racist remarks and demeaning insults about immigrants.
On Saturday morning Iowa Senator Joni Ernst wrote on Twitter: “I condemn Rep. Steve King’s comments on white supremacy; they are offensive and racist — and not representative of our state of Iowa.” She linked the tweet to an opinion article published Friday by Senator Tim Scott of South Carolina, a fellow Republican and the Senate’s lone black G.O.P. member, who called out his party for staying silent on racist comments.
Iowa’s senior senator, Charles E. Grassley, also criticized Mr. King in remarks to Axios published Saturday. Mr. Grassley had endorsed Mr. King in November for re-election, even after another Republican leader had denounced Mr. King as a white supremacist.
“Iowa needs Steve King in Congress. I also need Steve King in Congress,” Mr. Grassley said in that endorsement.
Mr. King has made racist comments for more than a decade that party leaders have mostly ignored. But his statements published Thursday in The Times went further than ever, triggering a barrage of public criticism from top House Republicans as well as a former G.O.P. presidential candidate and conservatives in the media.
Mr. King took to the House floor on Friday to try to explain his remarks, saying he was “simply an American nationalist.” He did not apologize for his remarks to The Times.
House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy, a California Republican, was among the party leaders who denounced him. “Steve’s language is reckless, wrong and has no place in our society,” Mr. McCarthy said.
Mr. Scott’s opinion column in The Washington Post focused on criticizing his party for frequently failing to condemn people like Mr. King.
“Some in our party wonder why Republicans are constantly accused of racism — it is because of our silence when things like this are said,” Mr. Scott said.
In a statement after The Times article was published online, and in a six-minute speech in the House on Friday, Mr. King strenuously denied that he was a white nationalist or white supremacist.
“I reject those labels and the evil ideology they define,” he said. He did not dispute making the original remarks, but argued that he was raising a historical question about how and when the phrases came to be used to criticize people.
Mr. King, a 69-year-old former bulldozer operator who is in his ninth term, began his speech by saying he had made “a freshman mistake” by speaking to The Times.
“I regret the heartburn that has poured forth upon this Congress and this country and especially in my state and in my congressional district,” he said.
There were rumblings in the House on Friday about trying to formally reprimand Mr. King. Representative Tim Ryan, Democrat of Ohio, said that he was considering drafting a House resolution censuring him. And at least one top Democratic leader, Representative James Clyburn of South Carolina, the highest ranking African-American in Congress, told CNN he would support Mr. Ryan’s move.
Still, it was far from clear that Democrats would actually follow through. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi condemned the comments and acknowledged Democratic interest in taking some action, but said late Friday she was not prepared to make any announcements.
Democrats are focused on the shutdown fight with the president and may be inclined to let Republicans sort out their own dirty laundry.
And strategists in both parties said the reaction, to some degree, reflects the degree to which Mr. King has become a millstone for his party. If Mr. King is on the ballot in 2020, they say, it could benefit Democrats by depressing support for the Senate re-election effort of Ms. Ernst in Iowa.
“What I don’t like is he’s a drag on all our candidates and an in-kind contribution to Pelosi,” said David Kochel, a Republican strategist in Iowa.
Two Iowa Republicans announced this week they would challenge Mr. King in a primary in 2020 for his Fourth District seat. He will likely face severe difficulties in raising money if he seeks re-election.
