WASHINGTON — It has become a favorite parlor trick of President Trump’s, and on Wednesday, he was at it again, brandishing his latest letter from the North Korean dictator, Kim Jong-un.
If history is any guide, he will end up showing Mr. Kim’s letter to more than a few people. Mr. Trump delights in sharing with visitors the correspondence he has received from North Korea’s leader since they began writing to each other last year.
Theirs is not the first improbable pen-pal relationship — Catherine the Great famously corresponded with Voltaire. Nor is it the most passionate — the writers Henry Miller and Anais Nin come to mind. But few pen-pal relationships have ever been so proudly celebrated, at least by one of the pals.
The White House has yet to release any of Mr. Kim’s missives to Mr. Trump, though the president did post on Twitter a brief letter he received from Mr. Kim in July. Mr. Trump has said he would like to make more of Mr. Kim’s letters public but that the North Korean leader asked him to keep them private. In the meantime, the president plays peekaboo with inquiring reporters.
Mr. Trump has a long history of showing off to visitors. His 26th-floor office at Trump Tower has a windowsill crammed with mementos, including a championship belt sent to him by the boxer Mike Tyson; a football helmet from Tom Brady, the New England Patriots quarterback whom the president once said he hoped would be his son-in-law; and a basketball shoe signed by Shaquille O’Neal, the N.B.A. star.
“This is some serious foot,” he told a Wall Street Journal reporter, gesturing at the shoe, during the 2016 presidential campaign.
What makes Mr. Kim’s letters different, analysts said, is that they are key to a highly sensitive diplomatic negotiation over North Korea’s nuclear arsenal. The North Korean leader, they said, has set out methodically to cultivate Mr. Trump — building a rapport with him, even to the exclusion of other senior American officials, like Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, who is overseeing the negotiations.
Some analysts said they believed that South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, had counseled Mr. Kim on the wording in the letters, calculating that the president would respond to flattery and a solicitous tone.
If so, it has worked: Mr. Trump has been unstinting in his praise of Mr. Kim, even as the nuclear negotiations have bogged down, sometimes rancorously. In one letter, said a person who saw it, Mr. Kim complained that he did not want to deal with Mr. Pompeo — only with Mr. Trump.
“From a negotiation standpoint, what Trump thinks is happening is that he has the trust of Kim Jong-un,” said Joseph Y. Yun, a former State Department official who has negotiated with North Korea.
Mr. Trump is not the first president to try to turn a hardened foe into a pen pal. His predecessor, Barack Obama, sent two letters to Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, in 2009 to try to restart negotiations over its nuclear program. The ayatollah sent a multipage response to Mr. Obama’s first letter and never replied to the second.
Those letters, however, have never been released; the White House refused even to confirm their existence.
Mr. Trump has been considerably less discreet. In June, he posed, smiling, with Kim Yong-chol, an emissary from the North Korean leader, who had hand-delivered a letter from Mr. Kim in a curiously oversize envelope. After teasing reporters about its “interesting” contents, he abruptly reversed course, when asked whether he had replied.
