In early 2015, Ashley Eddie started as a line cook at Santina, an Italian restaurant in Manhattan’s Meatpacking District. Within a year, she had caught the attention of one of the owners, Mario Carbone, who promoted her to sous chef. Last summer, she became the executive chef. Since taking over the kitchen, she has added several dishes like rigatoni with pumpkinseed pesto, as well as offering a gluten-free version of every dish on the menu. Ms. Eddie, 31, works between five and six long days a week, but Sundays are a guaranteed day off. “I use the time for practical stuff like errands but also to relax and practice some self-care,” she said. Her dog, Barbara, a terrier and Chihuahua mix, also factors into her day. She lives in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, where she grew up.
PETS KNOW Sunday is the one day where I get to wake up late, so I take advantage of it and won’t get out of bed before 9. Usually, I’m up between 6 and 7 after having gone to bed at 2 or 3 the night before, so I don’t get a lot of sleep. Barbara wakes me up early every day, but for some reason, she never bothers me early on a Sunday. It’s almost like she knows that I need the rest.
TRACK WORK To get going, I make myself a cup of strong espresso, and then I’m off to walk Barbara. I’ll listen to an audiobook on my phone while we walk. I love novels, and right now, I’m listening to “Rose Madder,” by Stephen King. We head to St. John’s Park, which is three blocks from my house. There is a track there, and we jog for about an hour or so. Barbara is wiped out by the end and so am I.
CLEAN Barbara passes out as soon as we get home, which gives me a chance to get stuff done around my apartment. I’ll do the laundry that’s been piling up all week and clean from top to bottom. That means mopping the floors, scrubbing the bathroom and kitchen and wiping all the furniture.
PROTEIN HIT By now, it’s around 1 or 2, and I’m starved. I never eat breakfast, so this is the first time I’m eating all day. I’ll either order in or cook. I love to make turkey burgers. I’ll season the meat with paprika, cayenne, some herbs and onion and garlic powder, pan sear the patty and put it on whole grain bread with spicy mayo, pepper-Jack cheese and lettuce and tomato. On the side, I’ll have baked sweet-potato fries. If I’m ordering in, it’s sushi. I live for spicy tuna rolls.
A FAMILY THAT SHOPS TOGETHER My mom lives in Bed-Stuy, and Sundays are the only day where we get to hang out, given my crazy work schedule. Normally, we’ll take the subway to Manhattan to see my sister, Nesha. She’s a personal trainer and always inspiring me to work out more. The three of us love to shop. We tend to hit boutiques in SoHo, and although we don’t never need anything, we inevitably end up buying clothes or beauty products. Our go-tos are Top Shop, Sephora and Bloomingdale’s.
DAY OF INDULGENCE We finish shopping around 7, just in time for dinner. Although we never make reservations anywhere, we love Mexican. Last time, we went to Rosa Mexicano where I had guacamole, steak tacos, rice and beans and plantains. To drink, all of us had palomas and margaritas. Sunday is my cheat day when it comes to eating. I’ve lost 50 pounds in the last year by following a healthy diet and working out, and I’ve learned that a day of indulgence keeps me on track all week long.
WEEKEND REPORT I’ll head back to Brooklyn close to 11. Our dinners last for hours because we have so much fun, but the time passes by fast. This is when I need to check in to work and start thinking about the week ahead. I’ll get emails on Sunday from the team at Santina, who update me on how the day went and what the most popular dishes were.
CLEANSING Around midnight, I give Barbara her weekly bath and take a long, hot shower. Then I do a five-step skin-care ritual that’s based on Korean beauty. I use cleanser, toner, serum, moisturizer and eye cream. If I’m in the mood, I’ll also do a mask.
SHOWS Right after my beauty routine, I get straight into bed and watch a show. I’m watching “Billions” right now but am also really into comedies like “The Office.” After an episode or two, it’s lights out. I may have to head into work the next day if it’s a six day workweek, and that means that it’s not long before I need to wake up.