The government shutdown and partisan wrangling over a wall at the southern border have produced high political drama in Washington, where President Trump has sought to portray the impasse as a national emergency.
And as the shutdown reached a record 22nd day on Saturday, Americans following local and national media coverage would be forgiven for thinking they had fallen into a parallel universe — with the episode being presented both as a moment of crisis and hardship, and a curiosity that mostly registered as a politically motivated annoyance.
Early in the week, the historically conservative Cincinnati Enquirer labeled the paralysis a “buzzkill,” warning readers that the lag in government approval of new beer labels could reduce the output from local breweries. Several days later it reported on 40 Cincinnati and Northern Kentucky government employees protesting outside a local I.R.S. processing center, focusing on the financial difficulties furloughed employees face, like day care expenses and rent payments.
Polls show that more Americans blame the president for the shutdown than blame congressional Democrats. But there is a very stark partisan divide, with a large majority of Republicans supporting Mr. Trump.
And while conservative media has been mostly supportive of the president, its coverage has sometimes diverged from Mr. Trump’s tone of crisis.
In Beaumont, Tex., a moderate city in a red district near Houston, the Beaumont Enterprise editorial board welcomed Mr. Trump’s visit to the border on Thursday but urged both sides to compromise.
The Dallas Morning News published an editorial this week that took particular aim at Mr. Trump for waging a potentially unwinnable fight that focuses on crime, questioned his “moral credibility” and urged him to offer a deal that protects immigrant children in exchange for the wall he wants.
But Robert Pratt, a popular conservative radio talk-show host in Lubbock, and a former head of the county Republican Party, recently criticized the news media for focusing on government workers affected by the shutdown.
The Government Shutdown Was the Longest Ever. Here’s the History.
The roots of Washington’s budget dysfunction date to the 1970s. Here’s a look at past shutdowns and how they led to today’s.
“The temporary plight of government workers is treated as a national crisis while the perpetual plight of millions more who take huge risks, work long hours to create jobs, and build and maintain the economy rarely gets a mention,” he wrote.
There has even been some conflicting commentary in the Fox News firmament.
Mr. Kilmeade’s break from Trump orthodoxy followed a tough exchange last weekend between the “Fox News Sunday” moderator Chris Wallace and Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary.
The harsh questioning of Ms. Sanders led to the president dropping one of his key talking points — an inaccurate claim that thousands of terrorists were crossing the border — in favor of a wall.
“He was the adult in the room tonight,” Mr. Isabella said.
Rush Limbaugh, the right-wing talk radio host, praised Mr. Trump for refusing to give ground.
But in some corners of conservative media, the sentiment supporting the president was more nuanced.
Raheem Kassam, a fellow at the conservative Claremont Institute and a columnist for The Daily Caller, wrote on Tuesday that the shutdown was “of course being leveraged by the Democrats and the establishment media,” but that it was working in Mr. Trump’s favor. He added that he didn’t think arguments about the shutdown’s impact on government workers would be effective.
“From a Christian perspective, that’s been a big part,” Mr. Brody said in a phone interview.
As the debate raged in many parts of the nation, others remained unperturbed. It seemed at times that the big divide was not over who was right — in conservative circles, many people agreed that it was the president — but over how important it really was.
For many Americans, as federal workers missed their first paycheck, the effects became more visceral, and the blame game less important. That was reflected in the Cincinnati Enquirer’s article on the I.R.S. protests this week.
