Book Review|Can Americans Get Along?
Can Americans Get Along?
Illustrated. 428 pp. W.W. Norton & Company. $28.95.
Conventional wisdom holds that Americans are polarized, divided, tribalized — choose your word — over significant policy issues and that our two political parties abet and fuel this schism. Leaving aside the distinction between polarized political parties and a polarized people for the moment, the nation is surely in a time of political, intellectual and emotional realignment.
Kevin M. Kruse and Julian E. Zelizer’s “Fault Lines” grafts a geologic metaphor onto three divisive threats to our democracy as suggested by Barack Obama in his January 2017 farewell address — economic, racial and political — while adding a fourth, gender and sexuality. The authors argue that these divisions have allowed the two parties, which are seen through the fractured lens of “the media,” to create a situation in which Americans have become more polarized than ever.
But are Americans really divided by fault lines? Interestingly, there is a great deal of research that shows it is the political parties that are polarized but not the American people. Political scientists describe this situation as “party sorting.” That is, the Democratic and Republican Parties have devolved into two separate groups that offer ideological and policy conformity with almost no overlap. Remember liberal Republicans like Nelson Rockefeller of New York or conservative Democrats like Zell Miller of Georgia? They almost don’t exist anymore (Joe Manchin of West Virginia excepted) because neither party in its current iteration would have them. The actual fault lines, it might be said, are between the parties, not between two groups of the public.
So if the real story is that the political parties have sorted ideologically and are appealing to the most ideologically engaged voters, who happen to be the most outraged, what is to be done? Kruse and Zelizer argue for Americans to build bridges “that can bring us closer together,” although they are also refreshingly frank about the cant of postelection remarks on coming together — noting the ritualistic aspect whose constant repetition is, in fact, an acknowledgment of division.
Kruse and Zelizer begin their book with Obama’s farewell address. They might have ended it with two points the Obama speech made as well: “Hold fast to the faith written into our founding documents” and “regardless of our party affiliation or particular interest, help restore the sense of common purpose that we so badly need right now.” Embracing both of those points might do the trick. Then again, it might not.