Two leading candidates in the 2021 race for mayor of New York City are already beginning their ground game.
Corey Johnson, the speaker of the New York City Council, and Scott M. Stringer, the city’s comptroller, will soon begin hosting fund-raising house parties, seeking to plant a stake in what is certain to be a prolonged race for City Hall.
Neither Mr. Johnson nor Mr. Stringer has formally declared his candidacy, but the small, intimate gatherings were designed with the city’s new campaign finance rules — which increase the power of small donations — in mind.
Mr. Johnson said that a year ago he had no plans to undertake an underdog run for mayor in 2021.
“I love this city. I love New York,” Mr. Johnson said in an interview with The New York Times.
He said his first house party would likely take place in March.
He said in an interview that the house parties — what he called “thought-raisers” — would focus on issues, and that he would “ask at the end of the night that people throw a couple of dollars into the tin.” Mr. Stringer’s campaign said an email invitation sent Friday, which also asked for volunteers to host the gatherings, had reached 85,000 people.
The 2021 race does have a formally declared candidate — the Bronx borough president, Ruben Diaz Jr. — and others have been more or less campaigning behind the scenes, including the Brooklyn borough president, Eric L. Adams.
The expected large field to replace Mayor Bill de Blasio, who must step down because of term limits, will likely include the winner of next month’s special election for New York City public advocate. With the primary election more than two years away, others will also have plenty of time to jump in.
The wide-open contest bears certain similarities to the 2013 race, in which Mr. de Blasio, then the public advocate, survived a freewheeling contest punctuated by heavy spending by horse carriage opponents and the second implosion of the former congressman Anthony Weiner.
As his first major push in a second term, Mr. de Blasio spearheaded changes to the City Charter that lowered maximum contributions to $2,000 from $5,100, but increased the power of small-dollar donations, which are now matched 8-to-1 for the first $250 given to a campaign by a resident of New York City.
Candidates in 2021 can run under the new system, or stay in the old one. They have until July to decide, though Mr. Johnson and Mr. Stringer said they have already decided on the new one.
A spokesman for Mr. Adams and a spokeswoman for Mr. Diaz said their candidates were still evaluating the new rules.
Mr. Diaz, Mr. Adams and Mr. Stringer all have significantly more campaign cash in their accounts than Mr. Johnson, who did not raise money during the last fund-raising period.
