Readers debate whether the United States should support the opposition leader trying to oust Venezuela’s president.
Congratulations to President Trump and his administration. The president has made one of the first, if not the first, positive diplomatic moves of his tenure. He has joined a number of other countries in denouncing Nicolás Maduro’s claim to be the legitimate leader of Venezuela and recognizing Juan Guaidó as the opposition leader and potential president of the country.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin’s announcement on Monday that the United States had imposed sanctions against the state-owned oil company brings additional pressure against Mr. Maduro and his beleaguered government.
Moral and perhaps financial support of the opposition is essential. Physical intervention on the part of the United States and the other governments must, however, be avoided. Intervention would only increase Russia’s influence not only in Venezuela but also throughout the region. It would give the Russians an opportunity to claim plans for regional domination by the United States and the other nations recognizing Mr. Guaidó’s legitimacy.
No, the Trump administration is not “right to support Mr. Guaidó.” Regardless of the economic hardship caused by mismanagement by President Nicolás Maduro, falling oil prices and U.S. sanctions, American support of last week’s coup attempt violates both national sovereignty and international law.
The United States has a greater long-term interest in respecting Venezuelan democracy than in removing an elected leader it doesn’t like.
The writer is co-founder and former director general of the International Development Law Organization.
Understanding all the terrible actions President Nicolás Maduro has taken, and that his presidency has been disastrous for the country, does this give Juan Guaidó the right to declare Mr. Maduro’s presidency illegitimate and to declare himself interim president? Does this not sound like a huge constitutional crisis that Venezuelans, not other nations, need to resolve?
How would we feel if Nancy Pelosi made the case that President Trump is unstable and unfit to serve and then stood in front of a cheering crowd and declared herself president of the United States? And would it then be right that other countries recognized President Pelosi before our own country decided what to do next?
