‘ANNE OF GREEN GABLES: PART I’ (Feb. 1, noon; Feb. 2 and 4, 6:30 p.m.; Feb. 3, 1 p.m.; through Feb. 11) and ‘ANNE OF GREEN GABLES: PART II’ (Jan. 31 and Feb. 3 and 7, 6:30 p.m.; through Feb. 10) at the Royal Family Performing Arts Space. If you’d like to acquaint your children with a young heroine who is brave, high-spirited and definitely not a pampered princess, you can always rely on Anne Shirley, the plucky 11-year-old Canadian orphan in Lucy Maud Montgomery’s series of novels. Lately, Anne’s story has attracted quite a few adapters, and the writer and director Chris Henry is bringing the first book about the character, “Anne of Green Gables” (1908), to the stage in a multipart dramatization. Royal Family Productions is offering the world premiere of “Part I” (first seen during its development in 2017), starring Ali Ewoldt, and a workshop production of “Part II,” with Doreen Montalvo. Choreographed by Lorna Ventura, these works present Anne’s adventures through the actions of the lead actress and a team of dancers.
BAMKIDS FILM FESTIVAL at BAM Rose Cinemas (Feb. 2-3, 9:30 a.m.-4 p.m.). Not many children get to travel the world, but those visiting the Brooklyn Academy of Music this weekend can do so through this annual festival’s movies, which represent 27 countries. Although few tickets remain for the Spanish director Andoni Canela’s feature-length documentary “Looking for the Wild,” in which Canela’s young son narrates his family’s journey to film an endangered species on each continent, young audiences will discover plenty of global creatures (and cultures) in the festival’s five programs of short works. Their characters include a checkers-playing cat in “6:1,” from Russia; a colony of partying birds in “Penguin,” from Germany; and an enterprising platypus in “No-No Wants to Try Sport,” from France. Festivalgoers will also encounter intrepid young people in films like the Danish adventure “Dark, Dark Woods,” the South African tale “Belly Flop” and the Brazilian story “Doctor of Monster.” Intended for children 3 to 11 — each slate of films has age recommendations — the festival also offers crafts, circus arts, a magic act, a green-screen experience and movement workshops (for which tickets are required) taught by the company Dancewave.
BROADWAY PLAYHOUSE: ALAN JAY LERNER & FREDERICK LOEWE at Merkin Hall (Feb. 3, 11 a.m.). Wouldn’t it be loverly if you could prepare your kids for a lifetime of theatergoing by introducing them at a young age to classic stage composers? That’s the purpose of the Kaufman Music Center’s Broadway Playhouse series, which is beginning its 2019 season with a show about Lerner and Loewe. Recommended for ages 4 through 11, the performance will include a mini-production of that duo’s current Broadway hit, “My Fair Lady,” with a chance to sing along to numbers like “The Rain in Spain.” The program will also feature medleys and games devoted to the songwriters, as well as opportunities to join the cast onstage.
JUST KIDDING: ‘THE GUSTAFER YELLOWGOLD SHOW’ at Symphony Space (Feb. 2, 11 a.m.). Gustafer Yellowgold is one hot dude. A creature born on the sun and now living in Minnesota, he may be the most child-friendly alien since E.T. The invention of Morgan Taylor, an artist, musician and singer-songwriter, Gustafer has been entertaining young audiences since 2005 in multimedia shows that combine Taylor’s original songs, stories and hand-drawn color animations. This performance, which will also feature a live band, will present an abridged version of Taylor’s recent audiobook, “I’m From the Sun: The Gustafer Yellowgold Story,” as well as older folk-flavored tunes starring his space-traveling hero.
‘THE STINKY CHEESE MAN AND OTHER FAIRLY STUPID TALES’ at the Borough of Manhattan Community College Tribeca Performing Arts Center (Feb. 3, 11 a.m.). Based on the popular fairy tale satire written by Jon Scieszka and illustrated by Lane Smith, this family theater production portrays the hero of “Jack and the Beanstalk” as a kind of latter-day Scheherazade. When Jack can’t escape the pursuing giant by chopping down the beanstalk fast enough, the boy tries to keep himself from being eaten by diverting the ogre with ever-more-fantastical stories. Jack’s jumbled versions of well-known narratives include “Little Red Running Shorts” and an encounter between Goldilocks and three elephants. And don’t forget that smelly cheese guy.
