Latasha McMickle, 41, dressed in a black shirt and black jeans, strutted down the two-block length of the Manhattan Marriage Bureau in New York as if she were in a fashion show. The stone-tiled floor was her runway. Brides, grooms and their family and friends, who sat on the faux lime green leather banquettes, became her spectators. A red rose bouquet was in one hand; a blue marriage certificate folder in her other.
Last May, the CityStore at the Bureau, where 300-plus ceremonies, often called City Hall weddings, are performed weekly, switched from selling real flowers to renting silk and synthetic arrangements of sunflowers, white roses and calla lilies, among others. Ms. McMickle is one of three salespeople who help showcase them.
“We used the same flower vendor for eight years, but he closed down his business. Wedding season was approaching and we needed to have an offering for the brides,” said Dana Rosario, 42, the director of CityStores, which operates from 141 Worth Street. Since its inception, more than 900 couples have rented bouquets, each costing $6 per hour. Before the holidays, the shop was averaging approximately 35 rentals per week. During the holiday season that number increased to 20-plus a day.
Almost instantly people inquired about purchasing them.
With an investment of less than $200, and in one day, Ms. Rosario replicated the originals, offering a total of 18 bouquets. Some, like the red roses, are duplicates. Each offers eight to 10 flowers.
According to Ms. Rosario, red roses are the favorite. “They’re more traditional and classic, and represent romance,” she said.
On Dec. 13, The Times followed three couples, who opted to rent flowers for their wedding, and all of whom were married by Angel L. Lopez, a staff member of the New York City Clerk’s Office.
BEATRIZ HERNANDEZ, 29, and her fiancé, Jeremy Bell, 30, met three years ago and were engaged for only a month before marrying. They stood with Ms. Hernandez’s sister and her wife, eager to wed.
Neither Ms. Hernandez nor Mr. Bell had expected to meet anyone significant in 2015, when each was invited to a friend’s barbecue in Los Cabos, Mexico.
Mr. Bell, who realized he might have appeared impolite, tried to talk with Ms. Hernandez again. This time things went better. They spoke until 4 a.m.
Their first date was a week later on Valentine’s Day. Again they talked into the early morning. Additional dates followed. In August, Ms. Hernandez moved to New York to pursue a career as a professional dancer; Mr. Bell went to Nevada to attend college.
Ms. Hernandez got a job as a nanny and joined a dance troupe; Mr. Bell left college and began construction work. Two years went by. Neither forgot about the other, and neither lost hope of rekindling their connection.
In March 2017, Ms. Hernandez had enough of the dating scene in New York. She missed Mr. Bell and invited him to visit. He agreed.
Mr. Bell felt similarly. He stayed for five days and discovered a passion for New York, and for Ms. Hernandez. When he returned home, he quit his job, sold his truck and moved to Brooklyn to join Ms. Hernandez, where they currently live.
Things were not easy. He attended community college, but he couldn’t find work. Ms. Hernandez carried the financial responsibilities. Their relationship became strained.
During these hard months Mr. Bell saw how much she cared about him and was committed to their relationship. He knew he had to stick it out — for her.
Things became easier when he secured a job at BierWax, a new bar in Prospect Heights. He saved money and bought a ring. In November 2018, he brought Ms. Hernandez to the Observatory at One World Trade Center and proposed.
Time 12:45 p.m.
Ms. Sascau met Edgardo Gallardo, also 39, on a Norwegian Cruise Line in 2011 where both had jobs. She is from Romania; he is from Mexico.
He nodded a yes.
Mr. Gallardo was not originally attending. He thought Ms. Sascau was asking him out, and so he accepted.
After the performance, the group went for dinner and drinks.
Mr. Gallardo liked her, and continued to ask her out. Other dates followed. Yet Ms. Sascau didn’t hold much stock in cruise romances.
Still, they stayed in touch. When she invited him to travel with her as her guest during her next stint, as he was not working during those months, he agreed. They had a great time. But their next job found them on different ships.
They decided to fight.
When Ms. Sascau’s father became ill and then passed away, that’s when they grew closer. They Facetimed, texted and called each other constantly.
In 2012 they found themselves working on the same ship, again.
At the time, she was an excursions manager; he was chief officer.
Their relationship continued to grow. In the summer of 2013 the couple bought a home in the suburbs of Bucharest, Romania, and Mr. Gallardo bought a ring. A year later, while on a puddle jumper in Alaska, one of Ms. Sascau’s favorite places, he proposed. Ms. Sascau quickly said yes.
Time 1 p.m.
Her parents, aunt, cousin, and Mr. Kovach’s mother were waiting with the couple.
Actually, they sort of did.
They discovered they had gone to the same grade school, and as children, lived a block away from each other.
Mr. Kovach turned out not to be involved with axes in any way, and Ms. Parham was having such a good time she created an extra item she “needed” so they could continue shopping.
“When he drove me home, we sat outside my house in his car and just talked for hours — neither one of us wanted to part ways,” she said.
They became closer over the next several months. There were phone calls, dates and introductions to one another’s families. In September, Ms. Parham helped Mr. Kovach celebrate his 24th birthday.
When Mr. Kovach used the restroom, Ms. Parham told her cousin she was going to marry him.
Two years later she did.
The marriage was somewhat spur of the moment. Mr. Kovach proposed spontaneously in Atlantic City on the boardwalk over the summer.
