OTTAWA — A Toronto landscaper pleaded guilty to eight murders on Tuesday in a case that traumatized the gay community in Canada’s largest city.
The landscaper, Bruce McArthur, 67, was arrested a year ago and initially charged with killing six men, dismembering them and hiding the pieces in planters on the property of a client who allowed him to store tools there.
Additional remains were later uncovered in a ravine behind the house where he had transformed planters into graves.
A limited amount of new information about the killings was presented in court on Tuesday. Michael Cantlon, a prosecutor, said Mr. McArthur planned all of the murders, held some of his victims captive and killed others while also sexually assaulting them.
Mr. McArthur kept pieces of his victims’ property, like jewelry and diaries, as souvenirs after killing them.
Speaking outside the downtown Toronto courthouse after the court hearing, the police involved in the investigation declined to speak about the killer’s motive.
“I don’t know if we’ll ever know why,” Det. David Dickinson of the homicide squad told reporters.
Mr. McArthur’s case opened a rift between Toronto’s police force and many members of the city’s gay community.
For about eight years, activists say, the police were uninterested in vigorously pursuing missing persons cases involving gay men or members of minority groups in and around a strip of Church Street lined with business catering to gays, and dismissed fears that a serial killer was at work.
Six of the victims were of South Asian or Middle Eastern descent.
A retired judge is now examining how the Toronto police handle missing persons reports, although she is not reviewing the actions of the police in the McArthur investigation.
The ill will has brought relations between Toronto’s gay community and the police to a low not seen since 1981, when the force staged raids of four bathhouses and arrested more than 300 men, then the largest mass arrest in the city’s history.
Most of the people charged then were subjected to taunts by police officers about their sexuality.
Ultimately, a majority of the people charged were acquitted. Large protests followed the raids, and the incident has come to be seen as a pivotal moment in Canada’s gay rights movement.
Mr. McArthur pleaded guilty to the first-degree murders of Skandaraj Navaratnam, Abdulbasir Faizi, Andrew Kinsman, Majeed Kayhan, Soroush Mahmudi, Kirushna Kumar Kanagaratnam, Dean Lisowick and Selim Esen.
All of his victims vanished between 2010 and 2017.
Mr. McArthur’s sentencing was scheduled for Feb. 4. At least two dozen people are expected to read statements about how their lives have been affected by the killings.
Under Canadian law, the maximum sentence for first-degree murder is life in prison with no chance of parole for 25 years.
Accounting for time served while awaiting trial, Justice John McMahon of the Ontario Superior Court told Mr. McArthur that he would be at least 91 years old before he could apply for parole.
Since 2011, judges have been allowed to impose consecutive sentences in mass murder cases. In Mr. McArthur’s case, that would mean he would certainly die in prison, since he could not apply for parole for 200 years.
Haran Vijayanathan, executive director of the Alliance for South Asian AIDS Prevention, said after attending the hearing that he was relieved that Mr. McArthur had spared the victims’ family members and friends from having to endure what would have most likely been a long trial.
And while he praised the efforts of investigators who finally tracked down Mr. McArthur, he said it now has become important to determine why it took so long.
In the 1990s, Mr. McArthur, a married father of two, left his wife in Oshawa, Ontario, and moved to Toronto, where he became a figure on the Church Street scene.
In 2003, Mr. McArthur was given a conditional sentence for attacking a man with a metal pipe. He was then barred by the court from the Church Street area.
