Theater|Will a New Play Restart a Fire?
Will a New Play Restart a Fire?
Years after the Supreme Court ruled that New Haven unfairly treated white firefighters who were seeking promotion, “Good Faith” checks in on a wounded city.
He was referring to conversations that form the basis of “Good Faith: Four Chats About Race and the New Haven Fire Department,” which begins performances Feb. 1 at the theater — and may well rekindle debates that divided this city.
In 2009, the Supreme Court ruled, in a 5-to-4 decision, that the city violated the civil rights of a group of largely white firefighters, including Mr. Ricci, when it set aside the results of a 2003 exam for promotion in which they had scored highest.
Administrators, including the mayor at the time, John DeStefano Jr., argued they were simply trying to comply with a federal law that views job requirements like promotional tests with suspicion when they disproportionately rule out minority applicants.
After a suggestion by a Yale law professor that the case, and its implications under a Trump administration, could make compelling theater, Yale Rep commissioned the playwright Karen Hartman to write about it for the stage.
The play also allowed her to talk about race in a small American city “with big city issues.” New Haven’s population of 130,000 is 34 percent black, 31 percent white and 27 percent Hispanic.
Over four years of research, Ms. Hartman — who lived in New Haven in the ’90s while a graduate playwriting student at Yale School of Drama — sat in on training sessions at the fire academy, rode in fire trucks and hung out among first responders.
The play is presented as a series of “chats” — Ms. Hartman’s deliberately chosen nonthreatening word — in the years following the verdict, centering mainly around four first-name-only characters: two African-American firefighters, a white firefighter and a white female lawyer, with a fifth character representing the playwright.
“I am, in a sense, the audience — someone trying to figure things out, following my nose and going with what was interesting to me,” Ms. Hartman explained.
She knew she would be initially seen as an outsider: a liberal white woman artist “swanning in with all of the assumptions that come with that,” and her expectations were not mistaken. But concern about how Ms. Hartman’s narrative will be presented came from both sides.
The play does not go into detail on the many trials and spinoff cases that ate up some 10 years, said Jennifer Kiger, director of new play programs at Yale’s Binger Center for New Theater, which helped in its development.
Kenny Leon, the Tony Award-winning director who is staging “Good Faith,” feels those issues personally.
Race and class divides go beyond the firehouse, according to Ms. Hartman, and the play also explores how members of elite liberal institutions show unconscious bias when making assumptions about merit. “That was a big thing that emerged,” she said.
The 2016 election of Donald Trump, whose victory depended on the anxiety of the white working class, led the playwright back to New Haven to continue her conversations.
Michael Briscoe, an African-American former firefighter, went on to challenge the city’s testing process following the 2009 court decision. He said he hopes the play, which features a character based on him, has a unifying message.
Mr. Ricci, on the other hand, hasn’t yet seen the play. But he is dubious about the role of Yale. While he acknowledged that the university’s law school has produced conservative judges — “some great ones, too, like Clarence Thomas” — the drama school is another place entirely.
In a divided city in a divided nation, will people approach each other with “good faith”? Ms. Hartman said the phrase was used by subjects on both sides of the fire department debate.
