The latest advice the Trump administration is giving government employees who are missing their paychecks: Just borrow some money.
Eric Pfeifer, a furloughed United States Forest Service employee, is not really sure how that would work. He is already carrying a mortgage from a new house he closed on in mid-December and had to barter away his furniture when the shutdown meant the government was suddenly unable to reimburse him for moving costs.
But that was the suggestion of Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross on Thursday, who said he did not understand why federal workers who will miss a paycheck for a second time this month on Friday would turn to services like food banks.
“The obligations that they would undertake — say borrowing from a bank or credit union — are in effect federally guaranteed,” Mr. Ross told Andrew Ross Sorkin of The New York Times on CNBC. Credit unions serving public employees are offering “very, very low-interest-rate loans” and banks are also willing to lend, he said.
“True, the people might have to pay a little bit of interest, but the idea that it’s paycheck or zero is not a really valid idea,” Mr. Ross said.
The terms available to the 800,000 unpaid workers can vary greatly: Some credit unions are offering straightforward interest-free loans that will be repaid automatically when workers receive back pay. But the nation’s four biggest banks — Bank of America, Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo — don’t offer personal loans at all, meaning workers who keep their accounts there would need to look elsewhere.
And credit unions that serve public workers cannot necessarily be counted on for low-interest help: The credit union affiliated with Mr. Ross’s department — the Department of Commerce Federal Credit Union — is offering shutdown loans of up to $5,000 with an interest rate of 8.99 percent. A credit union representative confirmed the rate listed on its website, but suggested a caller speak with a loan specialist to see if the rate could be reduced according to a borrower’s circumstances.
A rate of nearly 9 percent is higher than some commercially available loans not pegged to the shutdown. Goldman Sachs, which is making personal loans through its Marcus division, is offering rates as low as 6.99 percent.
The American Bankers Association has a list of more than 100 banks offering special help to furloughed workers, but each institution’s offer is different. SunTrust is offering a loan with no interest or payments for 90 days. Alpine Bank in Colorado is offering a no-interest loan up to $8,500 with no payments due until six months after the shutdown ends. Others, like US Bank and USAA, are offering low-rate loans.
Credit unions are typically more generous: Navy Federal Credit Union, for example, will allow workers who have direct deposit to take interest-free loans of up to $6,000 that will be automatically repaid when the shutdown ends. But that offer is open only to existing members who have already set up direct deposit.
The idea of a loan is hard to swallow for some employees. Interest or no, it is an obligation they would take on while uncertain when they could pay it back.
Some workers said they worried that back pay would not be included in their eventual paychecks, despite Mr. Ross’s assurances.
Mr. Pfeifer, who wanted to be clear that he was not speaking on behalf of the Forest Service, moved with his wife this month across the state of Washington, from Walla Walla to Republic. They immediately faced new expenses while still paying down credit card debt: His wife needed to buy school supplies before starting a new teaching job, and her car needed winter tires for the mountain town’s heavy snows.
Alecia Lane, a management analyst at the Food and Drug Administration who has been furloughed since Dec. 27, said she budgeted her expenses carefully and did not know how loan payments would fit into them once her paychecks returned.
“That’s another bill added that people might not be able to afford,” she said.
Ms. Lane preferred a crowdsourced solution: She set up a GoFundMe account. The page, which went up Friday, asks for $5,000 — the amount she has missed over two pay periods. As of late Thursday, she had raised over $3,000.
Demand for loan programs can only increase as the shutdown drags on. Navy Federal Credit Union said about 100,000 of its 8.1 million members were affected by the shutdown. More than 19,000 had enrolled in its loan program, and the number was rising.
If the shutdown persists, some of these institutions could end up needing loans themselves.
The U.S. Employees Credit Union, based in Chicago, is offering interest-free loans to the federal workers who make up the vast majority of its 8,000 members.
The credit union has $85 million in assets under management, but as of two weeks ago, the total dollar amount of direct deposits it received had dropped nearly 30 percent.
