Stephen Paddock, the gunman who killed 58 people in a barrage of gunfire from his perch in a Las Vegas hotel suite, had sought infamy and most likely chose his target, an outdoor music festival, because of the image of harming people who were having fun, according to an F.B.I. report released on Tuesday.
But after a lengthy investigation, a team of investigators and behavioral analysts could not determine a “single or clear motivating factor” behind Mr. Paddock’s October 2017 attack, the report concluded. In the years before the mass shooting, Mr. Paddock had complained about his declining physical and mental health, which led him to meticulously plan the attack with the explicit intention of committing suicide in the end, the F.B.I. found.
Yet Mr. Paddock left no suicide note, manifesto or communication about the attack or his thinking, investigators said. The F.B.I. report underscored the lingering mystery of the rampage, echoing the frustrations expressed by investigators just days after the attack — that Mr. Paddock had carefully covered his tracks, had not told anyone about his plans and had no obvious motivations.
“The L.V.R.P.’s Key Findings illustrate that Paddock was, in many ways, similar to other active shooters the F.B.I. has studied,” the report said, referring to the Las Vegas Review Panel, a group of investigators, psychologists and other experts who analyzed evidence over a year.
The report portrays Mr. Paddock as heavily influenced by his father, a notorious bank robber in the 1960s and ’70s who landed on the F.B.I.’s most wanted list, and as being devoid of empathy for others. According to the report, he viewed people much the same way he approached gambling: A life, like every bet, was transactional.
That mind-set led him to target the Route 91 Harvest Festival, the country music show below his suite on the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino.
“He had a history of exploiting others through manipulation and duplicity, sometimes resulting in a cruel deprivation of their expectations without warning,” the F.B.I. said in the report.