JERUSALEM — The Israeli military said on Monday that it had attacked Iranian military targets in Syria, capping an exchange of blows in a rare, direct confrontation between the two antagonists that risks escalating the fight over Iran’s military entrenchment in Syria.
Eight days earlier, Mr. Netanyahu said that Israeli forces had recently attacked Iranian weapons depots in Syria. Iran and Hezbollah, an Iranian-backed Lebanese militia, are sworn enemies of Israel and have been crucial allies of the Syrian ruler, Bashar al-Assad, in his country’s long and devastating civil war.
Analysts have warned that Israel’s new openness could ratchet up tensions, making it harder for Iranian leaders to ignore attacks and pushing them to retaliate.
Israel’s lifting of the veil on its fight against Iran in Syria came during a changeover of military chiefs of staff, and as Mr. Netanyahu is campaigning for re-election under a cloud of corruption investigations.
He specifically noted comments on Monday by the Iranian Air Force commander, Aziz Nassirzadeh, though they differed little from countless previous Iranian threats against Israel.
Iran’s “current and future generations are ready, impatiently, and with every fiber of their being, for battle with the Zionist regime and to wipe it off the face of the earth,” Mr. Nassirzadeh told the Young Journalists Club, a hard-line Iranian news outlet.
A hard-line Iranian news website, Tabnak, said that Iran and Israel were heading toward a dangerous confrontation over Syria, adding that Israel had recently changed what it called the unwritten rules of the conflict.
The Israeli military said the overnight targets included sites in Syria of the Iranian Quds Force, the branch of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps that is responsible for foreign operations, as well as a large weapons storage facility in the Damascus International Airport, an Iranian intelligence site and an Iranian military training camp.
“We see a clear presence of Quds forces in Damascus International Airport, inside Syrian army bases and even Quds Force buildings right next to Syrian armed forces, which is a liability to the Syrian regime and its armed forces,” Lt. Col. Jonathan Conricus, an Israeli military spokesman, told reporters on Monday.
Colonel Conricus said Syria had ignored Israeli warnings to keep out of the hostilities overnight, firing dozens of surface-to-air missiles. In response, he said, Israel conducted three sorties and attacked several Syrian antiaircraft batteries.
He described the Iranian missile attack as “premeditated,” and said it had been launched from an area in Syria that Israel had been promised would be free of Iranian forces. He refused to say who had made that promise.
The Israeli military was on an elevated level of alert on Monday and the popular ski site, on Mount Hermon, was closed for the day as a precaution.
The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said in a Twitter post that Israel had destroyed warehouses and sites of the Iranians, Hezbollah, and the Syrian military and killed 11 fighters, without specifying their nationality.
The Syrian state news media said that Syria’s air defenses downed most of the Israeli missiles before they reached their targets. The Defense Ministry of Russia, another country fighting for the Syrian government, said the Israeli strikes had killed four Syrian soldiers and asserted that Syrian forces had intercepted 30 Israeli missiles since Sunday.
Russia supplied Syria with the sophisticated S-300 ground-to-air missile system after a Russian military plane was shot down over Syria in September, killing 15 Russian service members. Syrian forces shot the plane down accidentally, trying to hit an Israeli jet after an Israeli airstrike, and Russian officials blamed Israel.
But Israel and Russia have a system for communicating with each other to avoid accidental clashes in Syria. Colonel Conricus said the mechanism was being “honored by both sides and continues as we speak,” and that it was used overnight.
Israeli officials have acknowledged carrying out hundreds of strikes against weapons convoys and Iranian targets in Syria, but had previously avoided confirming responsibility for specific attacks immediately after they took place in an effort to deter retaliation.
During the visit to Chad, the first by an Israeli prime minister in decades, the two countries announced a resumption of diplomatic relations.
Many Israelis have questioned the motives of Mr. Netanyahu and the military for lifting some of the secrecy from Israeli strikes in Syria.
Mr. Amidror discounted the possibility that the Israeli elections, scheduled for April 9, had anything to do with the decision.
But Mr. Netanyahu, who also serves as the defense minister, among other roles, faces possible bribery charges, and some critics have accused him of focusing on security threats to draw attention away from his legal troubles, and have voiced concern about a wider conflict.
