Daryl Dragon, the “Captain” half of the pop duo the Captain and Tennille, whose string of soft-rock hits in the 1970s included “Love Will Keep Us Together” and “Muskrat Love,” died on Wednesday in Prescott, Ariz. He was 76.
The Captain and Tennille, whose specialty was romantic ballads featuring Ms. Tennille’s silky voice, reached the Top 10 seven times from 1975 to 1979.
He had been performing with the Beach Boys for several years before the hat made its fateful appearance.
Daryl Dragon was born on Aug. 27, 1942, in Los Angeles. His father, Carmen, was a composer and conductor, and his mother, Eloise (Rawitzer) Dragon, was a soprano who sang on radio programs.
Mr. Dragon was trained in classical piano but didn’t take to it.
He played in several bands in the 1960s before signing on with the Beach Boys. He met Ms. Tennille in 1971, when he was brought in to play keyboards for the San Francisco run of an ecology-themed musical, “Mother Earth,” which she had co-written and in which she was performing with South Coast Repertory, a theater company from Orange County, Calif. He in turn brought her onto a Beach Boys tour as a backup singer and pianist.
The two began performing together in nightclubs, and after self-financing a demo, they landed a record contract. Their cover of “Love Will Keep Us Together,” a song that Neil Sedaka and Howard Greenfield wrote and that Mr. Sedaka recorded in 1973, became a worldwide hit in 1975, reaching No. 1 on the Billboard singles chart and winning the Grammy Award for record of the year.
The Captain and Tennille kept turning out hits for the rest of the 1970s.
They also landed a television variety show on ABC as the network tried to duplicate the success that Sonny and Cher had enjoyed with their own show earlier in the decade. But the series, which had its premiere in September 1976, lasted only one season. Mr. Dragon found the whole experience distasteful.
Mr. Dragon produced all 10 of the duo’s 10 albums. They continued to perform after their hit-making run ended in 1979 — “Do That to Me One More Time” was their last gold record — and Mr. Dragon produced other artists. Ms. Tennille, meanwhile, increasingly pursued solo projects.
The couple divorced in 2014. In 2016, Ms. Tennille published a memoir in which she wrote that their marriage had not been the idyllic partnership it had been made to seem.
Their record company, she wrote, falsely announced that they had married on Valentine’s Day 1975; to satisfy expectations, they married for real not long after.
“I can say without exaggeration that he showed no physical affection for me during our very long marriage,” she wrote.
Mr. Dragon is survived by a brother, Doug.