Books|Jane Harper Started as a Business Reporter. Now She Writes Novels About Murder.
Jane Harper Started as a Business Reporter. Now She Writes Novels About Murder.
Her mysteries set in Australia have international appeal. Her latest, “The Lost Man,” hits American bookstores in February.
SYDNEY, Australia — Four years ago, Jane Harper was a business reporter at The Herald Sun, a tabloid in Melbourne, Australia. Harper, who is now 38, liked to tell friends that she had “more self-improvement activities than a Victorian spinster,” busying herself with hobbies including sewing, ballroom dancing, tennis and piano lessons. But there was one project Harper didn’t talk about: She was writing a murder mystery inspired by “Gone Girl,” Agatha Christie and all the other thrillers she’d loved reading since childhood.
“Is there anything more boring than someone trying to tell you about the novel they’re working on?” Harper asked over lunch recently here in Sydney. She was explaining why she didn’t let on about her manuscript, which she worked on for an hour before and after work each day. A journalist eking out a novel is cliché, but what happened next was so shocking, you’d have to call it a twist.
Harper’s TEDx Talk was in part, perhaps, an effort to set the record straight: Much has been made in the news media about a 12-week creative writing course she took in 2014 through an offshoot of the London branch of the literary agency Curtis Brown. Shortly afterward, she produced the manuscript of “The Dry.” When Harper was asked at lunch about the course, it was the one time she seemed anything less than sunny. “I think honestly the impact of that has been overstated,” she said. “I was a journalist for thirteen years. I wrote every single day. I wrote thousands of words a week under pressure.” The course, she said, merely offered her some external accountability.
Another element that Paterson said elevates Harper’s books from procedurals is an attention to character. At the center of both “The Dry” and “Force of Nature” is Aaron Falk, a Melbourne detective. In “The Dry,” he is forced to confront a dark chapter in his past as he solves a murder in his hometown; in “Force of Nature,” he searches for a missing hiker, lost in the woods outside the city. Falk, at times infuriating in his emotional inhibition, is a particularly compelling creation.
“You don’t have to know the place to get the feelings of the characters,” said Deborah Force, who owns an independent Melbourne bookstore called the Sun and was an early champion of Harper’s writing. “The Lost Man” was her shop’s best-selling title over the holidays. “Even people who say they don’t like crime really liked ‘The Dry,’” Force said.
