WASHINGTON — For the last month, President Trump’s public schedule has mostly been a sparse document. The one issued for Tuesday, for instance, listed only his daily intelligence briefing and lunch with the vice president. No new policy announcements. No new cabinet appointments.
As the partial government shutdown enters its 33rd day, Democrats accuse Mr. Trump of hostage-taking tactics, but among the hostages has been his own presidency. Other than his single-minded pursuit of a border wall, Mr. Trump has all but put on hold advancing the rest of his agenda. It has become, as one administration official put it, a one-issue White House.
Senate leaders briefly raised hopes of a possible cease-fire in the shutdown on Tuesday by agreeing to hold votes on a pair of measures this week, but it appeared unlikely that either would draw the 60 votes necessary. Mr. Trump is eager to deliver his State of the Union address in the House chamber next week as originally scheduled, the most prominent platform a president has to set the terms for the coming year. But Speaker Nancy Pelosi has suggested it might be postponed or canceled if government agencies remain closed.
White House officials said they were operating on the assumption that the president would still give the speech at the Capitol next Tuesday unless expressly disinvited, but if that were to happen, they had alternative options, like a televised speech delivered in the East Room of the White House. The address is being written to unveil a variety of policies, not just discuss the border dispute, which is one reason it is so important to Mr. Trump.
The standoff has already forced Mr. Trump to cancel a trip to Europe to meet with global business leaders in Davos, Switzerland, at a time when the world economy faces a possible slowdown. The president has made no evident progress in filling a series of senior vacancies nor has he produced the tax-cutting plan he promised last year. He has done nothing in weeks to publicly promote priorities like fighting opioid abuse or bolstering the economy.
The core of President Trump’s argument for the southern border wall has remained largely the same. But as the fight wears on, his justification has expanded and details like cost and construction materials have evolved.
“The wall or the steel barrier. They can have any name they want. But we have to have it.” President Trump often repeats the same things when talking about why he wants a southern border wall. “The crime.” “Drugs.” “American jobs.” While there is little evidence these problems are caused by unauthorized immigration or that any of this will be helped by a wall, he has remained steadfast. “I will build a great, great wall.” “You need that wall.” “We can do without a wall.” But as the fight over border security has dragged on, here’s how he’s expanded his argument. He’s always said it was about securing the border. But recently, Trump has emphasized that he believes building the wall is the moral and compassionate thing to do. “This is the cycle of human suffering that I am determined to end. ” And he says a wall will benefit people on both sides of the border, addressing what he is calling — “This is a humanitarian crisis, a crisis of the heart and a crisis of the soul.” But Democrats say the current situation at the border was escalated by Trump’s policies. “A challenge that President Trump’s own cruel and counterproductive policies have only deepened.” So who does Trump think will benefit? Over time, Trump has named many groups that he says will benefit from a wall. It started as the — “American worker.” And then expanded to — “Legal residents.” And — “And our vets.” “Our immigrant communities.” “Asian-Americans.” “Hispanic-American communities.” “African-American workers.” “It’s also what our professionals at the border want and need.” How will Trump pay for the wall? After some discrepancies regarding the wall’s price tag — “$6 billion.” “Probably $8 billion.” “Maybe $10 or $12 billion.” “$18 billion.” “$5.7 billion for a physical barrier.” Trump has modified his claim that Mexico is going to pay for the wall. “Mexico —” “will pay —” “for the wall. 100 percent.” It’s gone from — “They don’t know it yet, but they’re paying for it.” To — “It may be through reimbursement, but one way or the other Mexico will pay for the wall.” And — “The border wall would very quickly pay for itself.” And finally, what will Trump’s wall look like? Trump’s vision for the wall itself has also changed over time. Early on, Trump said the wall would be — “It’s going to be a Trump wall. It’s going to be a real wall.” “An impenetrable, physical, tall, powerful, beautiful —” “A serious wall.” “This is a wall that’s a heck of a lot higher than the ceiling.” “It’s going to be made of hardened concrete and it’s going to be made out of rebar and steel.” Now, it’s sounding more like this: “I never said I’m going to build a concrete — I said I’m going to build a wall. Just so you know, because I know you’re not into the construction business.” “Steel is stronger than concrete.” “It’s a new design, highest technology.” “Walls that you can see through.” “It will be a steel barrier rather than a concrete wall.” So, will his latest push end with a wall? There’s still a tough political fight ahead.
“There is this frustration that the shutdown is interfering with the ability of Republicans — I assume Democrats feel the same way — to advance the agenda,” said Lanhee J. Chen, who was chief policy adviser to Mitt Romney’s Republican presidential campaign in 2012 and is now at Stanford University.
Many of Mr. Trump’s agency leaders and senior advisers, of course, are still at work. His trade negotiators are focused on brokering an agreement to ease the tariff war with China, and Mr. Trump himself met with a visiting official from North Korea to pave the way for a second summit meeting with its leader, Kim Jong-un, as early as next month.
But at a time when a president is typically finishing a collection of policies in connection with the State of the Union and previewing them to build public support, some of Mr. Trump’s aides acknowledge that the president and his senior team have been almost entirely focused on the border dispute.
Indeed, administration officials said the situation had the unintended benefit of making it easier for Mick Mulvaney, the newly installed acting White House chief of staff, to settle into his job because he did not have as many issues to juggle.
The president, who made no public appearances on Tuesday, has kept his primary attention on the fight for the border wall for weeks, making only two unrelated out-of-town trips since the shutdown began, an unannounced stop in Iraq to visit troops at Christmas time and a quick flight to Dover Air Force Base in Delaware last weekend to pay respects to the returning remains of four Americans killed in Syria. Even a day trip to New Orleans to address farmers turned into another public pitch for the wall.
Still in his inbox are a slew of important vacancies to fill, including defense secretary, interior secretary and chief of staff. His attorney general, United Nations ambassador and Environmental Protection Agency chief are all serving in an acting capacity while waiting for Senate confirmation votes of his nominees. The White House on Tuesday sent 51 judicial nominations to the Senate, returning names that had gone unacted on last year.
The number of press briefings in 2018 dropped far below the number held during previous presidencies.
Left uncertain is how Mr. Trump may pursue other goals. He vowed before the midterm election to pass a middle-class tax cut in the new Congress but has said little about it since then. He also vowed to pull out of the North American Free Trade Agreement to pressure Congress to pass his newly negotiated replacement but has yet to do so.
He has similarly talked about collaborating with Ms. Pelosi’s Democrats, who just took over the House, on possible bipartisan initiatives like rebuilding the nation’s roads, bridges and other infrastructure or bringing down the cost of prescription drugs. Neither of those ideas has come up lately and it is hard to see the current impasse establishing the sort of trust that might lead to across-the-aisle cooperation.
Moreover, any bitterness or ill will that lingers once the current shutdown is resolved, assuming it is, may complicate future financial negotiations when the debt ceiling needs to be raised to keep the country from defaulting on its obligations and when the current fiscal year is over at the end of September.
That may depend on how the border fight turns out. Some optimists see the potential for an eventual deal between Mr. Trump and Democrats that includes money for his wall in exchange for permanent revisions to immigration laws protecting many of those who have lived in the country illegally for many years.
“Hopefully, in the end, we can turn an awful situation into a legislative accomplishment for both sides,” said Representative Josh Gottheimer, Democrat of New Jersey and a leader of the bipartisan Problem Solvers Caucus, who met recently with the president.
Others are not so sure. Mr. Trump has been willing to subordinate the rest of his agenda to the border wall, analysts said, because it is so central to his political identity and his campaign for re-election next year.
“The president believes that the wall represents his contract with America, certainly his contract with his supporters,” said Mr. Galston, who is now at the Brookings Institution. “He regards it, and I think probably accurately, as the issue that did more than any other to propel him to the White House.
