CAMBRIDGE, Mass. — As a powerful winter storm moved up the East Coast to Maine and then out to sea on Sunday, residents across the Midwest and the Eastern Seaboard were bracing for winter’s next blow: plunging temperatures and blustery winds right behind the storm that were expected to freeze solid everything in sight, creating dangerous travel conditions and potentially widespread power failures.
On Sunday afternoon, some 20,000 utility customers were already without electricity in Connecticut, where freezing rain had damaged trees and power lines. The influx of Arctic air was expected only to make matters worse.
Gov. Ned Lamont warned residents that temperatures would fall by 20 degrees or more by Monday morning, and urged them to stay off the state’s roads so that plows could clear them of snow before they froze over. He also urged people to clear their own driveways while they can.
“That’s going to get very icy by later this afternoon,” he said.
The flash freeze was already taking hold farther to the west. In Donegal, Pa., southeast of Pittsburgh, the National Weather Service recorded temperatures falling swiftly to 14 degrees Fahrenheit on Sunday morning from well above freezing overnight.
With the wind chill in the area expected to dive as low as 25 degrees below zero, the Weather Service warned that any exposed skin could be frostbitten in as little as 30 minutes.
The Pennsylvania Department of Health cautioned residents to keep time outdoors to a minimum and to avoid alcohol, excessive consumption of which can make your body lose heat faster.
Brian Hurley, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service’s Weather Prediction Center in College Park, Md., said flash freezes pose an especially high danger of “black ice” conditions on roads and sidewalks.
When cold air moves gradually into an area, he said, it will tend to dry things out — but in this case, the deep cold is coming so quickly on the heels of precipitation that there will be little or no time for drying. Making matters worse, he said, in areas where the storm ended with heavy rain, the salt and other chemicals laid down before the storm to prevent ice may have largely been washed away.
“That’s certainly going to be a worry tonight,” Mr. Hurley said of black ice, which can be very difficult to distinguish visually from ice-free pavement. “Especially with the secondary roads, we want to make sure people are aware of it,” he said.
In Cold Spring Harbor on Long Island, temperatures peaked at about 45 degrees in the rainy morning, but were dipping below freezing in the afternoon and were expected to fall to 9 degrees overnight, with winds gusting to 45 miles an hour and wind chills below zero.
The Arctic air moving in behind the storm was expected to deliver freezing temperatures as far south as Tallahassee, Fla., and to snarl travel across most of the Northeast, even in areas where the storm dropped little or no snow.
“Anything that remains liquid is going to freeze rather quickly, so there will be dangerous travel conditions,” said Rich Otto, another meteorologist with the Weather Service.
Even as the storm moved off to the east, lake effects — created when frigid air blows across large bodies of open water like the Great Lakes — were delivering bands of heavy snow on Sunday to northwestern Indiana and northern Ohio, with near-whiteout conditions at times.
Though many people hunkered down, not everyone heeded calls to stay indoors. In Whiting Lakefront Park in Whiting, Ind., south of Chicago, people were spotted surfing on Lake Michigan during the snowstorm.
Spiro Mitrakis, the owner of the Purple Steer Restaurant in Whiting, said that was not unusual to see.
“To each his own, I guess,” he said.
Mr. Mitrakis said the area had received about three inches of lake-effect snow in the morning, but that the skies and the roads were clear — and frigid — by early afternoon, with temperatures around 17 degrees. “Just another day in the wintertime,” he said.
Farther from Lake Michigan in Valparaiso, Ind., Samantha Minton is a waitress at The Bait Shop, where brunch offerings include foie gras with French toast and a “Wagyu McMuffin.” She said she had yet to see a snowflake on Sunday, and that overall the storm, which delivered only a few inches on Saturday, had been a bit of a disappointment.
“I was really hoping to get snowed in and watch movies and gorge myself on junk food, but that didn’t happen, so here I am at work,” she said.
For many people in Connecticut, binge-watching to ride out the storm would have meant seeing their batteries head for zero along with the temperature. Eversource and United Illuminating, two utility companies in the state, said there were widespread power outages in large part because so much of the storm’s precipitation had come in the form of sleet or freezing rain. Mr. Otto, the Weather Service meteorologist, said the trouble could multiply as the frigid winds pick up.
“Those kind of winds blowing on those power lines and trees that are already stressed from the weight of the ice, I think, is going to be problematic,” he said.
Farther north and farther inland, the storm had mainly dropped snow. As of Sunday morning, the greatest total reported was in Lake Desolation, N.Y., north of Albany and in the southern Adirondack Mountains, where 16 inches fell, Mr. Otto said.
New York City received little snow, with no reports of accumulation in Manhattan, though there were minor amounts in suburban areas before the precipitation turned to heavy rain.
Greg Cornwell, a National Weather Service meteorologist in Caribou, Me., was working a 14-hour shift on Sunday and planned to stay in the office overnight. The storm was expected to drop about two feet of snow in that area, and “once the winds start picking up, there will be quite some impressive drifting,” he said. He said he did not expect to return to his home in Presque Isle, Me., until after his next shift ended at 11 p.m. Monday.
The service is providing forecasts and warnings as usual during the storm, even though it is affected by the partial government shutdown, along with the rest of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Meteorologists like Mr. Hurley, Mr. Otto and Mr. Cornwell are working without pay.
