Howard Schultz, the former chief executive of Starbucks and a self-described “lifelong Democrat,” came under fire on Monday from fellow party members as well as President Trump for taking steps to prepare to run for president as an independent.
Michael Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York City who is eyeing a run for the Democratic nomination in 2020, wrote on Twitter on Monday afternoon that he had considered an independent run for the White House in 2016 but opted against it because he did not want to split the anti-Trump vote. He argued that if Mr. Schultz ran as an independent, he risked enabling a second term for Mr. Trump.
Mr. Schultz, in an interview with The New York Times on Sunday, said he planned to crisscross the country for the next three months as part of a book tour before deciding whether to enter the race to challenge President Trump in 2020. A billionaire, Mr. Schultz said he had already begun the groundwork required to be on the ballot in all 50 states. Yet he would face a difficult road despite his considerable wealth: Few independent candidates have mounted successful challenges for the White House.
“We have a broken political system with both parties basically in business to preserve their own ideology without a recognition and responsibility to represent the interests of the American people,” Mr. Schultz said in the interview.
Mr. Trump, writing on Twitter Monday morning, said Mr. Schultz didn’t have the “guts” to run for president and needled him over their past association. “I only hope that Starbucks is still paying me their rent in Trump Tower!” the president wrote.
The possibility of Mr. Schultz’s candidacy as an independent has drawn condemnation from Democrats, who said that an independent run would split the vote on Election Day 2020 and hand Mr. Trump a second term.
“I have two words for Howard Schultz on a potential run for president as an independent: Just don’t,” Tina Podlodowski, chairwoman of the state Democratic Party of Washington, said last week as speculation mounted about Mr. Schultz’s plans. Ms. Podlodowski also appeared on CNN Monday to reiterate her concerns.
Mr. Schultz said he was well aware of the criticism, but said it was misplaced.
“When I hear people espousing free government-paid college, free government-paid health care and a free government job for everyone — on top of a $21 trillion debt — the question is, how are we paying for all this and not bankrupting the country?” Mr. Schultz said.
Mr. Schultz, who grew up in the public housing projects in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn, became a billionaire by building Starbucks from seven stores in Seattle into a global coffee chain with over 350,000 employees. He was known as a progressive corporate leader, offering full health benefits for full- and part-time employees and their domestic partners, and Starbucks became the first privately owned American company to include part-time workers in its stock-option program.
With an estimated net worth of $3.3 billion, Mr. Schultz, 65, is one of several billionaires who had been mentioned as possible presidential contenders.
The former hedge fund titan Tom Steyer, who had been eyeing a run, announced this month he would focus his energies on a private effort to impeach Mr. Trump. And Mr. Bloomberg has also been contemplating a presidential run.
Even before Mr. Schultz’s announcement, Senator Bernie Sanders and Democrats including Senator Elizabeth Warren, who has already announced her candidacy, had delivered pre-emptive strikes at billionaires, specifically citing those who self-fund their campaigns.
Mr. Bloomberg, with an estimated net worth of nearly $48 billion, has said he would self-fund any campaign. Mr. Schultz is expected to fund some of his own campaign, but would also likely seek public donations for a race that could cost more than $1 billion.
Mr. Schultz’s consideration of entering the race as an independent evokes the 1992 campaign by the eccentric Texas billionaire Ross Perot, also a political neophyte. Mr. Perot, for a time, was the leader in the polls and gained almost 19 percent of the popular vote, the most for an independent candidate since Theodore Roosevelt in 1912.
Like Mr. Schultz, Mr. Perot expressed concern about the national debt and vowed to reduce it. Mr. Perot failed to win any electoral votes.
Mr. Schultz, who pointed to a recent Gallup poll showing that 42 percent of voters identified as politically independent, scoffed at the comparisons to previous efforts of independent candidates.
Mr. Schultz is relying in part on a small team of outside advisers, including Steve Schmidt, the former campaign strategist for John McCain’s 2008 presidential effort.
Mr. Schultz’s success or failure may lie in who emerges as a top contender in the Democratic Party. If Joseph R. Biden Jr., who is seen as a moderate, decides to run, it would probably make it difficult for Mr. Schultz. However, he said he sees a clear opportunity if a far-left candidate emerges.
