Two weeks ago, the Knicks suggested to Kanter that his travel in London be strictly limited to the gym and hotel for safety reasons, he said.
After Kanter announced his decision to skip the trip, the team said it was because of an unspecified visa issue, though Kanter disputed this.
Kanter is a citizen of Turkey, but his passport was revoked in 2017. His American travel documents issued by the Department of Homeland Security enable him to enter the United States and the United Kingdom. Once the London game was scheduled, the N.B.A. obtained the documents on Kanter’s behalf.
“The N.B.A. has played hundreds of games outside of the U.S. and this is a very unique and unprecedented situation,” Mike Bass, the league’s spokesman, said.
Kanter started most of the season, but lost his starting job as the team decided to focus on developing its younger players. His poor defensive play made the decision easier. After a 12-point, 16-rebound night on Tuesday in a 122-95 loss at Golden State, Kanter was averaging 14.4 points and 11.0 rebounds a game.
He was born in Switzerland, where his father was studying, but was raised in Turkey.
After excelling for the Turkish national team, he enrolled as a freshman at the University of Kentucky in 2010 but was ruled ineligible to play by the N.C.A.A. because of impermissible benefits he received from a Turkish professional team.
In the 2011 N.B.A. draft, he was selected third over all by Utah and then traded to Oklahoma City in 2015 before the Knicks acquired him in 2017 in exchange for Carmelo Anthony. He will be a free agent this summer after the final year of his $18.6 million contract.
In contrast to the gravity of his outspokenness on human rights issues, Kanter is usually regarded as a goofball among his teammates.
After games and practices, he is quick with one-liners. He said he dreams of becoming a W.W.E. wrestler, and he regularly receives thousands of likes and retweets for his jokes on Twitter.
The lighter side, he said, is a coping mechanism.
As soon as he finished practice two days before Christmas, Kanter returned to the court dressed as an elf, complete with pointy ears, a long green tunic and a brown beard. His red sack was full of random gag gifts, which he handed out to teammates.
