‘I would like 50-year-old women to stop sending me photos of their bottoms and breasts,’ a French writer pleaded.
PARIS — I was at dinner with a group of Parisian women this week when someone mentioned the French writer Yann Moix. The table quickly erupted into arguments and denunciations. One woman claimed that Mr. Moix was entitled to express his views, however odious, while others insisted that he should just shut up.
Mr. Moix’s blunt remarks — made in the context of promoting his new novel, “Rompre” (“Breaking Up”) — aren’t especially shocking. It’s no secret that some older men fancy younger women. When researchers at the University of Michigan tracked messages on an American dating website, they found that women were most sought after at age 18, while men peaked at 50 (exactly Mr. Moix’s age).
Nor is this an exclusively male view. Women themselves often believe that youthful bodies look better: Fashion spreads in the same issue of Marie Claire feature models who look barely out of their teens.
And yet, Mr. Moix has set off a media storm in France and elsewhere, with middle-aged women and others lashing out at him in articles and on podcasts and social media.
What does “l’affaire Yann Moix” say about the state of Frenchwomen? Why have Mr. Moix’s comments provoked such anxiety and outrage?
A well-known novelist, filmmaker and commentator, Mr. Moix has made plenty of provocative statements before. But this time he committed the twin sins of inelegance and indiscretion. As a public intellectual he’s supposed to play the “seducteur” who engages in a chaste flirtation with his audience. Announcing that he wouldn’t sleep with some of them kills the mood.
And in a country that lives by the maxim “Not all truths should be told,” knowing what not to say — and what parts of your life to conceal — are key social graces.
Mr. Moix tried to explain that he’s a prisoner of his preferences and of his own fear of aging. His relationships with younger women often end painfully after a few months, dooming him to a perpetual adolescence. “It’s not something enviable, it’s something sad,” he said on a French talk show. His new book is based on his misery after a breakup.
But his remarks caught Frenchwomen in a take-no-prisoners mood, and feeling a new solidarity. #MeToo has made them more alert to the discrimination they face. They sense that they are still having to tolerate treatment their American counterparts have squashed, especially at work, and that this isn’t changing quickly enough.
Still, aging while female isn’t simple. Even in France it takes delicate internal calibrations to keep counternarratives at bay and stay “bien dans votre âge” — comfortable in your own age.
So there’s a collective satisfaction that Mr. Moix has been put in his place. He and Michel Houellebecq, the French novelist whose protagonists are sometimes revolted by the aging female form, are “the last salvos of an erotic masculine power that’s less and less socially acceptable,” the journalist Cécile Daumas wrote in the newspaper Libération this week.
But while women don't want to be reduced to their sexual allure, they also want to prove that they've still got it. Parisian newspapers and magazines — many of them edited by women Mr. Moix finds invisible — look like a jubilant counterattack: Julia Roberts, 51, is on the cover of Gala magazine (“To Be 50, and So What!” a headline exclaims), and the TV host Karine Le Marchand, 50, is on the cover of French Elle (“She’s as beautiful as a supermodel and as natural as a peasant”).
An ad for the Musée de l’Homme, a museum of anthropology in Paris, features the bones of Lucy, who’s estimated to be 3.2 million years old. “An extraordinary woman over 50,” the caption says.
Mr. Moix insists that there’s hope for him. By the time he’s 60, 50-year-old women will seem young. Alas, I’m not sure any of them will be waiting.
