Can I Cut Off a Relative With Hateful Views?
One reflection of our country’s toxic partisanship is that families may now find dinner-table conversations about politics impossible. Yet if people can’t talk about the things that divide us with their families — where there’s a background assumption that you should try to stick together even when you disagree — you’ve got to wonder where they can. So I’d be inclined to have a go at talking to this fellow about his noxious opinions, letting him know what you think. If most of his political discussions are in the echo chamber of social media and on a right-wing radio station, you and your family may be the only fellow citizens of his who have a chance to make him consider other points of view. Supposing that he doesn’t respond reasonably — the likeliest outcome, no doubt — you can tell him that you’re breaking off with him, and he’ll know your reasons. But at least you’ll have treated him respectfully, both as someone you had a family connection with and as a fellow American citizen.
 Of course, it’s possible that he is. But his views may have just been heightened by the extreme rhetoric that circulates in social media nowadays. If that’s the case, it’s not him individually but our civic culture that’s in need of help. Casting a social phenomenon as an individual pathology is a perilous temptation. (You can see it in the movement now afoot to medicalize racism as a mental disorder.) 
Like family members, fellow citizens in a democracy have to be committed to trying to work things out, because we are supposed to be running the republic together. Abandon that precept, and you undermine the moral basis of our common American citizenship. Your ex-in-law, in his hate-mongering, has done so. Your first response should be to try to uphold it.
Yes, do inquire. You could discover that the credit was intentional and you’re entitled to it guilt-free.  But it’s wrong to take advantage of what you believe to be an error. Despite that slightly worrying observation that you’re hesitant to get in touch with the loan collector “for obvious reasons,” you’re writing because you’re troubled by the situation you find yourself in. You’re basically an honest person. Best to stay that way.
You don’t say anything about your relationship with your upstairs neighbors. If she were your close friend and he wasn’t, you would clearly have greater responsibilities to her than to him. Friendship should lead you to tell her, even though the discovery might disturb her greatly; otherwise you’d be betraying a relationship of trust by keeping her in the dark. If they’re both your friends, you might feel torn. But if they’re merely acquaintances, as appears to be the case, you might prefer to stay out of it. You’d have no special obligations to either of them, after all.
For all you know, they have an open marriage, and the wife, in alerting her husband to the noise complaint, was aware of the activity if not its amplitude. Even if it is the sort of marriage-threatening misbehavior you take it to be, you’re not required to be an informant. Conversely, you’d be perfectly within your rights to share what you think you heard. Just bear in mind that doing so might create a ruckus of another sort.
I am in my mid-70s and have been happily married to my second husband for 40 years. When I was in college, I met a young man who was smart and funny. We each had difficult childhoods and were lonely. Our loneliness drew us together, and ultimately we fell in love and married. I was too immature and confused and should not have married, but for all intents and purposes, we were happy. He was a good person and treated me well.
We were married for a little over two years when I decided that I did not want to be married anymore. I really blindsided him, literally walking into our apartment one day and saying that I wanted to leave him. He was surprised and hurt but did not pressure me to stay. I told him it might not be permanent, and we stayed friends for a while, and it was during this period that, I realize in retrospect, I treated him especially badly.
For a long time I have felt that I would like to apologize. He didn’t deserve the pain that I caused him. The breakup was not due to anything he did or didn’t do. It was all me. Because he has a public presence, I know how to reach him, but I am concerned that an apology after all these years would not be appropriate. It might cause him more pain, and I certainly don’t want that.
Apologies are centrally about repairing relationships. You may think it’s very unlikely that this man will want to re-establish the relationship, and if that’s so, the only serious effect of the apology will be to cause him whatever distress might come from revisiting a painful episode or whatever relief might come from your “it’s not you, it’s me” assurances. Neither the fact that, in some sense, you owe him an apology nor the fact that apologizing might make you feel better settles the matter of what you should do. In short, the answer to your question is: No, apology isn’t always the ethical choice. When an apology from the remote past would simply unearth anguished memories, the right choice may be reticence.