Many members of the military now include yoga — often taught by veterans — as an element of their workout routine, and veterans turn to the practice for therapeutic applications.
To casual observers of either military service or the practice of yoga, the path from Oorah to Om may not seem obvious. But the intersection of yogi and veteran is natural if unexpected, beginning with the five classic yoga poses known as warriors.
While veterans make up a small percentage of yoga instructors, their ranks are growing. Many members of the military now often include yoga — sometimes taught by veterans — as an element of their workout routine, and veterans turn to the practice for therapeutic applications. The Department of Veterans Affairs has successfully used yoga to help treat opioid addiction and post-traumatic stress.
Veterans, long schooled in discipline and concentration, also make excellent yoga teachers, both to other veterans, whose experiences they understand, and to active-duty military members, whose trust they often gain. They are becoming a welcome addition in civilian yoga studios, where students are usually attracted to their compassionate yet frequently no-nonsense approach.
Here are some veterans who have become yoga teachers — from various service branches, eras and parts of the country — reflecting on the transition.
Retired Coast Guard; chief operating officer, Veterans Yoga Project; and teacher at Yoga Tribe in Huntington Beach and Purple Yoga in Long Beach, Calif.
Mr. Allaire teaches hot yoga, a power-driven practice that is popular with veterans because of its athletic nature, and his background shows in how he teaches. “Your commanding officer is your breath,” he said during a recent class in Huntington Beach.
Like many veteran yogis, he practiced what he now preaches. “What I bring when I teach veterans is not just my yoga journey, but how I have been able to weave in other support techniques,” he said. “I have been done great with it. I know it works. Since 2012 when I went to the V.A. and started practicing yoga, my relationship with my children has improved tremendously. But, he noted, “It hasn’t helped much with my relationships with my exes."
Corpus Christi, TEX.
Former Navy F-18 pilot and current Navy reservist. Teaches yoga at military bases and studios around the country and leads global retreats with Walkabout Yoga.
So what is the difference between teaching yoga to civilians and to active-military members and veterans?
Ms. Corwin’s work taps into the military-civilian divide in the United States.
