Rahaf Mohammed Alqunun secretly boarded a plane to Thailand last week to escape her family and seek asylum in Australia. She was barricaded in a hotel airport until Thai officials allowed her to enter the country without facing deportation on Monday.
I’m still in the room. I have no choice. They said, I have to go tomorrow and no one can help me right now.
BANGKOK — An 18-year-old Saudi woman who expressed fear that she would be killed if sent back to her family was allowed to remain in Thailand on Monday evening, ending a tense 48-hour drama at Bangkok’s main international airport.
The young woman, Rahaf Mohammed Alqunun, was on the verge of being deported earlier in the day at the request of the Saudi government. But after she and human rights advocates mounted a global social media campaign, Thai immigration officials agreed not to send her home.
After meeting with Ms. Alqunun and officials from the United Nations refugee agency Monday afternoon, General Surachate said that Ms. Alqunun had been allowed to leave the airport with agency representatives. They will take up to 10 days to process her request for refugee status and find a country that will accept her.
Earlier in the day, she posted a short video from an airport hotel room in which she had barricaded herself, saying she would not leave without seeing United Nations officials.
“I want asylum,” Ms. Alqunun said in a clear, calm voice.
Every woman in Saudi Arabia has a male “guardian,” typically a father, husband, brother or uncle. A woman must have permission from her guardian to do an array of things, including to travel, obtain a passport, marry or divorce.
King Salman relaxed some of the rules in 2017, allowing a woman, under some circumstances, to go to school, get a job, or rent an apartment without her guardian’s permission, but those changes are not always observed in practice. Women’s rights advocates say that the police often require a guardian’s permission for a woman to report a crime, making it all but impossible for her to report domestic abuse committed by her guardian.
In a telephone interview with The New York Times, Ms. Alqunun said she had slipped away from her family on Saturday during a trip to Kuwait, where women are allowed to travel without a male guardian, and had flown on her own to Bangkok.
She said that she had planned to spend a few days in Thailand and continue to Australia, for which she had a visa, and that she planned to request asylum.
But on arrival at Suvarnabhumi Airport in Bangkok, she was intercepted by a man she identified as Saudi who said he would help her. Instead, he took her passport and brought over Thai immigration officials, who said they would send her back to Kuwait at her family’s request.
The deputy Asia director for Human Rights Watch, Phil Robertson, who played a crucial role in mobilizing support for Ms. Alqunun, said he was pleased with the results of the fast-paced campaign.
Thousands of people called the United Nations refugee agency to express support for Ms. Alqunun, and ambassadors worked the phones to help find a solution, he said.
Thailand, which has been run by a military regime since 2014, is not a signatory to international agreements allowing travelers to seek asylum and was not bound to honor her asylum request.
Ms. Alqunun’s plight has attracted attention around the world. She opened a Twitter account over the weekend and already has tens of thousands of followers.
Ms. Alqunun told The Times that she had been planning her escape since she was 16. She said her brother and other family members often had beat her, and that she was once locked in a room for six months because she had cut her hair in a way disapproved by her family.
General Surachate said that Ms. Alqunun was free to go wherever she wanted in Thailand and that there were no government restrictions on her now that she had entered the country.
She will be under the care of the United Nations refugee agency until her departure, he said.
He said officials initially had planned to deport Ms. Alqunun because of her lack of money and concrete travel plans.
