Fahim Abed, 30, and Fatima Faizi, 24, are Afghan reporters for The New York Times in Kabul.
Then we wondered: What next?
“If there were peace, what’s the first thing you would do?” Fahim asked Fatima.
It was so exciting to dream like that, even though we know better, given all that we have seen, all the friends we’ve lost, all the attacks on innocent civilians we’ve witnessed, all the uncertainty about how a peace deal could possibly be reached.
Even if there were a peace deal, we know implementation would be a long way off, months at least, more likely years. And it’s entirely possible the end result would mean a Taliban in control of the places we would like to go, or even in charge of ministries that would try to tell us where to go.
Still, like so many people, both friends and enemies, we were caught up in the hope of an unprecedented moment.
Then we had the idea that all of our friends were probably dreaming about what they might do, too. Like us, most of our peers have never experienced peacetime — they would have to be nearly 50 to remember that, and most young people barely remember the Taliban days.
All we have ever known is a country at war.
So we checked around, first on Facebook, where all of our friends are — in wartime, Facebook is even more important for staying in touch, because it’s safer than meeting in public places.
Fahim’s friend Nasim Pakhtoon, 35, who runs a government television channel, had posted that when peace came he was going to open a restaurant in remote Nuristan Province, a place tucked into the mountains and so hard to reach that it was long described as the fabled Shangri-La.
Fatima’s friend Tahera Rezaee, 28, a documentary photographer, had it all planned, too.
Many of our friends had simple dreams.
Laila Noorani, 23, who works as a radio producer, just wants to go jogging — something she has only ever seen women do in movies.
Throughout the peace talks in Qatar, there was much more laughter in our newsroom than usual. Reports suggested more and more that a peace deal could actually happen, and it put us all in a heady mood.
We wondered whether the Taliban were having peace dreams of their own, so we asked some of them, too.
Fatima reached one Talib in prison, who asked to remain anonymous because he feared getting in trouble with the insurgents once he is released (as he probably will be if a peace deal is reached).
He confided that he had been relieved to be arrested, because it meant no more fighting, which he had been doing as long as he remembers. He is 36.
Shah Mohammad had a modest dream.
“The first thing I’ll do is visit my parents,” he said. He hadn’t seen them for six years. Then he would visit northern cities like Sheberghan and Mazar-i-Sharif, just to be able to walk around them without fear.
Then toward the end of the week, we all came back to earth. The talks in Qatar ended after six days without a deal — on an optimistic note, everyone said, but we’ve heard that before.
The obstacles suddenly seemed larger again, the way they had been for years.
It was especially disappointing this time, because we had gotten so excited. We Afghans almost never talk about our dreams for peace, because we have mostly stopped thinking peace is even possible.
Suddenly it felt kind of embarrassing to have slipped our guard. The newsroom laughter subsided.
We went back to remembering the war, which for a few hopeful days we had almost forgotten.
For Fatima, her most haunting war memory was the scene in 2016 in Dehmazang Square, where two Islamic State suicide attackers targeted protesters, killing 120 and wounding hundreds. She was in the middle of it, but her physical wounds were minor.
For Fahim, his worst war memory was from when he witnessed, at age 11, the slaughter of Taliban prisoners in his hometown, Mazar-i-Sharif, in 1997.
Hundreds of Taliban bodies lay in the street after their defeat by jihadis, and then a group of Taliban prisoners were brought in, and jihadi militiamen tortured and shot them.
In trying to think of an ending for this story, we had several ideas.
Last week we were so hopeful. We thought of all the friends we had lost, but now we wouldn’t have to lose any more. I couldn’t sleep properly last night. I felt like I wanted to cry, but I didn’t.
Last week I was daydreaming about my childhood. I was there in our village with my father, my grandfather and my great-grandfather. I was about 5. The walls around our house were really high.
Like now, everybody was sick of war then, the country was ruled by criminals, and the Taliban had just come on the scene and everyone thought they were good people and would be different.
Then my great-grandfather pointed at me and said, “I hope he will be the first in our family to finally know peace.” My great-grandfather lived to 105, but he died before peace returned.
Last week I kept thinking that maybe his hope for me would come true. This week I’m not so sure.