WASHINGTON — President Trump’s efforts to hide his conversations with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and new details about the F.B.I. inquiry into his ties to Moscow have intensified debate over his relationship with Russia, adding fuel to Democrats’ budding investigations of his presidency and potentially setting up a clash between the White House and Congress.
Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, who now leads the Intelligence Committee as part of the new Democratic House majority, implored his Republican colleagues Sunday to support his effort to obtain notes or testimony from the interpreter in one of the private meetings between Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin.
That development, first reported by The Washington Post, followed a report in The New York Times that the F.B.I. had earlier begun a counterintelligence investigation on Mr. Trump to see whether he had been influenced by Russia when he fired James B. Comey as F.B.I. director in 2017.
On Sunday, congressional Democrats said the steps Mr. Trump took to keep his conversations secret brought forth uncomfortable questions about the relations between the two men and why the American president echoed some of Mr. Putin’s positions.
A former senior administration official said a number of top figures in the administration sought in the hours and days after the meeting to find out details of what Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin had discussed. But Mr. Trump waved off their queries, leaving the officials to rely solely on a brief readout that Rex W. Tillerson, the secretary of state at the time, had provided to the news media, according to the former official.
Several administration officials asked the interpreter what had been discussed. But the interpreter told them that the president had taken the notes after the meeting, and had instructed the translator not to discuss the meeting, the former official said.
Last year both House and Senate Democrats called on Mr. Trump’s interpreters to testify on the president’s meetings with Mr. Putin, including the leaders’ July summit meeting in Helsinki, Finland. Mr. Trump’s news conference in Helsinki, in which he questioned his own intelligence agencies’ conclusion that Russia sought to influence the 2016 election, prompted bipartisan criticism.
Mr. Trump’s failure to allow other officials into the room or share notes of the meeting has become something of a Rorschach test inside the government.
The F.B.I. counterintelligence investigation into Mr. Trump’s ties to Russia was taken over by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel. While it is not clear what Mr. Mueller has done with the investigation, there are some clues that he has pursued at least parts of it.
While many of the questions Mr. Mueller submitted to Mr. Trump were focused on accusations of obstruction of justice against the president, others had to do with the president’s relationship with Russia.
Mr. Mueller asked Mr. Trump whether he had any discussions during the campaign about any meetings with Mr. Putin and whether he spoke to others about American sanctions against Russia.
While Mr. Trump did not answer Mr. Mueller’s questions about obstruction, he did answer the questions about Russia, although what the president said is not known.
The revelation about the earlier F.B.I. counterintelligence investigation prompted Republicans to renew their criticism of the bureau.
As Democrats press ahead in their investigation of Mr. Trump’s meetings with Mr. Putin, it is not clear what information they will be able to extract from the White House.
There are no reports inside the government on what Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin discussed in their meetings, current and former officials said.
Without official detailed notes about Mr. Trump’s conversations, senior officials in the administration have had to rely on intelligence reports about what the Russians were saying to one another after the meeting. There are limits to what officials could glean from the intelligence, current and former officials said. And the Russians could hardly be considered reliable narrators, even with one another.
