WASHINGTON — The reopening of the federal government signals the start of three weeks of intense negotiations over border security in an ideologically divided Congress that threaten to leave Republican and Democratic leaders right where they began: at risk of a government shutdown.
The stopgap spending bill President Trump signed into law on Friday night gives leaders in both chambers until Feb. 15 to devise a bipartisan resolution to their impasse over the president’s demand for $5.7 billion for a border wall. But whatever they come up with is likely to face obstacles from resurgent liberals in the House and a more conservative Senate.
And Mr. Trump is a wild card. The president will have the final word on any deal, and he has already vowed to shut down the government again, or invoke his emergency powers to build a wall, if Congress does not offer a solution he likes.
The shutdown, the longest on record, left 800,000 federal employees without pay for 35 days — and left lawmakers in both parties feeling scarred and jittery. Tensions were running especially high on Friday: Air traffic controllers called in sick, flights were delayed across the Northeast, work slowdowns at the I.R.S. threatened to postpone tax refunds and the F.B.I. director, furious that his agents were working without pay, lashed out.
This coming week, negotiators from the House and the Senate, led by the top Democrats and Republicans on the Appropriations Committees, will begin meeting to hash out a plan to secure the southwestern border. The appropriators have a history of working in a bipartisan way, and there are some areas of agreement.
Democrats and Republicans — including Mr. Trump — have both called for border security packages that would include money for new technologies to detect drugs and weapons, more personnel at the border, more immigration judges, infrastructure improvement at ports of entry and humanitarian assistance for migrants.
Mr. Trump, for his part, has softened his messaging, conceding in a speech in the Rose Garden on Friday that “we do not need 2,000 miles of concrete wall from sea to shining sea — we never did.” That semantic evolution could provide a face-saving way forward for both the president and Democrats, who have previously supported bills that include money for border fencing, though not a wall.
And Democrats have moved closer to Mr. Trump’s $5.7 billion price tag. Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina, the No. 3 House Democrat, told reporters this past week that lawmakers in his party were prepared to spend that much on a border security package that would include what he called a “smart wall,” featuring drones, sensors and more Border Patrol agents.
But the path ahead remains complicated. Mr. Trump is desperate to fulfill his 2016 campaign pledge for a “big, beautiful wall” along the southern border — a huge sticking point for Democrats, who see the president in a weakened position now that he has caved to their core demand of reopening the government first and negotiating border security later.
Progressives especially are feeling emboldened and do not like the idea that Mr. Trump is once again tying the debate over border security to a threat to shut down the government.
Even so, Mr. Trump may have already put forth the broad outlines of a deal, with his proposal to pair money for a barrier with protections for some undocumented immigrants. The Senate rejected that plan this past week. Still, if the protections were expansive enough, and included a path to citizenship for the young undocumented immigrants known as Dreamers, some centrist Democrats might be persuaded to sign on.
But expanding the border security discussion to include changes to immigration law could open a Pandora’s box, giving conservative Republicans a window to pursue more far-reaching restrictions on legal immigration. One such Republican, Senator Marsha Blackburn, a freshman from Tennessee, said on Friday that she intended to continue pushing not only for a “border barrier,” but also for an end to the program that protects Dreamers and an end to family-based migration — a position that is anathema to Democrats.
Ms. Pelosi has previously said that a wall would be “immoral” — an utterance that may have backed her into a corner, said Charlie Dent, a moderate Republican who retired from the House last year.
For Democrats, that is the proverbial $64,000 question. Mr. Trump is extremely sensitive to criticism from the right, and is known to change his stance in response to commentary from conservative pundits. Already, one of them — Ann Coulter — has ridiculed the president as a “wimp” on Twitter over his decision to reopen the government without wall funding.
During the shutdown Mr. Trump sent Vice President Mike Pence and the acting White House chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, to the Capitol to negotiate with Democrats. But it quickly became clear that Mr. Pence and Mr. Mulvaney were not speaking for Mr. Trump.
“I ask myself: Is this going to be a Trump negotiation, negotiated in good faith, or is he going to say one thing through his advisers and another when he hears from Rush Limbaugh and Ann Coulter?” asked Representative Nita M. Lowey of New York, who as chairwoman of the House Appropriations Committee will be leading the talks.
Some of the more pragmatic voices in Congress insist the two sides are not that far apart. Senator Rob Portman, Republican of Ohio, noted that last year Congress approved, and Mr. Trump signed into law, a bipartisan bill to fund the Department of Homeland Security that included $1.375 billion for new fencing along the border. Mr. Portman said Mr. Trump’s budget proposal for the 2019 fiscal year included money for just 234 miles of new fencing — hardly an enormous wall from one end of the country to the other.
“Both the president and his Democratic critics have mischaracterized what the proposal is,” Mr. Portman said, adding that he sees reasons for optimism. He has been heartened by comments from Ms. Pelosi and House Democrats about the importance of border security and by remarks from moderate Democrats in the Senate who have said they are open to more fencing.
