After the hashtag #ExposeChristianSchools went viral, we invited readers to tell us about how their Christian school educations shaped their lives.
In the polarized United States, where clashing religious and ideological views unfold daily on social media and television and radio talk shows, the Twitter hashtag #ExposeChristianSchools ignited a firestorm. Its creator, Chris Stroop, a former evangelical Christian, urged those who had attended Christian schools to use it and “tell how traumatizing those bastions of bigotry are,” calling out Vice President Mike Pence, whose wife decided two weeks ago to return to teaching at a private Christian school that does not allow gay, bisexual or transgender students, parents or employees.
The hashtag generated thousands of responses — first in the immediate aftermath of the news that Karen Pence would return to Immanuel Christian School in Northern Virginia, and then more after a video of a confrontation between a group of Catholic high school students and a Native American man at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington went viral.
While many wrote about their struggles in Christian schools, voicing tales of bullying and homophobia, others joined the Twitter conversation to defend their beliefs, condemning the criticism and sharing heartfelt testimonials of how their teachers fostered human compassion and an unimpeachable moral foundation.
On Monday, President Trump championed proposed legislation in six states that would require or encourage public schools to offer elective classes on the Bible’s literary and historical significance, writing on Twitter, “Starting to make a turn back? Great!” The tweet generated more than 54,000 responses, with the usual split of praise and criticism.
We asked people on Twitter to share their experiences of Christian schools. We received hundreds of responses from people of all ages and Christian backgrounds, from Evangelical to Catholic. Many expressed gratitude for the faith-based education they received, while others described trauma and rejection. Many others expressed a combination of both. All were eager to explain how their schooling shaped their lives and worldviews.
Here are some of their responses, which have been edited for length and clarity. We invite you to share your experiences in the comments.
— Cody Hill, 25, Raleigh, N.C.
— Mae L’Heureux, 26, Augusta, Me.
— Melissa Stewart, 28, Pioneer Valley, Mass.
— Laura Hagen, 31, South Saint Paul, Minn.
— Allyson Payne, 21, Birmingham, Ala.
— Kearney Moss, 24, Midland, Tex.
— Andrew Graus, 22, Lawrenceville, Ga.