Listen here, friends.
As a content-obsessed millennial, I have made podcasts part of my daily routine for years. I listen while commuting, cooking, running errands, putting away laundry, washing dishes or during any relatively mindless activity that can be done while wearing wireless headphones.
My bond with podcasts is so cemented that it comes as a shock when someone I meet at a party — or someone in my family, or a friend I thought I knew — tells me that they, in the year 2019, do not listen to podcasts. And never have. And don’t really get what it’s all about. And, worse, don’t quite know how to start.
Their reasons range from “I don’t have time” to “It’s passed me by” to “What should I even listen to?” Luckily, those concerns are easily answered and dispatched. For anyone who wants to become a full-fledged podcast listener, here’s what you need to know to get into it, from experts who know best.
To keep and organize your podcasts, you’ll need a podcast app that allows you to subscribe to new shows and listen. If you’re brand-new to podcasts, the stock podcast app already installed on your smartphone is the easiest point of entry; for iPhone, you have the Apple Podcasts app, and for Android users, the easiest option is to play podcasts through the Play Music app.
Beyond that, there is a huge range of third-party apps to choose from, but the app I use regularly and like best — and the favorite among the podcast experts interviewed for this article — is Pocket Casts, which costs a one-time payment of $3.99 on both Android and iOS.
“A lot of the world feels a little boring sometimes, so having that layer on top of it is great,” he said.
For many people, commuting by car takes up a large chunk of the day, so make sure your ride is wired for sound. For those using mass transit, I cannot recommend enough a pair of sound-cancelling headphones. Wirecutter, a New York Times company that reviews and recommends products, picked the Sony H.ear On 2 headphones as its favorite. But if that’s too steep a cost, at least invest in a pair of wireless earbuds; for those, Wirecutter recommends the Jabra Elite 65t. Once you banish cords from your life and can connect your phone with the touch of a button, your podcast habit will kick into high gear.
Now that you have your app and gadgets, you’re ready for the fun part: finding podcasts you’re going to love.
If it feels overwhelming, it’s not just you: Though podcasts have been around for at least a decade, there’s still no central database or clearinghouse for the thousands of podcasts out there, Ms. Gerber-Margie said.
“A lot of discovery happens via the way you choose to listen. There’s no ‘New York Times best-seller list,’” she said.
To mix in niche or offbeat podcasts with your brand-name shows, Mr. Quah of Hot Pod suggests going the old-fashioned route: word-of-mouth endorsements.
For him, that means hourslong shows on N.B.A. predictions. For James T. Green, a Brooklyn-based artist and audio producer, it means experimental audio like the work showcased on “Constellations,” a Canadian audio art podcast, and “The Black Guy Who Tips,” a comedy and current events talk show created by Charlotte, N.C., husband-and-wife pair Rod and Karen Morrow. Mr. Green has listened to the couple for years, ever since a dull desk job led him to search “black podcast” in the Apple podcast directory.
For Kelly Moffitt, a producer with StoryCorps and the author of the newsletter “Flyover Podcast" about shows made between coasts, she sees podcasts as a way to hear from people not represented in traditional media, particularly in rural areas. Some of her favorite shows are from Appalachia (“The Front Porch” from West Virginia Public Broadcasting) and Mississippi (“Gravy” produced by the Southern Foodways Alliance). Her advice for finding a great new show?
Google “‘podcast’ along with the place you want to hear a podcast from,” she said.
Ms. Gerber-Margie suggests looking at groups on Reddit and Facebook — such as Reddit’s podcast subreddit and the Facebook group Podcasts We Listen To — for recommendations from ordinary people “who just want something to listen to on their commute,” she said. Another option: Join The New York Times’s Podcast Club on Facebook for discussions and recommendations.
Example: “Everything is Alive," a podcast of interviews with inanimate objects that falls somewhere between fiction and philosophy, and “Sleep With Me,” a stream-of-consciousness podcast that aims to help its listeners fall asleep.
Example: Unsure if Radiolab is for you? Green fell in love with the show years ago while listening to their classic episode, “Loops” on an hourslong road trip. Not sure if you want to hear every episode of The Nod? Start with their oral history of the song “Knuck If You Buck.” “It’s kind of like hearing a good single and then you want to hear the album,” he said.
Example: “For a Bad Time Call" in which women call in and leave voice mail messages about their rage, produced in Columbus, Ohio, or “Wet Mountain Valley Dry Goods,” a collection of interviews with every resident in a small town of Westcliffe, Colorado.
Example: I listen to podcasts to escape the news cycle, not catch up on it. Favorite shows include the delightful pseudo-celebrity-obsessed podcast “Who? Weekly" (tagline: “Everything you need to know about the celebrities you don’t.”) and “Ear Hustle,” a podcast about life inside San Quentin State Prison made by inmates who live there.