This feature is meant to send you into the weekend with a smile, or at least a lighter heart. Want to get The Week in Good News by email? Sign up here.
A college gymnast scored a perfect 10 with a joyous floor routine.
Gymnastics can be a serious business. But Katelyn Ohashi of U.C.L.A. didn’t just deliver a brilliant technical performance last weekend — she also did it with an infectious smile and a sense of genuine fun. A video of her routine attracted millions of viewers on YouTube. The enthusiastic reaction of her teammates on the sidelines, some of them echoing her dance moves, is also worth watching.
These stripes are not just stripes.
Claudia Weber commutes from a town in the German countryside to Munich, and over the past year, track repairs could delay her journey by two hours or more. She had a novel way of working out her frustrations: knitting.
A huge disk of ice in a Maine river is attracting fans (and ducks).
 This enormous example appeared in a river in Westbrook, Me., and was notable for its size: While most disks are in the 20-to 30-foot range, the Westbrook one is estimated at about 300 feet across.
We celebrated more than 50 years of the New York pizza slice.
One of the hardest things about living away from New York City, for me anyway, is the lack of convenient, delicious, piping hot “New York-style” slices. And while the subject of pizza can be a great divider, it can also unite us, particularly when it comes to the reheated, foldable, portable variety.
Female ranchers are blazing a trail in the American West.
These women have found the same independence and adventure that first lured their male antecedents, but they’re also leading the trend of sustainable ranching and raising grass-fed breeds of cattle in humane, ecological ways.
At BroadwayCon, fans get the curtain call.
At this convention, Broadway’s biggest enthusiasts have a chance to shine. This year’s offered nearly 200 hours of sessions, with 7,000 estimated attendees. There were singalongs, fan meetups and workshops.
An egg is Instagram’s most-liked post ever.
This one is a head-scratcher. A simple picture of an egg dethroned Kylie Jenner’s birth announcement as the top Instagram post of all time. That means that more than 35 million accounts have liked a picture of a single egg.
