It is a new year and a new Congress — with a Democratic majority in the House of Representatives — begins this week. But many issues and challenges remain from 2018.
One major one is the partial shutdown of the U.S. federal government, which began on Dec. 22.
What do you know about the shutdown?
1. The authors write, “America will get its first taste of divided government under President Trump this week when a Democratic House tries to wrest control of the political agenda from Mr. Trump, who appears determined to keep the focus on border security, immigration and his ‘big, beautiful’ wall.” How is the U.S. government divided? How will America “taste” this division?
2. President Trump said on Twitter: “Border Security and the Wall ‘thing’ and Shutdown is not where Nancy Pelosi wanted to start her tenure as Speaker! Let’s make a deal?” What role will Ms. Pelosi play in the ongoing negotiations over the shutdown? According to the article, why might she not want to compromise and make a deal, despite the president’s assertion?
3. What political compromises are being proposed by rank-and-file Republicans and Democrats to end the shutdown? What difficulties will these compromises face in solving the stalemate?
4. Mr. Trump claims that Democrats previously favored a wall. What evidence supports this claim? What evidence contradicts it?
5. What are Ms. Pelosi’s priorities once she is elected to speaker of the House this week? What legislation do Democrats hope to pass starting on Jan. 3? How might this legislation impact you or your community?
6. The article states that “the midterm elections ushered in the most diverse freshman class in history.” What challenges do Democratic leaders face from new Congress members within their own party?
— What is your reaction to the government shutdown? How does it make you feel about political leadership in Washington? Do you think the shutdown will end soon? Has it affected you or anyone you know? What questions do you still have?
— How do you think Congress, including the new Democratic House majority, should handle President Trump’s demands for billions of dollars to fund a border wall in exchange for ending the government shutdown? Should Democratic congressional leaders compromise with the president, and if so, in what ways?
— Do you think the new Congress will be effective? Will the House and Senate be able to pass much new legislation or will Congress be largely gridlocked? If you were a new member of the Congress, what issues or legislation would be your priority? Please tell us why.