‘ABOUT ALICE’ at the Polonsky Shakespeare Center (in previews; opens on Jan. 20). Based on what The New York Times Book Review called a “slim but walloping book,” this Theater for a New Audience play by Calvin Trillin relates his long, fine romance with his wife, Alice, who died in 2001. Under Leonard Foglia’s direction, Jeffrey Bean and Carrie Paff portray Calvin and Alice.
‘THE CONVENT’ at A.R.T./New York Theaters (in previews; opens on Jan. 24). A girls’ trip with monastic overtones, Jessica Dickey’s new play goes on retreat with a group of women trying to live like medieval nuns (though likely practicing better personal hygiene). Daniel Talbott directs the all-female cast, which includes Lisa Ramirez and Samantha Soule, as they recede from modernity.
‘EDDIE AND DAVE’ at Atlantic Stage 2 (in previews; opens on Jan. 22). A story of big personalities and even bigger hair, Amy Staats’s play explores ’80s rock as seen though a mist of extra-hold hair spray. Staats and Megan Hill portray Van Halen-esque shredders, with Vanessa Aspillaga as an MTV V.J. The director Margot Bordelon jumps in.
‘JOAN’ at Here (previews start on Jan. 19; opens on Jan. 27). Having worked up a lather in “Sweat,” the ferocious Johanna Day has returned to the stage in this new play by Stephen Belber (“Tape,” “Match”). For Colt Coeur, Adrienne Campbell-Holt directs a story of an American everywoman. Adam Harrington and Marjan Neshat also star.
‘THE LIGHT’ at the Susan & Ronald Frankel Theater at the Robert W. Wilson MCC Theater Space (previews start on Jan. 23; opens on Feb. 10). In Loy A. Webb’s play about a marriage proposal gone awry, saying yes isn’t so easy. A two-character drama about the legacies of sexual trauma, this MCC show, the first in its new space, is directed by Logan Vaughn and stars McKinley Belcher III and Mandi Masden.
‘THE PRICE OF THOMAS SCOTT’ at the Beckett Theater at Theater Row (previews start on Jan. 24; opens on Feb. 20). The classiest resurrectionists in town, the Mint Theater Company specializes in reviving forgotten plays and playwrights. Its latest object: Elizabeth Baker, a neglected English playwright. First up is this 1913 play about a moralist who balks at selling his business to a dance hall proprietor.
‘RED STATE BLUE STATE’ at Minetta Lane Theater (in previews; opens on Jan. 22). Having already attacked local demographics in “The New York Story,” the comedian Colin Quinn (“Long Story Short,” “Unconstitutional”) makes his exasperation national. This new show, which will be released by Audible, plants its feet on both sides of the political divide, promising to pummel liberals and conservatives alike. Bobby Moresco directs.
‘TRUE WEST’ at the American Airlines Theater (in previews; opens on Jan. 24). Propose a toast. Better yet, lots of toast. Sam Shepard’s darkly funny tale of sibling rivalry returns with Ethan Hawke and Paul Dano as California brothers in arms and at throats. James Macdonald directs and Marylouise Burke makes a late-in-the-play appearance as Mom.
THE BIG APPLE CIRCUS at Damrosch Park (closes on Jan. 27).  
