Have you ever dreamed of being on Broadway?
Watch this video of his performance at the 2018 National High School Musical Theater Awards — a performance that led to his discovery by a Broadway producer. What qualities in his performance do you think might make him a Broadway star?
1. The article begins: “If there is a world in which theater kids rule, Andrew Barth Feldman seems to live there.” How does Michael Paulson, the author, paint a world where Andrew rules? What details in the opening paragraphs help to set the scene?
2. Although the title role in the play “Dear Evan Hansen” is a teenage character, all previous actors cast in the role have been in their 20s. Why have teenage actors not been cast until now?
3. What qualities does the character Evan Hansen possess, and how does Andrew relate to the role? Do you agree with his assessment that he seems “right for the role”? Why or why not?
4. Mr. Paulson writes: “This is not one of those stories about someone who happened into theater unwittingly. This is a story about an unabashed theater geek.” What examples does the author provide to support this claim? In what ways do you identify with Andrew’s story?
5. Why might casting Andrew be “scary” for the producers, for the actor himself and for his mother? How might it be a risk for the show’s producers? How is its creative team working to support him to be successful?
6. What sacrifices has Andrew made, and will he have to make, to prepare for and play the role of Evan Hansen?
7. What are some of the highlights of this actor’s previous performances? Why might his experiences in less-than-great plays make him ready for this big moment?
— Do you think Andrew Barth Feldman will be successful? Why? What are the pressures he faces and will need to overcome? Do you think you would be able to face those pressures?
— What qualities of his — outside of singing and performing — do you think have helped him to garner this extraordinary opportunity? Are there qualities you admire?
— Is theater a part of your life? What does Broadway mean to you? If you have had a memorable Broadway or theater experience, please tell us about it.
In what ways do you identify with the character? Does this article make you want to see the play?