Good Wednesday morning. Want this by email? Sign up here.
High-level delegates from Beijing and Washington are meeting near the White House today for the first of two days of trade talks, but appear to have a great distance left to bridge.
Each government has reason to play nice. Evidence is mounting that reciprocal tariffs are hurting both sides, and global markets have been skittish while awaiting a deal.
But there are signs that China is unwilling to bend on key U.S. demands involving intellectual property and technology transfer, even as its lawmakers accelerated a vote on legislation addressing foreign investors’ concerns.
A pair of indictments revealed earlier this week against the Chinese telecommunications firm Huawei could complicate the discussions, as could disagreements over strategy within the Trump administration’s team.
Weakness in the Chinese economy. At least 20 companies reported yesterday that their 2018 earnings would fall short of expectations. The Chongqing Changan Automobile Company, Ford Motor’s primary partner in China, warned of a profit slump of as much as 93 percent last year. China Life Insurance said its net income may have fallen as much as 70 percent. And Chinese exporters suffered a sluggish start to 2019.
Slowing Chinese investment abroad. Net purchases of U.S. commercial real estate by Chinese companies — big buyers earlier in the decade — have slipped to their lowest level since 2012.
Worries to the west. The motorcycle maker Harley-Davidson said that tariffs — along with other shifts in its business — left it barely breaking even in the final quarter of 2018. In the European Union, there are concerns whatever happens: If China and the U.S. reach a deal, Mr. Trump might turn his attention to German cars and French wines. If not, China might dump discounted goods into the European market. “We are next in the queue,” said William De Vijlder, the chief economist at BNP Paribas.
The Trump administration’s growth forecast is much rosier than those of economists at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere, who warn that growth is slowing and put some of the blame on the government, writes the NYT’s Jim Tankersley.
An exceptional year: Growth appears to have exceeded 3 percent in 2018, the first time it has done so in a decade. But many economists attribute that to a burst of fiscal stimulus that isn’t expected to be repeated.
Growing consensus: The Congressional Budget Office predicted that growth would slow to 2.3 percent this year and then to 1.7 percent in 2020. Economists at the Fed also forecast 2.3 percent growth this year. Some corporate financial executives are bracing for a recession.
More Fed news: Jerome Powell, the Fed chairman, has taken a conversational tone in public comments, but the markets didn’t understand. Investors face three outcomes if the Fed is done raising interest rates, and none of them are good.
Apple reported yesterday that it had flat profit and lower revenue in the fourth quarter, which included the holiday shopping season. After years of expansion, the tech giant appears to be entering a period of vulnerability, writes the NYT’s Jack Nicas.
Diminishing demand: The company has had some success with new products like the Apple Watch, but they haven’t had the global impact of the iPhone. That was a drag on the company’s earnings.
Slowdown in China: Apple is uniquely vulnerable to slowing consumer demand in China, as well as to potential tariffs on Chinese-made products.
Security concerns: Customers said a flaw in the iPhone let people eavesdrop on phone calls. The problem was in the FaceTime app, which Apple promised to fix by the end of the week, but it has been criticized for moving too slowly. A lawyer in Houston sued Apple over the glitch.
More Apple news: Shares rallied after the company outlined plans for life beyond the iPhone. And it plans to lower prices on some phones outside U.S. to offset a strong dollar.
PG&E bankruptcy: What happens next?
Pacific Gas and Electric filed for a corporate reorganization on Tuesday that “is shaping up to be one of the most complicated and difficult in recent years,” writes Ivan Penn.
Facing tens of billions of dollars in claims related to 17 major wildfires in California in 2017, with its equipment under investigation in several other blazes last year, PG&E decided to declare bankruptcy despite having a stable income stream and several offers of financing.
Now creditors and suppliers of the state’s largest utility will face off against California officials and fire victims to be paid, while renewable energy companies and climate change activists jockey for position. Lawyers, bankers and consultants are likely to collect hundreds of millions of dollars in fees.
Thanks for reading! We’ll see you on Thursday.
