The police investigated him in 1993. Another accusation led to a trial in 2005 that became a pop culture spectacle, complete with crowds of supporters waiting outside the courthouse. Jackson was acquitted and died four years later while preparing for a string of concert dates he hoped would revive his career.
A new documentary, “Leaving Neverland,” has rekindled interest in the accusations. The film had its debut at the Sundance Film Festival and airs on HBO March 3 and 4.
In August 1993, when Jackson was still a major star on the pop charts and touring to support his album “Dangerous,” the Los Angeles Police Department began investigating claims that Jackson had molested a 13-year-old boy. Executing search warrants for a condominium in Los Angeles and Jackson’s Neverland Ranch in Santa Barbara County, Calif., the police seized videotapes but found no incriminating evidence.
On Sept. 14, while Jackson was on tour in Moscow, the boy’s parents sued the star, saying that Jackson had “repeatedly committed sexual battery” on their son. Among the accusations were that Jackson had performed oral sex on the boy and masturbated him.
As the case drew headlines, the Jackson camp introduced the news media to children who gave interviews supporting the star. One, a 10-year-old boy named Wade Robson, told CNN about harmless “slumber parties” in Jackson’s bedroom. As prosecutors continued to pursue a criminal case, another boy, James Safechuck, who had appeared with Jackson in a Pepsi commercial, gave sworn testimony on Jackson’s behalf.
On Dec. 20, 1993, Jackson was strip-searched by police at Neverland, and photographs were taken of his genitals to compare to a description given by the boy. Two days later, Jackson spoke on live television, denying the accusations and excoriating the news media.
In January 1994, Jackson settled the case for $23 million, with $5 million going to the family’s lawyers. Prosecutors dropped the criminal case after the boy declined to cooperate.
The documentary sparked a criminal investigation, and in December, Jackson was charged with child molesting, serving alcohol to a minor, conspiracy and kidnapping. He faced up to 20 years in prison.
Jackson’s trial began on Feb. 28, 2005. Throughout, the global news media paid close attention to Jackson’s erratic behavior, like arriving in floral pajamas.
The boy from the documentary, who was 14 at the time of the trial, testified that Jackson had masturbated him. His brother said he had witnessed the abuse, and that Jackson had showed them both pornography and served them wine, calling it “Jesus juice.” A former housekeeper, Blanca Francia, said she had seen Jackson taking a shower with Wade Robson, the young man who had spoken to the media in support of Jackson in 1993.
Jackson’s lawyers portrayed the boy at the center of the case and his family as practiced grifters, and several witnesses who had been close with Jackson as children — like the actor Macaulay Culkin, then 24 years old — took the stand to deny any abuse. Robson, by this point a choreographer for stars like Britney Spears, testified that he had spent the night at Neverland more than 20 times but that Jackson had never molested him or taken a shower with him.
Safechuck, who had defended Jackson earlier, did not testify.
Jackson was found not guilty of all charges on June 13, 2005; outside the courthouse, a fan released 10 white doves, one for each count that was acquitted. Jackson died four years later, at age 50, on the eve of a comeback attempt.
In 2013, four years after Jackson’s death, Robson sued the star’s estate, saying that Jackson had molested him for seven years, beginning when he was age 7. In an interview on the “Today” show, he said that “brainwashing” by Jackson had led him to testify on the star’s behalf. Lawyers for Jackson’s estate blasted Robson’s credibility, saying that in the past he had repeatedly denied abuse. Robson’s case was later thrown out by a judge for being filed too late.
Safechuck filed his own suit in 2014, saying that Jackson had abused him “hundreds” of times from 1988 to 1992, beginning when a 10-year-old Safechuck — and his mother — accompanied Jackson on his “Bad” concert tour. According to his complaint, Jackson kissed Safechuck’s genitals and gave him jewelry as rewards for performing sexual acts. His case was also dismissed. Both men’s suits are under appeal.
