WASHINGTON — The Trump administration said Thursday that it would start blocking a small number of asylum seekers from entering the United States from Mexico, using the San Ysidro border crossing near San Diego as the first location to turn back immigrants applying for refugee status.
The policy to block asylum seekers was first announced last month by Kirstjen Nielsen, the homeland security secretary, and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. It will gradually be expanded over the next two weeks at border crossings with heavy foot traffic in Texas, New Mexico and Arizona, according to a senior United States official briefed on the move, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
It will apply both to some asylum seekers who try to enter the United States at border crossings and to people who are stopped while illegally trying to enter. Asylum seekers generally have been allowed to wait in the United States, often for years, for their cases to be processed.
The number of pending immigration cases has grown by nearly 50 percent under President Trump, what many lawyers and advocates say is a crisis.
“For far too long, our immigration system has been exploited by smugglers, traffickers and those with no legal right to be in the United States,” said Ms. Nielsen, who described the new protocol as a “methodical common-sense approach” in a statement late Thursday.
While she cited the danger posed by adults and criminals, a fact sheet explaining the justification for the new policy, described as “migrant protection protocols,” cited an unmanageable influx of children and families from Central America as the main reason for the change.
The protocol was necessary to counter “misguided court decisions and outdated laws that have made it easier for illegal aliens to enter and remain in the U.S.,” Ms. Nielsen said. Under the provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, the new policy can be enforced immediately without congressional approval, she added.
Mr. Trump shut down the government over a month ago over demands that House Democrats allocate $5.7 billion for the construction of a wall along the southwestern border. His plan failed in the Republican-controlled Senate on Thursday, leaving no clear path for an end to the longest funding lapse in American history.
