The president deserves to lose his job — and he’s vulnerable. Just look at the final midterm results.
In his recent book on the history of impeachment, the legal scholar Cass Sunstein asks readers to do a mental exercise. When thinking about the impeachment of a given president, imagine that he was a member of your political party, Sunstein suggests. In that case, would you still support impeaching him?
1. He has accepted money from foreign governments, used the presidency to promote his businesses and hidden his personal finances from the American people.
2. He directed a criminal campaign-finance violation scheme, in the final month of the presidential campaign, and lied to the American people about it.
3. He pressured Justice Department officials to go easy on an investigation into the president himself and his campaign.
4. He attempted to undermine the credibility of multiple checks and balances on the executive branch, including the justice system, the press, the electoral system and the Central Intelligence Agency.
No other president, Republican or Democrat, has ever behaved as Donald Trump has. I think Americans, regardless of party, should come to see that he is unfit for the office and is damaging the country. In the Sunday Review yesterday, I made the much longer version of this case. I also argued that Democrats would be doing him a favor by impeaching him soon. The best way to push for his removal from office is not to impeach him, at least not yet. Richard Nixon, as you may recall, was never impeached but resigned under pressure after he lost the support of fellow Republicans.
If you’ve already read the article, you may be interested in the reader comments that other Times readers suggested as the most interesting (which you can see by clicking on the “Readers’ Picks” tab). I’m grateful to my editors for encouraging me to write the piece and for giving it as much space as they did.
I know one skeptical question that many readers ask is a version of: So what? That is, even if Trump deserves to be removed from office, people have come to believe congressional Republicans will never abandon him. I don’t think that’s quite right, and my Monday column explains why. The column starts with an analysis of the midterm elections. As the final results have come in, it’s clear they were even worse for Republicans than first understood.
Finally, for anyone interested in more detail, I recommend Sunstein’s book, as well as a new book “Impeachment: An American History,” written by four experts. And for people who want to dive more deeply into the midterm results, an excellent resource is this table of results for each House district, compiled by David Wasserman and Ally Flinn of The Cook Political Report.
Ocasio-Cortez appeared on CBS’s “60 Minutes” and said she favored a top tax rate of as much as 70 percent on income above $10 million. “As you climb up this ladder you should be contributing more,” she explained. That’s how marginal tax rates work. Even people making more than $10 million would not pay a 70 percent rate on the first $10 million of their income. They’d pay a much lower rate.
But after Ocasio-Cortez’s interviews, social media and television shows were full of talk suggesting that she wanted to start taxing a wide swath of people at 70 percent.
My colleague Paul Krugman explains that some of the world’s top economists favor a top marginal rate — on the very highest incomes — as high as the one Ocasio-Cortez discussed. He noted that the United States also had such a rate for many years and that the American economy did extremely well during these years. In a previous column, I’ve argued that such high rates discourage corporate executives from paying themselves ludicrously large sums.
For people who’ve had enough economics and want to read more about Ocasio-Cortez, check out Maureen Dowd in The Times and Rebecca Traister in New York Magazine.
