Most issues will strongly favor the Democrats in 2020. Taking away people’s health insurance is an exception.
The poll’s details, however, were a lot of less positive about Medicare for All. In fact, they showed why single-payer health care may turn out to be one of the few problematic issues for Democrats heading into 2020 — if the party isn’t careful. Harris has highlighted the tensions this week, saying on Monday night that she supported the most aggressive version of Medicare for All before moderating her position, via aides, late yesterday.
Not only that, but when the pollsters described a version of Medicare for All in which private insurance was wiped away, support plummeted. The idea flipped from being popular to unpopular: 37 percent of respondents favored it, and 58 percent opposed it.
This same hostility to change helped sink Bill and Hillary Clinton’s health care plan in the 1990s. It also became the mainline of Republican attack against Barack Obama’s health care law — and one reason that law remained unpopular (until President Trump started attacking it). Many Americans are happy with their current insurance, polls show. Even among those who aren’t, many worry about being forced into a new plan. “Loss aversion is a hell of a drug,” notes Brendan Nyhan, a University of Michigan political scientist.
I understand the arguments in favor of mandatory Medicare for All. It could reduce bureaucratic waste and insurance-company profit skimming. It could help the United States lower its world-leading medical costs. And I’m thrilled to see presidential candidates willing to offer bold economic ideas.
The next Democratic president will need to prioritize among several big issues. I’d much prefer a winnable health care fight that also leaves room for action on climate, taxes, civil rights and other issues to an all-consuming uphill battle.
Watch Harris explain her position during the town hall on Monday night. CNN’s Jake Tapper said to her: “I believe it will totally eliminate private insurance. So for people out there who like their insurance, they don’t get to keep it?” Harris’s answer: “Well, listen, the idea is that everyone gets access to medical care. And you don’t have to go through the process of going through an insurance company, having them give you approval, going through the paperwork, all of the delay that may require. ... Let’s eliminate all of that. Let’s move on.” On Tuesday, her aides said she was also open to other approaches.
In Jacobin, Tim Higginbotham recently offered a more favorable view of mandatory Medicare, arguing that the transition wouldn’t be as disruptive as some Americans fear. “It will certainly face complications, but the Medicare bureaucracy will be able to sort these out as they come,” he wrote.
Sarah Kliff and Dylan Scott of Vox have analyzed the various versions of Medicare for All, as well as other Democratic health care plans.
Elizabeth Warren, Kirsten Gillibrand and Julian Castro — three other presidential candidates — also support the Sanders version of Medicare for All that Harris backs. But they have generally not been as clear about ending private insurance as Harris was on Monday. When Gillibrand was asked about that part of the plan on a recent episode of “Pod Save America,” she sidestepped the question.
My view is that the best answer is a version of: I’m for Medicare for All. If you want Medicare, you can have it, regardless of your age. If you’d rather keep your private plan, you can do that, too. This approach will give us universal coverage, lower costs and consumer choice. Oh, and I’m in favor of tax increases on the wealthy and corporations to help pay for it. They’re not paying their fair share right now.
Newsletter readers know that I’m a fan of David Axelrod’s podcast, “The Axe Files,” in which he asks guests to tell their life stories and eventually wends around to current events. I sat down with Axelrod in Chicago last week to tape an episode and had a great time talking about politics, economics and my wayward adolescent years. The conversation is available on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Stitcher and the show’s website.
