BEIRUT, Lebanon — A car bombing targeted a joint American-Kurdish patrol in Syria on Monday, injuring a number of fighters from a Kurdish-led force allied with the United States. The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack.
The explosion came just five days after at least 15 people, including four Americans, were killed in a suicide bombing by the Islamic State in Manbij, Syria, which is controlled and protected by American-backed local forces.
Coming only weeks after President Trump ordered American troops to withdraw from Syria, the attacks serve as a reminder that the Islamic State, while controlling just a small fraction of the territory it once had, remains capable of striking in what was considered relatively safe territory.
The Amaq News Agency, which is linked to the militant group, reported that a suicide bomber had attacked a convoy of United States troops and Syrian Democratic Forces in what it claimed as a “martyrdom-seeking attack,” wording it uses to take responsibility.
The explosion took place near the town of Shadadi in Hasakah Province, in far northeastern Syria, according to both Amaq and the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a group based in Britain that monitors the Syrian war.
The Observatory said a suicide bomber in a vehicle had attacked the convoy, killing at least five Kurdish fighters from the Syrian Democratic Forces, the group that has served as the United States’ military’s main partner on the ground in battling the Islamic State. The deaths were not independently confirmed.
But Mustafa Bali, a spokesman for the Syrian Democratic Forces, said in a tweet that there were no casualties in Monday’s car bombing.
No Americans were killed in the attack, a spokesperson for the American-led coalition said.
One American has died in the area: Army Specialist Etienne J. Murphy, 22, died in May 2017 in an incident involving a vehicle that rolled over. He was one of four American service members who died in Syria between American forces’ arrival there in 2015 and last week; the bombing last Wednesday matched that casualty count in one day.
As the Islamic State has lost territory, many of its fighters have gone underground or returned to their former lives rather than being killed or captured. An estimated 20,000 to 30,000 fighters remain at large in Iraq and Syria, raising concerns about a resurgence of the group.
He made the decision after speaking with President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, who assured Mr. Trump that his country could mop up what was left of the Islamic State. But many American officials warned against abandoning the United States’ Kurdish allies; Mr. Erdogan wants to defeat them, as well, seeing them as tied to a Kurdish insurgency within Turkey.
Mr. Trump and Mr. Erdogan spoke by phone on Sunday, and the Turkish leader said his forces were ready to take over security in Manbij without delay, Anadolu, the semiofficial Turkish news agency, reported.
A White House statement and the Anadolu report stressed that the two presidents had agreed to work together against terrorism. Anadolu also said that Mr. Erdogan had told Mr. Trump that he would not allow Kurdish forces in northeastern Syria to be a destabilizing force.
Mr. Erdogan also expressed condolences for the American deaths last week, Anadolu reported, calling the attack a provocation to influence the United States withdrawal.
Mr. Pompeo also spoke about the United States’ commitment to addressing Turkey’s security concerns, Mr. Palladino said, and “the protection of forces” that have worked with the United States-led coalition against ISIS.