LA QUINTA, Calif. — Adam Long bounced around golf’s backwoods for years, winning only a lone Hooters Tour event. Now he is headed to the Masters as a PGA Tour winner.
Long won the Desert Classic on Sunday at PGA West, beating Phil Mickelson and Adam Hadwin by a stroke with a 14-foot birdie putt on the final hole after a 6-iron approach from an awkward stance.
“In some ways, it’s been a little bit of a roller coaster, but it’s been a steady improvement throughout my career,” Long said. “I’ve played in pretty much most tours around the world that there are and just kind of steadily progressed.
Long closed with a seven-under 65 on the Stadium Course, holing the winning putt after Mickelson’s 40-foot birdie attempt curled left at the end.
Long, a 31-year-old former Duke player, set up with the winning putt with the 6-iron approach from 175 yards with the ball below his feet in dormant grass on a mound to the right of the fairway.
He earned his tour card with a 13th-place finish last year on the Web.com Tour’s regular-season money list. In five previous PGA Tour starts, he had made only one cut — a tie for 63rd in October in the Safeway Open.
Hadwin, of Canada, finished with a 67, losing a three-stroke lead on the back nine.
Hadwin had his fourth straight top-six finish in the event. He was second in 2017 after a third-round 59 at La Quinta Country Club and tied for third last year.
Long finished at 26-under 262 and earned $1,062,000. Talor Gooch was fourth at 24 under after a 64, Dominic Bozzelli followed at 22 under after a 66, and Jon Rahm, the 2018 winner, shot 67 to reach 21 under.
Long chipped in twice on the back nine to remain in contention.
The 48-year-old Mickelson was making his first tour start since the Safeway and first competitive appearance since beating Tiger Woods in Las Vegas in November in a made-for-television event.
Mickelson entered the day two strokes ahead of Hadwin and three ahead of Long. The tournament winner in 2002 and 2004, he matched his career-low score with an opening 60 at La Quinta.
“It’s a weird game how sometimes if you haven’t played for a while, it just can click and come right back,” Mickelson said. “But usually, you need a little bit of a foundation there coming down the stretch.
