One day last month, a New York City health inspector showed up at the juice cart at 54th Street and Avenue of the Americas where Long Huynh works. The inspector spent about an hour examining ingredients for freshness, and making sure the work equipment and surfaces were spotless and organized.
Mr. Huynh’s diligence was rewarded Friday when his cart became one of the first to receive a letter grade from the city Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. A placard bearing a blue A was affixed to the front of the cart. “They gave me the big one,” he said.
Since 2010, city inspectors have been assigning grades to restaurants, which are required to post them prominently, as a way to heighten awareness of food safety and hold restaurants more accountable. Though owners still complain about the fairness of the grading, and the fines that accompany violations, the practice has become more or less accepted; today, more than 90 percent of the city’s 24,000 restaurants receive A grades.
Until now, the more than 5,000 food carts and trucks have been inspected, but not graded. On Friday, the health department handed out the first 22 grades, in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens. All but a few were As, the department said.
The immediate response, from both vendors and customers, ranged from approval to a collective shrug.
The department announced in November that it would begin grading the carts and trucks, and attaching location-sharing devices to the vehicles to help inspectors find them. The move followed passage of a bill sponsored by City Councilwoman Karen Koslowitz that Mayor Bill de Blasio signed into law in June.
Corinne Schiff, the city’s deputy commissioner of environmental health, said food carts and trucks would be evaluated on the same criteria as restaurants, by the same set of health inspectors and with the same schedule of fines. All the violations and grades will be posted online.
She said the department aimed to grade all mobile vendors in the next two years. To aid in the effort, four inspectors have been added to the inspection staff of more than 100.
Vendors and restaurateurs who receive less than an A are given a chance to address problems before a reinspection. At a news conference on Friday, the health commissioner, Dr. Oxiris Barbot, said her department no longer fines businesses with top grades for minor violations.
Some customers said the new grades didn’t seem to carry much weight.
The most distinctive aspect of the new policy is the location-sharing device that will be installed on each cart or truck. In the past, the department used data analytics to pinpoint locations, but they weren’t always accurate. Now, as each vehicle renews its one- or two-year health department permit, the device will be installed. Then the cart can be graded.
To protect the privacy of vendors, department officials said, location data will be deleted from the department’s internal database after 24 hours.
Still, Mr. Shapiro, of the Street Vendor Project, worries about the ways the devices could be misused, especially since some vendors are undocumented immigrants, living in fear of detention by Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
A health department spokesman, Michael Lanza, said, “We couldn’t do that because we don’t store the data by name,” only by location.