COLUMBIA, S.C. — The gym was hot. The lights malfunctioned. But the audience of nearly 1,000 people was engrossed as Senator Elizabeth Warren, the Massachusetts Democrat and presidential hopeful, did what she does best: “nerd out,” as she puts it.
After talking up gun control laws and criminal justice reform on a recent South Carolina campaign swing, Ms. Warren dug into the nitty-gritty of free market regulation and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a federal agency she helped create, which has returned more than $12 billion to people in refunds and canceled debts. Nothing made her more enthusiastic.
By the end, she had many in the audience cheering.
“You may leave here and say, ‘Oh my gosh, I must be turning into a nerd, I was applauding a government agency’ — how did that happen?” Ms. Warren joked with the crowd at Columbia College in South Carolina.
Almost one month into her presidential campaign, Ms. Warren’s passion for policy minutiae has become her way of standing out in an increasingly crowded Democratic field, establishing herself as a wonk’s wonk whose expansive ideas and detail-oriented speaking style are her bid for a good first impression on voters. While other Democrats have focused on sweeping themes of unity or change, as Senator Kamala Harris of California did on Sunday at a campaign kickoff rally, Ms. Warren is making a personal and political wager that audiences care more about policy savvy than captivating oration.
It is a bet intended to draw contrasts with President Trump, who rarely delves into policy, but also to put pressure on Democratic rivals. In what promises to be a nomination contest featuring many candidates with broadly similar ideologies, a strategy of highlighting even the smallest differences in policy could pay off, especially with liberal voters who want firm and thorough positions rather than squishy generalities that could be setups for compromise.
On one level Ms. Warren is running as herself: a former Harvard law professor who likes getting into the weeds of policy. She is also trying to avoid the political trap of adopting a poll-tested, all-things-to-all-people persona and coming off as inauthentic. But some Democrats say she runs the risk of being seen as out of touch and too intellectual and offbeat.
Patrick Morgan, a Nebraska resident who attended Ms. Warren’s recent event in Council Bluffs, Iowa, said he wished she had more “charisma” and “energy.” David Briggs, who attended a Warren event in Des Moines, said he worried about her ability to go beyond traditional issues and inspire the country.
“I’d love for her to just go straight into office, but I worry she can’t bring people together and beat the Republican Party,” Mr. Briggs said.
Ms. Warren’s political strategists believe that after years of Mr. Trump’s leaning on catchphrases and easy-to-digest proposals like “build the wall,” Democrats want a nominee who articulates a detailed vision for America. They point to the 2018 midterm elections, where several successful Democratic candidates talked at length about issues and tried to engage voters directly by their favorite means: streaming themselves on Instagram Live in some cases, expounding on bankruptcy law in others.
Her approach is on display during the question-and-answer portion of Ms. Warren’s events, which is a hallmark of each campaign stop and relies on a lottery system instead of prescreening questions. The result: extended riffs about Puerto Rican debt restructuring, the history of denying black Americans access to mortgage subsidies, renewable energy policies like net metering and the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 2018.
In another question-and-answer moment in Des Moines, a man named Jeffrey Goetz thanked Ms. Warren for her longtime scholarship around bankruptcy law.
“I’m a bankruptcy practitioner, Chapter 11. Thank you for sponsoring the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 2018,” Mr. Goetz said.
“Yes, it’s a nerd thing,” Ms. Warren responded, drawing laughter from the crowd.
By playing up her instincts as a wonk, Ms. Warren is trying to define herself and her candidacy on her own terms before Democratic rivals try to cast her in a more unflattering light. Past presidential candidates in both parties have grappled with this.
Republicans and Democrats alike tried to portray Hillary Clinton as inauthentic in her 2016 and 2008 runs for president, invoking her paid speeches to Wall Street firms and her earlier vote in support of the Iraq war. And many of Republicans who ran in 2016 also struggled to define themselves and not have Mr. Trump do the job for them; his pejorative nicknames for rivals like “Low Energy” Jeb Bush, “Lyin’ Ted” and “Liddle Marco” did political damage.
Mr. Trump is already trying to do the same to Ms. Warren by slurring her as “Pocahontas” and casting her as too liberal for the American electorate. But her tendency to embrace her inner wonk predates that nickname and is not a newly conjured attempt to push back at him.
Ms. Warren was the first major candidate to enter the presidential race and begin touring early primary states, and it remains to be seen which of her fellow Democratic candidates will prioritize laying out a policy-driven vision for voters to latch onto and which will ground their candidacy on their supposed ability to beat Mr. Trump.
Even a fresh national face like Ms. Harris, who announced her presidential candidacy last week, has taken a more cautious approach to campaigning at her first three events. On Friday, Ms. Harris spoke at a ticketed gala for members of her collegiate sorority, she hosted a kickoff rally in Oakland on Sunday afternoon and she is set to participate in a CNN-moderated town-hall-style meeting in Iowa on Monday night.
Faiz Shakir, national political director for the American Civil Liberties Union, said candidates would be wise to mimic Ms. Warren’s willingness to focus on policy. On Thursday, Ms. Warren announced a plan that would impose a new annual tax on the 75,000 wealthiest families in the United States. The proposal would raise $2.75 trillion in tax revenue over a decade, according to calculations by Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman, two University of California-Berkeley economists who consulted with Ms. Warren on the plan.
