DETROIT — Moments after winning the pairs championship at the United States Figure Skating Championships on Saturday, Timothy LeDuc started talking about last month, when his partner, Ashley Cain, fell on her head at an event in Croatia and had to be hospitalized.
Then Cain took over the story.
Even then, Cain said, she was hoping to be back on top of the podium in short order, and she fulfilled that wish when she and LeDuc won the title.
Earlier Saturday, Nathan Chen took the lead in the men’s competition with a dazzling short program, moving into great position to win his third straight national title.
Tarah Kayne and Danny O’Shea, who led the pairs event after the short program, fell to fourth after a disappointing free skate. They had a problem with an early combination and then failed to perform a lift near the end of their program.
Cain and LeDuc, skating last, took advantage, and by the time their program ended, they appeared well aware that they were about to become champions.
They finished with a score of 212.36. Haven Denney and Brandon Frazier (201.64) were second, followed by Deanna Stellato-Dudek and Nathan Bartholomay (199.92).
The defending champions, Alexa Scimeca-Knierim and Chris Knierim, finished seventh.
Chen, the reigning world champion, received a score of 113.42 for a short program that included a quad flip and a quad toe loop-triple toe loop combination. Jason Brown (100.52) and Vincent Zhou (100.25) were next. All three were sharp, but Chen is the clear favorite heading into Sunday’s free skate.
“Over all, I thought the performance has been developing comparatively to the past couple of competitions, so I’m pretty satisfied,” he said.
Madison Hubbell and Zach Donohue, capped the session by winning their second straight national ice dancing title, beating out Madison Chock and Evan Bates in a battle of friendly local favorites.
Both teams have strong ties to Michigan and train together in Montreal under the same coaches. There was little doubt the championship would come down to them after they went 1-2 in the rhythm dance Friday, and they finished in that order after Saturday’s free dance.
Chock and Bates had the crowd clapping along to their routine, which included the music of Elvis Presley, but it was not enough to catch Hubbell and Donohue, who skated a clean, flowing program to the 1996 “Romeo and Juliet” soundtrack.