LOS ANGELES — There was a moment during the Golden State Warriors’ morning walk-through on Friday that Shaun Livingston, even after his 14 seen-it-all seasons in the N.B.A., felt a need to pause in admiration of what was happening.
So Livingston stared out onto the floor at Staples Center and tried to process that DeMarcus Cousins had indeed joined the starry quartet of Stephen Curry, Kevin Durant, Klay Thompson and Draymond Green to run through some defensive instructions — as a unit.
The rest of the Warriors would go on to enjoy their own fantasy-becomes-reality moment Friday night. Finally making his debut with the two-time reigning champions, after nearly a year in injury exile, Cousins frankly looked as joyful as we’ve ever seen him in an N.B.A. game, logging four effective stints for a total of 15 minutes 3 seconds in a 112-94 road rout of the Los Angeles Clippers.
There were a few awkward drives to the rim, more than a few of his familiar grumbles to the referees and six fouls in those 15 minutes, but Cousins also racked up an impressive 14 points, 6 rebounds and 3 assists. Despite Cousins’s rust and apparent lack of conditioning, Golden State outscored the Clippers by 21 points in his time on the floor before he fouled out.
“This is his night,” Curry said afterward.
It certainly was. The 6-foot 11-inch Cousins hammered home a vicious dunk for his first basket as a Warrior, ran the floor with aplomb, hounded the various Clippers he guarded one on one into 0-for-7 shooting, found a cutting Curry for a layup with a nifty bounce pass out of the post, took a charge against a driving Tobias Harris and, most notably, drained three 3-pointers.
Two of those 3’s, early in the fourth quarter, “really broke the whole game open,” Warriors Coach Steve Kerr said.
“Like a kid on Christmas,” Cousins said.
And that might be the most ominous aspect of Cousins’s long-anticipated bow with the juggernaut he joined on a bargain deal via free agency last summer. That one-year-deal, worth just $5.3 million, came amid leaguewide concern about how Cousins would respond to a torn Achilles’ tendon in his left foot, historically one of the sport’s most devastating injuries. The resultant skepticism wiped out most of his free-agent market.
Yet Cousins, just one game into the Warriors experiment, already looks content and comfortable with this group.
If that continues?
“Things should only get better from here,” Curry said.
Even with a playful nickname like Boogie, there have been few happy occasions in the pros for Cousins, who has played more N.B.A. games (536) than any other active player without a taste of the postseason and had been sidelined since he shredded his Achilles’ as a member of the New Orleans Pelicans on Jan. 26, 2018.
But his desire to find a productive role with the franchise that has won three titles over the past four seasons was very clear on Friday night. Playing in short bursts to start every quarter, Cousins, 28, still found the time to flash every facet of the versatile skill set that, when it neutralizes the emotional side that Kerr referenced, has long made him one of the league’s most tantalizing talents.
In the 46th game of what Curry himself described as a “very dramatic” season for the Warriors, Cousins’s return also helped Golden State shed some of the aftertaste from its last visit here to play the Clippers — when a nasty argument on the bench between Durant and Green led to Green’s one-game suspension without pay and considerable tension afterward.
Those scenes seemed particularly dated on Friday even as Curry cast a wary eye on all the gushing sure to emerge in coming days about how mighty Golden State now looks with all five of its reigning All-Stars in uniform.
Still, no N.B.A. team has been able to trot out a lineup featuring five All-Stars from the previous season since the 1975-76 Boston Celtics. Well aware of such history, Kerr tried before tipoff to convince his players to tune out the external noise.
While things aren’t quite that hopeless for the league’s other 29 teams, it sure seems as though a new season just started for the Warriors, who are back atop the Western Conference despite a 32-14 record that isn’t as gaudy as usual. The Clippers might have been short-handed without the injured Lou Williams and with a hobbled Danilo Gallinari, but the Warriors’ ability to slot Cousins in among their marquee foursome or mix him in with trusted reserves such as Livingston and Andre Iguodala quickly made them look as dangerous as they ever have during their championship run.
Noting that he wasn’t being double-teamed no matter what the lineups on the floor were, Cousins called it “a first” in his career.
“I can get used to this,” he said.