ASASE YAA AFRICAN AMERICAN DANCE THEATER at Symphony Space (Feb. 2, 7:30 p.m.). Since 2001, this Brooklyn-based company — named after the earth goddess of the Ashanti in West Africa — has been sharing the traditions of African dance and drumming. For one night only, Asase Yaa presents “Drum Love,” choreographed by its founder and artistic director, Yao Ababio. The work relays the story of a young girl who ventures into the city where she winds up alone and pregnant. Ultimately, she finds love and support from her friends and family. However serious that story may seem, expect exuberant song and dance to have the final word.
CAMILLE A. BROWN & DANCERS at the Joyce Theater (Feb. 5-6, 7:30 p.m.; Feb. 7-9, 8 p.m.; through Feb. 10). In 2012’s “Mr. Tol E. Rance,” Brown dissected historical and modern-day minstrelsy; in 2015’s “Black Girl: Linguistic Play,” she used childhood games to celebrate the camaraderie of black women. Her latest work, “Ink,” which had its premiere in 2017 at the Kennedy Center and now comes to the Joyce, completes her trilogy on black identity. Using a mix of blues, hip-hop, jazz and swing music, a broad spectrum of movement from African to tap to modern dance, and her talent for shaping compelling characters in rich theatrical worlds, Brown links past to present with a powerful meditation on communal strength.
FRIDAYS AT NOON at the 92nd Street Y (Feb. 1, noon). More than 60 years ago, a 27-year-old Alvin Ailey and his new dance company made its debut at the 92Y, where they performed a sensual work called “Blues Suite.” In honor of the company’s anniversary and the beginning of Black History Month, Ailey II, the troupe’s junior wing, performs an excerpt from that work, along with sections from the Ailey classics “The Lark Ascending” (1972), “Hidden Rites” (1973), “Isba” (1983) and the enduring, ever-popular “Revelations” (1960). Sylvia Waters, who led Ailey II from its founding in 1974 until 2012, will have a conversation with Troy Powell, its current director.
PARIS OPERA BALLET at French Institute Alliance Française (Feb. 3, 1 p.m.). This revered French troupe doesn’t often visit New York, which makes the screening of this film all the more valuable. The movie’s quadruple bill includes a work by the Swiss choreographer James Thierrée that slips offstage into the sumptuous interiors of the Palais Garnier. Also on the program: a typically dark and moody piece for women by the Israeli choreographer Hofesh Shechter, a dance for men by the Spanish choreographer Iván Pérez that nods to Monet’s paintings, and an interpretation of Max Richter’s take on Vivaldi’s “The Four Seasons” by the much-admired Canadian choreographer Crystal Pite.
VICKY SHICK AND DANCERS at St. Mark’s Church (Feb. 7-9, 8 p.m.). For decades, Shick has facilitated physical conversations among her performers, allowing them to be emphatically individual while also demonstrating their commitment to the collective. In her new work, “Next to the Sink,” the latest in a long line of commissions from Danspace Project, Shick performs alongside Jodi Bender, Jennifer Lafferty, Mina Nishimura and Jimena Paz. With its signature calm precision and quirky gestural details, Shick’s choreography reveals the specificity of its characters as it explores layers of universal relationships — those that connect dancers to one another, to the space they’re in and to their place in the world.
PAM TANOWITZ at the Martha Graham Studios (Feb. 5-6, 7 p.m.). Through her own company, Tanowitz has garnered acclaim for stripping away the artifice of classical choreography and rearranging it in inventive ways to conjure a fresh physical language that feels both old and new. For a commission from the Martha Graham Dance Company, set to debut in New York in April, Tanowitz is mixing in some of Graham’s famous and fierce technique while transforming it as well. For this intimate showing, part of the company’s New@Graham series, Tanowitz shares excerpts from the work in progress and discusses its creation with the artistic director at Graham, Janet Eilber.
