Andy Kravis’s puzzle is so sweet, it’s fattening.
SUNDAY PUZZLE — Today’s puzzle from Andy Kravis spun my mind off in a particular direction that I don’t think I’ve delved into before in these pages: the emotional response to or interest in something that’s in your cultural history, but not in your personal experience. Wistfulness for the past is woven into human nature, and there are lots of words for different types of nostalgia in different languages — the wistful and evocative “saudade” that you might recognize from Portuguese music; “hiraeth” from the Welsh (who search for a cwtch, or a cuddle, in the comforts of their past); the Japanese “mono no aware,” a reflection on impermanence; and “sehnsucht,” a German word explored deeply by C.S. Lewis.
Apologies for all that pretense — it’s too cold for ice cream here, and it’ll counterbalance how frothy and fun this puzzle was.
I worked from the northeast corner and didn’t hit too much resistance today; there was a lot of theme, and most of the proper word entries were in my purview (aside from an erroneous Y in ASHLEE and V in OLAF, which I blame on hearing such names far more often than reading them). LOREN sent me looking for some short video of Sophia and Marcello, but everything I found was too steamy for Wordplay except for the actress in 2015, bundled up, affectionately discussing their relationship.
I loved the clues for PARADISE, DEE and EMOTICON, WISP, AMEX, WAGE HIKE, IKEAS and others, as well as the entries JEN and JAH and KISS OFF. I also liked how 56D informed 103A, as I’ve never really thought of an Arthur SULLIVAN.
28A: Well, here it is, the first post-2015 use of a word that literally made headlines some months ago, DOTARD. I vaguely remember the word from Melville, though not the context, which was a scornful description of a shark.
78A: I solved this as “Selmac” with “Sens” at 78D, until I just checked on this entry in the answers while columnizing for you. I don’t think I was that crazy about TV when “Alf” was on, although I have sehnsucht for “Alf” because one of my favorite dogs, now deceased, was considered an Alf doppelgänger by many passers-by — she had a very misshapen nose, this dog, and a prominent, quizzical brow. She was a delight. But, she almost definitely didn’t come from MELMAC, which is Alf’s planet (or “homeland,” as it was wistfully clued in its 1991 debut).
4D: This entry is easily surmised, I think, with a few letters as hints, but it’s new so I figured I’d mention BOATLIFT. I think the Wordplay yacht is just too big for one of these. We will not be deterred, or lifted.
31D: Have you ever really thought about glass containers, which came in such an amazing variety of sizes, shapes, colors and detail, before the flood of plastic that we’re drowning in now? The DEMIJOHN, which last appeared in the puzzle in 1971, is a nice big bottle once used to import European goods in the 1800s, often handblown, apparently, so one of a kind. 
There are eight across clues — at 23, 39, 42, 67, 70, 92, 97 and 115 — that are solved by common two-word phrases. The second words of all these phrases can be found in a common location, which is referred to in the puzzle’s title, “Parlor Tricks.” Lest one go immediately goth and think, “Oh, funerals! Finally, a sepulchral theme on Sunday,” Mr. Kravis specifies “at the ice cream parlor” in that first theme clue at 23A. Hopefully, much as we all must die, everyone also gets to at least try ice cream once in their lives.
The first entry I got, because of the pattern of my solve, was a little bit misleading — 39A, “The confirmed bachelor ordered a …” which, on the crosses, became SINGLE MALT, and made me go immediately something and think, “Oh, a hard liquor Sunday! I feel you, Mr. Kravis.” But a few more entries straightened me out.
At 23A, “The grand marshal ordered a …” made me think of a PARADE right away — what else would a grand marshal want? The full answer, PARADE FLOAT, soon followed (crossed with CALORIC, which was really brutal, Mr. Kravis; why are you doing this to us).
At 42A, “The crossing guard ordered a …” TRAFFIC CONE.
In case you grew up sugar-free (or are the most self-disciplined person I’ve ever encountered), we are looking at words that go with ice cream.
The only one that didn’t zing and sing for me right away was 70A, “The dental hygienist ordered a …” SUCTION CUP, probably because dentistry gets me a little squeamish. Not that I don’t have the utmost respect and admiration for dentists, and honestly it’s a perfectly decent way to get the requisite CUP in here.
I like crosswords that tell a story or describe a punny scene. Merl Reagle was the master of this kind of puzzle (as he was of so many things); I also really enjoyed Ross Trudeau's recent puzzle in this style that told the story of two people's quest, fraught with disagreement and indecision, to choose a board game to play. Today's puzzle doesn't reinvent the genre, but I hope it tickles the folks who enjoy such themes.
