Tesla has now shown it can make money — it reported its second consecutive quarterly profit on Wednesday, the first time it has done so — but the automaker still faces many challenges as it seeks to keep its growth going.
The Model 3 sedan still costs too much to produce. The company has set an ambitious goal of churning out cars from a new factory in China by the end of the year. And it struggles to provide the kind of customer service that buyers of luxury automobiles expect. Tesla also is planning to spend heavily on a new model even as a big bond payment reduces its cash reserves.
Still, Elon Musk, the chief executive, says he believes Tesla’s toughest times are behind it.
The automaker’s earnings in the final three months of 2018 leave some doubt about whether its profits will continue to grow. It reported $139 million in earnings in the fourth quarter, a substantial drop from the third quarter, despite a nearly 6 percent jump in revenue, to $7.2 billion.
The company blamed the introduction of lower-priced Model 3 variants that generate less profit than costlier versions, price cuts on the vehicles it exports to China and fewer sales of emissions credits to other carmakers.
Tesla said it had $3.7 billion in cash, an increase of about $700 million from Sept. 30. With that rise, Tesla said it would be able to make a $920 million payment to its bondholders in March, solving one of the most critical questions about the company’s finances.
Investors had been concerned about how Tesla would pay off the bonds, fearing the company could be left squeezed for cash. Tesla could have made part of the bond payment in stock if its share price had been above $360, a level it exceeded for part of last year.
The shares closed Wednesday at $308.77 but dropped nearly 5 percent in aftermarket trading after the company announced that its chief financial officer, Deepak Ahuja, would retire without saying exactly when.
Tesla said its revenue rose nearly 6 percent to $7.2 billion.
Mr. Musk predicted the company would deliver 360,000 to 400,000 cars this year, up from 245,000 in 2018, driven by higher sales of the Model 3. The company also said it anticipated lower North American vehicle sales in the current quarter compared to the fourth quarter. At the same time, it expects to begin sales in Europe and China.
The company also said it anticipated lower North American vehicle sales in the current quarter compared to the fourth quarter.
Some analysts believe increasing sales may prove tough, now that sales of the Model S luxury sedan and Model X S.U.V. are flattening, and the federal tax credit available to Tesla customers has fallen to $3,750 as of Jan. 1. Last year, customers were eligible for credits of $7,500. And soon it will face competition from other luxury car makers.
Tesla’s most affordable car is a midrange variant of the Model 3 that starts at $44,000 before tax incentives. Adding options can push the price up to $70,000 or more — well outside the range of most mainstream buyers.
Tesla originally promised that the Model 3 would start at $35,000, but Mr. Musk has said the automaker would lose money if it sold the car at that price now. Earlier this month, he said the company would cut 3,000 jobs — about 7 percent of its full-time work force — to reduce costs.
Tesla is investing heavily to add showrooms, service centers and charging stations, expand into additional markets and develop new models. These include an electric pickup truck, a semi truck and a small sport-utility vehicle, the Model Y, which Tesla has said it will unveil this year.
Mr. Musk has repeatedly said Tesla won’t issue more bonds or sell additional stock to finance its ambitious plans, but many analysts are skeptical. The company is already carrying nearly $10 billion in debt. Issuing new bonds would increase its debt load. Selling additional stock could worry investors.
Mr. Musk said Tesla aimed to start production of the Model 3 in China by the end of the year, at a factory that has not yet been built. Producing cars in China will enable Tesla to avoid that country’s import tariffs that hamper its sales now.
The company will also have to spend heavily to build more delivery centers in the United States. Last fall, as Model 3 sales rose, many customers experienced delivery delays and confusion at the company’s showrooms. Others complained of waiting weeks or months for repairs because of severe parts shortages. Some have reported quality problems that vary from cracked windows to rear bumpers falling off.
On the conference call, Mr. Musk said improving customer service in North America was his top priority this year.