Neediest Cases|His 4-Year-Old Can’t Sit Up. So a Father Devotes Himself to Care.
His 4-Year-Old Can’t Sit Up. So a Father Devotes Himself to Care.
Midsentence, Tyree Scott breaks off and bolts across the room.
He has noticed a subtle change in his son’s breathing.
Mr. Scott’s hearing is finely tuned to the rhythms of his 4-year-old son, Zahir, who has hypotonia and lacks the muscle tone to sit up on his own. So Mr. Scott adjusts his son’s posture, adding another pillow to the couch.
Zahir also has epilepsy, difficulty swallowing and problems with his intestines. Cognitively, he has the ability of a 1- to 3-month old, and his motor skills are on par with a 2-month-old’s, according to an assessment by the New York City Education Department. Food and water are fed directly to his stomach through a gastrostomy tube.

Zahir began living with his father full time when he was about a year old. When he was born, Mr. Scott, now 27, and Zahir’s mother were separated but tried to raise their son together.
When the baby was 6 months old but could not lift his head, Mr. Scott grew concerned. A trip to the doctor for a chest cold started the cascade of Zahir’s diagnoses, and Mr. Scott decided to push for custody. At the time, he was working nights at the Macy’s on 34th Street. The demands of Zahir’s care forced him to quit in 2016.
That year and the next, Mr. Scott found himself homeless, passing through shelters with his son in the Bronx, Manhattan and Queens. Taking Zahir on public transportation was hard, and there were stretches when he didn’t have a working phone number. Mr. Scott said the start of Zahir’s nursing care was delayed by six months because they moved around so much. Missed doctor appointments led to a case with the Administration for Children’s Services.
He was desperate to provide for his son. He had no relationship with his own father, and his mother died when Mr. Scott was 2 years old, leading to a tumultuous time in foster care.
A doctor of Zahir’s vouched for Mr. Scott’s care to officials, and he was able to keep his son.
The inquiry opened the door for Mr. Scott to receive help and create a more stable environment. A doctor recommended to city officials that the two be placed in housing in the Bronx, close to Zahir’s appointments at the Children’s Hospital at Montefiore. Returning to the borough where Mr. Scott had spent much of his life proved to be a turning point.
Last year, Zahir began attending prekindergarten classes and receiving regular nursing care and physical therapy.
Mr. Scott took the requisite courses to become a licensed security guard and hopes to find a position this year. Right now, the Scotts live on $750 a month in Supplemental Security Income and $514 in monthly food stamps.
In October, they found stability with the help of a Living in Communities housing voucher, and Mr. Scott pays $177.53 a month out of pocket in rent for a new apartment in the Bronx. They sleep in the same bed and start their daily routine at 5 a.m.
But the walls were bare, the living room just a tile floor that stared back. So with the help of New Alternatives for Children, an agency supported by FPWA, one of the eight organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, Mr. Scott received $1,000 for furniture. He purchased a sofa, table and TV stand.
Mr. Scott said he wants to push forward; he is focused on the next move for himself and his son.
