Really? In the illustration for your cover review by Isabel Wilkerson of “Becoming” (Dec. 23), could you not depict Michelle Obama as her skin color really is, rather than as a black woman “becoming” white?
Whether the decision was conscious or unconscious, you should do better.
As a white teacher for 20 years at a predominantly black university on the South Side of Chicago, I passed thousands of black men and women heading to work when I got off the train at the Dan Ryan station. I walked by thousands of black kids, backpacks filled, hurrying down 95th Street going to their different schools.
I taught thousands of young black men and women working determinedly to get their degrees and get ahead in life, just as Michelle Obama has done.
As Wilkerson notes, these black men and women and children are also full-fledged members of the middle class, though often forgotten and invisible in today’s political discourse about the middle class.
Written with endearing grace, warmth and confidence, Michelle Obama’s memoir reminds us that there are millions like her.
ARROYO SECO, N.M.
Obama’s biographical work, a stunningly revealing feat of personal and national reflection by a first lady extraordinaire, is brought even more to life by being seen in a larger context, as another example of the legacy of the Great Migration.
While John Sutherland’s sympathetic review of Susan Gubar’s “Late-Life Love” (Dec. 30) appropriately honors her extraordinary critical achievements, it misses the texture and feel of her memoir by emphasizing too strenuously her very painful struggles with cancer.
What is moving and powerful about Gubar’s new book is its brilliant celebration of the possibilities of love for those who the culture believes are past passion and love’s satisfaction.
“Late-Life Love” is a joyous book, an inventory of the possibilities of life and love after youth.
If, as Sutherland says, Gubar helped lift the veil from our eyes about women’s place in our culture, in this book she unsentimentally lifts the veil on aging and allows us old folks the possibilities of deep affection and romantic joy in familiar and new varieties.
ATLANTIC HIGHLANDS, N.J.
The writer is emeritus professor of English at Rutgers University.