1. The government shutdown lives on, but there have been hints of movement.
President Trump is still insisting on $5.7 billion for his wall on the southern border, and he announced Saturday that he would extend deportation protections for some undocumented immigrants in exchange for the wall money.
But it looked unlikely that Democrats, who had added more than $1 billion in border-related spending to their funding bills to try to get him to relent, would budge. Eight hundred thousand federal employees are still going without pay.
Separately, the president is set to meet with North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, for a second time, in late February. Their dialogue has eased tensions but hasn’t led to progress in eliminating North Korea’s nuclear arsenal.
2. Robert Mueller is among the quietest figures in Washington.
That changed briefly when the special counsel’s team issued a rare public statement disputing a BuzzFeed News report that said President Trump had directed Michael Cohen, above, his longtime fixer, to lie to Congress about negotiations to build a skyscraper in Moscow.
The explosive report had led to a flurry of talk among Democrats about possible impeachment proceedings if the details proved to be accurate.
This all came against the backdrop of confirmation hearings for William Barr, the president’s nominee for attorney general. Mr. Barr vowed to let Mr. Mueller finish his inquiry, and he seems all but assured of confirmation.
3. Britain is paralyzed over Brexit.
Prime Minister Theresa May suffered a humiliating defeat over her plan to withdraw from the European Union. She then narrowly survived a no-confidence vote in Parliament.
No one knows what will happen next, and our reporter Ellen Barry found that precisely one person seems to be having fun: John Bercow, the speaker of the House of Commons.
4. At least 66 people died in a gas explosion north of Mexico City after thieves ruptured a pipeline. Above, soldiers stood guard afterward.
Elsewhere in the world, Shabab militants stormed a luxury hotel and office complex in Nairobi, Kenya, killing at least 21. And in Syria, an Islamic State suicide bomber killed at least 15 people, including four Americans.
5. An enormous snowstorm raced across the northern United States this weekend.
The wintry conditions led to thousands of canceled flights and many spoiled plans for the three-day weekend from Kansas to New England. Above, snow was cleared in Chicago’s Millennium Park.
But hey, at least (most of us) aren’t relying on horses anymore. Take a look at these early New York Times pictures to see the havoc a blizzard could visit on the city in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
6. The Trump administration most likely separated thousands more children from their parents at the southern border than was previously believed.
That’s according to a report that found that the official count of 2,700 migrant children began only after a court order in June. The real number may never be known. Above, a mother and son reunited after 34 days.
7. Thirty thousand teachers went on strike in Los Angeles.
In addition to demanding higher pay, smaller class sizes and more support staff, they are trying to combat the spread of charter schools, which the union says siphon off students and money from public schools. Prominent Democrats are supportive of the teachers, but deeply divided on the charter school question.
Separately, the second anniversary of the Women’s March brought smaller crowds as the movement has weathered a storm of controversy.
8. Older white men have always defined the halls of power. Ever so slowly, that’s changing.
Our portraits series shows how the 2018 midterm elections accelerated this shift in representation. For the first time, more than 100 women serve in the House of Representatives — out of 435 seats — and members of color were elected in more states than ever before. Above, from left, Representative Ilhan Omar of Minnesota, Representative Carol Miller of West Virginia, and Representative Deb Haaland of New Mexico.
The election results gave women something to celebrate this weekend at the women’s marches all over the country. Though there was some controversy in the movement, and the crowds were smaller, the spirit was still alive.
Residents of Cremona, Italy, are hearing a lot of that lately. The city, the birthplace of the world’s finest string instruments, has thrown itself behind an effort to preserve every note before the instruments are too fragile to play.
That requires absolute silence in the cobblestoned area around the auditorium where the sounds of Stradivarius instruments are being recorded. The streets are shut down, and a dropped glass or even the sound of a woman’s high heels clicking make for an “an auditory nightmare,” said one of the people behind the project. Above, the Museo del Violino, which is helping with the project.
10. Finally, our Best Weekend Reads include disconcerting imagery from Kazakhstan, where a warming climate is rapidly shrinking the Tuyuksu glacier, above. As glaciers melt worldwide, the hundreds of millions who rely on them for water will suffer.
Others are happy and they can’t help it. Like Sphen and Magic, two gay male penguins in Australia who are contentedly and diligently raising a baby together.
For more suggestions on what to read, watch and listen to, may we suggest these eight new books our editors liked, a glance at the latest small-screen recommendations from Watching, and our music critics’ latest playlist.
