A collection of short stories by Anton Chekhov and another one by Maupassant. “The Journal of Jules Renard,” which continues to move me and inspire me.
“Ce qui reste de nos vies,” by Zeruya Shalev. I admire her so much. She is an extraordinary writer.
What’s your go-to classic?
My favorite classic is probably “Anna Karenina.” But I love “Madame Bovary” also.
You are President Macron’s representative for the promotion of French language and culture. What books would you recommend in that capacity to American readers?
Svetlana Alexievich, Toni Morrison, Lyudmila Ulitskaya, Alaa Al Aswany, Maryse Condé, Patrick Modiano, Laura Kasischke.
Whose opinion on books do you most trust?
My publisher’s opinion, probably.
What I find magical about literature is when the voice of the writer is unique but you feel at the same time that he or she has managed to express universality.
I can read anything, but I must confess that I am not a huge fan of science fiction or fantasy.
What book by somebody else do you wish you had written?
“Blonde,” by Joyce Carol Oates.
Oh my god! I don’t organize them at all. They are a total mess, but I like that. It takes me a long time to find the book I need, and very often I find another one I had totally forgotten about.
What’s the last book you recommended to someone in your family?
“The Children Act,” by Ian McEwan.
“Robot Dreams,” by Isaac Asimov.
I was very curious and impatient. I wanted to read everything! Jules Verne was probably one of my first revelations. But Jack London is the one who made me want to be a writer myself. Martin Eden was a shock.
If you could require the American president to read one book, what would it be? And the French president?
Chekhov, Philip Roth and Virginia Woolf.
“The Man Without Qualities,” by Robert Musil. I know that it is a masterpiece, but I found it very boring. The last book I didn’t finish is “Fire and Fury,” by Michael Wolff: very interesting but too depressing.
I trust only myself for that.
I am planning to reread “Histoires extraordinaires,” by Edgar Allan Poe. It is an inspiration for my next novel.