Opinion|Would We Rather Have Pence Than Trump?
Would We Rather Have Pence Than Trump?
Readers offer their reactions to a column by Gail Collins. “Honestly, I would take the White House janitor over Mr. Trump at this stage of the game,” says one reader.
As a Hoosier, I found Gail Collins’s description of Mike Pence spot on. As the parent of a gay adult, I say yes, it could be even worse under a Pence administration, because Mr. Pence has more focus than Donald Trump and the Koch money to back him up.
One fact not mentioned in Ms. Collins’s summary of Mr. Pence’s career is that he signed an anti-abortion bill in Indiana requiring, among other things, that miscarried fetuses be cremated or buried, thus inserting the state into an event that is already painful for families. The bill was blocked by a federal court, but it’s just another example of what Ms. Collins describes as “the world of the old order,” where women and gay people have fewer rights.
Since Mr. Pence has stood by while Donald Trump has broken laws, violated ethics rules and damaged America’s standing in the world, I personally would vote to impeach them together.
The writer is a former board member of Planned Parenthood of Indiana/Kentucky.
In the great 1960 film “Spartacus,” Charles Laughton’s character, Gracchus, says that “politics is a practical profession.” I thought of that line as I read Gail Collins’s column.
As a lifelong moderate-to-liberal Democrat who has been sickened by what Donald Trump has done to the country (and the world), sure, I’ll take Mike Pence over Mr. Trump any day. Honestly, I would take the White House janitor over Mr. Trump at this stage of the game.
Would I prefer a Democrat in the Oval Office in 2020? You bet. But that election is down the road a piece. Mike Pence is less than ideal and has some conservative points of view that are beyond the pale as far as I am concerned. But at least he is not petty, vindictive and juvenile. He knows how the system works, and he doesn’t like Twitter!
I would never vote for him as president. But we have to be practical right now.
