We first meet David Dunn (Bruce Willis) on a passenger train from New York to his hometown, Philadelphia; that train derails en route, killing every passenger except David, who not only survives, but also emerges with nary a scratch. In time, we discover he has never broken a bone, never had a serious illness and never even succumbed to a common cold.
When we meet David, his marriage to Audrey (Robin Wright) is all but over, and his relationship with his son, Joseph (Spencer Treat Clark), is clearly remote. His brush with death causes the couple to give their union a fresh start, while the discovery of David’s newfound gifts helps him forge a new bond with Joseph. When David finally accepts Elijah’s explanation of his fate and saves two children from a twisted home invader (while wearing the green poncho of his day job as a security guard — effectively his superhero costume), David insists that his secret identity stay between him and his son.
James McAvoy stars as Crumb, a deeply disturbed young man with Dissociative Identity Disorder. He has 23 distinct personalities fighting for control of his mind and body. “The Beast,” a more dangerous 24th, is on its way.
These alter egos (or “alters”) are referred to, in both “Split” and “Glass,” as the Horde. They include Barry, a fashion-loving good guy who prides himself on being the Horde’s functional, public face; Dennis, the tough, obsessive Alpha male who has “taken charge” of the personalities alongside Patricia, a stern, matronly type, and Hedwig, a nine-year-old boy who says “et cetera” a lot; and the Beast, who seems to comprise the various animals at the zoo where he works (and where he keeps his victims, in an underground maze of abandoned cages and tunnels).
Kevin’s “alters” frequently reference stepping into “the light,” a shorthand phrase describing when a personality has taken control of his body and mind. In “Glass,” his captors use a large bank of strobe lights to force a switch in whatever personality is dominant.
