Do you deliberately devote classroom time to social-emotional learning, or SEL? Does your school address it building-wide? How?
[There is a] growing body of evidence — including long-term studies drawn from data in New Zealand and Britain — that have profound implications for educators. These studies suggest that if we want many more children to lead fulfilling and productive lives, it’s not enough for schools to focus exclusively on academics. Indeed, one of the most powerful and cost-effective interventions is to help children develop core social and emotional strengths like self-management, self-awareness and social awareness — strengths that are necessary for students to fully benefit from their education, and succeed in many other areas of life.
Because we know more and more schools are incorporating strategies to bolster these strengths, we have collected recent Times writing that seems to us to speak especially well to the five SEL “core competencies” as defined by the Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning (Casel).
Our list is long, yes, but we also know it’s not nearly complete: We’d love to hear what books, articles, podcasts or videos you’ve read, watched or listened to that have been especially helpful. Please post ideas in the comments, or write to us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| since we hope to add a section of educator-recommended sources to this post.
One additional place we can recommend ourselves, however, is Little Free Library’s Action Book Club that will run from January 29 through July 30 and focus on the theme of “Moving Forward.” There you’ll find novels from “Genesis Begins Again” by Alicia D. Williams to “In Every Moment We Are Still Alive” by Tom Malmquist, as well as nonfiction like “(Don’t) Call Me Crazy” edited by Kelly Jensen, all of which focus on themes of growth and well-being.
Finally, our list comes out just ahead of the Feb. 24 special print Learning section, which will focus on the theme of “resilience.” The editors there would like to hear from educators about how you see resilience in your students — and if you address related concepts like “grit” and “growth mind-set.” Please take their quick survey and share it with other educators you know. We’ll be sure to update this list with a link to the whole section when it is live.
1. Discuss them in a professional development context.
These articles can provide insights into effective methods of creating a healthy, productive and positive classroom or school climate — and many include examples of how schools and programs around the country are doing that.
You might also discuss controversies around this movement, as outlined in articles like “Testing for Joy and Grit? Schools Nationwide Push to Measure Students’ Emotional Skills” and the related Room for Debate forum, Testing Students’ True Grit.
Then consider selections from the list below for professional development around specific social and emotional issues your students are facing, such as bullying or childhood trauma. Or, you might use them to develop ideas for improving aspects of your school culture in general, focusing on topics like forming positive student-teacher relationships; building effective teaching teams; managing students and staff respectfully; developing productive learning routines; or empowering staff and students to make responsible and ethical decisions.
2. Address them in health, advisory or life-skills classes.
Or, you might invite students to practice responding to awkward or challenging social situations in a low-stakes environment. After they read one or more articles, ask them to apply what they’ve read by responding to questions posed to The Times’s advice columnists in Social Q’s, The Ethicist and The Sweet Spot.
Finally, we have posted a Student Opinion question, “How Resilient Are You?,” that your students are invited to answer in our forum. We’re eager to hear what they have to say.
3. Pair them with academic curriculum.
Many of these pieces can work well alongside the literature, history or science you’re teaching already. For instance, in our own Text-to-Text series, we’ve used some of these pieces already to explore themes in literature such as social isolation in “The Metamorphosis”; friendship in “Of Mice and Men”; perspective-taking in “Little Things Are Big”; stress and well-being in “When I Consider How My Light Is Spent” and many more.
In social studies, these articles can help students examine the correlation between social issues and the social and emotional health of individuals and society. We’ve used some of them ourselves in lessons about race and racism, the #MeToo movement, student activism and service learning and social action.
In science, you might incorporate the study of mental health into your curriculum, helping students understand the science behind depression and anxiety, or how exercise, diet and relationships impact mental health.
You can also scan the categories into which we’ve sorted over 1,000 of our writing prompts to find the ones that speak to both social-emotional issues and the texts you’re teaching.
4. Embed SEL skills as part of your classroom routine.
Many of the skills outlined in these articles are essential to learning, and can easily be integrated into any class — perhaps by reading about a particular skill together, and then building practice with it into your classroom rituals and routines.
For instance, invite your students to read about “growth mind-set” or learning from failure, then give them opportunities to try out what they learn. They might read about how to set SMART goals, then come up with their own. Or, you might have your class learn about the importance of taking time for deep contemplation and introspection as an introduction to building in regular time for them to reflect on their learning. Before a big group project begins, they might read about setting group norms and discuss why the practice is important.
What other social and emotional learning skills could your students work on? Time management, conflict resolution, listening, organization? Find solutions for these and more below.
5. Use them to improve your own life.
Every educator knows that teaching is an intellectually, emotionally, socially and physically demanding job; you also know that the happier and healthier you are, the better you can do that job. In fact, on our site we have a whole lesson written by teachers for teachers called Cultivating Mindfulness for Educators that is full of practical suggestions for supporting your own well-being.
Which articles below speak to you right now? Read on to find tips and strategies on everything from being more productive and confident at work to maintaining personal relationships, thinking positively, creating healthy habits and more.
Although our emotional state influences the quality of our work, many of us aren’t aware of how we’re feeling or what the impact may be.
No safe space or trigger warning lifts the sting of a cold new world.
A person’s understanding of their own early trauma can lead to transformative change.
Confidence may be overrated.
High school students reported more confidence after completing an exercise intended to instill a basic message to help manage tension: People can change.
In the long run, being unable to express what you want is a recipe for perpetual dissatisfaction, because your needs always end up on the back burner. The good news is people can learn to ask for the things they want at home, at work and even at a local restaurant when you get a burnt steak and want a new one.
Mastery-based learning allows students to learn at their own pace.
If you always succeed in school, you’re not setting yourself up for success in life.
Chronically viewing the glass as half-empty inhibits one’s ability to bounce back from life’s inevitable stresses.
Students, especially poor ones, arrive at college feeling overwhelmed academically and socially. A few simple nudges can help them thrive.
If your instinct is to feel compassion for brave people who try hard at something hard and fail nonetheless, consider granting yourself that same grace.
Before I went to college, I thought of change as something I could control.
Most people make relatively few personal experiments, in both small and big things. The cost of passivity is enormous.
Learning to handle negative emotions is critical for children, but parents tend to teach avoidance rather than acceptance.
The tutors deal not in plain-old schoolwork or straight-up counseling, but in a blend of the two, offering academic and psychological support, at a price.
If everybody knows that test scores and grades aren’t the keys to success, how do we teach, and measure, the things that are?
The way people talk about their pasts reveals a lot about how they approach and write the future.
Impostor syndrome is not a unique feeling, but some researchers believe it hits minority groups harder.
The ability to successfully regulate one’s emotions, thoughts and behaviors in different situations — effectively managing stress, controlling impulses and motivating oneself. The ability to set and work toward personal and academic goals.
Willpower is for chumps. Here’s what actually works.
The eternal war between pride and jealousy.
When we dole out an easy yes instead of a difficult no, we tend to overcommit our time, our energy and even our finances.
Grudges can be good. They are one habit that humans have evolved to keep ourselves from the pain of breakups and also from eating mozzarella sticks for every meal.
Many in this driven generation believe they can’t move forward without beating themselves up.
Overpacked days lead to restless nights, and more experts are rightly questioning the sense — and safety — of that.
Anxiety is everywhere, which can be strangely reassuring. Here are some tips to help.
Can We Ever Be Truly Fearless?
We’ve needed fear to survive as a species. But how do you not let the emotional response of the fear reflex run wild?
Everyone has the power to make small changes in our behavior, our surroundings and our relationships that can help set us on course for a happier life.
Here, we offer basic tips for children and adults of all ages, as well as several activities that develop compassion, focus, curiosity and empathy.
Here, we offer basic tips to get you started on a path toward greater equanimity, acceptance and joy.
Here are ways to deal with stress, reduce its harm and even use your daily stress to make you stronger.
A collective, non-exhaustive list of behaviors and diagrams that keep us on point, compiled by some employees of The New York Times.
There may not be a magic formula, but here’s what we know about how to get there, according to recent research and expert advice.
Researchers are studying whether the power of writing — and then rewriting — your personal story can lead to behavioral changes and improve happiness.
Being tired, ambivalent, stressed, cynical and overextended has become a normal part of a working professional life.
Encourage people to do something for its own sake, not for its benefits.
Here’s how to identify the right resolution to improve your life, create a plan on how to reach it, and become part of the small group of people that successfully achieve their goal.
By creating a mission statement people can begin to identify the underlying causes of behaviors, as well as what truly motivates them to make changes.
One-size-fits-all lists on how to be more productive don’t work; we’ll outline productivity techniques that can be adapted to your personality and working style.
Our subconscious programming — developed through our youth and on into adulthood — plays a huge role in how we survive or thrive at work. Here’s how your “attachment style” may affect your office relationships.
The obsession with elite colleges distorts reality, hurts kids and perverts education.
Remind yourself of how electric your idea feels when you are most stoked. Find a quiet place. Write it down (again). Then, get started.
Regrets. You Have a Few. Don’t Beat Yourself Up Over Them.
A life without regrets is one where you probably haven’t learned anything from the struggle to decide between two things you care about deeply.
New data indicates that perfectionism, especially when influenced by social media, has increased by 33 percent since 1989.
It’s not that you can’t feel it. You just don’t want to.
Just how successful are we at seeing the world as others see it?
Discipline can be a lose-lose proposition. Here’s a different method.
Say you are getting ready for a blind date or a job interview. What should you do? Besides shower and shave, of course, it turns out you should read.
There are steps people can take to acknowledge their biases and to move beyond their own worldviews to try to understand those held by other people.
How Do We Increase Empathy? (Related Learning Network lesson plan) A column about a buddy who dealt with the consequences of poverty and inequality sparked a conversation about empathy, or the lack thereof.
When students explore foreign cultures, they learn not just about others, but also about themselves.
Many people hear “implicit bias” as academic jargon for “racist.” But the reality is more complicated.
A Learning Network collection with teaching ideas drawn from our weekly Film Club series.
From a viral moment on C-Span to a meeting in the Appalachian foothills.
Social factors can have a powerful influence on intelligence.
What we can learn from lab rats that don’t show empathy for other rats.
Being a better forecaster means setting aside emotion and being more cold and calculating.
It’s not about racism per se. It’s about us versus them.
Our efforts to help others may have a somewhat mixed record of success, but they have an almost perfect record of helping ourselves. So, here’s how to go out and change the world!
As teenagers consider joining a national school walkout, new research points toward the benefits of political activism.
Volunteering is linked to health benefits including lower blood pressure and decreased mortality rates.
If you don’t handle criticism in the proper way, it can have a major impact on your ability to do work that matters in the world.
The solitary journey toward contentment is a self-help truism that isn’t really true.
If you’re in college, at work or somewhere in between, we’re here to help.
Keeping cherished friendships afloat doesn’t need to be a huge time commitment.
If you had to make a choice, would you choose your phone or your partner? Don’t answer that.
In our smartphone-obsessed culture, are we starting to learn that maybe life is just better led when it is lived rather than viewed?
There are no easy answers for helping someone struggling with depression, especially if you’ve already tried and tried. Here are some tips from experts.
The only jobs showing consistent wage growth in recent years are those requiring both cognitive and social skills.
It’s about listening, empathy and having more women.
These insights can help you lay the groundwork for a highly productive team that can communicate, cooperate and innovate in an atmosphere of mutual trust and respect.
Be genuine. Be interested. And stop hogging the conversation.
Hearing, for the most part, is a no-brainer. When we listen, that’s when the neurons really fire.
Who needs a plan for friendship? Probably you, if you’re relying on loose ties and social media to maintain bonds. Trying harder pays unexpected dividends.
The anxieties and etiquette quandaries that result from having your friends befriend your friend.
What to do when you want to be an old-fashioned friend to someone in need.
While the “Me Too” movement has largely focused on adults, sexual harassment can leave deep and lasting scars on children and teenagers too.
Wondering just how vicious teenagers can be? Listen to the winners of the Op-Ed columnist Nicholas Kristof’s essay contest on bullying.
In a 10-year study in Maryland, students’ reports of being bullied decreased and more students reported feeling safe at school.
The ability to make constructive choices about personal behavior and social interactions based on ethical standards, safety concerns and social norms. The realistic evaluation of consequences of various actions, and a consideration of the well-being of oneself and others.
A strategy called “design thinking” has helped numerous entrepreneurs and engineers develop successful new products and businesses. But can design thinking help you create healthful habits?
It’s best to give yourself time to identify and evaluate all of your choices.
Once considered the product of genius or divine inspiration, creativity — the ability to spot problems and devise smart solutions — is being recast as a teachable skill.
Nowadays, people can keep negative thoughts at bay with a frenzy of activity.
Most people, if pressed, would acknowledge that when it comes to ethics, they could use a tuneup.
The word has taken a beating recently. But what role does it truly play in our lives?
Find the latest reporting on social and emotional health via this list of Times sections that regularly publish related news and opinion.
Essays, art and opinion exploring the lives of people living with disabilities.
Science and stories about how we live and how we die.
Everyone’s got problems. We try to fix them.
Tips and advice to keep us on point.
Lighthearted advice about awkward social situations.
Kwame Anthony Appiah considers readers’ ethical quandaries.
A collection of Sketch Guy columns from Carl Richards.
A radically empathic advice column from Cheryl Strayed and Steve Almond.