And like many women, Ms. Jami is convinced that any peace deal that gives the Taliban a share of power will come at the expense of freedom for Afghan women. “Come that time, they will complete their incomplete dreams and they will be crueler than in the past,” Ms. Jami said.
Ms. Haidari’s work would not have been allowed under the Taliban regime, when she lived in exile in Iran. “But the Afghan government totally ignores Afghan women on the peace process,” she said.
Ms. Paykan was forced from her university professorship and her daughter’s school was closed, like all girls’ schools under the Taliban. She opened a clandestine school at home, pretending to teach girls the Quran and dressmaking, among the only subjects allowed for them. The only women allowed to work then were doctors, and even they had to have a close male relative as a chaperone at work.
Ms. Paykan, who is from Kundiz, said she felt shut out of the Afghan peace process.
American officials hope to persuade the Taliban at a later stage to sit down with Afghan officials, which they have so far refused to do, and issues like the Constitution, which guarantees women’s rights, would be on the table then.
Saira Sharif, an Afghan poet and politician from Khost, said that previous efforts at talks between the government and the Taliban had excluded women.
“We want the Taliban to accept women’s rights and publish a statement where they guarantee women’s rights,” said Ms. Paykan. So far, though, no one is even talking about that, she said.
Mr. Crocker said he was worried that the withdrawal of American troops would have consequences beyond whatever future role the Taliban have.
Women are still reeling from the 2015 murder of a female Islamic scholar, Farkhunda, by a mob of men as police officers stood by idly. Shelters set up to protect women from abusive husbands and families have been under growing pressure from government and society.
Ms. Haidari’s restaurant in Kabul, Taj-Begum, has been raided by the police repeatedly. She said she was being harassed because she allows men and women to dine together, doesn’t always wear a head scarf, and is a woman in business.
Her drug rehabilitation center was closed down, too, amid unfounded accusations that it was a front for prostitution. “It is a democratic government, but still women face many problems in this country,” Ms. Haidari said.
