Movies|Is a Film About a Transgender Dancer Too ‘Dangerous’ to Watch?
Is a Film About a Transgender Dancer Too ‘Dangerous’ to Watch?
“Girl” sounds like a film that transgender moviegoers might rally around. It depicts a teenage trans girl, Lara, raised by a single father who supports not only her dreams of becoming a ballerina but also her gender confirmation surgery. It’s set in Belgium, so much of Lara’s health care is paid for and her doctor and therapist are encouraging caregivers. And it’s a prize winner that is up for a best foreign-language Golden Globe on Sunday.
Not long ago, when trans people showed up in movies, if at all, they were victims or predators. As advocates demanded increased visibility, shows like “Pose” made waves with more truthful depictions written and portrayed by trans performers. Problems persist, for sure. But the days seem to be gone when a movie like “Dressed to Kill” assumed trans women were psychos in skirts.
“Girl” asks a provocative question: Have we gotten to a place where a film can explore dark aspects of an individual trans character without feeling regressive? No one should have the burden of representing a class of people in a film; real people are complicated. But what happens when a movie is both art and a trigger?
That’s the question behind the two main criticisms of “Girl.” One is that neither Dhont nor his co-writer, Angelo Tissens, nor the young actor who plays Lara, Victor Polster, are transgender. (Dhont said he auditioned more than 500 performers, including trans actors.) Adding salt to the wound, Polster won an acting award at the Cannes Film Festival.
The other objection, the one that has prompted foes to label the film “traumatizing” and “sickening,” involves scenes near the end.
 Her back is to the camera, so viewers hear her screams but see neither the act nor blood. She recovers from her injury, and the final shot is of her smiling face. But there had been no obvious cues that Lara would harm herself, and it’s unclear why she takes this horrific step other than the fact that her gender confirmation surgery has been postponed and, like many teenagers, she’s impatient and impulsive.
The concerns are heightened by the fact that the film is likely to reach a wide audience via Netflix. The movie was set to stream beginning Jan. 18 but has been moved, probably to the spring, according to Netflix, which declined to comment further.
When I spoke with Monsecour, she sounded tired of having to defend the film. “I know what the truth is, and ‘Girl’ is my truth,” she said.
Ann Thomas, the founder of Transgender Talent, a talent listing service for trans people, chastised the campaign against it.
“The message these arrogant trans activists are saying is that Nora doesn’t have the right to tell her story,” said Thomas, who also defended “Girl” in an opinion piece for The Advocate.
One idea that foes and fans of the film might agree on is a content advisory card that tells viewers the R-rated film is for mature audiences. Netflix added a similar message to the TV series “13 Reasons Why” after it faced criticism from mental health professionals who said the show glorified suicide.
Monsecour told me she hoped the trans community knew that “Girl” was a beginning, not an end.
