Readers discuss two options the president has considered: using relief funds or calling a national emergency.
You have to give President Trump credit for creativity. Having devastated the lives of thousands of government employees who live on the financial edge in the best of times, he now wants to take relief funds away from victims of hurricanes and forest fires to pay for his medieval border wall.
Given his apparent lack of empathy and his instinct for cruelty, what can we expect next? Charging the parents of children taken into custody at the border for their cage and board?
What a frightening juxtaposition of two articles on Friday’s front page. The first is about a real catastrophe ignored, even exacerbated, by President Trump. The second is about a completely unnecessary crisis manufactured by Mr. Trump.
I continue to be amazed by the hypocrisy of the Republican Party. In 2014, when President Obama stated he would take executive action to protect four to five million immigrants from deportation, the House speaker, John Boehner, referred to the president as “an emperor” who had exceeded his constitutional authority. The point was amplified by Senator Ted Cruz, who described the president as a “monarch” whose actions were unlawful and unconstitutional.
Now, as President Trump considers employing executive power to build a border wall that the majority of the country does not support, the G.O.P. remains silent. For all of the right’s criticism of Mr. Obama’s use of executive authority, Mr. Trump’s attempt to manufacture a national security crisis to fulfill a campaign promise is a blatant abuse of executive power far more invasive than any taken while Mr. Obama was in office.
Does our president have the power to declare a national emergency and build the wall in defiance of Congress? Several legal scholars and many from the left-leaning media are saying he does not.
Please support our president for the sake of our national security.
Republicans should be careful what they wish for regarding getting funds to build a wall by calling it a response to a national emergency. What is to stop a future Democratic president from calling a national emergency in response to the tens of thousands of gun deaths and confiscating all guns, or in response to climate change and spending billions of dollars to build windmills all across the country? Both are clearly more serious threats to Americans.
