The first musical to reach the Great White Way partly on the strength of an active, passionate grass-roots following — “Be More Chill,” in case you’re over 30 — begins previews next month.
No wonder, then, that the fourth edition of BroadwayCon — a three-day expo targeting hard-core Broadway fans — was as much about shill as chill.
Spending Friday and Saturday at the New York Midtown Hilton, I saw dozens of teens and tweens in elaborate costumes from shows like “Angels in America,” “Mean Girls,” “Anastasia” and “Newsies.” Actors from “Be More Chill” rubbed elbows with fans portraying their characters.
The last two shows are certified hits and, you’d think, don’t need a push. Yet most of their lead actors — and Tina Fey, who wrote the book of “Mean Girls” — were on hand.
BroadwayCon is the brainchild of Melissa Anelli (the chief executive of Mischief Management, which runs the convention) and the actor Anthony Rapp (now in the CBS series “Star Trek: Discovery,” but forever known to attendees as the original Mark Cohen from “Rent”). The convention has grown steadily since its debut, in 2016, and this edition offered nearly 200 hours of sessions, with 7,000 estimated attendees over three days.
This is small potatoes compared to, say, Comic-Con International in San Diego and New York Comic Con, which draw about 130,000 and 250,000 people yearly. Still, it’s enough for BroadwayCon to flex marketing muscle.
And just as those conventions screen trailers for the latest Hollywood would-be blockbusters, BroadwayCon offered song previews from “Hadestown,” “Kiss Me, Kate,” “Tootsie” and “Beetlejuice” — all scheduled to open on Broadway later this season.
This is expected from a convention and its mix of cosplay, fun behind-the-scenes anecdotes and an emphasis on process.
At the well-attended panel “Creating a Character,” Melissa Errico talked about hypnotizing herself with a YouTube video while preparing to appear in “On a Clear Day You Can See Forever” last year. The actress Donna Murphy described how James Lapine’s staging bore a direct influence on Stephen Sondheim’s rewrites during the creation of their 1994 musical, “Passion.” And the original Broadway Mary Poppins, Ashley Brown, recounted trying not to vomit while flying over the audience.
BroadwayCon also prompts questions about the musical-theater canon. The list of top-tier golden-age musicals may be set, but which of the newer shows will join their ranks?
The most unchallenged recent entry in the canon is “Hamilton.” Talia Buksbazen, 18, said that it was her favorite musical “but not because I’m basic — it’s really good.” Shade and admiration in one breath.
It was like being at a Bizarro version of the popular piano bar Marie’s Crisis — and few were old enough to drink.