Every month, Netflix Australia adds a new batch of movies and TV shows to its library. Here are our picks for February, broken down by release date.
Given how many novels and short stories George R.R. Martin has written over the past 50 years — including the series that inspired HBO’s wildly popular “Game of Thrones” — it’s surprising that his work hasn’t been more widely mined by TV producers. The author wasn’t directly involved with the new adaptation of his 1980 novella “Nightflyers,” but the show still retains the heart and brain of what Martin has called his “haunted starship story.” “Nightflyers” follows a disparate band of deep-space colonists, fleeing a dying Earth while being driven to paranoia and madness by some mysterious entity. The show combines the atmospheric intergalactic terror of “Alien” with a good old-fashioned ghost story, and suggests that Martin’s back catalog might contain a gold mine of good TV material.
The “Groundhog Day” premise of the eternally resetting day has itself — somewhat ironically — been done over and over in movies and TV shows. But nothing that’s come before is quite like “Russian Doll,” an innovative comedy co-created by Natasha Lyonne, Leslye Headland and Amy Poehler. Lyonne stars as Nadia, who finds herself continuously looping around to the same party, where something disastrous always happens. With every do-over, “Russian Doll” proves constantly delightful and surprising.
It feels like a little gift every time this critically acclaimed reimagining of Norman Lear’s long-running ’70s-and-’80s sitcom gets renewed. In season three, the blue-collar Cuban-American Alvarez family will continue to spar about hot-button political issues, while also dealing with big anxieties in their personal lives — involving career changes, romance and the persistent fear that one bad medical diagnosis or huge repair bill could upset everything they’ve been working toward.
One of the many recent TV series adapted from podcasts, the eight-episode first season of “Dirty John” is about John Meehan (played by Eric Bana), a handsome and magnetic con artist known for seducing women and then slowly destroying their lives. The already-in-the-works second season will tell an entirely new true story, but it’ll be hard to top the cast for the first, which includes Connie Britton as Debra Newell — one of John’s victims — and Juno Temple and Jean Smart as her concerned family members.
The writer-director-comedian Larry Charles is known for his willingness to take chances and push buttons, whether partnering with Larry David on “Seinfeld” and “Curb Your Enthusiasm” or helping Sacha Baron Cohen prank the unsuspecting in the movie “Borat.” Charles’ latest project is more serious: a four-part documentary series about comedians in some of the world’s most troubled regions, who risk reprimands or worse when they try to make people laugh.
The rock band My Chemical Romance’s frontman Gerard Way turned to writing comic books about a decade ago, combining his lifelong obsessions with science fiction and teen rebellion into the cult series “The Umbrella Academy.” The TV version of the comic has Ellen Page playing a non-super-powered sibling in a family of superheroes. When the clan’s ultra-rich and ambitious patriarch dies, his adopted children are reunited and have to put aside old grudges to help save the world.
Very few Netflix originals have run for as many seasons as “Chef’s Table” (granted, each season only features four to six episodes). Still, it’s impressive that its creator, David Gelb, has been able to draw such a steady audience with a cooking show that emphasizes visual beauty and psychological inquiry over, say, instructions on how to pan-sear a tuna steak. The chefs in the sixth season include the American Southern-cooking expert Sean Brock and Asma Khan, the London-based master of Indian food.
The intense, complex Italian-mafia saga “Suburra: Blood on Rome” returns for 10 more episodes, continuing to examine the interconnections of organized crime, political power and real estate in modern Italy. “Suburra” is a different kind of mob drama — one that functions less like an action thriller and more like a detailed procedural, aiming to show exactly how corruption can seep through every layer of society.
“Gotham” Season 4 (February 1), “Nailed It! Mexico” (February 8), “Dating Around” (February 14), “The Dragon Prince” Season 2 (February 15), “Homeland” Season 7 (February 15), “Rebellion” Season 2 (February 22), “Working Moms” (February 22), “The Big Family Cooking Showdown” Season 2 (February 22), “Tales by Light” Season 3 (February 22), “Van Helsing” Season 3 (February 25) and “Shadowhunters: The Mortal Instruments” Season 3 (February 26).
Part art-world satire, part serial-killer thriller, the “Nightcrawler” writer-director Dan Gilroy’s new movie “Velvet Buzzsaw” should delight some adventurous movie buffs … and probably irritate just as many. An all-star cast (including Jake Gyllenhaal, Rene Russo, Toni Collette, Daveed Diggs and John Malkovich) plays a close-knit group of Los Angeles visual artists, dealers, gallery managers and critics, who are wowed by the gruesome paintings discovered in the apartment of a mysterious dead man. The first half of “Velvet Buzzsaw” is a pretty standard-issue spoof of the rich and pretentious. Then the haunted artwork starts coming to life and a whole lot of truly original weirdness ensues.
Director Steven Soderbergh and screenwriter Tarell Alvin McCraney (who wrote the play that Barry Jenkins adapted into the movie “Moonlight”) take on the evolving business of professional sports in “High Flying Bird,” a crackling drama that raises questions about whether the power in athletics should rest with the players or the owners. André Holland plays a forward-thinking agent, working with and against various factions in a pro basketball league to get the best deal — within a 72-hour window — not just for his in-demand client, but for everyone else who plays the game. Soderbergh shot this movie on an iPhone, adding a documentary immediacy.
The writer-director Jordan Peele’s latest offbeat horror film “Us” is debuting in cinemas in March, so now’s a good time to revisit the comedian’s startling 2017 feature filmmaking debut: a clever low-budget thriller that went on to be one of the most financially successful and talked-about movies of that year. Daniel Kaluuya stars as a black photographer who agrees to meet his white girlfriend’s aggressively progressive parents, not realizing that the whole family has nefarious plans. While poking at the subtle racism of well-meaning liberals, Peele also delivers a picture filled with nail-biting suspense and pulse-pounding action.
The prolific filmmaker, TV producer and actor Mark Duplass both stars in and co-wrote the dramedy “Paddleton,” alongside the movie’s director Alex Lehmann. Duplass and Ray Romano play neighbors who gradually become chums, bonding over a game they invented. Like a lot of Duplass’s work, “Paddleton” starts out as a film about grown men who act like goofy kids, but it takes a turn when a terminal cancer diagnosis changes the nature of the friendship and inspires a road trip.
Romantic comedy clichés get savaged — mostly affectionately — in the colorful “Isn’t It Romantic,” which stars the comedian Rebel Wilson as a woman who gets conked on the head and wakes up in an idealized rom-com world. Her gritty urban neighborhood now sparkles. Her suddenly enormous apartment is filled with stylish furniture and clothes. She has a gay best friend. And the handsomest man she’s ever met (played by Liam Hemsworth) pursues her relentlessly. While kicking the genre around a bit, Wilson and the filmmakers still get to angle for a crowd-pleasing happy ending.
The “Everybody Loves Raymond” star Ray Romano has lately been showing off his skills as a dramatic actor, in movies like “The Big Sick” and “Paddleton” and TV shows like “Vinyl” and “Get Shorty.” He returns to his stand-up roots for his first special in 23 years, assembled from recordings of two Manhattan club gigs that Romano performed on the same night — showing the kind of hustle required of young comics when they’re just starting out. Pre-sitcom fame, Romano was widely acknowledged as one of the best in the biz, able with just a few lines to get audiences rolling at his pointed observations about everyday family life.
