Davenport Theater, 354 W. 45th St.
Neil LaBute has long been accused of being a meanspirited nihilist who does not like his characters. Yet for the past 15 years or so, reviews have been pointing out that he’s softened up — by now his reputation is more fearsome than his actual shows.
Besides, those doing the disliking are Mr. LaBute’s characters, not him. Much of his work is about the power struggles between people who try to camouflage their mutual antipathy under the veneer of social graces. Inevitably, that veneer cracks.
A two-hander sandwiched by a pair of solo pieces, “Great Negro Works of Art” is an ur-LaButian text, starting with a title that should inspire an anticipatory wince, but vague enough to make it difficult to pinpoint the issue.
After connecting online, Tom (KeiLyn Durrel Jones) and Jerri (Brenda Meaney) are meeting in real life for the first time at the titular museum exhibit. Jerri is white and Tom is black — it should not matter that he is light-skinned, but here it does.
 Tom starts by passive-aggressively nettling her — he then tries to deflate the tension by pretending he was just kidding — before revealing his irritation at Jerri’s ignorance. That he’s also handsy with her does not help his case.
Anybody with the remotest knowledge of Mr. LaBute’s M.O. knows that the encounter will not go well. Mr. LaBute’s writing is as skillful as ever, but Tom and Jerri’s date spins into a predictable downward spiral.
It’s unclear what Mr. LaBute is trying to say, save for the obvious points that Nazi apologists don’t necessarily look like the notorious white supremacist Richard Spencer and that soft-spoken, self-serving sophistry is a dangerous quality.
The evening concludes with another solo, this time directed by Mr. LaBute himself. In “Unlikely Japan,” a young bank manager (Gia Crovatin) revisits past decisions, prompted by the death of a former high school boyfriend in a mass shooting. She wonders if the turning point was the time she stood him up at the airport before a trip to Japan. What would her life be like if she’d accompanied him? What about his?
This resignation makes a more lasting impression than anger. Mr. LaBute may be mellower, but that does not make him any more uplifting.