The Learning Network|What Messages About Gender Have You Gotten From Music?
What Messages About Gender Have You Gotten From Music?
What do your favorite musicians or songs either state directly or suggest about gender identity? Or is this a topic they do not take on?
Today’s article is about musicians who are challenging norms that they see as products of toxic masculinity. Why do you think they choose to write songs about this?
In recent months, a number of male rock musicians and hip-hop artists have released songs that rail against the most suffocating notions of what it can mean to be a man. And they’re finding a significant audience by doing so.
As It Is, a neo-emo band from Brighton, England, released a single last June, “The Stigma (Boys Don’t Cry),” that attacks traditional male restrictions. The band’s current album, “The Great Depression,” has been streamed more than 13 million times on Spotify.
American artists have tackled the issue as well, including Tiny Moving Parts, an emo group from Minnesota, who released the album “Swell” last year. And Henry Jamison, 30, a singer-songwriter in Vermont, addresses what Rolling Stone magazine calls “violent interpretations of masculinity” in “Gloria Duplex,” an album due out next month.
— What messages about gender have you gotten from music? Are those the messages you want to receive?
— Are you familiar with any of the bands, artists or songs mentioned in the article? If so, what is your opinion of the music and message behind it? If not, listen to one of the songs mentioned, such as “Dead Boys” by Sam Fender, and then answer this question.
— Are there other artists that you think should have been included in this article? Which musicians, and what messages are they conveying about gender identity in their songs?
— In the article, Patty Walters, the lead singer of As It Is, is quoted as saying, “I don’t want to in any way belittle the struggles of other people while talking about the struggles of a straight man.” What is your response to this statement?
— Are you generally interested in the message, if there is one, in the music you like? Explain.
