TOKYO — Carlos Ghosn will finally get a day in court.
Mr. Ghosn, the embattled former chairman of Nissan Motor, is set to appear in a Tokyo court on Tuesday in what would be his first public appearance since his arrest in November. He has been held since then in a Tokyo jail and faces charges that he underreported his compensation to the Japanese authorities.
His appearance is likely to further stoke interest in a legal and corporate clash that has shaken a global auto empire. The brash Mr. Ghosn won fame for turning around Nissan more than a decade ago and leading a car-making alliance that also includes Renault of France and Mitsubishi Motors of Japan. He has since been ousted as Nissan’s chairman, straining ties with Renault and leaving open the question of who will run a business that combined sells more than 10 million cars annually.
Citing his lawyer, the Japanese public broadcaster, NHK, said Mr. Ghosn planned to appear. He will be allowed to speak at the hearing, though it was not clear what he might say. Mr. Ghosn’s lawyer in Japan could not be reached for comment, and the lawyer’s office was closed on Friday.
Under Japanese law, Mr. Ghosn has the right to request that the court that allowed his detention explain its justification. In Japan, prosecutors can ask a court to keep suspects in custody for up to 22 days after their arrest.
Mr. Ghosn has been arrested a total of three times over the past several weeks, allowing prosecutors and the court to keep resetting that clock. He was arrested the second time on similar accusations in December, and then a third time later that month on suspicions that he shifted some of his personal investment losses onto Nissan’s books. After his third arrest, the court extended his detention to Jan. 11.
It was not clear why Mr. Ghosn or his lawyers did not exercise the right to get more information from the court related to his earlier arrests.
Mr. Ghosn’s family has blamed corporate intrigue for the accusations against him, saying they are based on opposition to proposed changes in the alliance between Nissan and Renault.
Another former Nissan executive, Greg Kelly, has also been charged with violating financial reporting laws. Mr. Kelly, who has denied wrongdoing, was released on bail last week.
Prosecutors have also charged Nissan itself with violating financial reporting laws. Nissan has said that its own investigation is continuing and that it is reviewing its compliance procedures.