The 15 or 20 minutes before the performance ticked by the same way they do on nights when Rome Neal presides over jazz at the Nuyorican Poets Cafe on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. But this time Mr. Neal was directing a reading of a play. It takes aim at the sensation that is the theatrical juggernaut “Hamilton” and its creator, Lin-Manuel Miranda.
So this was different from the jazz nights. There was no music, in contrast to the rap-infused lyrics of “Hamilton,” one of the biggest critical and commercial successes in Broadway history.
The play, “The Haunting of Lin-Manuel Miranda,” was written by Ishmael Reed, 80, a prolific and often satirical writer who, as a critic reviewing one of his books once said, “has made members of every constituency angry” during his long career.
Mr. Reed’s most recent work should prove to be no exception.
Mr. Miranda was in Puerto Rico last week for a three-week run of “Hamilton,” and a publicist for the show said he was unavailable to talk about “The Haunting.” Another publicist connected with “Hamilton” said that Mr. Chernow would not answer questions that had been sent by email.
But Mr. Neal said he believed that Mr. Miranda was aware of the reading, because he had sent Mr. Miranda a direct tweet and also a flier. Mr. Neal said he had not received a reply from Mr. Miranda.
The issues raised in “The Haunting of Lin-Manuel Miranda” involve questions that scholars have debated about “Hamilton” — “Ishmael Reed revives an old debate” was part of the headline on an article about the reading on The New Yorker’s website. Among some historians, the discussion has touched on whether Mr. Miranda’s play — which moved from the Public Theater to Broadway in 2015 — overstated Alexander Hamilton’s opposition to slavery and whether it devoted enough attention to other, less appealing elements of Hamilton’s legacy, such as arguing that the president should be more like a monarch and that senators should serve life terms.
Last year, for example, Rutgers University Press published “Historians on Hamilton: How a Blockbuster Musical Is Restaging America’s Past,” with chapters by 15 scholars who look at how Mr. Miranda’s play has changed the general public’s perspective about colonial history.
“The Haunting of Lin-Manuel Miranda” treats Hamilton and slavery far differently.
Lyra D. Monteiro, an assistant professor of history at Rutgers University, Newark, who wrote one of the chapters in “Historians on Hamilton,” said “The Haunting” was “entirely correct to bring attention” to Hamilton and slavery.
When the time came for the reading, Mr. Reed was in the cast, playing the role of Mr. Miranda’s agent in imagined conversations about celebrity endorsements and, in Act 2, an offer to write a musical about Christopher Columbus, a heroic figure discredited in recent decades by those who say his voyages opened the way to the destruction of native culture and the importation of slaves.
Mr. Neal said he had not seen “Hamilton” or read Mr. Chernow’s book. He said he had not gone to “Hamilton” even though Jasmine Cephas Jones, the actress who originated the roles of Peggy Schuyler and Maria Reynolds, had appeared at one of his jazz shows at the Nuyorican Poets Cafe.
