What can genes tell us about who we are? Millions of people around the world have begun using consumer ancestry services like 23andMe in an attempt to peer into their personal origins and understand where they came from.
Meanwhile, though, in a handful of elite genetics labs around the world, scientists have begun analyzing ancient DNA — which can now be extracted from skeletal remains that are thousands or even tens of thousands of years old — to ask, and try to answer, even more fundamental questions about the human past.
For decades, it was commonly believed that ancient communities tended to stay in one place — and thus didn’t mix very much with their neighbors. When a lab in Leipzig, Germany, sequenced the majority of a Neanderthal genome, in 2010, the scientists surprised just about everybody with the finding that humans and Neanderthals had actually interbred; we now know that most people, with the general exception of sub-Saharan Africans, can trace part of their genetic inheritance to our extinct cousins.
As it turns out, we probably bear very little resemblance to human populations of ancient times. Most of these groups — to which researchers have given names like “Ancient North Eurasians” — disappeared as distinct populations as they mixed with other peoples they encountered. The idea of “pure” groups with identifiable “origins” has been largely reconsidered.
For peoples around the world today, these new theories about origin and migration can have destabilizing implications.
In the South Pacific nation of Vanuatu, a few thousand kilometers northeast of Australia, the national post issued stamps that commemorated the first settlers on their remote shores. In an artist’s recreation of the founding scene, the people were drawn to resemble the country’s modern inhabitants, an indigenous group called the ni-Vanuatu.
Recent work with the region’s ancient DNA, however, has suggested that the original settlers were in fact the distant descendants of a group of migrants from East Asia — people who looked nothing like the contemporary ni-Vanuatu, whose ancestors are presumed to have arrived much later. Does the country need to reimagine its origin story, down to its stamps?
Many archaeologists feel as though they’ve been here before. For the first half of the twentieth century, archaeology tended to believe that large migrations of superior peoples shaped the landscape and culture of the ancient world. That idea was easily exploited by nationalists, eager to tell stories about their people’s glorious past; the Nazis, for example, seized on the ideas of Gustaf Kossinna, a German archaeologist whose work seemed to find evidence of the inherent superiority of the German people.
And, as excited as many archaeologists are about all of the new data geneticists have produced, some feel that their own concerns and expertise are being sidelined in the competitive scramble for access to ancient bones.
Ancient DNA research has enjoyed a tremendous amount of success in a very short period of time, and the latest results are often published in the most prestigious journals. This has led to great demand for access to old bones, especially from exotic places. These unique samples are often destroyed or damaged in the process of DNA extraction.
