Domestic violence continues to drive homelessness in New York City, ahead of evictions and overcrowding, at a time when the city’s primary shelter system is so taxed that Mayor Bill de Blasio plans to open 90 new facilities over five years.
To address the issue, the city is also bolstering its separate, smaller system of domestic violence shelters by opening 54 additional apartment-style units for families next month. Another 150 emergency beds for individuals are to open later this year.
But the new beds cannot keep pace with the demand for the shelters, which last year housed a total of 8,786 people, including the children of victims.
About two weeks ago, Safe Horizon, the city’s largest domestic violence shelter provider, sent letters to its residents to inform them that the city was stepping up enforcement of state policy that limits stays to 180 days, and that they should begin looking for alternatives.
No one has been forced out yet, but the aim is to free up capacity for families that need intensive services when their lives are in immediate danger.
The letter urged people to consider moving in with relatives or friends, moving out of the city or finding an apartment to rent. Entering the city’s main shelter system should be “a last resort,” according to the letter.
But frequently, the Department of Homeless Services shelter system, the city’s main system, is the only option.
Though there are now rental assistance vouchers specifically aimed at helping domestic violence victims pay for permanent housing, the voucher amounts often fall short of covering the rents and the competition for affordable apartments is high.
Deborah, 37, a cook who moved from a domestic violence shelter in Brooklyn to a general homeless shelter in Queens last year, said she feared she was stuck because the apartments she has found are out of reach of her take-home pay of no more than $900, even with a voucher.
“If I can’t pay the difference, I’ll be staying in the shelter all my life,” said Deborah, a single mother of three children, who asked that her last name not be used in order to protect her identity.
Steven Banks, the city’s commissioner of social services, said the voucher system was working for many people. After the vouchers were put in place early last year, the city resumed enforcement of the state policy limiting stays to 180 days.
Allowing people to extend their stays was costing the city about $10 million annually, Mr. Banks said. That money has been redirected to the rental assistance and other programs.
Safe Horizon had been working with residents individually as they timed out of emergency shelter. But the nonprofit provider recently took the more formal approach of sending a letter to current residents after getting a reminder from the city about the 180-day rule.
Evictions, always a leading cause of homelessness, have been falling in part because the city has heavily funded one-time rental assistance programs and legal aid for tenants fighting landlords in housing court, Mr. Banks said. But domestic violence has continued to increase, and now accounts for about 30 percent of homeless families with children.
In 2016, the number of domestic violence incident reports increased to 91,617, up from 74,684 in the previous year, according to data that the mayor’s office released last month when a task force issued a report on how the city should respond to escalating violence among intimate partners.
“Domestic violence happens in secret; it’s not like when you put more police in the street and you drive down street crime,” said Judy Harris Kluger, executive director of Sanctuary for Families, a nonprofit that provides shelter and counseling to domestic violence victims.
Domestic violence victims often cannot stay with family members for fear of running into their abusers, and they lack the income to find permanent housing quickly.
Finding permanent housing presents other challenges as well. A majority of domestic violence victims in the shelter system are under 30, and they often lack the education and work experience that could help them out of homelessness, said Liz Roberts, deputy chief executive of Safe Horizon.
“If you’re 22, we’re your one and only way out in many cases,” she said.
Undocumented immigrants confront similar hurdles, said Hayley Carrington, a program director at HELP USA.
Deborah, an undocumented Guyanese immigrant, left her husband, whom she described as verbally abusive and threatening to the point where she had to call the police on several occasions.
Landlords balk when they learn she is not in the country legally, said Deborah, who is hopeful that she will be able to afford permanent housing once she becomes a certified nursing assistant, a credential she is going to pursue with the help of a $5,000 scholarship from HELP.
For now, she depends on two rental assistance vouchers — one known as Living in Communities III that is worth $1,268 and is specifically for domestic violence victims, and another, the Family Eviction Prevention Supplement, that pays $1,515.
In collaboration with the city, the state expanded the FEPS program to domestic violence victims as part of the settlement of a lawsuit reached this year with the Legal Aid Society and the law firm of Hughes Hubbard & Reed.
Safe Horizon now has a housing specialist who is focused on identifying landlords that have units available, said Kelly Coyne, who oversees its domestic violence shelters.
“This person is really dedicated to going out and meeting with landlords and brokers that are able to give them 10 to 15 apartments a month versus one or two a year,” Ms. Coyne said.
Kirsis Rodriguez, 39, first moved in with her sister in Brooklyn as she tried to flee from her now ex-husband. She went into a HELP shelter after he easily found her by spotting her car near her sister’s apartment.
“He would wait out there all night,” she said.
She and her daughter are in a permanent apartment that she could afford with the LINC III voucher.
It’s a studio for $1,260 elsewhere in the city, and now, she said, she feels a bit safer.