WASHINGTON — As James B. Comey was testifying that President Trump was a liar, Senator John Hoeven held two meetings about health care, and pondered ideas about infrastructure.
For their part, his Republicans colleagues on the Senate Intelligence Committee made it clear at Mr. Comey’s hearing that they had no appetite to confront the president, saving their criticism for Hillary Clinton and spending much of their time focused on the fact that Mr. Trump himself was not under investigation.
As they have traveled through the various stages of grief over the unpredictability of their president and the realization that Mr. Trump is unlikely to change, congressional Republicans appear to have landed at acceptance, basically hoping that the president does not get in their way.
The House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, seemed to chalk up Mr. Trump’s attempt to pressure Mr. Comey into backing off an investigation into his national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, to the incompetence of a newcomer. “The president’s new at this,” he told reporters on Thursday.
Realizing that Mr. Trump has served as neither a strong advocate for their positions — indeed he often criticizes them — nor a focused student of public policy, Republicans are letting Democrats serve as Mr. Trump’s loudest critics while trying to establish the president as inept, perhaps, but not criminal.
With Mr. Trump still broadly popular among rank-and-file conservatives, Republican lawmakers are uneasy about aggressively criticizing the president and potentially angering their voters. So even while deeply critical of Mr. Trump in private, readily questioning his fitness for office, many of them leap to his defense before the cameras.
Few Republicans who were interviewed on Thursday thought that Mr. Trump was immediately imperiled by Mr. Comey’s testimony. But there is growing fear that the drumbeat of questions about Mr. Trump’s conduct, the prospect of a loss in a highly anticipated special House election this month in Georgia, and months more of legislative inaction could debilitate Republicans going into the 2018 midterm elections.
In contrast to the Republicans in the capital who offered a defense of Mr. Trump, the party’s candidate in the Georgia House race was far more measured.
Republicans in blue states are trying to execute even more limb-testing contortions. Gov. Bruce Rauner of Illinois, who is facing re-election next year, drew attention this month for a local TV interview in which he declined to mouth Mr. Trump’s name and ignored five successive questions about whether he had even voted for the president.
How Republican officials at all levels handle Mr. Trump will be similarly shaped by their own political interests, depending on whether they represent the president’s more enthusiastic backers or a more skeptical constituency.
Should Mr. Trump’s popularity continue to fall, as it has in consecutive polls over the last few months, some congressional Republicans may reconsider their support, especially if it is not yielding an accomplished agenda. In the long term, elected officials will also care deeply about the findings of Robert S. Mueller III, a special prosecutor investigating Mr. Trump’s campaign.
But even as his overall approval ratings fall, the president is retaining support among bedrock Republicans. A Quinnipiac survey this week that showed Mr. Trump’s job approval ratings slipping to just 34 percent also indicated that 81 percent of Republicans still approved of the president’s performance.
With the economy continuing to add jobs and the stock market growing, most Republicans believe there is little in the short term that could dislodge the party’s grass roots from their support of Mr. Trump. The only caveat to this assessment is if there is a national crisis of some kind.
For Republican candidates eyeing the prospect of contested primaries next year, their assumption is plainly that Republican voters expect them to rise to Mr. Trump’s defense.
Local party leaders, while shrugging off the Russia investigation, concede there is a rising frustration that Republicans have yet to advance their legislative agenda. But in a sign of how much latitude they are giving Mr. Trump, Republican activists are more inclined to point a finger at Congress.
