PITTSBURGH — The fresh-faced, 22-year-old rookie who leads the N.H.L. in playoff goals this year — a hot streak that could even land him the Conn Smythe Trophy, given to the postseason’s most valuable player — was once too embarrassed to shoot the puck.
That rookie, Jake Guentzel, figured it was better to use his uncanny vision to set up teammates than to be greedy. It’s a mind-set that helped Guentzel, now a budding Pittsburgh Penguins star, set a program record for assists during his freshman year at Nebraska-Omaha three years ago. His collegiate coach, Dean Blais, tried to alter that selflessness, with mixed results.
Consider the message finally received.
Guentzel beat Nashville goaltender Pekka Rinne twice in Pittsburgh’s 4-1 win in Game 2 of the Stanley Cup finals on Wednesday, as the Penguins took a two-games-to-none lead in the best-of-seven series. The Nebraska-born, Minnesota-raised son of a coach who spent most of his childhood trying to keep up with his older brothers Ryan and Gabe, Guentzel now has a dozen goals this postseason. That’s the most ever by an American-born rookie and within two of Dino Ciccarelli’s N.H.L. rookie record set while playing for the Minnesota North Stars in 1981.
Oh, and his five game-winning goals so far are tops among first-year players in a league that dates back a century.
“Someone that would have dreamed this is lying,” Blais said with a laugh.
Maybe, but this is hardly a fluke. Though the beginning of Guentzel’s N.H.L. career may have been charmed — he did score on his first two shots in his debut in a loss against the Rangers in November, after all — much of it is simply because of his talent and work ethic.
Sure, there’s a little luck involved, but not much. You don’t have 28 goals and 24 assists in 61 games thanks to a bounce or two.
“He’s been given a lot of responsibility and he’s done a great job of just continuing to improve and compete,” said Sidney Crosby, the Penguins’ captain.
It’s not a coincidence Pittsburgh’s equipment manager Dana Heinze put Guentzel in a stall adjacent to Crosby’s when Guentzel was called up for good in January.
It is a practice the team uses to give young players a chance to get acclimated to life in the N.H.L. Putting a new player next to Crosby also limits distractions for the rest of the room during the daily media crush around Crosby, a two-time Hart Trophy winner.
Eventually, however, the crowd breaks up. It’s in those quiet moments that Crosby becomes equal parts mentor and teammate.
Not that Guentzel has ever lacked confidence, even if he doesn’t exactly fit the physical profile of an elite goal scorer at 5 feet 11 inches and 180 pounds. Yet he’s thrived anyway thanks to a preternatural sense of timing and a hockey I.Q. gleaned from a lifetime around the game. He was never the biggest in his family but still found a way to keep up with Gabe (six years older) and Ryan (eight years older).
Guentzel’s winner in Game 1 against Nashville was a testament to his vision and patience. He was at center ice when the puck was pinched along the wall. He began sprinting toward the Nashville zone before his teammate Brian Dumoulin even had it. By the time Guentzel collected Matt Cullen’s one-touch pass, he was racing in on Rinne.
Rather than just fling the puck at the goaltender, he pulled it back, allowing Nashville’s Ryan Ellis to inadvertently screen Rinne. The goaltender could only wave his glove at it as it ripped into the net to put Pittsburgh ahead for good.
The player who never wanted to shoot now can’t seem to stop, and Blais can’t help but laugh. Maybe the problem before wasn’t the message but the messengers.
Guentzel had an eight-game goal drought, from Game 6 of the second round against Washington, until the opener of the finals. Sullivan opted to keep Guentzel in the lineup, though he briefly took him off Crosby’s line in hopes of a reset.
The two were reunited during the latter portions of Game 2. Guentzel’s rebound goal 10 seconds into the third period came on a set play of sorts. Bryan Rust came in on the rush and flipped the puck at Rinne. The rebound went right to Guentzel waiting in the slot. He had no problem powering it into the open net.
When he was at Omaha, Guentzel would arrive two hours early to practice, meticulously preparing his gear, then going to pick the brain of the coaching staff until his teammates showed up.
“He’d want to know what was going on,” Blais said.
That attention to detail helped him earn a captaincy with the Mavericks, and when Blais describes Guentzel’s leadership style, it sounds an awful lot like the guy Guentzel hangs his No. 59 sweater next to every day.
Good thing, because it’s coming. Fast.