Let fiction transport you to other worlds this week, from Arundhati Roy’s cinematic contemporary India to Sarah Perry’s fantastical Victorian England to Courtney Maum’s near future of rampant techie consumerism. In nonfiction, Jack Ewing gets under the hood of the Volkswagen scandal, and Thomas E. Ricks explores the common causes of two very different Englishmen: Winston Churchill and George Orwell. Speaking of politics and the English language, Senator Al Franken has a book out. If he’s lucky, it’ll be the funniest political memoir you read this year.
BAD DREAMS AND OTHER STORIES, by Tessa Hadley. (Harper/HarperCollins, $26.99.) A spellbinding and witty writer, Hadley serves up the bitter along with the delicious. In these 10 stories, set in Britain in the 1950s and ’60s as well as the present, the uncanny is almost precisely counterbalanced with the commonplace — picture insects falling on books and rabbit droppings in dolls’ tea-cups — and apparently minor trespasses turn out to reverberate.
FASTER, HIGHER, FARTHER: THE VOLKSWAGEN SCANDAL, by Jack Ewing. (Norton, $27.95.) Since the Environmental Protection Agency accused Volkswagen of equipping its diesel engines with software that circumvented emissions testing, the company has pleaded guilty to civil and criminal charges and paid over $20 billion in fines. In his book, Ewing, a New York Times reporter, offers not only an account of a great corporate scandal but also a rich history of a company whose cars have touched millions of lives, a character study of a brilliant but deeply flawed leader, and a case study in how a corporate culture can turn toxic.
INHERITANCE FROM MOTHER, by Minae Mizumura. Translated by Juliet Winters Carpenter. (Other Press, $27.95.) On its face, this is the story of a woman in an antiseptic Tokyo who is waiting for her difficult mother to die and has just learned her husband plans to leave her. But Mizumura expands her tale into an ambitious portrait of middle-class anomie in a Japan still reckoning with its past and the paradoxes of its identity.
AL FRANKEN, GIANT OF THE SENATE, by Al Franken. (Twelve, $28.) When Franken, the “Saturday Night Live” writer and performer, first ran for the Senate from Minnesota in 2008, he had to project an air of utmost seriousness. His staff has learned to respond to his quips with a helpful but stern “O.K., that’s for inside the car.” In this memoir he tells the jokes he’s been sitting on for the past 10 years and describes the value of humor as a force for bringing people together — yes, even in Congress.
CHURCHILL AND ORWELL: The Fight for Freedom, by Thomas E. Ricks. (Penguin Press, $28.) Winston Churchill and George Orwell never met. But this enjoyable dual biography by Ricks, a Pulitzer Prize winner and military history columnist for the New York Times Book Review, draws out the common causes of these 20th century giants: two independent thinkers and opponents of totalitarianism whose influence remains pervasive today.
TOUCH, by Courtney Maum. (Putnam, $26.) The protagonist of this satirical novel, a trend forecaster, loses her faith in her job and in techie consumerism and foresees a return to intimacy. Maum’s writing is easy, eager and colloquial, and she shines when she writes about creativity, the slow burn and then sudden rush of ideas that lead her heroine to change her life.