On my night stand: “The Nix,” by Nathan Hill; “The Excellent Lombards,” by Jane Hamilton; and “A Separation,” by Katie Kitamura.
The last truly great book I read was “Alice & Oliver,” by Charles Bock. I can go on for decades about this book. It’s about a young wife and mother diagnosed with awful blood cancer. It’s about life and death and love and parenting. It’s about health care in America. It has possibly the most morally complex plot twist I’ve ever encountered in literature. I sobbed. Sobbed! My heart broke so that I could feel the pieces rattling in my chest.
And guess what? It got panned in these very pages by another writer I admire. She criticized it for being “autobiographical” and claimed that the author was cheating on some fictional level. I went to the Iowa Writers’ Workshop, and hence I know the rule: Just because it happened, doesn’t make it true. But this book was truer than true on the most basic human level. It’s not a “happy” novel. It’s not an “Elin Hilderbrand” novel. But it’s the best book I’ve read in the past decade, hands down.
I succumbed to a marketing ploy and read “Valley of the Dolls,” by Jacqueline Susann, which was in its 50th anniversary edition this past summer.  My character finds it on her twin sister’s night stand; it’s the book that once belonged to their mother. My character and I actually had the same thing to say about it: So. Many. Pills.
What’s the last book that made you laugh?
“Man at the Helm,” by Nina Stibbe. This was a recommendation from “Manda.” It’s a quiet British novel about an adolescent girl and her older sister and younger brother. Their parents divorce, their once posh mother is left at loose ends and the kids desperately want to find her a husband so that there is, once again, a “man at the helm.” I don’t think I’ve ever laughed so hard in my life, marked so many pages or simply marveled at how funny adults seem to children.
The last book to make you cry?
“Lily and the Octopus,” by Steven Rowley. This was a “David” recommendation. I texted him a photo of the cover to say I had finally taken his advice and was reading it, and apparently the mere photo made him cry.
The last book that made you furious?
“May We Be Forgiven,” by A. M. Homes. Because I didn’t write it. Let’s say all of Homes’s work has a similar strain, but this is by far her masterpiece. Sheer brilliance.
Lorrie Moore. I was at Iowa 1996-98, and we all voted (via pieces of paper stuck in a shoe box) on who we wanted to invite to come read. Lorrie Moore won in a landslide. She is a writer’s writer. Her long stories are absolutely, hands-down the best pieces of writing that exist, in my opinion.
Also: Toni Morrison, Anna Quindlen, Sloane Crosley and the great Ann Patchett.
What’s the most interesting thing you learned recently from a book?
How do you like to read? Paper or electronic? One book at a time or simultaneously? Morning or night?
I am a very nerdy reader, in that I am as disciplined about my reading as I am about my writing. I consider reading to be part of my job. I had a Kindle for a brief while, but I dropped it in the ocean, and that was the end of electronic reading for me. So I read only paper books, and I read them one at a time, all the way through — although since I was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2014, I loosened up on my rule of finishing everything no matter how abysmal. I read for 30 to 45 minutes during my workday, usually before I get started composing, but sometimes also if I get blocked. I find that reading (especially an excellent book) is a great inspiration. People ask if I’m afraid I’ll plagiarize or accidentally adopt someone else’s voice. No, after writing 19 novels, that’s not a concern. I have my own voice.
I wonder if I’m alone in this? I have my books organized by the time of my life in which I read them. All of my Ellen Gilchrist and Andre Dubus (the father) are in one section, because those are the books I read in the early ’90s, after I had graduated from Johns Hopkins and was living in Manhattan, first working in publishing and later teaching at I.S. 227 in Queens. I had a long commute, and all I did was read with the vague goal of self-discovery. I have a section dedicated to the books I read while at Iowa: the aforementioned Lorrie Moore, Faulkner’s “Go Down, Moses,” Ethan Canin (he was my professor while I was there). I have a section of the books I read when I had babies. I would read while I nursed, and this is where it became imperative that the books I was reading had a strong narrative drive. On that shelf is “Atonement,” by Ian McEwan, and “Empire Falls,” by Richard Russo.
“The Riders,” by Tim Winton, Christmas 1996. And this is now a gift I’m giving to you. Tim Winton is a novelist from Western Australia, which is why you’ve never heard of him, and he is, hands down, my favorite writer of all time. This novel, plus “Cloudstreet” and “Dirt Music,” are works of extreme genius.
Like most writers, I read constantly. I used to hide in remote parts of the yard and house so I could read in peace. When I was in second grade, I told my elementary school librarian that I had read “every book in the library.” The following year, she ordered the Nancy Drew mysteries, and I worked my way through them all. Then I started writing a series of my own entitled “Rachel and Gretchen,” about sisters who have adventures together: “Rachel and Gretchen Fly to the Moon,” “Rachel and Gretchen Make Their Parents Breakfast in Bed.” And in one story Rachel gets a sliver of glass stuck in her eye (?!) and has to go to the hospital. I illustrated the covers, punched the paper with three holes and tied them with ribbon. Several of these “books” now grace the shelves of my elementary school library.
J. D. Salinger, John Cheever, Flannery O’Connor. I’m serving very cold Veuve Clicquot and a bowl of mixed nuts.
“David” thinks it should be Danielle Steel, because I live a life of glamour. (True: I am answering these questions from a hilltop with a 180-degree view of the Caribbean in the Virgin Islands.) But I would choose Curtis Sittenfeld. I’ve never met Curtis in person, but I can tell just from reading her novels that she understands me, and she has a dynamite sense of humor.
See Question 1.