Pete Rose tugged on the edge of the tarp Saturday afternoon and slowly unveiled a bigger-than-life sculpture of one of his headfirst slides, revealing it from the airborne cleats to the ground-scraping elbows. Rose, the Reds’ banished hits king, was finally in bronze.
On a sizzling afternoon, thousands of fans packed the entrance to Great American Ball Park in Cincinnati for the latest tribute to their favorite baseball son. The Hall of Famers Johnny Bench, Tony Perez and Joe Morgan were among those attending the festivities. Rose, a Cincinnati native, became the eighth Reds star honored with a sculpture outside the ballpark.
With Major League Baseball’s permission, the Reds have been catching up on honoring their most famous and most controversial player. Last June, they inducted him into the team’s hall of fame and retired his No. 14 in front of capacity crowds.
AROUND THE MAJORS Alex Meyer dominated for six innings as part of a two-hitter for the host Los Angeles Angels, whoended the Kansas City Royals’ six-game winning streak with a 9-0 victory. Gregory Polanco broke out of a slump with a two-run homer as the Pirates edged the Chicago Cubs, 4-3, in Pittsburgh. Boston’s Rick Porcello gave up seven runs and 10 hits in six innings as the Astros beat the Red Sox, 7-1, in Houston. Todd Frazier and Matt Davidson hit consecutive home runs to lead the Chicago White Sox to a 5-2 victory in Toronto. Cory Spangenberg and Chase d’Arnaud each hit solo home runs in the 11th inning, lifting the San Diego Padres, 7-5, in Milwaukee.
POWER PITCHER AND HITTER The pitcher-first baseman Brendan McKay of Louisville has won the Dick Howser Trophy as the top player in college baseball. McKay, the fourth overall pick in the Major League Baseball draft, is 10-3 with a 2.34 E.R.A. and 140 strikeouts in 104 innings. He is also batting .343 with 17 home runs and 56 R.B.I.
COLLEGE WORLD SERIES Adley Rutschman hit the tiebreaking single in the eighth inning, Jake Mulholland pitched four and a third innings of no-hit relief, and Oregon State (55-4) came back from a four-run deficit to beat Cal State Fullerton (39-23), 6-5, in the opener in Omaha.
The Browns rookie defensive end Myles Garrett has a sprained left foot, but he is expected to be ready for training camp next month. Garrett, the No. 1 overall pick in this year’s N.F.L. draft, injured his foot late in practice Wednesday. The Browns waited until Garrett received a second opinion before providing an update Saturday.
Lucas Pouille will play Feliciano López in the final of the Stuttgart Open in Germany.
Pouille, the No. 4 seed, defeated his fellow Frenchman Benoît Paire, 7-6 (5), 7-5, and López prevailed, 6-7 (2), 7-6 (4), 7-5, over the sixth-seeded Mischa Zverev of Germany in the other semifinal.
López, who upset the third-seeded Tomas Berdych on Friday, will play his first final of the season as he bids for his sixth career title. Pouille, who was given a wild card to play in Stuttgart, a grass-court tournament, will be going for his second title of the season and his third over all.
MÜLLER MAKES FINAL Luxembourg’s Gilles Müller beat the second-seeded Alexander Zverev of Germany, 7-6 (5), 6-2, in a semifinal of the grass-court tournament in Den Bosch, Netherlands.
KONTA ADVANCES Johanna Konta, the top seed, reached the final of the grass-court tournament in Nottingham, England, with a 6-2, 7-5 win over Slovakia’s Magdalena Rybarikova.
Konta, who was born in Australia but took British citizenship five years ago, is aiming to become the first British woman to win a WTA event on home ground since Virginia Wade at Eastbourne in 1975. Wimbledon, which Wade won in 1977, is not part of the WTA Tour.
Russia, the host nation, beat New Zealand, 2-0, to open the Confederations Cup with a win that was all but demanded by Vladimir V. Putin, Russia’s president.
Putin was in the new $750 million stadium in his native St. Petersburg to see forward Fyodor Smolov’s goal in the 69th minute added to an own goal by New Zealand defender Michael Boxall in the 31st. Putin recently demanded better results from the 63rd-ranked Russia team, which complied by easily dispatching No. 95 New Zealand.
Russia’s win eases the pressure on its second game, against Cristiano Ronaldo’s Portugal in Moscow on Wednesday. Portugal, the European champion, is set to open its Group A program on Sunday against Mexico in Kazan.
VILLA SCORES TWICE David Villa did not let the rain bother him, scoring twice in leading New York City F.C. past Seattle, 2-1, at Yankee Stadium. Villa scored his 50th and 51st M.L.S. career goals in the second half.
Seattle took a 1-0 lead in the 40th minute on a goal by Cristian Roldan, who made his way through the waterlogged turf to score. But Villa tied the game with a penalty kick in the 52nd minute, and 25 minutes later he volleyed home Jack Harrison’s cross.
The state of Michigan is seeking to terminate the parental rights of Larry Nassar, a sports doctor accused of sexual assaulting dozens of women and girls.
The Lansing State Journal reported that lawyers for the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services filed a petition against Nassar, 53.
Lawyers cited December testimony from an F.B.I. agent who said investigators found images and videos of child pornography on Nassar’s property, including videos showing him assaulting girls.
Shannon Smith, one of Nassar’s lawyers, noted in a Friday court hearing that there was “absolutely nothing” in the charges filed against Nassar involving allegations he abused his three children.
A lawyer for Nassar’s wife, who has filed for divorce, argued that the petition was unnecessary because she had been granted sole custody of their children.
Nassar, who has denied wrongdoing, was a doctor at Michigan State University and at U.S.A. Gymnastics, which trains Olympians and other elite athletes. Dozens of women and girls have accused him of sexually assaulting them and are suing him in federal court.
The Arizona Coyotes traded Mike Smith, their longtime starting goaltender, to the Calgary Flames.
Arizona received a conditional 2018 third-round pick, the defensive prospect Brandon Hickey and the rights to the pending unrestricted goaltender Chad Johnson. The trade was announced shortly before the N.H.L.’s trade freeze for the expansion draft for the Las Vegas franchise.
Smith, 35, has been the Coyotes’ starter for the past six seasons and helped them reach the 2012 Western Conference finals. Last season he was 19-26-9 with a 2.92 goals against average and .914 save percentage.
SABRES GET A DEFENSEMAN The Buffalo Sabres acquired defenseman Nathan Beaulieu, a pending restricted free agent, from the Montreal Canadiens for a third-round draft pick. Beaulieu, 24, set career highs with four goals, 24 assists and 28 points last season, his fifth in the N.H.L. Montreal was in danger of losing Beaulieu in the expansion draft, while Buffalo has room to protect him.
FROM A SHARK TO A DEVIL The Devils acquired defenseman Mirco Mueller from the San Jose Sharks. San Jose got a second-round pick and a fourth-round pick, while the Sharks also sent their fifth-round pick to the Devils. The Sharks had risked losing the 22-year-old Mueller in the expansion draft for nothing.
Peter Sagan, the world road race champion, powered to victory in the eighth and penultimate stage of the Tour of Switzerland. Simon Spilak maintained his overall lead.
Sagan, 27, pulled away from Sacha Modolo at the end of the 62-mile ride around Schaffhausen to add to his win in Stage 5. Matteo Trentin finished third.
Spilak will have a 52-second advantage over Damiano Caruso in Sunday’s final stage, a 16.7-mile time trial. Steven Kruijswijk is 13 seconds behind Caruso.
A Spanish bullfighter died after he tripped in the ring and was gored in the chest by a bull in southwestern France, according to multiple news media reports.
Ivan Fandino, 36, was rushed to the hospital but died from his injuries, the Spanish news agency EFE reported.
