The Summer Olympics will grow by 15 events in 2020, the International Olympic Committee announced on Friday, adding three-on-three basketball and six events that will involve men and women competing on mixed teams.
The committee added mixed-gender relays in swimming, track and triathlon; mixed team events in archery and judo; and mixed doubles in table tennis.
Amid the additions, one sport will have a net loss in events: Men’s weight lifting will lose one weight class.
The new events come in addition to five sports that were added for 2020 last year: karate, skateboarding, sport climbing, surfing and baseball/softball, which are counted as a single sport by the I.O.C. and will return after missing two Games.
In years past, women and men seldom competed together at the Olympics. When tennis was brought back in 1988, for example, men’s and women’s doubles was included but not mixed doubles.
But mixed events have found favor in international sports and with the I.O.C. in recent years. Mixed doubles badminton was added for the 1996 Games, and for tennis in 2012.
Mixed relays are a new development in international sports. Swimming added a mixed relay to its world championships in 2015, and it brought intriguing strategic decisions, like whether to start with the slower women or to try to build a big lead with the men.
Swimming will be adding the 4x100 mixed medley relay to the program. Britain won that event at the world championships, with the United States second.
Track’s World Relays competition added a mixed 4x400-meter race this year; the Bahamas beat the United States. “I hope the mixed relay stays in the program, especially as we won,” said Shaunae Miller-Uibo, the 2016 Olympic 400-meter champion.
Three-on-three basketball, with separate men’s and women’s events, also was added to the 2020 program. At the 3-on-3 World Cup, which dates to 2012, the United States has yet to win a men’s gold while sending starless teams of players who were once midlevel collegians. Perhaps the Olympics would attract a higher caliber of player: A potential American team of N.B.A. All-Stars would probably be a heavy favorite.
Despite the new events, the number of athletes at the Games will drop modestly, as the number of entrants in many events will be reduced.
Also on Friday, men’s events were dropped in favor of women’s events in boxing, canoeing and rowing, to bring the Games closer to a stated goal of full gender equity. Kit McConnell, the I.O.C. sports director, said that 48.8 percent of athletes would be women, up from 46.1 percent in Rio in 2016.
“We know the importance of female participation in the Games at both the event level and the athlete level,” he said.
The committee also added the 800-meter freestyle for male swimmers and the 1,500-meter freestyle for women; freestyle BMX cycling; the Madison, a two-person cycling race; and fencing team events.