Sara Ehrman, a fixture in liberal politics who advised President Bill Clinton on the Israeli-Arab conflict but was best known as the woman who advised a young Hillary Rodham not to move to Arkansas to marry Mr. Clinton, died Saturday in Washington. She was 98.
A family friend, Jodi Enda, said the cause was endocarditis.
Born on Staten Island, and forged by the politics of the Labor Zionist Youth movement of the 1930s, Mrs. Ehrman became the outspoken doyenne of a generation of Democratic leaders who turned to her for expertise on the Jewish vote and the Middle East.
She described herself as “first a Jew, second a Democrat and above all a feminist” who, like a village elder, dispensed tough love to young women trying to navigate their own careers in Washington. Hillary Clinton was her most notable protégée.
In 1974, two years after Senator George S. McGovern’s failed bid to unseat President Richard M. Nixon, and after she had graduated from Yale Law School, Mrs. Clinton lived in Mrs. Ehrman’s Washington home while she worked on the Senate Watergate Committee. That August, Mrs. Ehrman, who saw a bright future for her spirited, if sloppy, young tenant, offered to drive her to Fayetteville, Ark., to be with her boyfriend, Mr. Clinton.
In 1974, Sara Ehrman drove a 26-year-old Hillary Rodham nearly halfway across the country so she could be with her boyfriend, Bill Clinton. Mrs. Ehrman recently recounted the trip to The Times.
Mrs. Ehrman was born Sara Teitelbaum on April 24, 1919, the youngest child and only daughter of Hungarian Jewish immigrants who had fled persecution and whose communist sympathies would inspire their daughter’s left-leaning politics. Her mother, Mary, died when Sara was 8; an aunt in Manhattan with 10 children of her own took her in.
Mrs. Ehrman first learned about the Labor Zionist movement in 1934, when she was 15, at a dance hosted by the Young Poale Zion Alliance, a Marxist-Zionist group. She then spent summers at the group’s Camp Kvutza in upstate New York. The friends she made there, including Jews of Palestinian descent, would serve as an influence years later in her fervent push for the establishment of an independent Palestinian state alongside Israel.
By high school, Mrs. Ehrman lived in Flushing, Queens, with her father, Maurice, and older brother William. She was conditionally admitted to Barnard College, but she failed high school chemistry and refused to retake the course at summer school.
She married Libert Ehrman in 1940, and after World War II, the couple eventually settled in Hollin Hills, a progressive enclave outside Washington in Northern Virginia. They divorced in 1969. Mrs. Ehrman is survived by her two sons, Daniel and David.
Always exhibiting a blunt restlessness, Mrs. Ehrman did not conform to the traditional role of the midcentury housewife. She hated to cook and was eager for a career, so in the 1950s, she took a job as the manager of her sons’ school cafeteria.
By 1965, when her sons were almost grown, she got a job as a legislative assistant to Senator Joseph S. Clark, Democrat of Pennsylvania, and worked with him until he was defeated in 1968. The next year, she became a legislative assistant to Mr. McGovern, Democrat of South Dakota, and served as director of issues and research on his 1972 presidential campaign.
That role took Mrs. Ehrman to South Texas, where she first met Mr. Clinton, who was the McGovern campaign’s state director for Texas.
In 1992, Mrs. Ehrman moved to Little Rock, Ark., to lead Jewish outreach efforts for Mr. Clinton’s presidential campaign. On the morning of his inauguration in 1993, she attended church with the Clintons. During Mr. Clinton’s first term, Mrs. Ehrman, then the Democratic National Committee’s deputy political director, helped organize Mr. Clinton’s first trip to Israel and handled the arrangements for him to attend the funeral of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin after the Israeli leader was assassinated in 1995.
“She was right there trying to figure out who to come on the plane — who was really important and who wanted to be important and who would you pay a price if you didn’t include?” recalled Maria Echaveste, a former White House deputy chief of staff to Mr. Clinton. She shared a room in Little Rock with Mrs. Ehrman when they both worked on Mr. Clinton’s 1992 campaign.
Mrs. Ehrman was a sisterly presence in the East Wing, and well after the Clintons left the White House, the denizens of what came to be called Hillaryland visited her sunny apartment in the Kalorama section of Washington, which became something of a salon for like-minded women.
“People on Hillary’s staff in the White House became very close to her and very fond of her,” said Lissa Muscatine, a longtime friend of Mrs. Clinton’s and a speechwriter for her.
Mrs. Ehrman grew deeply disillusioned with Aipac, the powerful pro-Israel lobbying group that she had helped expand as political director in the early 1980s, and she was unflinching in her critique of American Jews who thought Israel could do no wrong.
She spent decades pushing for a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, serving as a senior adviser to S. Daniel Abraham, the billionaire who helped found the Center for Middle East Peace, and working with Americans for Peace Now and J Street, two groups that favor such a solution.
Mrs. Ehrman’s advocacy took her on numerous trips to the Middle East, where her moxie was on full display in meetings with dozens of heads of state, including multiple sessions with Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader. In 2011, at 92, Mrs. Ehrman met in the West Bank with Salam Fayyad, the prime minister of the Palestinian Authority at the time.
In 2009, the Clintons hosted a 90th birthday party for Mrs. Ehrman in the grassy backyard of their Washington home. The guest list of more than 100 people included Mr. McGovern among a who’s-who of the Democratic Party.
In July 2016, Mrs. Ehrman took a seat in the Clintons’ friends-and-family booth at the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia to watch her former tenant become the first woman to capture the Democratic nomination for president.
