This five-bedroom Art Nouveau-style house abuts the Boulevard de la Pétrusse in central Luxembourg City. It was built in 1871 and renovated in 1997, and the exterior is protected by the city’s historic preservation regulations.
The 3,336-square-foot home is semidetached, with three stories and a full basement. The main entrance opens to a foyer on the ground floor, which is currently used as office space. The two offices to the right could easily be returned to residential use: Both have high ceilings with decorative plaster moldings, and one has ornate stained-glass windows as well. The ground floor also has a bedroom with an adjacent bathroom, a cloakroom and storage space.
Upstairs is a living room, dining room, lounge area and galley kitchen with granite counters. On the third floor is the master bedroom and an en-suite bathroom with an open shower, as well as a guest bedroom and storage space. There is a second kitchen in the basement, which opens to a backyard with a terrace; there are also two wine cellars, a utility room, laundry facilities and storage. The house has a separate two-car garage.
The surrounding area is a mix of residential, institutional and commercial buildings, including embassies, law firms, schools and medical facilities, said Christophe Muller, director of sales at Luxembourg Sotheby’s International Realty, which has the listing. Stores and restaurants are within walking distance, as is a large park, Vallée de la Pétrusse. The international airport is about a 15-minute drive, Mr. Muller said.
Luxembourg, a small country with fewer than 600,000 residents, has seen strong demand for homes in recent years, brokers said. Prices in the capital, Luxembourg City, which has a population of about 115,000, have increased by about 4.7 percent annually for the past seven years, Mr. Muller said.
In the last year alone, apartment prices in the city have increased by 5 percent, while house prices have grown more modestly, by about 2 percent, Francis Drabik, the broker-owner of Re/Max Select, said. In the third quarter of 2016, the most recent period for which official information is available, the average sales price for an apartment was about €674,500, or about $756,000, he said, and the average sales price for a house was about €1,178,400, or about $1.3 million. Both local and foreign buyers favor apartments at the moment, Mr. Drabik said, a consequence of their relative affordability.
Nearly half the population of Luxembourg is foreign, Mr. Drabik said. Most foreign buyers are from Portugal, France, Italy, Belgium, Germany and other European Union countries. Less than 10 percent of the country’s population is from other parts of the world, he said.
There are no restrictions on foreign buyers in Luxembourg, and mortgages are readily available to them, Mr. De Prince said.
A notary handles the sale, for a fee that is typically about €10,000, or about $11,200, Mr. Muller said. Closing costs are about 7 percent of the home’s purchase price, brokers said.
The annual property taxes on this home are about €1,000, or $1,120.
