For weeks, Mayor Bill de Blasio was unwavering in his public statements: He would march in the Puerto Rican Day Parade in New York on June 11 even though it was giving a hero’s honor to a former leader of a bomb-planting Puerto Rican nationalist group.
It was up to the parade’s leadership to choose who was honored, Mr. de Blasio insisted, and he intended to march in tribute to the Puerto Rican people — “simple as that,” he said.
In fact, the mayor’s calculations in whether to march were far more involved, and on Monday, he admitted that his public statements were not completely forthright.
The mayor said that behind the scenes, he was putting pressure on the parade’s leadership to rescind the honor, finally issuing an ultimatum that he would skip the parade if he did not get his way.
The mayor’s remarks on Monday were the latest phase in the surreal excursion that the parade has produced since its organizers announced in early May that Mr. López Rivera would march at the front and be honored as a National Freedom Hero.
Mr. López Rivera spent more than 35 years in prison for his actions as a member of the Armed Forces of National Liberation, which set off more than 100 bombs in the 1970s and 1980s, killing five people in New York and injuring scores.
On May 17, when he was first asked about the parade, Mr. de Blasio said he did not agree with the violent methods of Mr. López Rivera’s group but voiced something akin to sympathy for him, saying that Mr. López Rivera was a Vietnam veteran and that he had renounced violence (although Mr. López Rivera’s recent statements on the use of violence have been contradictory).
“I’m comfortable that he’s served his time, has made his statement clear, and let’s move on,” Mr. de Blasio said then, in a tone more emphatic than diplomatic.
On Monday, the mayor sought to clarify his position.
“I made clear to them that I was uncomfortable with the situation, and I wanted them to resolve it,” he said, referring to his private communications with parade officials, which began about 10 days ago.
“If it wasn’t resolved, I wasn’t going to be comfortable being a part of it,” he added.
The parade’s major corporate sponsors, including Goya Foods and Coca-Cola, cut their ties over Mr. López Rivera’s participation. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said he would not march, as did Police Commissioner James P. O’Neill, who called Mr. López Rivera a terrorist. Mr. O’Neill on Monday reiterated his decision not to march.
Mr. de Blasio’s insistence on marching was made somewhat more tenuous after the May 22 terrorist bombing in Manchester, England. It put him in the position of decrying the bombing there while seeming to play down Mr. López Rivera’s association with his group’s deadly bombing campaign.