PITTSBURGH — The salary cap was a passion project for Mario Lemieux, the owner, when the N.H.L. wrestled with it during the 2004-5 lockout, even though he knew it would have been something that Mario Lemieux, the player, would have fought against to the bitter end.
“We couldn’t compete with the Rangers and L.A. and the big markets, and Chicago and Detroit,” recalled Lemieux, the Pittsburgh Penguins Hall of Famer who is now their chairman.
So Lemieux pushed for the cap during the N.H.L.’s lost winter, well aware that the ripple effects would include a rise in league parity that could threaten the dynasties that had been a part of the league since it started awarding the Stanley Cup nearly a century ago.
The math was easy for Lemieux. Better to have at least 30 solvent and competitive clubs than just a handful.
“The salary cap gave us a chance to spend to the cap and be on level playing fields with the other teams,” he said.
The cap has proved to be more of a speed bump than a roadblock for the Penguins. The proof was all around Lemieux as he spoke on the ice at Nashville’s Bridgestone Arena on Sunday night after the Penguins defeated the Predators in Game 6 of the Stanley Cup finals to win the series, 4-2. Pittsburgh is the first team in 19 years, and the first of the salary-cap era, to win a second consecutive title.
“It’s hard to win the Cups, as we’ve found over the last 10 to 12 years,” Lemieux said.
The Penguins flew home to Pittsburgh on Monday with the Cup in their possession for the third time in nine years. A downtown parade is scheduled for Wednesday.
Pittsburgh has done it by investing heavily in a core group and finding the right complement of players and staff around Sidney Crosby, Evgeni Malkin and Kris Letang to make it work.
That is not how it is supposed to work nowadays. Championship windows are supposed to be narrower with the cap in place, not wider. Yes, Chicago has won it three times in six seasons in the cap era, but the Blackhawks were forced to blow up their roster after 2010. The Kings won it all in 2012 and 2014, but they are now in the process of starting over.
Not Pittsburgh. The Penguins have more Cup appearances (four), playoff wins (90) and regular-season victories (467) during the past decade than any team in the N.H.L. And it is not really that close. While Crosby is loath to talk about his legacy — he is just 29 — the way he describes the only team he has known sounds a lot like a dynasty.
“Your goal is to win every year, and our team just had a collection of guys that knew how to win, knew how to find ways,” Crosby said after picking up his second straight Conn Smythe Trophy as the postseason’s most valuable player.
It helps to have a coach with an ability to challenge his stars without alienating them, and a general manager with a knack for finding the right pieces. When Jim Rutherford replaced Ray Shero as the Penguins’ general manager in the summer of 2014, he raised eyebrows when he said he planned to be in the job for only a couple of years.
The Penguins are right up against the salary cap annually, but they do not overpay their stars. Given their value to the team, both Crosby ($8.7 million) and Malkin ($9.5 million) are bargains. And there are others.
Jake Guentzel (who scored 21 points in the playoffs, tying a league record for rookies), Bryan Rust, Conor Sheary and Scott Wilson all played vital roles alongside Pittsburgh’s cornerstones at some point during the postseason. None of them carried a cap hit greater than $675,000.
No wonder Malkin is hardly in the mood to put his career into perspective. He will turn 31 next month. Malkin, Phil Kessel and Letang are all under contract through 2022, Crosby until 2025.
If Malkin and Crosby can stay healthy, Pittsburgh will certainly be right there. Oddsmakers made them the early favorite for a third consecutive title, something that has not been done since the Islanders won four straight from 1980 to 1983, a year before Lemieux made his N.H.L. debut and nearly half a decade before Malkin and Crosby were born.
There will be turnover. Goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury’s handing off of the Cup to Matt Murray was a symbolic passing of the torch. Fleury will almost certainly play elsewhere next season, and defenseman Justin Schultz is a restricted free agent but may have played himself into a contract too rich for the Penguins to match.
Rutherford and Sullivan will get to work trying to fit the pieces together again. Their team cornerstone, Crosby, will take a brief breather this summer, maybe go fishing back home in Nova Scotia, and then start pointing toward next season.
