Customers of Pirate Joe’s, the Canadian renegade reseller of groceries from the American chain Trader Joe’s, no longer have a place to buy products like Organic Carrot Turmeric Juice Blend or Quinoa Cowboy Veggie Burgers.
Pirate Joe’s, which for more than five years celebrated its status as an unauthorized importer of Trader Joe’s products with a blend of cheeky humor and David-versus-Goliath determination, closed its doors at 12:01 a.m. Thursday after a protracted legal battle with the American corporation.
Mike Hallatt, the founder of Pirate Joe’s, had an approach that was both simple and complex: He sought to meet a demand for Trader Joe’s products in Vancouver, British Columbia, by opening a store and selling the goods at inflated prices. But to get the groceries, he shopped in bulk at Trader Joe’s stores almost three hours away in Seattle.
Trader Joe’s, a private company with more than 450 stores across the United States, is known for its loyal following, customer service and clever product names, like Speculoos Cookie Butter Cheesecake Bites and Chocolate Dilemma Cheesecake.
His bulk shopping trips got the attention of Trader Joe’s, and in 2013, the company filed a lawsuit against Mr. Hallatt for trademark infringement, unfair competition, false designation of origin and false advertising.
A Federal District Court in Washington ruled that the violations had occurred in Canada, where Trader Joe’s has no stores, and that Trader Joe’s had failed to prove that Pirate Joe’s affected its business in the United States. In August 2016, a federal appeals court sent the case back to the lower court for a trial, which was scheduled to take place in November.
Mr. Hallatt, who had personally spent about $75,000 in court costs, was trying to raise $50,000 by the end of this month to put toward the $250,000 he needed. As of Thursday, a little more than $5,700 had been raised, according to an online fund-raiser.
On Wednesday, the two sides reached a settlement.
“They definitely didn’t want me to be a business,” said Mr. Hallatt, who had agreed to close the store.
A spokesman for Trader Joe’s, which is based in Monrovia, Calif., declined to comment on Thursday.
Mr. Hallatt had been banned by Trader Joe’s from setting foot in its stores, but he had devised ways to shop undetected and keep his enterprise afloat.
At various times, he relied on a fake mustache and a wig, and once dressed in drag, the podcast StartUp reported last year. On another visit, he went for a more subtle look: a gray pinstripe suit and wire-rimmed glasses.
The Pirate Joe’s store in Vancouver, British Columbia, closed early on Thursday morning. The owner dropped the letter “P” on the sign to form the word “irate,” signaling his determination to fight Trader Joe’s.
He would fill a cart with the items he needed and then have companions pay at the cashier — the most sensitive part of the expedition because it was where he most risked being spotted. In ads on Craigslist, Mr. Hallatt recruited “day laborers” for $25 an hour.
He organized a “hot shop” — going to a Trader Joe’s and stocking up on vast multiples of a few items. His undercover shoppers would go directly to a manager with a cover story about an event or party.
For one trip, he hired a couple who he said did not look like conventional Trader Joe’s shoppers. They had dreadlocks, tattoos and piercings. “They looked like they just walked off the set of a Burning Man documentary,” he said.
Their story? They were hosting a marijuana trimming festival. (Recreational marijuana is legal in Washington State.) “They went in there and lit the place up,” he said, noting that they had bought $600 worth of chips and crackers.
At one point, Mr. Hallatt dropped the “P” from his store sign so it read “Irate Joe’s” — a signal of his determination to fight the grocery chain. He opened his first store in a former Romanian bakery on Jan. 1, 2012, and later relocated to the storefront of a former dry cleaner’s.
He closed the doors at 9:30 p.m. to put one of his daughters to bed, and returned to find people still lined up outside.
At the end, the shelves were mostly bare, and Mr. Hallatt rang up the last customer a minute into Thursday.
The customer bought gluten-free pancake mix, matcha green tea mix and shortbread cookies with dark chocolate filling.
He threw in a bar of organic milk chocolate — his favorite.