TIMO ANDRES AND DAVID KAPLAN at National Sawdust (June 17, 7 p.m.). Because of the burdens on contemporary composers, we predominantly hear their newer pieces. So this is a welcome opportunity to hear an early Andres work, an hourlong epic in 10 movements for two pianos that was Mr. Andres’s senior thesis at Yale.
‘THE GUILTY MOTHER’ at the Garage (June 20 and 22-24, 7:30 p.m.). Performed in its American premiere, this 1966 Darius Milhaud work completes On Site Opera’s survey of lesser-known adaptations of the French playwright Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais’s Figaro trilogy. Benefiting from a luxury pit band in the form of the International Contemporary Ensemble, Geoffrey McDonald conducts Jennifer Black as Rosina, Adam Cannedy as the Count, Amy Owens as Florestine and Andrew Owens as Leon. Eric Einhorn directs a site-specific production.
LOFTOPERA at the Muse (June 16-17, 8:30 p.m.; through July 8). This pioneering opera company will make a detour into sacred music to perform Pergolesi’s “Stabat Mater,” along with works by Vivaldi, in a Bushwick, Brooklyn, circus school. John de los Santos directs a production including four dancers, the soprano Heather Buck and the countertenor Randall Scotting. Brian Gilling conducts.
MAKE MUSIC NEW YORK (June 21). Walk around the boroughs on Wednesday and you’re almost certain to bump into a Make Music New York event: There are over 1,000 of them, morning, afternoon and evening. Part of the fun is simple exploration, the pleasure of the unexpected, but three highlights are worth noting: “49 Flutes,” a citywide performance of John Cage’s “49 Waltzes for the Five Boroughs”; a performance of Gérard Grisey’s “Le Noir de l’Étoile” at the American Museum of Natural History at 12:30 p.m.; and “WTC @ WTC,” a complete account of Bach’s “Well-Tempered Clavier” at the 9/11 Memorial plaza, at 4 p.m.
LEWIS SPRATLAN at Bargemusic (June 16, 8 p.m.). An important composer receives his due with three premieres, including two wholly new works — Six Preludes for piano and the Piano Quartet No. 2 — as well as the New York debut of his Clarinet Trio.
ST. LUKE’S CHAMBER ENSEMBLE at the Morgan Library & Museum (June 21 and 23, 7:30 p.m.). The essayist Adam Gopnik joins the players of the Orchestra of St. Luke’s, reading original writing among the movements of Schubert’s Octet. The program is repeated at the Brooklyn Museum at 2 p.m. on June 25.
‘THREE WAY’ at BAM Fisher (June 16-17, 7:30 p.m.; June 18, 2 p.m.). Three one-act operas on themes of sex — featuring an android lover, a private dungeon and a country-house orgy — from the composer-librettist team of Robert Paterson and David Cote, will have their New York debut at BAM after a premiere in Nashville last January. Dean Williamson conducts the American Modern Ensemble for this production, which is directed by John Hoomes.