And Signature Travel Network has a 10 percent increase in sales of land vacations for this summer, compared with last summer, said Karryn Christopher, the senior vice president of sales and marketing.
Outside of travel networks, individual travel companies are also reporting a rise. Indagare has 20 percent more bookings for travel from June through early September, compared with the same period last year, said Melissa Biggs Bradley, the founder and chief executive.
And Josh Alexander, a travel adviser at the New York City-based Protravel International, said that he has planned 130 private trips for clients traveling this summer; last summer, that number was around 100.
Flight searches are another barometer suggesting increased interest in summer travel. Between March 1 to May 24, for example, the online travel site Cheapflights.com saw flight searches in the United States for both domestic and international travel grow more than 26 percent, compared with the same period last year.
“Generally, air is booked 60 to 90 days before travel, so it’s safe to say that people are traveling more this summer,” said Emily Fisher, a spokeswoman for the company.
It’s not surprising that consumers scale back their travel during election years, said Zachary Sears, a senior economist at Tourism Economics, part of the research firm Oxford Economics.
“When a president is in the process of being elected, there’s uncertainty about the future of the market so people cut down on discretionary expenses such as travel,” he said. But Mr. Sears also said that this cutback is usually temporary, and once an election is over, consumers return to their usual spending patterns.
On the flip side, some data indicates that inbound tourism to the United States is down: For example, the app Foursquare, which analyzes the locations of more than 50 million global users a month, found that international tourism to leisure locations in the United States decreased 11 percent between October 2016 and March 2017, compared with the same period the year before.
After several years of weak tourism because of the country’s debt crisis, Greece is making a comeback as a summer getaway spot. Between March 1 and May 24, Cheapflights.com saw flight searches to Greece from the United States increase 50 percent, compared with the same period last year, and Indagare has a 30 percent increase in 2017 summer trip bookings to Greece, compared with last summer. Ms. Biggs Bradley said that Greece is an attractive vacation choice because it’s family-friendly and much more affordable than a number of other European countries.
Andy Pesky, the senior vice president of leisure sales and marketing at Protravel International, which has $400 million a year in leisure sales, said that the country is one of the company’s top three destinations in sales for travel this summer.
Sales for trips to South Africa in 2017 are up 20 percent within the Signature Travel Network, compared with sales last year, and the country is among the top five best sellers within the Virtuoso network. Expedia.com has seen a 25 percent increase in air ticket demand to South Africa this summer, compared with last summer, and searches for flights to South Africa from the United States on Cheapflights.com increased 11 percent between March 1 and May 24, compared with the same period last year.
It takes nearly a day to reach this South Asian island country from the United States, but that doesn’t appear to be deterring travelers from planning summer vacations there. American Express Travel has seen a 117 percent growth in summer 2017 bookings to the Maldives, compared with last summer. And at Expedia.com, the demand for air tickets from the United States to the Maldives for travel this summer is up 30 percent from last summer, said Sarah Waffle, a company spokeswoman.
Part of the draw may be the several hotels that have opened in the Maldives within the last 18 months, such as Soneva Jani and the St. Regis Maldives Vommuli Resort, but Claire Bennett, the executive vice president and general manager of American Express Travel, said that the growth is also because more Americans want to disconnect from everyday chaos and want to explore untouched places. “The Maldives is the essence of this experience,” she said.
Mr. Pesky said that Italy is Protravel International’s best-selling summer vacation destination. “We’re going to do $25 million this year in sales to Italy, and that number increases every year,” he said.