BurgerFi is going flexitarian.
The burger chain is adding the Beyond Burger, a plant-based burger from Beyond Meat, to its menus on July 3 in eight of its 101 stores around the country — Malibu, Calif.; New York City; Poughkeepsie, N.Y.; Philadelphia; Coral Springs, Fla.; Coral Gables, Fla.; and two stores in Delray Beach, Fla.
The Beyond Burger was introduced to consumers last year at Whole Foods. Made from proteins derived from peas and other plants, the burger has no cholesterol, but it oozes “grease” on the griddle and “bleeds” beet juice.
Beyond Burgers are available at Veggie Grill, a small West Coast vegetarian chain, but gaining a toehold in a large burger business has long been a goal for Ethan Brown, a founder of Beyond Meat. “This is a really important step out of the plant-focused world and into a place where carnivores are going to go,” Mr. Brown said.
Mr. Brown hasn’t exactly gotten a warm welcome — even having Don Thompson, the former McDonald’s chief executive, on the Beyond Meat board hasn’t helped.
That may be changing. Last week, Sonic Drive-In announced it would add a burger made from a blend of ground beef and mushrooms to its menu, and Hopdoddy Burger Bar, a small Texas-based chain, put the Impossible Burger — a competing plant-based burger — on menus in 11 of its 18 stores.
And Mr. Brown noted that during Memorial Day weekend, sales of the Beyond Burger at the Whole Foods in Omaha, a city where walking tours of steak restaurants are popular, were 40 percent higher than in the grocery chain’s stores in the Venice section of Los Angeles and in Brooklyn.
Advice for camp cooking, picnics and potlucks, along with recipes, cocktails, frozen desserts and a taste-test of the best supermarket hot dogs.
More consumers are adopting quasi-vegetarian diets in an effort to eat healthier foods, and burger restaurants in particular know they’re going to have to offer something more interesting than an iceberg lettuce salad with a few bits of shredded carrot, cabbage and cheese.
BurgerFi already has a quinoa-based veggie burger, the VeggieFi, on its menu. Paul Griffin, the executive chef at BurgerFi, created it, but after seeing an increase in plant-based burgers that mimic beef at food shows, he decided to look for another option. Mr. Griffin sampled and cooked dozens of plant-based burgers before choosing the Beyond Burger.
BurgerFi plans to roll out the Beyond Burger to all of its stores by the end of the summer. The burger, which will be served in options to satisfy both vegetarian and vegan diets, will sell for $8 to $9.
