LONDON — Russia’s prohibition of what it considers the promotion of homosexuality is discriminatory and violates freedom of expression, Europe’s top human rights court ruled on Tuesday, in a strong rejection of laws that rights groups say have been routinely used as cover for abuse and violence.
Homosexuality was decriminalized in Russia shortly after the fall of the Soviet Union, but gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people are often subject to discrimination, persecution and worse.
The prohibition, codified in national law in 2013, has been seen as a central plank of President Vladimir V. Putin’s nationalist message, one that has positioned Russia as a defender of Christian and traditional values, and the West as decadent and godless.
Ruling in favor of three gay activists, the European Court of Human Rights found that “the very purpose of the laws and the way they were formulated and applied” was “discriminatory and, over all, served no legitimate public interest.” It ordered Russia to pay the men a total of 43,000 euros, or $48,000, in damages.
Russia ratified the European Convention on Human Rights in 1998. The court, which is charged with interpreting the treaty, which took effect in 1953, has often castigated the country. The ruling is binding, but as with much else in international law, there is not a strong enforcement mechanism. Russia vowed to file an appeal.
The “gay propaganda law,” as it became known, is actually a series of statutes introduced at regional levels in 2003 and 2006 and at the federal level in 2013, essentially proscribing public mention of homosexuality.
Critics said the law’s very wording promoted insidious stereotypes that gay people promote a “homosexual lifestyle,” or even worse, prey on children.
This year, it emerged that gay men had been detained and tortured in the Chechnya region of Russia, in what observers likened to a pogrom.
The three activists who sued — Nikolai V. Bayev, 42; Aleksei A. Kiselev, 33; and Nikolai A. Alekseyev, 39 — staged demonstrations from 2009 to 2012 in the cities of Ryazan, Arkhangelsk and St. Petersburg, carrying banners stating that homosexuality is natural, not a perversion. They were arrested and fined.
They challenged the verdicts before Russia’s Constitutional Court, which upheld the ban on the grounds of protecting morals. The three men then brought their complaints to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, France.
The judges ruled 6 to 1 against Russia. The judge who dissented, Dmitry Dedov, is Russian.
The ruling focused on two doctrines: freedom of expression and nondiscrimination.
On the first part, the court flatly rejected the government’s claim that regulating public debate on homosexuality served to protect morals. Russia “failed to demonstrate how freedom of expression on L.G.B.T. issues would devalue or otherwise adversely affect actual and existing ‘traditional families’ or would compromise their future,” the court found.
The laws flouted “a clear European consensus about the recognition of individuals’ right to openly identify themselves as gay, lesbian or any other sexual minority, and to promote their own rights and freedoms,” the judges wrote.
On the issue of nondiscrimination, the judges found that “differences based solely on considerations of sexual orientation” are unacceptable under the European convention.
Russia’s law “specifically states that same-sex relationships are inferior to opposite-sex relationships,” and therefore “embodied a predisposed bias,” the court found.
In his dissent, Judge Dedov said his colleagues had failed to properly balance conflicting rights.
He cited statistics reporting that 50,000 children a year are sexually abused in Russia, most by men. 
