Once you have read James Baldwin’s “Giovanni’s Room” and Larry Kramer’s “Faggots,” both classic gay novels, here are 25 recent works that have shaped the L.G.B.T.Q. literary genre over the last two decades.
At the time this series of monologues, performed as a one-woman show by the author, was released, they were viewed as revolutionary for their frank and sometimes disturbing discussion of topics like childbirth, rape and lesbianism. They quickly became a hit, and remain a staple on college campuses and in theaters.
This is the third book in Patricia Nell Warren’s series examining queer life in the sports world. Warren’s first, “The Front Runner,” about an athlete outed while on his way to the Olympics, became a New York Times best seller. 
Awarded the 1999 Pulitzer Prize for fiction, “The Hours” is a riff on Virgina Woolf’s “Mrs. Dalloway.” In fact, Woolf is one of the three characters the story follows, as we find her in a suburb of London in 1923, beginning to write the novel. Meanwhile Clarissa Vaughan lives in modern day New York City with her lover, Sally, and is planning a party in honor of her friend Richard, an AIDS-stricken poet who is set to receive an award. The third central character is Laura Brown, a pregnant housewife in the late 1940s who feels suffocated by her life. The women’s lives intersect in a surprising and beautiful way.
Mark Doty’s gay coming-of-age memoir follows Doty and his family across the country as they move from Tucson, Ariz., to Sweetwater, Tenn., for his dad’s job as an Army engineer. “Firebird” explores his mother’s alcoholism, the challenges involved in being a “chubby smart bookish sissy with glasses and a Southern accent,” and how art saved him.
In this fictionalized account of the surgical transition of the Danish painter Einar Wegener from man to woman, Ebershoff explores how the events might have affected Wegener’s family and life. The book was later turned into a movie starring Eddie Redmayne.
  He comes out as gay during this time, to which one of the psychiatrist’s daughters responds, “Big deal.” Burrough’s memoir is considered one of the best in the genre.
This book, which won the Man Booker Prize in 2004, takes place in pre-AIDS London and follows Nicholas Guest after he is invited to stay in the mansion of his Oxford friend’s father, Gerald Fedden, M.P. Grappling with feelings of inadequacy in the lavish “looking-glass world,” he discovers metropolitan gay life through a friendship with Leo, a civil servant.
This novel, set between 1895 and 1899, treads the line between fiction and biography, exploring the later life of Henry James, the writer known as “the Master.” Colm Toibin imagines, with vivid detail, members of James’s circle — like his devoted manservant, Burgess Noakes — as well as James’s feelings of guilt, regret and homosexual longing.
This novel by longtime theater actor Keith McDermott follows Gerald Barnett, a retired actor suffering from AIDS. When his former mentor, William Weiss, calls on him to participate in a final production, he hops a plane to Italy to join the cast. But while there, he is caught up in a romance and a frenzied schedule that cause him to neglect his medication, putting his health at risk leading up to opening night. McDermott captures theater life well, and infuses the book with an international cast of characters.
In this acclaimed graphic memoir, which was turned into a Tony Award-winning Broadway musical, Alison Bechdel — a cartoonist also known for creating the Bechdel test, a standard for judging the quality of women’s onscreen roles — describes both coming out and coming to terms with her closeted gay father’s death.
In this well-reported work of narrative nonfiction, Cris Beam follows the lives of a group of four teenage transgender girls: Christina, Dominique, Foxxjazell and Ariel. With sensitivity and a deep connection to the girls, Beam describes their struggles with transitioning and how they reconcile them with more familiar teenage concerns like crushes and cliques.
 Then, one day, Kiran starts to think that he might be a descendant of Krishna, a Hindu god, and starts to model his life after him. This debut novel is a beautiful twist on the gay coming-of-age story.
Winner of the 2010 National Book Award for nonfiction, this memoir documents Smith’s relationship with Robert Mapplethorpe, a photographer later known for his sadomasochistic imagery, before he came out as gay. It evocatively captures the time when they were a young couple, both unknown and on the brink of fame.
The author, acclaimed for her autoiographical first novel, “Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit,” places her mother, “Mrs. Winterson,” at the center of the narrative in this memoir.  “Why Be Happy” tells the story of Winterson’s troubled childhood and her journey to overcome her trauma.
This novel starts when 21-year-old Regina seems set to begin an affair with her literature professor, Nicholas Brodeur. But the familiar story takes a turn when Regina becomes interested, instead, in Brodeur’s wife, Martha, and kisses her after a dinner party. This smart exploration of bisexuality follows a series of relationships and sexual encounters that explore the complexity of the characters’ desires.
This book, presented as nonfiction, is set in the recent past in New York City and follows a group of young gay men — though the word gay is never used — as they date, drink and navigate the complexities of work and finding love in New York City. It reads like a modern fable.
In her first memoir, Janet Mock describes coming of age and transitioning as a young transgender girl. She gives insight into the experiences and challenges of transgender women with unflinching honesty.
This exquisite, emotional novel by Hanya Yanagihara, editor-in-chief of T Magazine, follows four men over two decades of friendship — from their time as college students at a Massachusetts school and into adulthood in New York. The book’s central character is Jude, who has a troubled past that unfolds slowly; Yanagihara provides sharp insight into his struggles as a disabled gay man.
This story, set during a brutal civil war in Nigeria in the late 1960s, starts when Ijeoma, whose father is killed in an air raid and whose mother is so affected she cannot care for her child, is sent to live with her mother’s friend in another town. There Ijeoma meets another girl, Amina, and they fall in love. This is a story of queerness in a society where it needs to be hidden, and an account of how their love story plays out after they are yanked apart.
At the same time the author was experiencing the bodily changes that come with pregnancy, her partner, Harry Dodge, an artist who identifies as neither male nor female, was starting testosterone injections. In this gender-bending memoir, Maggie Nelson writes about the way both their bodies were changing, and about the intracacies of building her queer family.
This book takes place in Jamaica’s Montego Bay, but it’s hardly a beach novel. It centers on Margot, a 30-year-old front desk receptionist at the Palm Star Resort who will do anything to get ahead, even recruit women for a high-end prostitution ring or start rumors about a colleague’s sexuality (despite her own love for another woman). The characters are memorable and complex, and the author poignantly explores the dynamics of sexuality in Jamaica.
Though the book was originally published in France in 2014, it was translated to English only this year. In this disturbing and deeply moving autobiographical novel, Édouard Louis introduces Eddy, a young gay boy living in a decaying manufacturing town, and describes his experience of growing up poor and gay, which included disturbing and violent bullying.