Kris Kobach likes to bill himself as “the A.C.L.U.’s worst nightmare.” The Kansas secretary of state, who was a champion debater in high school, speaks quickly for a rural Midwesterner, with the confidence of a man who holds degrees from Harvard, Oxford and Yale Law School, and until January he hosted his own local radio show, which used that line about the A.C.L.U. to introduce each episode. On March 3 he strode into the Robert J. Dole Federal Courthouse in Kansas City, Kan., to face the latest lawsuit filed against him by the civil-liberties organization. In an unusual arrangement for a secretary of state, Kobach, 51, personally argues all of his cases. He seems to see it as a perk of the job — and a mission.
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 outlawed tactics that prevented blacks, Hispanics and other minority groups from voting. But for decades, Republicans have fought to circumvent the law by describing their proposed restrictions — requiring specific forms of identification to vote, preventing early voting, purging voting rolls — as colorblind security measures, even though there is little evidence of any individual voter fraud in the United States. The A.C.L.U. has repeatedly argued that the Kansas law discriminated against minorities, young people and low-income people, all of whom are more likely to be registering for the first time and less likely to have immediate access to citizenship papers, because they can’t afford them or were more transient and don’t have copies of their documents at hand. No state has been as aggressive as Kansas in restricting ballot access, and no elected official has been as dogged as Kobach.
Standing before Judge Julie Robinson in Kansas City, Orion Danjuma, one of the A.C.L.U. lawyers, noted that Kansas’s proof-of-citizenship law applied only to people registering or updating their registrations after 2013. “Tens of thousands of Kansans have already been prevented from registering to vote because of this requirement,” Danjuma said — one in seven new registrants. Close to half of those were under 30.
Kobach did not go to work in the Trump administration: He said in May that he had turned down two offered positions, one in the White House and the other at the Department of Homeland Security, although The Wall Street Journal reported in January that John Kelly, the secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, had balked at making Kobach his deputy. But on May 11 Trump named him vice chairman of a new Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity to be led by Vice President Mike Pence. The commission will examine “improper voter registrations and improper voting” — issues that Kobach, with his high-profile efforts in Kansas, almost single-handedly put on the Trump administration’s radar.
On June 8, Kobach announced his candidacy in the 2018 Kansas gubernatorial race, telling a room full of supporters in the Kansas City suburb of Lenexa that he had “the honor of personally advising President Trump, both before the election and after the election, on how to reduce illegal immigration. And is he doing a good job?” The crowd cheered. If Kobach wins, he could be positioned to run for president as the legal mind who can deliver the promise of Trumpism without the baggage of Trump himself.
No one better represents the kind of America that Kobach is promoting than Kobach himself. He is tall and broad-shouldered and looks like John Wayne. He was born in Wisconsin and moved to Topeka, Kan., when he was 7. In high school, he mowed lawns and worked at his father’s Buick dealership. After becoming class president, he went on to Harvard.
Kobach says Huntington “touched on a lot of themes I’ve worked on with immigration law,” but he distances himself from some of Huntington’s more radical ideas. Two of those ideas, however, have played an important role in the direction of the larger reactionary movement that Kobach leads.
Kobach enrolled at Yale Law School in 1992. In his final year, California voters approved Prop. 187, a sweeping law, also known as the Save Our State initiative, that for the first time restricted public benefits, including education and health care, for undocumented immigrants. The federal courts ultimately blocked the law, on the grounds that California was overstepping federal immigration authority, and it is now largely remembered as a political debacle. California had been predominately Republican for decades, but a backlash from the state’s growing Hispanic population pushed Gov. Pete Wilson out of office and flipped the state from more-or-less red to permanently blue.
FAIR was founded in 1978 by John Tanton, an ophthalmologist in rural Michigan. Tanton was initially concerned about how human population growth was harming the environment, but increasingly embraced nativist arguments that demonized all kinds of immigration, illegal and legal. He was especially struck by a brazenly racist 1973 novel called “The Camp of the Saints,” by a French author, Jean Raspail, depicting “the end of the white world” after a fleet of savage refugees, led by an Indian called “the turd eater,” overwhelm Europe. Tanton republished the book in English, and it attracted some influential American readers, including Steve Bannon, who has cited the book frequently.
Tanton argued that white people needed to take action against the country’s demographic changes. Tanton outlined his concerns in a 1986 memo, now available from The Southern Poverty Law Center, which labeled FAIR a “hate group.” “Will Latin American migrants bring with them the tradition of the mordida (bribe), the lack of involvement in public affairs, etc.?” he asked in the memo addressed to colleagues at a retreat of anti-immigration activists in 1986. “As Whites see their power and control over their lives declining, will they simply go quietly into the night? Or will there be an explosion?” The Los Angeles Times studied FAIR’s tax returns and found that it had received at least $600,000 in grants from the Pioneer Fund, a nonprofit foundation that subsidizes research that claims to prove blacks and other minorities are genetically inferior to whites.
Kobach’s connection to Tanton — in addition to representing FAIR in court, he received contributions totaling $10,000 from a political-action committee run by Tanton’s wife — became an issue in his congressional run. “People and groups tied to white supremacists gave Kobach thousands,” said a TV ad run by Moore. “One even hired Kobach.” But Kobach refused to return the donations or disavow Tanton or FAIR. Instead, he made opposition to undocumented immigration the centerpiece of his campaign, criticizing Moore for supporting what Kobach described as “amnesty” and calling for the National Guard to patrol the Mexican border.
In 2006, Kobach received a call from the Maricopa County Attorney’s office in Phoenix. Andrew Thomas, the county attorney, wanted Kobach to defend his interpretation of the state’s “coyote law,” which in his view should allow undocumented immigrants to be charged as co-conspirators when they were caught illegally crossing the border. Kobach agreed.
Even as he remained active in his own state’s politics, serving as chairman of the Kansas Republican Party from 2007 to 2009, Kobach began spending more time in Arizona. He struck up a friendship with Joe Arpaio, the Maricopa County sheriff, who dubbed himself “America’s toughest sheriff.” Arpaio, one of the first local sheriffs who took it upon himself to enforce federal immigration law, was also a flamboyantly authoritarian figure who drew national attention for requiring his inmates to wear pink underwear, work on chain gangs and live outdoors in tents where temperatures reached 130 degrees. At the Justice Department, Kobach had promoted an effort to deputize local police departments with immigration-enforcement authority from Immigration and Customs Enforcement. In 2007, Arpaio received such a deputization, and his office within two years had arrested 33,000 undocumented immigrants, many of them in highly publicized “crime suppression” sweeps.
Kobach also helped State Senator Russell Pearce, the foremost opponent of undocumented immigration in the State Legislature, draft SB 1070, a 2010 bill that required the Arizona police to ask for citizenship papers from anyone they had “reasonable suspicion” of being in the state illegally.
Kobach counseled Pearce on how to make the bill even more sweeping. In an email to Pearce before the law’s final passage, Kobach said that a person’s violation of “any county or municipal ordinance” could lead to an immigration query: “This will allow police to use violations of property codes (i.e., cars on blocks in the yard) or rental codes (too many occupants of a rental accommodation) to initiate queries as well.” After filing a lawsuit against SB 1070, the A.C.L.U. referred to it on its website as the Show Me Your Papers law.
Arizona became the first state to act on another of Kobach’s theories: attrition through enforcement. Make life miserable enough for immigrants, and they will leave of their own volition. As Pearce told The Arizona Republic newspaper, “Disneyland taught us that if you shut down the rides, people leave the amusement park.” Mitt Romney was widely mocked when he used the word “self-deportation” during the 2012 election, but that was exactly what Kobach was trying to achieve in Arizona.
The Arizona experiment didn’t end well for the state or its principal actors. The interpretation of the “coyote law” that Kobach came to Arizona to defend was blocked in 2013. The Supreme Court struck down three of four sections of SB 1070 and narrowed enforcement of the “show me your papers” provision. The Justice Department sued Arpaio in 2012, and the following year a federal court ruled that his immigration stops violated federal law, including the Civil Rights Act of 1964, for discriminating against Latinos. Arpaio was ultimately charged with criminal contempt of court; he failed to be re-elected in November 2016. Andrew Thomas, the county attorney, was disbarred by the Arizona Supreme Court in 2012 for what it called an “unholy collaboration” with Arpaio. Russell Pearce was recalled from the Senate in 2011 and then resigned as vice chairman from the Arizona Republican Party after saying on his radio show that Medicaid recipients should be sterilized, which led to a public outcry.
But Kobach continued to thrive. In 2010, the same year SB 1070 passed in Arizona, he ran for secretary of state in Kansas. “My hope is that Kansas will be to stopping election fraud what Arizona is to stopping illegal immigration,” he told The Kansas City Star. The position of secretary of state was not an especially glamorous one, but it offered an enormous amount of power by virtue of its authority to enforce state voting laws, particularly as American elections were being decided by increasingly narrow margins. During the 2000 election in Florida and the 2004 election in Ohio, Republican secretaries of state were at the center of hotly disputed elections.
A reporter from The Wichita Eagle found Alfred K. Brewer very much alive; he was in his front yard doing chores. “I don’t think this is heaven, not when I’m raking leaves,” Brewer said. He was 78 and had been listed as being born in 1900 because Kansas didn’t record birth dates on voter registration forms back when he first registered. The date of death was his father’s, who had the same name but was born in 1904. Kobach could have avoided the embarrassing mix-up if he had called Brewer before singling him out.
But Kansas voters, in the age of Obama, demonstrated an appetite for Kobach’s nativist brew of anti-immigration sentiment and voting restrictions. He won handily and quickly set about turning a once-sleepy office into a kind of laboratory for limiting access to the ballot.
In 2005, Kansas joined with three other Midwestern states in a regional compact called the Interstate Voter Registration Crosscheck Program. The program compared state records to find people registered to vote in more than one place. On taking office, Kobach, recognizing the program’s potential, championed it to election officials around the country, rapidly expanding its reach. The program now includes more than 30 states.
Crosscheck has led to outrageous headlines that make double voting seem far more common than it is. In 2014, after North Carolina joined Crosscheck, the head of the state board of elections reported that in the 2012 general election, there were 35,750 voters in the state whose first and last names and dates of birth matched those of individuals who voted in the same election in a different state. Republican leaders of the North Carolina Legislature called it “alarming evidence of voter fraud,” and the conservative political strategist Dick Morris told Sean Hannity on Fox News, “It’s the most important data I’ve read in a year,” adding that it was “the first concrete evidence we’ve ever had of massive voter fraud.” But when North Carolina investigated the numbers using additional data like the last four digits of voters’ Social Security numbers, eight cases of potential double voting were referred to prosecutors and two people were convicted.
Kobach’s other major project was making the SAFE Act into a sustainable model of election legislation, one that would stand up to scrutiny in the courts. When it was made into law in April 2011, Kobach compared it to the 19th Amendment, which gave women the right to vote. But the A.C.L.U. immediately began to file legal challenges claiming that rather than expand access to the ballot, the law was making it harder to vote.
One of the most significant challenges to the SAFE Act came from a lawsuit in a different state. In June 2013, the Supreme Court ruled that Arizona could not require proof of citizenship for those who registered to vote using a federal registration form, which had the effect of nullifying part of the SAFE Act. Justice Antonin Scalia, however, in writing the majority opinion, noted that states like Arizona and Kansas that wanted to implement proof-of-citizenship laws could petition the Election Assistance Commission, which is a little-known federal agency created after the 2000 presidential-election recount. Its approval, he said, would be sufficient to make the laws constitutional. Kobach, who filed just such a petition in 2012, promptly sent another request two months later, but the acting executive director of the E.A.C. denied it.
A finalist for the permanent position of executive director at the E.A.C. happened to be one of Kobach’s own election commissioners in Kansas, Brian Newby of Johnson County. Kobach was informed in April 2015 by staff at the Johnson County Election Office that Newby was being audited for misusing county funds, but instead of admonishing Newby, Kobach recommended him for a top federal job. The E.A.C., which was made up of three commissioners, two of whom were Republicans, took Kobach’s advice, and Newby got the job in November 2015. Three months after Newby took office, he unexpectedly changed the E.A.C.’s rules in Kobach’s favor.
The League of Women Voters sued the E.A.C. two weeks later. “If the Newby decision stands, then every state in the nation will be able to require documentary proof of citizenship,” the group’s advocacy director, Lloyd Leonard, told The New York Times. “Citizenship documents,” like birth certificates and passports, are not things most Americans carry around with them. That makes it impossible for groups like the League of Women Voters to register voters at farmers markets or public marches and demonstrations. When the SAFE Act went into effect, eight of nine chapters of the Kansas League of Women Voters suspended voter-registration activities; the Wichita chapter went from registering 4,000 voters in 2012 to just 465 in 2014.
The Obama Justice Department took the extraordinary step of refusing to defend Newby’s directive in federal court, so Kobach defended it himself. The 10th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against him, finding that Newby, as executive director, did not have the authority to make the decision without the consent of his commissioners.
In 2015, Kobach persuaded the Kansas Legislature to make him the only secretary of state in the country with the power to independently prosecute voter-fraud cases. He told The Kansas City Star that this was “the final piece in the puzzle in terms of preventing voter fraud.” Betty and Steven Gaedtke were two of the first people Kobach charged. After retiring, the Gaedtkes left Olathe, Kan., to build their dream house in the woods of the Arkansas Ozarks. Betty is a member of the Quapaw Tribe of Oklahoma, which was based in Arkansas before being forcefully relocated to Oklahoma in the 1800s, and she felt as if she were returning home. She was elected to the tribal council and became an advocate against sexual assault. “She’s very, very civic-minded,” her lawyer, Trey Pettlon, said.
Betty became an Arkansas resident and voted there in 2010. Her husband moved down after her and, before he left, filled out absentee ballots for each of them in Kansas. Then he settled in Arkansas before the 2010 election and voted there too, believing he had lawfully established residency. County attorneys in Kansas declined to prosecute the Gaedtkes, seeing the double voting as an honest mistake. But in October 2015, a month before the five-year statute of limitations expired, Kobach charged them each with three misdemeanor counts of “voting without being qualified.” The evidence was “very strong that the individuals in question intentionally voted multiple times in the same election,” he said.
Though Kobach received the authority to prosecute fraud cases after warning that voting by “aliens” was rampant, the nine convictions he has won since 2015 have primarily been citizens 60 and over who own property in two states and were confused about voting requirements. Only one noncitizen has been convicted. A state representative, John Carmichael, a Democrat from Wichita, told me these cases were “show trials to try and justify his prosecutorial authority,” and he has introduced a bill to repeal Kobach’s prosecutorial power.
While Kobach searched for fraud cases, his SAFE Act had blocked the registrations of 35,000 Kansans by September 2015. Then Kobach started removing anyone from the rolls who didn’t provide citizenship documents within 90 days. “It’s no big deal,” he told Fox News. “Nobody’s being disenfranchised.” In February 2016, the A.C.L.U. sued Kobach on behalf of more than 18,000 Kansas voters who had unsuccessfully tried to register at the Department of Motor Vehicles. A federal court found that the SAFE Act violated the 1993 National Voter Registration Act, which allowed voters to register at many government agencies. In response, Kobach had an administrative rule passed which said that any Kansan who registered at the D.M.V. but didn’t show proof of citizenship could vote in federal but not state elections. In July 2016, while Kobach was at the Republican National Convention helping to draft the G.O.P. platform, the A.C.L.U. sued him again. “It seemed bonkers that someone would be able to vote for president but not school board or City Council or secretary of state,” said Dale Ho, director of the A.C.L.U.’s Voting Rights Project.
As evidence, Kobach pointed to a 2014 study whose lead author was an Old Dominion University political scientist, Jesse Richman. It estimated that “6.4 percent of noncitizens voted in 2008.” That finding was quickly picked up by Breitbart (“Study: Voting by Non-Citizens Tips Balance for Democrats”) and National Review (“Jaw-Dropping Study Claims Large Numbers of Non-Citizens Vote in U.S.”) and was also cited directly by Trump on the campaign trail.
Yet Richman’s study was soon contested by other political scientists. Richman had found 489 noncitizens in a much larger 2010 Harvard survey of 55,400 American adults called the Cooperative Congressional Election Study. In 2012, three political scientists who coordinated the original C.C.E.S. study went back and re-interviewed 19,000 of the respondents. They found only 85 who said they were noncitizens in the survey — and none of them could be matched to a valid voting record. “Thus the best estimate of the percentage of noncitizens who vote is zero,” they wrote.
The Trump commission marks a major step forward in Kobach’s efforts to nationalize his restrictions on voting. He’ll have a presidential bully pulpit and access to government resources that weren’t previously available, such as a nationwide database that includes noncitizens that could be run against state voter rolls to generate new allegations. But that Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements database does not automatically reveal the status of immigrants who become U.S. citizens, which means thousands of noncitizens who are subsequently naturalized could mistakenly be tagged as illegal voters. The commission will also make policy recommendations at the federal and state level, which could include support for suppressive policies like strict voter-ID laws and voter-rolls purges.
Kobach says the National Voter Registration Act and the Voting Rights Act, the country’s cornerstone voting-rights laws, are being misinterpreted. “The N.V.R.A. has been abused by organizations like the A.C.L.U.,” Kobach told me. “They’ve twisted the words to try and say it prevents proof-of-citizenship laws.” The Voting Rights Act is also “being abused by the A.C.L.U.,” he says. “Now they’re trying to attack photo-ID laws using the Voting Rights Act by claiming, using very flimsy evidence, that photo-ID laws disproportionately affect minority populations more than others.” Kobach wants proof-of-citizenship laws to be adopted in every state.
