PARIS — Stan Wawrinka has been late to the party, yet very much the life of the party, when it comes to Grand Slam finals.
He did not reach his first until age 28 and is now 3 for 3 on tennis’s biggest occasions. He clearly relishes the thin air at the season’s peaks, which is all for the best, because he could hardly ask for a tougher climb than the one he faces on Sunday.
Stan is now the only man between Rafael Nadal and “La Decima”: a 10th French Open title.
Nadal has lost just two matches at Roland Garros since he arrived here as a pirate-panted teenager in 2005, and he has been in time-machine form all tournament, crushing the hope out of opponent after opponent at age 31.
“He’s still a monster,” Wawrinka said.
Nadal has yet to drop a set in this tournament, and he continued that streak on Friday, somewhat surprisingly, as he took down Dominic Thiem, the second-best player on clay this season, by the steamroller score of 6-3, 6-4, 6-0.
By the start of the third set, the gritty surface of Court Philippe Chatrier was covered in early-evening shadow. That was because Wawrinka had used up most of the sunlight in the day’s first semifinal, his thriller of a victory over Andy Murray.
Wawrinka’s 6-7 (6), 6-3, 5-7, 7-6 (3), 6-1 triumph was the match of the men’s tournament (with apologies to Pablo Carreno Busta and Milos Raonic), full of all-court enterprise and inspiration, as well as pendulum swings of momentum and emotion.
Murray, still ranked No. 1, has had a downbeat year by his standards, and he grumbled and cursed plenty on Friday. But he also competed, improvised and above all defended as precious few men have defended in this 89-year-old stadium. He smacked reflex winners even off Wawrinka overheads, tracked down sharply angled groundstrokes and stayed creative under great duress.
A less secure opponent than Wawrinka would have taken the hint, especially after Murray came from behind to snatch the first and third sets. But instead of melting down, Wawrinka called for ice towels on the changeovers and muscled one-handed backhands and running forehands for winners when he needed them most.
Roger Federer, Wawrinka’s absent Swiss compatriot, does not call Wawrinka “the diesel” for nothing. When he warms to the task in the homestretch of a major marathon, he can generate irresistible force.
Wawrinka did it against Novak Djokovic on this court, playing the spoiler in the 2015 French Open final. He did it against Djokovic again last year in the United States Open final.
Add Murray to the list, and add another strong rivalry to a men’s game already overflowing with them. Murray leads their head-to-head series by 10-8, and they have split their six meetings in Grand Slam tournaments.
Murray struck the balance more effectively in last year’s French Open semifinal, when he beat Wawrinka.
Still, escaping Murray required 4 hours 34 minutes, and it was a stylistic duel well worth the price of admission, which was a good thing because this year the French Open organizers sold the two men’s semifinals as separate tickets for the first time.
Those who ended up with Nadal-Thiem did not get nearly as much entertainment value. Thiem, a big-swinging 23-year-old from Austria, is still the only man to have defeated Nadal on clay this season. But beating a weary Nadal in the quarterfinals in Rome is not nearly the same as beating a full-throttle Nadal in Paris.
The court surface outside the lines is bigger, giving the speedy Nadal more room to chase down would-be winners. The stakes are bigger, and Nadal’s memories are happier.
He remembers the few bitter moments, too, including his shocking loss to Robin Soderling in the fourth round in 2009, when Soderling kept hitting the lines and when Nadal’s knees were sorer than anyone outside his entourage realized.
Soderling’s coach at the time was Magnus Norman, a former French Open finalist from Sweden who now coaches Wawrinka. Norman has been the major, understated influence on Wawrinka’s rise from merely a top-10 player to a three-time Grand Slam champion.
Wawrinka beat Nadal to win his first, in 2014 at the Australian Open, a match in which Nadal had back problems. A reporter who asked Nadal on Friday if this latest final offered an opportunity for revenge should have known better.
If anyone can come up with a plan to destabilize an in-form Nadal, one suspects it is Norman. And if anyone at this stage has the staying power to keep hitting the corners on clay for several hours under pressure, one suspects it is Wawrinka.
This will be the second Grand Slam final between players in their 30s this year. Federer, 35, beat Nadal in the Australian Open in January in a five-set classic. Now it will be Nadal against the 32-year-old Wawrinka, the oldest man to reach the French Open final since Niki Pilic in 1973.
That explanation makes Nadal’s enduring excellence all the more impressive. He has been in the lead pack for more than a decade, but it has never seemed as if making history was his biggest thrill. He has always found his meaning in the rally at hand.
“It’s true that 10 is a beautiful number, but actually my favorite is 9,” said Nadal, who acknowledged, with a grin, that he was open to changing his mind.
He already has secured his 10th titles at Monte Carlo and Barcelona this year, and he leads the season-long points race. He is moving and playing on clay as he did at his peak.
There has been so little drama that it is easy to forget what happened to Nadal here last year, when he was in ominous form and a good mental space after a shaky 2015 but had to withdraw after two rounds with a left wrist injury that continued to trouble him for the rest of the season.
The day of his withdrawal, he sat in the Roland Garros interview room wearing a gloomy expression and a blue brace on his wrist. Now he is back to whipping his forehand with his trademark blend of abandon and precision, and back in another French Open final.
He has yet to lose one. Wawrinka has yet to lose a Grand Slam final.