WASHINGTON — The Department of Education is scaling back investigations into civil rights violations at the nation’s public schools and universities, easing off mandates imposed by the Obama administration that the new leadership says have bogged down the agency.
According to an internal memo issued by Candice E. Jackson, the acting head of the department’s office for civil rights, requirements that investigators broaden their inquiries to identify systemic issues and whole classes of victims will be scaled back. Also, regional offices will no longer be required to alert department officials in Washington of all highly sensitive complaints on issues such as the disproportionate disciplining of minority students and the mishandling of sexual assaults on college campuses.
The new directives are the first steps taken under Education Secretary Betsy DeVos to reshape her agency’s approach to civil rights enforcement, which was bolstered while President Barack Obama was in office. The efforts during Mr. Obama’s administration resulted in far-reaching investigations and resolutions that required schools and colleges to overhaul policies addressing a number of civil rights concerns.
That approach sent complaints soaring, and the civil rights office found itself understaffed and struggling to meet the department’s stated goal of closing cases within 180 days.
The commission — an independent, bipartisan agency charged with advising the president and Congress on matters of civil rights — voted on Friday to conduct a two-year investigation of federal civil rights enforcement, saying it had “grave concerns” about the Trump administration’s agenda. The commission identified the Education Department as an agency that was particularly troubling.
Nevertheless, the department’s move was lauded by advocates who believe that the office for civil rights has been overzealous in its enforcement activities in recent years.
“So many of the campus hearings are kangaroo courts with low due process, and you can’t really have any confidence in the outcomes,” Mr. Shibley said.
Both sides of the civil rights issue keyed on the department’s decision to reverse its practice of automatically broadening investigations and scrutinizing years of data, searching for patterns of violations.
The U.S. Civil Rights Commission voted on Friday to launch a two year examination into the Trump administration's enforcement of civil rights laws. The commission then released its decision in a statement.
“That was quite alarming from a double jeopardy and civil liberties perspective,” Mr. Shibley said.
Since her appointment as the education secretary, Ms. DeVos has come under fire from lawmakers and civil rights advocates for her remarks about the department’s role in enforcing civil rights laws in the public school system.
Ms. DeVos has denounced discrimination in any form and has said schools that receive federal funds must follow federal laws. But she also believes in a limited federal role in education. She has signaled that her office is “not going to be issuing any decrees” on civil rights and that those should come from Congress or the courts.
Ms. Hill, the department spokeswoman, declined to release the internal document, but said it guides staff members on how to “functionally execute on these cases.” Transgender cases will be investigated by the department “fully and fairly” and will not be dismissed or referred because of a lack of guidance.
