The show’s first season finale debuted Wednesday on Hulu. In a phone interview, Mr. Miller answered questions about his methods of adapting Ms. Atwood’s book, about what new scene gave him the most pause and about Gilead’s connection to the current political climate.. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
How did you decide on the structure of the season and make sense of it to yourselves in the writers’ room? You jump around in time with flashbacks-within-flashbacks and multiple characters with the same name — two Ofglens, two Offreds.
We keep track in a very old-fashioned, pen-and-paper way. We have cards up on the wall of our timeline, and we move them around when we add or subtract things because our story doesn’t follow the book exactly. Our timeline tells us things we don’t quite know, such as what June was doing when the commander and his wife, Serena Joy, were having their flashbacks. A TV show is an excruciating level of minutia that you have to go down to in order to make it never bump for the audience, because otherwise, the scene in the finale where June goes to see her daughter doesn’t mean anything to you.
That scene where she goes to see her daughter is gut-wrenching.
Oh my God. Yeah, Lizzie hit it out of the park. I want a finale to be a good episode, not just a checklist to tie up loose ends. So I was following what happened in the book, Offred got pregnant, and after that, the show took on a life of its own. We laid out what would happen if Offred was pregnant, and what if Serena Joy was extra super mad at her? 
The “salvagings” act as book ends for Season 1, in a way. We see how Gilead dispenses with political prisoners in Episode 1, calling one a rapist and letting the Handmaids tear him apart.  Her pregnancy changes the power dynamics.
It offers her a level of protection, which may or may not be at the front of her mind. That’s a huge tool that she can use. And how she’s going to use it over the next season is, for me, fascinating.
As I was working through how to show what the world was, that was such a defining moment for me, the salvagings, how they recognized the animalistic engines of the handmaids and give them something like a chew toy to get that anxiety out on. I just thought it was so ironic that here we’ve spent an entire episode showing how these women are raped every month, and then they bring out this terrible person and they say, “Oh, he’s a rapist!” Well, you’re all rapists! What are you talking about?
Your ending of this season is the same ending as the book.
I thought it was a perfect season-ender for a TV show — the beautiful, dramatic moment of her getting in the van. It’s a frustrating end to a novel, but that’s part of the appeal. It makes you even more invested to know more. And a TV show can end one chapter and start another. Everybody says, “You got to the end of the book!”  I read the book a lot. I pick out clues here and there, not so much to alter it, but to say, “O.K., let’s logically extrapolate it.” And that’s where Margaret Atwood has come in so essentially to our conversation. It’s like when you meet the other lunatics who are inpatients at the same asylum you are — the only other people who care about it as much as you do and have gone so deep into thinking about one sentence of the book!
Was there anything you added that wasn’t in the original material, that folks were worried about?
What happens to Ofglen was probably the biggest point of contention and something that had never, as far as we could tell, been depicted on television in exactly that way. Female genital mutilation happens all the time, all over the world, and it is horrifying. The question was, would it be so disturbing that you’d turn off the TV? I had a lot of trepidation about doing it, but it seemed a logical progression to the story. Imagining cruelties for women, though, is not the business we’re in. As Margaret has said, everything in the book is something that’s happened in the world, or is happening now, and we’ve ascribed to that tenet very religiously. We’re not just making up things to be sadistic.
How many seasons do you see the show running?
Well, you know, honestly, when I started, I tried to game out in my head what would ten seasons be like? If you hit a home run, you want energy to go around the bases, you want enough story to keep going, if you can hook the audience to care about these people enough that they’re actually crying at the finale.
You’re in the writers’ room now for Season 2. What do you want to explore?
Aunt Lydia is one of my most fascinating characters. We would like to explore her back story, and what the lives of the aunts are like. The networks between the Marthas. What is the commander doing all day long, and what is his life like? What are his responsibilities?
And the Mayday resistance movement? Rita now has possession of the letters that Moira helped smuggle out for June.
The Mayday resistance is going to be a big part of Season 2. The part that I’ve been thinking about is that Mayday is not the handmaid rescue organization — it’s the anti-Gilead organization. And the anti-Gilead organization is not necessarily a friend to June or a friend to handmaids. If I was going to try to hurt Gilead, the first thing I might do is kill all the handmaids. You’re trying to weaken the state. We make the assumption that there are good guys and bad guys in this world, and that certainly is a bad assumption on our part, just like it’s a bad assumption on our part in the real world.
Did you end up changing anything on the show, even on the smallest scale, because of the outcome of the election?
I had one character say something that was too close to “Make America Great Again.” That was unintentional, so that I cut because it felt like it was a dig directly at one person’s campaign for president. There were lots of things in the show that we wrote, shot, and then while I was editing, we saw them on the news. I saw pictures of refugees trying to cross the border into Canada. The women’s march came months after we filmed our women’s march protests. I don’t think it’s by chance. I think that the same forces that we had been digging into over the last couple of years to figure out what are the elements in the country today that could lead to Gilead, those are the same forces that won the election of Donald Trump. It’s not just coincidence. It’s all part of the same America we live in now.