A brain slice showing cells of a mouse hippocampus, in lighter green, that were activated by a new electrical stimulation technique.Credit...Edward S. Boyden et al.
Pulses of electricity delivered to the brain can help patients with Parkinson’s disease, depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder and possibly other conditions. But the available methods all have shortcomings: They either involve the risks of surgery, from implanting electrodes deep within the brain, or they stimulate from the skull’s surface, limiting the ability to target electricity to the right brain areas.
Now, a team of neuroscientists and engineers has devised a method that might achieve the best of both worlds: skipping the surgery while reaching deep brain areas. The research, published Thursday in the journal Cell and led by a prominent neurobiologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, was conducted in mice, and many questions remain about its potential application to people. But experts say if the method proves effective and safe, it could help a range of neurological and psychiatric disorders more cheaply and safely than current approaches.
Edward S. Boyden, the study’s senior author and co-director of the M.I.T. Center for Neurobiological Engineering, said he and his colleagues are already testing the method on people without disorders to see if it works in human brains. If those results are promising, at least one clinician, Dr. Alexander Rotenberg, a neurologist who directs the neuromodulation program at Boston Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, said he would collaborate with the team to evaluate the technique for epilepsy.
“This is something that many of us in the field have wished for for a long time,” said Dr. Rotenberg, who said it might also eventually help tens of thousands of epilepsy patients for whom medications fail. Dr. Rotenberg and Dr. Mayberg said they could also envision the technique as a diagnostic tool to pinpoint the best brain location to target for electrical stimulation before surgically implanting electrodes for deep brain stimulation.
At a time when scientists are developing sophisticated technological approaches to look inside the brain and manipulate brain cells — including a celebrated technique called optogenetics that was created in part by Dr. Boyden — the new study uses a basic and long-established tool: electricity. But it adds a brand new twist.
The method, called temporal interference, involves beaming different electric frequencies, too high for neurons to respond to, from electrodes on the skull’s surface. The team found that where the currents intersected inside the brain, the frequencies interfered with each other, essentially canceling out all but the difference between them and leaving a low-frequency current that neurons in that location responded to, Dr. Boyden said.
That means other regions would be unaffected by the electricity, in contrast to what happens with other surface techniques, like transcranial magnetic stimulation, a federally approved treatment for depression.
When the team used electricity to stimulate the hippocampus in mice, “there’s no evidence whatsoever that the neurons were activated,” in the cortex and other structures closer to the surface, said Li-Huei Tsai, director of M.I.T.’s Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, who led the mouse experiments.
To further test whether they could target the electricity, the researchers aimed at certain spots in the motor cortex causing mice to move forepaws, whiskers or ears. The technique caused no safety problems, Dr. Tsai said.
Several experts raised potential limitations and questions. Dr. Mayberg said it would have to deliver frequencies like 130 hertz, higher than those in the study, and would need to work among complex brain circuitry, like the white matter bundles her work involves.
