Who will take over from Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan Chase’s chief executive, has just become a mystery-horse race. Mr. Dimon is losing his leading successor candidate, Matt Zames, the chief operating officer. Granted, the bank’s division heads are all more than capable executives, but age or inexperience probably means they would be interim C.E.O.s at best.
Mr. Zames is both young and well traveled. Now 46, he was head of fixed-income trading before Mr. Dimon in 2012 asked him to clean up the mess left when the bank’s chief investment office lost $6 billion in the infamous “London whale” fiasco. His duties as chief operating officer then grew.
He wants, though, to go back to running a business, he told The New York Times on Thursday — possibly in financial technology. Mr. Zames is the latest top executive to leave the bank in recent years as Mr. Dimon, 61, extends his now 11½-year reign at the top.
JPMorgan Chase has lost another potential succesor to its chief executive and chairman, Jamie Dimon.
The former investment banking bosses James E. Staley and William T. Winters now run Barclays and Standard Chartered, respectively. Frank J. Bisignano, Mr. Zames’s co-chief operating officer for a time, now heads First Data, while the onetime retail chief Charles W. Scharf stepped down last fall after four years as boss of Visa.
JPMorgan’s board is by no means bereft of alternatives now that Mr. Zames is joining the exodus. Trouble is, none of them is an obvious candidate to run the bank long term. Gordon Smith has had great success overseeing the consumer and community bank, not least in keeping the retail-banking and credit-card division’s tech skills ahead of the pack. But at 58 he’s only three years younger than Mr. Dimon, who has no intention of leaving any time soon.
Daniel Pinto has kept the investment bank powering ahead, but has little experience in other parts of the organization. The same applies to the asset-management boss, Mary Erdoes. Doug Petno, the commercial bank chief, used to be an investment banker, but he has a relatively low profile in a smaller part of the company.
There is one other candidate: Marianne Lake, who has shone as finance chief and is well known to investors. She, though, has never run a major business. Handing her the reins to the chief investment office, which she will take over from Mr. Zames, is a start. If Mr. Dimon gives her a larger profit and loss to manage, it will send a strong signal that she is the next anointed one.