A New York City police officer was fighting for his life after he was injured late Saturday when he was dragged by a stolen car in Brooklyn, Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Sunday.
The officer, Dalsh Veve, 35, was questioning the driver of a black Honda sedan around 11:50 p.m. near the corner of East 53rd Street and Tilden Avenue, the police commissioner, James P. O’Neill, said at a news conference on Sunday at Kings County Hospital Center, where the officer was being treated. The driver sped off, dragging Officer Veve for two and a half blocks, Commissioner O’Neill said.
Mr. de Blasio said the officer remained in critical condition on Sunday. Officer Veve, who emigrated from Haiti, sustained severe head injuries and body trauma, the police said.
“He represents the American dream — an immigrant child came here, joined the greatest police force in the country and has been an exemplary officer,” Mr. de Blasio told reporters. The mayor met with the officer’s family at the hospital on Sunday morning.
Officer Veve has been a city police officer for nine years, Commissioner O’Neill said, and he is married and has a 2-year-old daughter. The car that dragged him had been reported stolen in Valley Stream, N.Y., on Long Island, a couple of days ago.
A short time after the episode, a 15-year-old boy walked into Brookdale University Hospital and Medical Center with a gunshot wound to the face. The police believe he was one of three people in the vehicle that struck Officer Veve, who fired his weapon twice. The unidentified teenager was taken into custody at the hospital, where he was in serious condition, the police said.
The other two occupants of the car — a 30-year-old man and an 18-year-old woman — were also in custody, the police said.
Throughout the day on Sunday, scores of police officers arrived at Kings County Hospital Center. Councilman Mathieu Eugene visited the hospital and discovered that he knew Officer Veve because they had grown up in the same town in Haiti.
Councilman Eugene said he played soccer as a boy with Officer Veve’s older brother and had known their father as a hardworking man who raised a large family and valued education.
“I hope he’s going to be O.K.,” Councilman Eugene said.
Officers responded to three 911 calls on Saturday night reporting gunfire in the East Flatbush neighborhood, where several people were attending a party, the police said. The officers concluded that the reports had probably been in response to fireworks.
On Sunday, police tape cordoned off the sprawling crime scene in the area, blocking rows of homes with neatly trimmed bushes and blossoming rose gardens.
At a home on Tilden Avenue near East 53rd Street, there were remnants of a birthday party for a 2-year-old boy, according to the boy’s grandmother, who declined to provide her name because she feared retaliation. The decorations included a colorful arch of balloons.
The party started late, postponed by the threat of rain, the grandmother said. It ended around 11 p.m., but the boy’s parents and other young adults lingered on the porch, leaving red cups on the railing that remained on Sunday afternoon.
The boy’s grandmother said she did not know whether any fireworks had been set off. But she said the police had come to the party and asked the guests not to use them. A group of teenagers had been hanging out across the street before the officer was hurt, she said.
Monique Dixon said she was returning from dinner on Saturday and had been waiting for a parking spot on Snyder Avenue nearby when she heard two gunshots.
Officer Veve was one of six plainclothes officers from the 67th Precinct to respond to the report of gunshots, Commissioner O’Neill said. Several of the officers were interviewing people at the location. Officer Veve was speaking to the occupants of the black sedan.
Three officers then saw the car begin to move, dragging Officer Veve with it, the commissioner said. After the car crashed, the three people inside fled. The officers carried their colleague to their vehicle and drove him to the hospital.
Earlier Saturday, another police officer was dragged by a car on Staten Island, Commissioner O’Neill said. That officer, who was not identified, had pulled over a red car on Victory Boulevard in Bloomfield on the suspicion that it had been involved in a robbery. The driver sped off, leaving the officer with a bruise on his left arm. He was hospitalized for observation, Commissioner O’Neill said. The police said no arrests had been made.
Patrick J. Lynch, the president of the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association, said the encounter in Brooklyn was an example of the sacrifice officers make to keep the city safe.
