Ariel Melissa Stein and Rares Iulian Orzata were married June 3 at the Park Hyatt New York, in Manhattan. Justice Douglas E. McKeon of New York State Supreme Court in the Bronx, officiated.
Mrs. Stein Orzata, 27, works in Manhattan as the production coordinator for the international and Broadway productions of “Aladdin,” and is in the theatrical group division of the Walt Disney Company. She graduated from Northwestern.
She is a daughter of Jacqueline B. Stein and Dr. Kenneth Stein of Manhattan. The bride’s father, a cardio-electrophysiologist, is a senior vice president and the chief medical officer for rhythm management and global health policy in Arden Hills, Minn., for Boston Scientific, the medical-device manufacturer. Her mother, a lawyer, is a principal law clerk to Justice McKeon.
Mr. Stein Orzata, 40, is a residential real estate agent for Spire Group, the real estate brokerage and consulting firm in Manhattan. From 1996 to 2002, he was a gymnast on the Romanian Olympic team, competing at the Olympics in Sydney. In 2002, he joined Cirque du Soleil, performing in its touring show of “Quidam,” and then in “Love” in the Las Vegas company. He graduated from the Academia Nationala de Educatie Fizica si Sport in Bucharest.
He is a son of Ecaterina Orzata and Iulian Orzata of Brasov, Romania. His mother retired as a laboratory assistant at Compania Apa, the company in Brasov that oversees the city’s drinking water supply. His father retired as an engineer, supervising the pipe system that fed the gas plant at Termo, a public supplier of the hot water used for heating residences and businesses in Brasov.
The couple met in 2012, when Ms. Stein ran away to join the circus (actually, she had just graduated from college and had taken a stage-management internship with the Cirque du Soleil company in Las Vegas) and found Mr. Orzata, in a dress, heels and full makeup, playing the role of Her Majesty the Queen in the company’s production of “Love,” a reimagining of music from the Beatles with a stage performance. She was instantly smitten.
“He was just supercharming, and I totally didn’t even recognize him when he had taken off his costume,” she said.
“We became great friends,” he said. Since she knew no one in Las Vegas or where to go there, he offered to show her around. They began spending their Wednesdays — the day off for members of the show — together, and soon found they had much in common.
She said that while she was attracted to him immediately, she wanted to secure her own place in the organization before embarking on a romantic affair.
Late in the year, when Ms. Stein was on the verge of taking a new job, back in New York, the two went to a dive bar in Las Vegas run by one of his friends. They talked, covering their familiar territory of art and sports. Then something different happened.
It was the second option that he had in mind. After he downed his shot, the couple walked out into the parking lot and shared their first kiss.