Illustrated. 290 pp. Scribner. $26.
Some books are not meant to be read straight through, but maybe that shouldn’t be held against them. Even if we learn nothing profound from them, we may get something out of plowing in.
“A Flag Worth Dying For: The Power and Politics of National Symbols,” by Tim Marshall, a longtime diplomatic and foreign correspondent for Sky News and the BBC, is just such a book. It takes us on a lightning tour of the world of flags, with extra space for the Stars and Stripes and the Union Jack, but touching down on nearly every continent and in dozens of countries.
There is something a little dutiful about this tour, but Marshall offers us a surprising fact or six along the way. I was interested to discover, for example, that Gilbert Baker, the designer of the rainbow flag that emerged as a symbol of gay pride in the late 1970s, was inspired by the ubiquity of the American flag during the bicentennial celebrations in 1976.
The writing in books like this is often rushed and cramped on the one hand and glib and expansive on the other, and Marshall does not transcend the genre. The supposedly clever bits can be particularly annoying. When Marshall discusses Oliver Cromwell’s abandonment of the royal flag in 1649, he mentions the regicide of King Charles I before remarking, “Eleven years later … one of them made a comeback and it wasn’t the headless Charles.” By the time racing’s checkered flag makes an appearance on Page 260, readers may well be ready for it to fly.
“A Flag Worth Dying For” does not pretend to have the kind of coherent argument about terrain begetting destiny that Marshall’s previous book, “Prisoners of Geography: Ten Maps That Explain Everything About the World,” did, but it suffers from the absence of one nonetheless. Oddly, Marshall’s clearest statement on the strength of feeling flags arouse occurs in the acknowledgments at the end of the book, where he points out that “flags are an emotive subject,” and then pretty much leaves it at that. Readers looking for an understanding of how silk waving from a stick can come to mean everything will be disappointed, but they will not leave empty-handed either.