“Win on Sunday, sell on Monday” is a motor sports adage. In the early days of the automobile, manufacturers used competitions to show off their cars and draw buyers into showrooms.
Results on the track now have a debatable effect on sales, but manufacturers continue to use racing for research and development, perfecting ideas on the track before they show up in production cars.
Formula One and the World Endurance Championship (or W.E.C.), with the 24 Hours of Le Mans as its premier event, have long been testing grounds of auto technology. Seatbelts and windshield wipers were developed on the track, as were better aerodynamics, safety equipment and engines. Composite materials like carbon fiber, alternative fuels and energy-recovery systems were all track tested.
In the last few years, because of the way Formula One is structured, the W.E.C. has surpassed it as a technology science lab.
Le Mans has helped develop technologies that highway drivers now take for granted. In 1926, Lorraine-Dietrich introduced fog lights for its Le Mans cars. One year later, a front-wheel-drive car made its Le Mans debut. The race has also hosted early versions of direct-injection engines, disc brakes and halogen headlights.
Le Mans’s major innovations are now in powertrain technologies, which include recovery systems that harvest energy under braking for increased power.
Le Mans has also produced innovations in fuel efficiency. Recent winners have included the Audi 2012 R18 e-tron quattro, a diesel-electric car and the first Le Mans winner to rely on kinetic energy recovery; the Porsche 919 hybrid, powered with a two-liter, four-cylinder turbo engine, and the Peugeot diesel 908 HDi FAP.
The LMP1 cars racing at Le Mans have helped accelerate the research into maximizing power and efficiency from alternative fuels and helped develop battery technology.
Formula One can also claim hybrid successes. The power units introduced in 2014 delivered more power than their predecessors, while using half the fuel, but the series has not been the impetus for road-ready technology like the World Endurance Championship.
In contrast to the W.E.C.’s LMP1 class, Formula One is very restrictive from a regulatory perspective. It has a multitude of engine suppliers — Mercedes, Ferrari, Honda and Renault — but the specifications of the power unit are clearly defined by Formula One, and variations in power output are a result of the ingenuity of each manufacturer and not differences in fuel type, engine capacity or cylinder count.
Formula One and Le Mans have seen manufacturer involvement ebb and flow. The 2008 financial crisis led to a manufacturer exodus from Formula One, with BMW, Renault, Toyota and Honda withdrawing their factory teams.
In contrast, there was a peak of manufacturer interest in the W.E.C. and Le Mans around 2010. In the LMP1 category were Audi, Nissan, Porsche, Peugeot and Toyota, while other categories had Aston Martin, Ferrari and Porsche as factory-backed entries.
That degree of manufacturer involvement has since declined. Peugeot, for example, withdrew from LMP1 in 2011, citing the financial climate in Europe.
When Porsche returned to the top LMP1 category at Le Mans in 2013 after a 15-year absence, Wolfgang Hatz, then Porsche’s head of research and development, said the endurance championship was a better option than Formula One.
