No taxpayer money will be used, Santander said.
The rescue will test the system that the European Union created in the wake of the global financial crisis to limit the damage from bank collapses. The European Central Bank said it had contacted the Single Resolution Board, which was set up to handle the winding down of banks that fail. After an auction, the board selected Santander as the successful bidder.
Uber has dismissed 20 employees over harassment, discrimination and inappropriate behavior, according to an employee who attended a staff meeting where the company disclosed the terminations. The firings were first reported by Bloomberg News.
The terminations, which occurred in the past few months, were related to an internal investigation led by the law firm Perkins Coie.
Bobbie Wilson, a partner at Perkins Coie, said the firm was focused on “specific” allegations raised from a confidential hotline that Uber had set up.
Eric H. Holder Jr., a former United States attorney general, and the law firm he works for, Covington & Burling, were hired to conduct a broader investigation focused on the ride-hailing company’s overall culture, after Susan Fowler, a former Uber engineer, said in a blog post in February that she had been sexually harassed by her supervisor.
The report for that investigation has been received by Uber’s board, and the company has said it plans to make some of it public next week.
As President Trump gets ready to deliver a speech extolling the benefits of public-private partnerships to shore up aging infrastructure, it’s worth looking at whether the benefits to the public of such deals are as advertised.
Proponents of the partnerships say that companies can complete projects faster and more cheaply than the government. Local governments can also limit the amount of debt needed to finance the projects.
But many experts say there is little hard evidence that public-private partnerships perform better over time. They add that these projects can cost the public in the end through road tolls or government payments to contractors.
“Taxpayers or users are going to need to pay for private infrastructure just as they need to pay for public infrastructure,” said David Besanko, a professor at the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University in Illinois.
And sometimes, private companies can get burned, too.
A group led by the Australian investment bank Macquarie and the Spanish infrastructure firm Cintra ended up filing for bankruptcy in 2015 after signing a deal to lease an aging toll road in Indiana.
The consortium took on too much debt, and toll revenue fell during the Great Recession as fewer people drove to work.
• At G.M., Greenlight Capital had been pushing to replace three company directors and split the automaker’s stock into two classes.
• At Tesla, a group of Connecticut pension funds had proposed one-year terms for board members to create more independence from the company’s chairman and chief executive, Elon Musk.
Tom Buerkle of Breakingviews warns that Mary T. Barra, G.M.’s chief executive, shouldn’t get complacent.
She has only to look at Ford Motor, he writes, which ousted Mark Fields as chief executive last month, to realize how quickly shareholder support can disappear.