Attorney General Jeff Sessions testifying before the Senate Intelligence Committee.
On Monday, a friend of President Trump said that Mr. Trump was considering whether to fire Robert Mueller, the special counsel investigating possible ties between Russia and his campaign. A White House official said that “only the president or his attorneys are authorized to comment” on the matter.
And Senate leaders said they had reached an agreement to impose new sanctions against Russia — which would place the White House in an uncomfortable position.
2. An American college student, Otto Warmbier, held prisoner in North Korea for more than a year, has been evacuated in a coma and is on his way back to the United States.
Mr. Warmbier, 23, was sentenced to 15 years of hard labor for attempting to steal a propaganda poster from a hotel. (Above, Mr. Warmbier apologizing on North Korean state television last year.) Three other American citizens are known to be detained in North Korea.
The release coincided with yet another visit by Dennis Rodman, the ex-N.B.A. star, to Pyongyang. Mr. Rodman, who is apparently friendly with Kim Jong-un, declined to say whether he had spoken about the trip with President Trump.
3. Megyn Kelly responded to criticism over her interview with Alex Jones, the right-wing conspiracy theorist who runs the website Infowars.
The segment is scheduled to run on NBC on Sunday night. An anti-gun violence group dropped Ms. Kelly from its gala over the interview. Mr. Jones says the 2012 Sandy Hook school massacre was a hoax.
4. Twitter was buzzing with rumors that the Golden State Warriors would not go to the White House to celebrate their championship victory.
It’s true, but not because they turned down the invitation to a White House photo op. They haven’t actually been invited yet. N.B.A. champions often go the season after a championship, when they have a game nearby. “Today is all about celebrating our championship. We will make those decisions when and if necessary,” a team spokesman said.
5. Uber’s chief executive will take a leave of absence “to work on himself” and reflect on building “a world class leadership team” for the company.
Travis Kalanick announced the move minutes after the release of a new report detailing the findings of an investigation led by former Attorney General Eric Holder. The inquiry, which was commissioned after complaints of sexual harassment and other violations, concluded that the $70 billion company must repudiate its aggressive start-up culture.
6. A Venezuelan student who was tortured by the security services for participating in an antigovernment protest may be deported from the U.S.
Marco Coello, above, now 22, fled to the U.S. when he was released from prison, and his case was documented extensively by Human Rights Watch. So his lawyers figured his asylum application would be a cinch.
Not so. He was detained after an appointment at an immigration office, and a judge will decide his fate. The case may be a sign of how far the government is willing to go to crack down on immigration.
7. It’s gritty house-to-house fighting as the siege of the southern Philippine city of Marawi enters its fourth week.
The Islamic State-backed rebels are holding out in part of the city center, controlling several bridges and planting snipers in mosques. The Philippine military controls the skies, inflicting heavy damage but so far failing to drive out the militants.
Our correspondent says both sides are digging in for a protracted battle.
8. The cardinal of Newark, appointed last year by Pope Francis, is welcoming lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender Catholics into the church.
Cardinal Joseph W. Tobin, above, is among a handful of church leaders nationwide taking a more inclusive approach, and recently offered a Mass specifically for L.G.B.T. groups.
9. Take a break with us to discover the hidden treasures of Italy’s grand historic libraries.
Many of the stunning structures were built during the Renaissance and house rare books. Our travel writer and photographer toured a handful, including the Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana, above, designed by Michelangelo.
“Michelangelo’s library is so rational, so resolute, so majestically realized, that not in my wildest dreams could I imagine working here,” the reporter concluded.
