Rameau’s “Les Indes Galantes” contains one of the great hits of French Baroque music, the “Dance of the Peace Pipe,” so catchy and spry as to make grown men want to skip. This rondeau made a welcome appearance on Friday, toward the end of Opera Lafayette’s performance of “Les Sauvages,” the fourth and final part of this opéra-ballet, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. But it did little to redeem a flat-footed production.
“Les Indes Galantes” (“The Amorous Indies”) is a sprawling work, made up of thematically linked mini-dramas on the subjects of love and virtue in what were then exotic locations, including Turkey, Persia, Peru and the North American plains. In Rameau’s time, the set design, dancing and singing had equal importance. Friday’s semi-staged performance (of select instrumental numbers from the Turkish, Persian and Peruvian parts, as well as the complete “Sauvages”) showed how threadbare the music can feel in the absence of stagecraft and with only a sprinkling of basic dance steps. But the most important thing missing was a point of view.
That’s a shame, because “Les Sauvages” could be a fascinating point of departure for exploring 18th-century attitudes toward colonization. The libretto, by Louis Fuzelier, has two Europeans, the Frenchman Damon and the Spaniard Don Alvar, pursuing the beautiful Native American Zima. Adario, the chief of her people, anxiously contemplates the possibility of losing her heart just as he lost the war against the invaders. But Zima is as unimpressed with Damon’s lackadaisical approach to love as she is with Don Alvar’s hotheadedness. She freely chooses Adario, and everyone rejoices in the restoration of peace and conjugal bliss in harmony with nature.
Opera Lafayette’s performance, with gaudy costumes by Patricia Forelle and minimal stage direction by Dietlinde Turban Maazel, took no discernible stand on what the true meaning of “Les Sauvages” might be. Is it an anti-colonialist cri de coeur? A projection, onto the supposedly blank slate of the infantilized New World, of European anxieties regarding a lost connection to nature? A relationship advice column?
Instead of answers, the audience was merely offered free-floating snippets of music. Although the period-instrument Opera Lafayette Orchestra, led by its violinist-conductor, Ryan Brown, played them with idiomatic style and fresh sound, the orchestral selections that made up the first half of the hourlong program never found a narrative flow. And “Les Sauvages” offers little dramatic substance — the conflict is resolved almost as soon as it is set up.
It would be churlish to fault the performers, though, who included the bass-baritone André Courville as Don Alvar and Robert Getchell as Damon. The soprano Sherezade Panthaki poured her generous, golden sound into the part of Zima, and her joyful duet in the final scene with the clarion baritone Victor Sicard, as Adario, was radiant.