Roxane Gay, an internationally known feminist writer and professor, released a memoir on Tuesday that focused, in part, on what it is like to move through the world as an overweight woman.
So it was both annoying and somewhat fitting, she said, that she had gotten attention this week not only for her work but also for a podcast that provoked a backlash for suggesting that it was difficult to arrange an interview with Ms. Gay last month because of her weight.
Ms. Gay, 42, called those words “cruel and humiliating” in a tweet on Monday. And in a phone interview on Tuesday, she said she would have preferred to focus on “Hunger: A Memoir of (My) Body,” on the date of its publication.
But she added that the controversies surrounding the podcast had been somewhat illustrative.
Ms. Gay recorded the interview for the podcast last month to promote her memoir. Then, as now, she expressed frustration that Ms. Freedman had discussed steps that were taken to accommodate Ms. Gay.
In its apology, Mamamia said that during the interview, Ms. Gay talked about the stress of wondering whether spaces would be accommodating to her size.
“We felt this was an important issue that was integral to understanding Roxane’s point of view in the world and helping people learn about and empathize with a perspective they may never have considered — just as she writes in her book,” the apology said.
Emails and a phone call to try to reach Ms. Freedman or other employees at Mamamia, which were made outside of normal business hours in Australia, were not immediately answered.
Ms. Gay has written several columns for The New York Times. “Hunger” is her second book to come out this year; the other was a collection of short stories called “Difficult Women.” Ms. Gay is also well known for the 2014 New York Times best seller “Bad Feminist,” a book of essays.
Her new memoir “takes readers through the physical and emotional realities of her daily life as a woman of size,” said the publisher, Harper, in a news release. In the book, Ms. Gay describes an episode of sexual assault she suffered as a child, and the ways she tried to cope with the trauma.
“I ate and ate and ate in the hopes that if I made myself big, my body would be safe. I buried the girl I was because she ran into all kinds of trouble. I tried to erase every memory of her, but she is still there, somewhere,” reads an excerpt from the memoir.
