Does My Ex Owe Something to Our Grown Children?
I assume that your ex-husband has a story to tell about why he severed contact with you and your children. But I don’t see how it could explain away a simple truth: In bringing children into the world, a person accepts responsibilities. Your husband wasn’t wrong to say that your children also have responsibilities to a parent. Yet in failing to meet his, he gave them no opportunity to do their part.
“This is my past/Which I shall not discard,” the poet James Fenton writes. “This is the ideal./This is hard.” A man who has abandoned both a vocation and his minor children would seem rather too eager to discard his past. But what of the future? The main things that your ex owed your children were things he can’t give them now: a relationship, guidance and support as they grew. If you’re asking whether he should make up for this now by giving them money, I’d say it is too late. The moral breach here can no longer be healed. It’s true that, in some traditions, people have a duty to leave part of their estate to their children; but they don’t in ours. And it would seem very unlikely that he’ll come around. You’d be right to characterize his paternal withdrawal as an ethical failure, but you’d be wrong to dwell on it.
Your brothers’ friend asked an inexperienced person to load and drive a truck without its owner’s consent. That was foolish of her. But you proceeded to do so when you knew that you lacked the requisite experience and skills. That was foolish of you. If you had had the money to help foot the bill, it would have been the decent thing to offer to do so. At least, in these circumstances, I wouldn’t have asked to be paid.
First, a distinction. The Americans With Disabilities Act requires a range of exemptions for a service animal, which means “any dog individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual or other mental disability.” The creatures you’re talking about — emotional-support animals — mainly don’t meet this definition. (To begin with, not all are dogs.) But confronted with a no-pets policy, people can invoke the Fair Housing Act, which, subject to certain exceptions, permits a much wider class of animals; here, the basis for the accommodation has to be a disability, defined as “a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.” If the disability or the need for the animal isn’t obvious, landlords are entitled to limited documentation. (Something similar holds for air travel.) That’s where you come in.
You should feel free to provide such a letter for your patients if they suffer from a disability, like an anxiety disorder, for which a support animal is helpful. If your patient’s condition falls short of the legal definition of disability, or if the animal isn’t really alleviating that disability, you would be abetting an abuse of the system. Typically, the existence of a disability and the relevance of the animal are going to be matters of judgment. But you’re trained to make the relevant judgments. Your only obligation is to do so conscientiously. The law is helpful here: You can explain to those of your patients who don’t have a disability, or whose animal companions don’t help with a disability-related problem, that you can’t certify what isn’t true.