DAKAR, Senegal — Four gunmen stormed a camping resort outside Mali’s capital on Sunday, killing two people before escaping in a shootout with soldiers from an antiterrorism unit, a security ministry official said.
The resort, known as Le Campement Kangaba, is about seven miles from the capital, Bamako, and is a popular weekend getaway for local residents and tourists to camp, swim and eat.
One civilian and one soldier were wounded in the attack on Sunday afternoon, according to the official, Amadou Sangho, head of communications for the Security Ministry. One of the attackers was wounded and managed to escape with his comrades, Mr. Sangho said. He added that the situation at the resort had been contained but that the gunmen were still at large.
Several terrorist attacks have targeted foreigners in Mali in recent years, including an assault in November 2015 when gunmen stormed the lobby of the Radisson Blu Hotel in Bamako, mowing down guests and workers. At least 19 people were killed in a melee that lasted several hours.
That assault touched off a spree of similar attacks in the region on hotels and cafes frequented by Westerners. Officials blamed branches of militant groups loyal to Al Qaeda for attacks on a cafe and hotel in Ouagadougou, the capital of Burkina Faso, and on a beach resort in Ivory Coast.
Mali has served as a base for rebel and Islamist groups in recent years. In 2012, militants controlled an area in the north of the country until a French-led offensive ousted them in 2013.
Since then, remnants of the militant groups have waged a series of attacks on United Nations peacekeepers and Malian forces, and new factions of rebel groups have formed. This month, three peacekeepers were killed in an attack in Kidal after their camp was hit by rocket and mortar fire. Hundreds of French soldiers remain in the country.
France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, visited French troops in northern Mali on a trip shortly after he was elected last month, vowing to be “uncompromising” in the fight against Islamist terrorists.