The Mets and the Nationals both wore an unaccustomed hue on Saturday at Citi Field, a nod to Father’s Day weekend.
While the hosts’ team name was rendered in script a few shades lighter than usual and Washington traded its red for a matching light blue, the on-field performances of the two teams could not have clashed more as the first-place Nationals once again distinguished themselves in a 7-4 victory.
The Nationals have taken the first three games of this four-game series, with the Mets offering little fight along the way. Washington has never trailed, outscoring the Mets by 22-9, and now leads the Mets by 11 ½ games in the National League East.
After the game, Mets Manager Terry Collins was asked if the chasm in the standings between his team and the Nationals, who have won all six of their games at Citi Field this year, was weighing on the confidence of his players.
Collins’s answer suggested the possibility of a situation more complicated than merely a crisis of confidence.
If there was solace, it was that the middle of the Nationals’ order was not especially effective — except, of course, the Mets’ perpetual tormentor Daniel Murphy, who went 2 for 4 and drove in a run.
But the Nationals’ lesser lights supplied the power: Trea Turner led off the game with a homer, the backup catcher Jose Lobaton had a solo shot in the second inning, and Adam Lind added a two-run homer in the eighth.
The Mets, however, had contributions from almost no one beyond Yoenis Cespedes and Jay Bruce for a majority of the day. Before the game, Collins said he was batting Cespedes second for a second straight game to bunch his best hitters toward the top of the lineup in an effort to get them as many at-bats as possible.
Cespedes and Bruce singled in each of their first three at-bats, but the Mets were never able to piece together a multiple-run inning off those hits. In the first and fourth innings, Cespedes and Bruce both reached base, only to have Wilmer Flores follow by hitting into a double play.
In the sixth inning, with the Mets trailing by 4-1, Cespedes and Bruce gave Flores a chance at redemption. With Cespedes on third and Bruce on first and with no outs, Flores mustered a sacrifice fly, but the rally would stop there.
The Mets were trailing by 4-2 in the seventh when someone other than Cespedes or Bruce finally got a hit. Jose Reyes singled on a dribbler back to pitcher Blake Treinen, whose rushed throw bounced past first baseman Ryan Zimmerman and allowed Reyes to take second. The next three batters could not put the ball past the infield.
After Lind’s two-run homer, the Mets eventually showed some life in the eighth inning, beginning, again, with Cespedes. He picked up his fourth hit with a solo home run to make the score 6-3. Flores singled and went to third two batters later on Travis d’Arnaud’s two-out single. Reyes singled to drive in Flores and moved d’Arnaud to second. But Rene Rivera struck out — for the fourth time of the day — to end the threat.
Seth Lugo pitched into the seventh inning in his second start of the year after returning from a partly torn ulnar collateral ligament in his right elbow and gave up four runs, three of them earned, with five strikeouts.
Stephen Strasburg, who entered Saturday at 6-1 with a 1.97 E.R.A. in eight career starts at Citi Field, was not exceptionally precise, but he had protection from a team that demonstrated its ability to win when its best parts were not all clicking. The same cannot be said right now for the Mets.
