McDonald’s ended its 41-year-old sponsorship of the Olympic Games three years early, the International Olympic Committee said on Friday, reflecting the company’s focus on its core business as well as rising Olympics sponsorship costs and declining television ratings.
The Court of Arbitration for Sport has dismissed an appeal by the Russian boxer Misha Aloian, who was stripped of his 2016 Olympic silver medal for doping.
The court said its judging panel had found that Olympic rules afforded “no discretion and that disqualification of results is a necessary consequence” of a positive test.
Aloian, 29, won silver in the men’s flyweight division at the Rio Games but tested positive for the banned stimulant tuaminoheptane.
PENTATHLETE BARRED Maxim Kustov, a Russian modern pentathlete who was accused of being part of a doping cover-up, has been barred for four years. Kustov was blocked from taking part in the Rio Olympics after a report by the World Anti-Doping Agency investigator Richard McLaren alleged that Kustov had tested positive for three steroids in 2014 but that Russian officials had recorded the test as negative.
The Russian Anti-Doping Agency said that Kustov had been given a four-year ban, backdated to October 2016. The agency said Kustov had broken a rule regarding the use or attempted use of a banned substance but did not clarify which substance was involved or whether the case was linked to the McLaren report.
Feliciano López upset Tomas Berdych, 6-7 (4), 6-3, 6-4, and Mischa Zverev ended Tommy Haas’s run in the quarterfinals of the Stuttgart Open in Germany.
López saved all nine break points he faced against the third-seeded Berdych and will face Zverev — a 6-4, 6-4 winner over Haas — in the semifinals.
The fourth-seeded Lucas Pouille defeated Philipp Kohlschreiber, 6-4, 2-6, 6-3, to set up a semifinal against Benoît Paire, who beat Jerzy Janowicz, 6-1, 7-6 (4).
GERMAN CLUB SIGNS DUTCH DEFENDER Hertha Berlin signed the Dutch defender Karim Rekik from Marseille. Hertha Berline said that Rekik, a 22-year-old center back, signed a “long-term” contract. Hertha is hoping Rekik will fill the gap left by John Anthony Brooks’s departure for Wolfsburg. Brooks’s reported fee of 20 million euros ($22.4 million) set a record for an American player.
Irregular Heartbeat Puts Martinez on D.L.
The Detroit Tigers have put designated hitter Victor Martinez on the 10-day disabled list because of an irregular heartbeat. Martinez, 38, left Thursday’s win over Tampa Bay in the seventh inning with a racing heartbeat, dizziness and cold sweats. He was initially treated in the clubhouse for dehydration but was taken to a hospital when the symptoms continued.
Hendrick Motorsports announced that Jimmie Johnson had agreed to a three-year contract extension through 2020.
Johnson, a seven-time Nascar Cup Series champion, won the title last year at age 41. “I do know I’m having a great time and I don’t want to stop right now,” Johnson said in Brooklyn, Mich., the site of this weekend’s race at Michigan International Speedway.
Johnson leads all drivers with three victories in 2017. He is tied for sixth on the career list with 83 wins — one behind Bobby Allison and Darrell Waltrip, and 10 behind Jeff Gordon.
The former champion Simon Spilak climbed to the overall lead in the Tour of Switzerland with a solo breakaway to a summit finish of the seventh stage at Sölden, Austria.
The Spanish rider Ion Izzagirre and the American Joe Dombrowski kept pressure on Spilak, a Slovak who won the event in 2015. Spilak finished strongly and not only won the stage but took the overall lead from the Italian rider Domenico Pozzovivo, Thursday’s stage winner.
A bull rider from Australia sustained life-threatening injuries when a bull threw him and stepped on his chest at the College National Finals Rodeo in Casper, Wyo., his coach said.
Bradie Gray, a junior from Australia who competes for Odessa College in Texas, sustained broken ribs, a bruised aorta and collapsed lungs at the competition Thursday night, the coach, C. J. Aragon, said.
Gray had no pulse when he arrived at the Wyoming Medical Center. He underwent surgery and was in a medically induced coma and on a ventilator, Aragon said.
END OF THE CRUSADERS Alvernia University, a Roman Catholic college in Reading, Pa., has changed its nickname from the Crusaders for the Golden Wolves. The university said on its website that the change had been prompted not by a desire to be politically correct but to create a stronger tie to its patron saint, Francis of Assisi.