Isabelle Rapin, a Swiss-born child neurologist who helped establish autism’s biological underpinnings and advanced the idea that autism was part of a broad spectrum of disorders, died on May 24 in Rhinebeck, N.Y. She was 89.
The cause was pneumonia, said her daughter Anne Louise Oaklander, who is also a neurologist.
Dr. Rapin’s focus on autism evolved from her studies of communications and metabolic disorders that cause mental disabilities and diminish children’s ability to navigate the world. For decades she treated deaf children, whose difficulties in communicating limited their path to excelling in school and forced some into institutions.
“Communications disorders were the overarching theme of my mother’s career,” Dr. Oaklander said in an interview.
Along the way, she helped debunk the myth that emotionally cold mothers were to blame for their children’s autism, and advocated early educational intervention for autistic children, with a focus on their abilities, not their disabilities. She also popularized the use of the term “autism spectrum disorder,” which refers to a wide range of symptoms and their severity.
Isabelle Martha Juliette Rapin was born on Dec. 4, 1927, in Lausanne, Switzerland, to René Rapin, a professor of English and American literature at the University of Lausanne, and the former Mary Coe Reeves, a Connecticut-born homemaker who graduated from Vassar.
Fascinated by science, Isabelle decided at age 10 that she would be a doctor. And when she entered medical school at the University of Lausanne in 1946, she was one of about a dozen women in a class of 100 students. After six weeks of study at the Hôpital des Enfants Malades in Paris in 1951, she left determined to be a child neurologist.
She immigrated to the United States in 1953 to work in pediatrics at Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan. A year later she started a residency at the Neurological Institute of New York at Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital. In 1958, she moved on to Albert Einstein in the Bronx.
In addition to her daughter, Dr. Rapin is survived by her husband, Harold Oaklander; two sons, Stephen and Peter; a second daughter, Christine Oaklander; and four grandchildren.
In a twist on social convention, Mr. Oaklander subordinated some of his career ambitions — he is a former associate dean at Pace University’s graduate school of business — to let his wife advance hers.
Over the years, Dr. Rapin became a mentor to other female neurologists.
Dr. Mehler, a former student of Dr. Rapin’s, said he had often sat with her at the Einstein library, discussing science, until it shut down at midnight.
