Ernst Beyeler got his first job in wartime Switzerland working for an antiquarian bookseller. When the bookseller died in 1945, Mr. Beyeler took over the Basel shop and turned it into a gallery.
By the mid-1960s, Mr. Beyeler was one of the world’s top modern-art dealers, selling works by Pablo Picasso, no less. He had also amassed a collection that included works by Giacometti, Braque, Miró and other giants of 20th-century art.
Today, the dealer and collector lives on through an institution that is Switzerland’s most visited art museum: the Fondation Beyeler in Basel, his birthplace. Inaugurated 20 years ago by Mr. Beyeler (13 years before his death), the foundation is based in an airy glass-fronted building by Renzo Piano, the Pritzker Prize winning Italian architect. That edifice is now getting a three-part extension designed by Peter Zumthor, a Pritzker winner from Basel.
The extension is needed because the original Piano building lacks education and events spaces and room to show the Beyeler’s expanding collection. Still, the museum is careful not to let the art be overtaken by everything else.
As the architect of the new Beyeler, Mr. Zumthor (who was picked from a pool of 11 international architecture firms) could not be more different from Mr. Piano. Somewhat reclusive, he is known for producing austere, meditative buildings and often works with concrete.
The Zumthor extension will have three parts: a main building for art display, with three floors and windows overlooking the park; a small side building for offices; and a multipurpose garden pavilion that’s an open-access public space by day and by night can be turned into an auditorium, dining hall, concert hall or event site.
The budget for the extension is roughly 100 million Swiss francs ($104 million). Half of that will cover land and construction expenses, and the other half — unusually — will pay for operational and maintenance costs in the first 10 to 15 years.
The extra 1,500 square meters of exhibition space will be used mostly to show works in the permanent collection or works on long-term loan, whose number is growing. The Beyeler has long-term loans from the Louise Bourgeois estate and the Calder Foundation, for example, and has received a gift of works from the Renard collection of mostly postwar European art.
Mr. Keller said Mr. Zumthor was a good fit. He said the architect knows the town, the museum and its surroundings very well; he understands and cares about art, and he has a very close relationship to nature.
Theodora Vischer, senior curator at the Beyeler, said she was pleased that Mr. Zumthor had decided to design three smaller buildings and not one giant one.
