Even in those unusual moments when an opposing team has a big second-half lead on the Golden State Warriors, the prevailing sense is that the game is not over because of the Warriors’ ability to go on extended offensive runs. But in Game 4 of the N.B.A. finals Friday night, the Cleveland Cavaliers turned that notion on its head and had the game all but won in the first quarter.
In an offensive display unlike anything the finals had quite seen before, Cleveland put up 49 points in the first 12 minutes, not only setting a finals record but scoring more points than they did in the second halves of Games 1 and 2.
The best the Warriors could do after that initial onslaught was to knock the deficit down to 11 points in the fourth quarter, and it was back up to 21 by game’s end. In other words, the Warriors never got close.
The Cavaliers’ eventual total of 137 points was also the most by one team in a non-overtime finals game since 1987. Afterward, both teams credited Cleveland with throwing a haymaker to start the game and then holding off Golden State for the remaining three quarters, when the difference between the teams was only five points.
His backcourt mate, J. R. Smith, said the Cleveland locker room had been surprisingly mellow before the game, and Irving said the Cavaliers just had to remind themselves of their own capabilities rather than focus on how close the Warriors were to winning the championship.
What made the Cavaliers’ achievement on offense in Game 4 even more remarkable is that the Warriors, despite all their dazzling scorers, take great pride in their defense. Coming into Game 4, the Warriors had the N.B.A.’s most efficient defense in the playoffs in terms of points allowed per 100 possessions. But that did not matter against a Cavaliers club that ranked first in offensive efficiency.
From the opening shot of the game — a 24-foot 3-pointer by Smith off an assist from LeBron James — the stingy Warriors defense was on its heels. Kevin Love led all players with 14 points in the quarter, and the Cavaliers simply outplayed the Warriors in every respect.
The starkest change in that quarter was the aggressiveness of Tristan Thompson, the Cavaliers’ center, who won the opening tip for the first time in the series. He then set a tone for the game with physical play under the basket, extending possessions with three offensive rebounds and making the most of his playing time, which had been reduced as he struggled in the first three games of the finals.
Draymond Green, the Warriors’ volatile power forward, was unwilling to accept the notion that his team had been outplayed in the quarter, saying the officials played a role in Cleveland’s hot start by calling 12 fouls on Golden State against just six on Cleveland.
Green was referring to the two fouls each in the first quarter that he, Klay Thompson, Stephen Curry and Andre Iguodala received. But while the fouls may have reduced Golden State’s ability to play aggressively on defense, the 49-33 score at the end of the quarter could have been even worse if Cleveland had shot better than 14-of-22 from the free-throw line.
“The reason we didn’t hit 50 is because I can’t shoot a free throw,” James said afterward, taking a jab at himself.
Still, 49 was pretty impressive, an astounding number that propelled the Cavaliers to victory, gave them another entry in the N.B.A. record book and perhaps changed the tone of the series.