Today’s introduction comes from Thomas Fuller, the San Francisco bureau chief.
Google and the city of San Jose have a vision for a new Silicon Valley: compact, walkable and accessible by public transportation, a stark departure from the suburban sprawl that has brought the cradle of American technological innovation to the brink of a gridlocked meltdown.
The San Jose City Council will vote Tuesday on whether to offer Google exclusive negotiating rights for parcels of city-owned land next to Diridon train station, part of a plan to transform 250 acres of downtown San Jose into a transport hub connected to office towers and apartments.
Google and other technology companies have been criticized for contributing to the sharp increases in housing costs in the San Francisco Bay Area — and not doing much to address the fallout for the hundreds of thousands of lower- and middle-income workers who can no longer afford to live there. The Diridon station plan does not immediately address this problem: It calls for office space for 15,000 to 20,000 workers and only 2,500 units of housing, according to the mayor.
But through a web of public transportation it could connect Silicon Valley to more affordable areas.
By 2025, Diridon station would host Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) trains and, if fierce opposition by the state’s Republican Congressional delegation is overcome, a high-speed rail line already under construction in the central valley, which would allow someone to live in Fresno and get to San Jose in less than an hour.
Diridon station, named after Rod Diridon, a tireless advocate of public transport for the Bay Area and already a hub for Amtrak, Caltrain and San Jose’s light-rail system, will be the “largest intermodal transit hub in the West,” according to the mayor.
A Google spokesman said the company was looking to build up to 8 million square feet of office space at the site, around three times the size of Apple’s new “spaceship” headquarters. The increase in office space would be gradual, the spokesman said, and of course contingent on reaching a deal with the city.
It’s been called Sacramento’s Golden Gate Bridge.
Stretching across a bend in the Sacramento River, the Tower Bridge serves as the western portal to the city’s downtown.
Shelley Green, a reader from Vacaville, shared a photo she captured of the bridge lit up against the night sky.
The vertical lift bridge was erected during the Great Depression to relieve transportation pressure in the fast-growing city.
Built in the Streamline Moderne architectural style, it became a beacon of civic optimism.
Aside from the Capitol dome, the Tower Bridge remains Sacramento’s most visible landmark.
In recent years, it’s also been the setting for one of the hottest events of the city’s social calendar.
For one night each fall, it is closed and decked out with dining tables for the Tower Bridge Dinner. The gala routinely sells out in minutes.
Want to submit a photo for possible publication? You can do it here.
The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Los Osos. Follow him on Twitter.
