On a hot and humid Monday morning in Austin, Tex., the artist Claire Oswalt is eager to give a tour of the Charles Moore Foundation, where she rents a studio. Unlike the riot of curiosities that is the late architect’s estate, her secluded space (a small building on the edge of the property) is a simplified oasis of calm and introspection. In jeans and vintage yellow cowboy boots, with her hair tucked away in a headwrap of her own creation, she moves serenely through the bright space. Her paintings line the walls, and ivy grows up through the floor toward the skylight.
At her feet, scraps of paper — painted in her signature soft hues of blue, pink and yellow, with contrasting swaths of black and gray — have been swept into a tidy pile. While Oswalt’s only rule for herself in the studio is “to not have any rules,” an edict illustrated by her body of work (drawing, painting, sculpture, textile, graphic design and more), her main passion these days is watercolor collage. Her pieces have garnered a particular following among young designers, including Sophie Buhai and Jesse Kamm.
Oswalt returned to her hometown nearly two years ago after long stints in Los Angeles and New York City, and the effect of the relocation on her work has been profound. “I wasn’t creating memories, and that’s the best way I can explain it to anyone,” she says. “I just needed space. I needed literal space, physical space, and I needed space in my head to reflect. And I needed life to get simpler.” The focusing effect of motherhood — Oswalt has two young sons, aged 2 and 5 — and paring down the demands of the outside world has allowed her to reclaim a sense of play and freedom.
Following in the footsteps of her family of surgeons, Oswalt originally wanted to become a doctor. But after working in a hospital during college, she quickly learned that the “monotony of color and routine and uniform” was not for her. After trying her hand at children’s book writing, she discovered that she was happiest when she was drawing.
If her graphite drawings were calculated and precise, Oswalt’s current watercolor collages are almost entirely visceral and nuanced. Between 9 a.m. and whenever her afternoon child-care duties resume each day, the artist can be found in her studio letting the pieces of ripped paper that are piled up on the floor speak to her. “Every piece really dictates itself, I don’t have that much control over it,” she says, adding that if she tries to come up with a plan for a new piece of art, everything falls apart. “I’m moving pieces, but in each one, I don’t have a plan. It’s its own discovery… it’s me showing up just to be there with the work and seeing how it evolves organically on the paper.” She’s working on a show that opens this September in Berlin, and has upcoming collaborations with several hotels ranging in location from Brooklyn to Amsterdam.
