MEXICO CITY — The Mexican government said Wednesday that it was opening a criminal investigation to determine whether the nation’s most prominent journalists, human rights defenders and anticorruption activists were subjected to illegal government surveillance.
The announcement followed an article by The New York Times that detailed a sweeping operation using advanced spyware to infiltrate a target’s smartphone, turning it into a power surveillance tool.
The software, known as Pegasus, was sold to the Mexican government by an Israeli cyberarms company on the condition that it be used for the sole purpose of investigating criminals and terrorists. But the spyware was deployed against some of Mexico’s most influential reporters and activists, including a highly respected academic pushing for anticorruption legislation, two of Mexico’s most famous journalists and lawyers looking into the case of 43 students who mysteriously disappeared after clashing with the police.
Forensic analysts at digital rights groups in Mexico and at the Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto’s Munk School, found that the surveillance operation had also swept up an American citizen, as well as the family members of some government critics, including a teenage boy living in the United States.
Pressure built quickly on the government to take action, with victims of the spyware and others calling for an independent investigation into the surveillance. The forensic analysts say there is little doubt that the Mexican government, or some rogue actor within it, is behind the surveillance attempts. But while the software is sold only to governments, with special precautions to ensure that it can be used only by the agencies that buy it, there is no ironclad proof of the Mexican government’s hand in the spying.
Activists said that the government’s announcement of an investigation, which will be conducted by the attorney general’s office, fell far short of their demands.
To begin with, the attorney general’s office is among the various Mexican agencies that purchased the software, raising the question of whether it will thoroughly investigate itself.
The office heading up the investigation is in charge of crimes against the freedom of expression, tasked with looking into crimes against journalists and human rights defenders. In recent months, it has largely focused on the rising number of murdered reporters.
The government replaced the office’s head prosecutor a few days after a separate Times article showed that the federal government had hardly prosecuted any cases, even though Mexico is among the deadliest places in the world to be a journalist. The Committee to Protect Journalists had also pressed the government on the issue, and had met with Mexico’s president to demand stronger steps to safeguard the nation’s reporters.