HAMILTON, Bermuda — Many a well-financed maritime expedition has come to grief through the centuries in the treacherous and deep blue water off Bermuda.
Oracle Team USA joined the list on Monday, as the challenger Emirates Team New Zealand and its crew of young newcomers finished off a surprisingly lopsided 7-1 victory to reclaim the America’s Cup 14 years after losing it.
The final race was yet another rout. Team New Zealand trailed at the first mark, but its superior boat speed and its slicker, more intuitive crew work helped the team dominate after that, finishing 55 seconds ahead of the Americans.
It was a day of redemption for the Kiwis, who blew a seemingly insurmountable 8-1 lead against Oracle in the last America’s Cup, in San Francisco in 2013, by losing eight consecutive races.
To survive and remain in the game, Team New Zealand and its chief executive, Grant Dalton, had to overcome existential challenges, including internal divisions and an early shortage of financing.
Some of Team New Zealand’s money troubles were linked to the decision to strip it of the chance to host a preliminary regatta in Auckland. That move by the America’s Cup event authority cost the Kiwis government funding and led to a lengthy arbitration dispute with the Cup organizers and a multimillion-dollar award this year to Team New Zealand.
Still, the Kiwis survived only by reducing salaries and taking calculated risks on design like the long-secret decision to add cycling pedestals to their boat to generate power, instead of the conventional hand-cranked pedestals used by other teams. The move freed some of the Kiwi grinders’ hands to help control the boat’s foils and other systems.
The team also made the right calls on navigational control systems for the challenging AC50 foiling catamarans and on which foils to use in the light winds that prevailed in Bermuda. Perhaps most important, the team successfully navigated the contentious transition from the popular veteran helmsman Dean Barker to the 26-year-old Peter Burling.
Burling — cool and confident under pressure in Bermuda — turned out to be just the man for the very tricky job, and he helped produce a one-sided result that was humbling for Oracle’s star helmsman, Jimmy Spithill, and its billionaire owner, Larry Ellison.
“I think they made a lot of smart decisions,” said Spithill, who was dominated in the starting box by Burling throughout the series.
Ellison, the latest in a long line of tycoons to catch America’s Cup fever, has spent hundreds of millions of dollars — his own and his team sponsors’ — to pursue, secure and now lose the most prestigious prize in yachting.
It is unclear whether he will continue funding a Cup team, but what is definite is that the next Cup, the 36th, will be in New Zealand. Immediately after Monday’s victory, Team New Zealand announced that the Royal New Zealand Yacht Club, which it represents, had received and accepted a challenge from the Italian yacht club Circolo della Vela Sicilia.
That club, based in Sicily, will be represented by Luna Rossa Challenge, the longtime Cup syndicate headed by Patrizio Bertelli, chief executive of Prada.
Bertelli angrily withdrew Luna Rossa from this Cup after Oracle and a majority of the other challengers agreed to reduce the size of the catamarans midway through the cycle to cut costs. Bertelli then provided Team New Zealand’s campaign with information and expertise. The two teams had a history, sharing design elements ahead of the previous Cup in San Francisco after Luna Rossa entered it late.
In this Cup, Team New Zealand was the only one of the five challengers not to sign a framework agreement with Oracle that would have had the Cup staged every two years in the same class of AC50 foiling catamarans used this year in Bermuda.
Dalton, who viewed this Cup as a fight over the venerable event’s identity, was reluctant to divulge too much of his thinking on Monday but did say he favored a cycle longer than two years. He has also expressed support for a stronger nationality rule for the crews. That could be a game changer for a team like Oracle, which had a majority of Australians on its crew.
Ellison, the 72-year-old co-founder of Oracle Corporation, undeniably transformed this event. He invested heavily to improve television coverage and supported the move to high-performance foiling catamarans in an attempt to broaden the sport’s appeal.
But that move, which made the Cup more dangerous and more physical, also made it too demanding for him to race on his own yacht. He watched from a chase boat in Bermuda on Monday.
Oracle and Ellison had the option to defend the Cup in home waters this year, receiving bids from San Diego and Chicago. But Ellison and Russell Coutts, a New Zealander and former Oracle skipper, decided to take the financial guarantees on offer here in this tiny British overseas territory in the mid-Atlantic.
It was the first time in the 166-year history of the Cup that an American syndicate chose to defend the trophy outside the United States.
It will now remain overseas, with Team New Zealand expected to defend it in Auckland, the country’s largest city, which was also the site for the Cup in 2000 and 2003.
The Kiwis are scheduled to return home in triumph next week, potentially to a ticker-tape parade, but Dalton and his young crew were busy Monday exchanging hugs and hoisting the Cup in triumph in the Bermuda sunshine.
It is a shiny, heavy trophy. And as Dalton and Ellison both now know, it is so much harder to win than to lift.