A defamation trial over an ABC News report about so-called pink slime, a once-common ingredient in ground beef, began Monday. A South Dakota meat processing company says the report wreaked havoc on its business after it aired in 2012.
What Is ‘Pink Slime’?
The term refers to low-cost processed beef trimmings sold by Beef Products Inc.
The first use of “pink slime” is widely credited to Gerald Zirnstein, a former Agriculture Department scientist, who used it in a 2002 email to colleagues in which he expressed concerns about the product.
The processed trimmings — officially known as lean finely textured beef — were once a popular ingredient in ground beef and were found in McDonald’s and Burger King hamburgers and in grocery chains and schools across the country.
The product is created by placing trimmings in centrifuges to separate lean meat from fat. The lean meat is then treated with ammonia to remove pathogens. That process, the company has said, was perfected over years and can produce 10 to 20 extra pounds of lean beef per cow.
In 1993, the Agriculture Department approved the processed trimmings for use in ground beef.
What Is the Controversy?
Concerns about the product had been mounting for years when, in 2012, ABC News aired an investigation into its widespread use in ground beef.
Later that year, Beef Products sued ABC for defamation, arguing that the segment and several subsequent reports were rife with inaccuracies and had created a consumer backlash with a “devastating impact” on its bottom line.
The company is now seeking $1.9 billion in damages, but that figure could grow to as much as $5.7 billion under a South Dakota law, according to a recent financial report by the Walt Disney Company, which owns ABC.
Although it became the target of the lawsuit, ABC News was far from alone in raising questions about the processed trimmings.
By the time the ABC News report was broadcast, three major fast food chains — McDonald’s, Taco Bell and Burger King — had already committed to dropping the trimmings from their food.
The trial over the ABC News report is expected to last about eight weeks.
It will focus on claims by Beef Products that ABC News had launched a “disinformation campaign” and acted “with reckless disregard” for the truth in airing its report.
“We look forward to the opportunity to present our case and establish for the jury that B.P.I. has suffered significant financial harm because of the wrongful conduct by ABC,” Dan Webb, a lawyer with the firm Winston & Strawn who is representing Beef Products, said in a statement.
The lawsuit accuses ABC News of falsely suggesting that the product was, among other things, “pink slime,” a “filler” ingredient, low quality, not beef, and not safe for public consumption. ABC’s publication of a list of grocery chains that sold the processed trimmings led nearly every major store in the country to stop buying them, Beef Products said.
In its own court filings, ABC argued that the central question in the case was whether its reporters had acted with “actual malice,” which it said they had not.
“We believe in the principle that people deserve to know what’s in the food they eat and are confident that when all the facts are presented in court, ABC’s reporting will be fully vindicated,” Kevin Baine, a lawyer representing ABC and Mr. Avila, said in a statement.