Book Review|What Distinguishes Cultural Exchange from Cultural Appropriation?
What Distinguishes Cultural Exchange from Cultural Appropriation?
In Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Rivka Galchen and Anna Holmes discuss the line between artistic license and cultural theft.
In an exchange, the more you take, the more you have to give back — the better the work has to be.
The “exchange” in cultural exchange suggests you give something in return for having taken something. If it’s culture that’s taken, then presumably what’s given back is the art. In which case the difference between appropriation and exchange, to be (maybe absurdly) logical about it, would have to lie with an assessment of the value of the art itself. Of course we can’t really quantify the value of what is taken or the value of the art, but that would be the logic.
The more you take, the more you have to give back — the better the work has to be. Maybe when we say it’s wrong to take something, we really mean, What you’ve given back is far too poor, too mediocre — it’s bad art. I’ve never heard anyone accuse the hip-hop group Wu-Tang Clan of appropriating Chinese culture. This may be because I haven’t talked to enough people. But maybe it is because the music that came from a group of hip-hop kids from Staten Island who watched a lot of kung fu movies in trips to Times Square was that good.
RZA, the de facto head of Wu-Tang Clan, has noted in interviews that when he was growing up in Staten Island, his upstairs neighbors in the projects were Chinese kids, and that all the gold from rapper bling came from Chinatown. Chinese culture was always part of his life. But this wouldn’t mean much to us if the work of the Wu-Tang Clan were so-so; if the work weren’t good, he could be from Shanghai and it would still be an appropriation, even if an appropriation of forms nearer to home. No authority is wholly natural or native; when we’re not borrowing from our neighbors, we’re borrowing from our ancestors. One reason art tends to come from looking outward and not just inward is that we’re always speaking from a shaky authority, even when narrating our own experiences — maybe especially when narrating just ourselves. To be entirely against taking anything from another culture would be to condemn everything to memoir — and of all the genres of literature, I think memoir deserves the reputation for being the least true. It’s awkward to recognize that “Madame Bovary” couldn’t be better written by a French housewife. Flaubert himself identified with Emma just enough. RZA (who with his friends referred to Staten Island as “Shaolin”) saw himself, just enough, in tales of underground kung fu rebellion leaders.
But most of us instinctively have more faith in what someone outside the center of power has to say; what of this instinct is legitimate, and what of it is too blunt? We remember that it was a gay, bourgeois Jew who best portrayed the French aristocracy, and not the reverse. Even though we also know that Tolstoy, from his family estate, could write any character, from peasants to princes. In the case of Wu-Tang Clan, the distribution of power between the culture they came from and the culture they borrowed from is usefully unclear.
So from an odds-ratio perspective, I’d notice that it’s most often the less powerful outsider who has insight into the more powerful insider; but I say this as if from a statistical perspective, not as a steady truth. I’d offer second-best odds to the insider writing about the inside (as we saw recently in the Edward St. Aubyn novels). Longest odds would be on the insider writing about the outsider. (Maybe this is because the outsider lives in the world run by the insider, and so has a natural insight into, and skepticism of, both the “Other” and themselves; the insider is less likely to notice that “normal” is just their norm.) So I find it less likely that a person can make art borrowing from a culture less empowered than his own. But again, that’s just the cold eye of the bookie. It doesn’t seem impossible for someone in the more powerful position to be able to have some insight in the other direction; it just seems difficult, and unlikely.
Underlying the idea of appropriation is the sense that something — or someone — is just there for the taking.
My colleague, who has a great sense of humor about most things, was irritated by the kaffiyeh because he felt that his traveling companion failed to consider the blitheness with which it was worn. On someone of Middle Eastern descent, or with an Arab name or Muslim background, the kaffiyeh would have seemed both completely ordinary and quite provocative, at least in the context of a trans-Atlantic flight headed to a country known for its racial profiling by airline and immigration authorities. On the bearded Jewish hipster, however, it was all just a pose — an ignorant and even, he would argue, aggressive one.
But what is cultural appropriation and exchange? Would it have made a difference if the traveler’s kaffiyeh had been manufactured and purchased in, say, Kuwait City, instead of an Urban Outfitters store in Toronto? Determining such a distinction is also, as with so many things, dependent on intent. Appropriations are expressions of ignorance or aggression, when objects, ideas, lived experiences or points of view are not so much examined as exploited and performed. Exchanges, conversely, suggest a certain sort of generosity, an openness to discussion and an invitation to reciprocity.
I hesitate to accuse Shriver of ignorance, but her commentary was arrogant and imprecise. (Who is “we”? What does it mean to “allow” or “not allow” something to be written?) Indeed, rather than allowing for engagement — for exchange — with real or imagined arguments, Shriver’s speech was emblematic of the sort of posturing and performance that people talk about when they talk about cultural appropriation. In other words, exchange is about teasing out points of conflict, among other things. Appropriation suggests a significant amount of self-satisfaction and a desire to show off.
The problem is, as with most everything, there’s a certain subjectivity to the entire affair. Intent can be difficult to discern, and it’s certainly not quantifiable in any precise way. But what I do know is that underlying the idea of appropriation is the sense that something — or someone — is just there for the taking: A style of dress, a personal narrative, an entire continent. You can’t always prove appropriation. But you usually know it when you see it.
Anna Holmes is an award-winning writer who has contributed to numerous publications, including The Washington Post, Salon, Newsweek and The New Yorker online. She is the editor of two books: “Hell Hath No Fury: Women’s Letters From the End of the Affair”; and “The Book of Jezebel,” based on the popular women’s website she created in 2007. She is an editorial executive at First Look Media’s film, TV and digital studio, Topic.