The Supreme Court made same-sex marriage a nationwide right on June 26, 2015. The next day, The New York Times highlighted 12 same-sex couples, many of whom were the first in their cities to wed on that day.
Ten of those couples recently reflected about what marriage meant to them, and what they had learned. The interviews have been edited and condensed. Their names are listed in left-to-right order as they appear in each photo.
Lori Hazelton, 26, graphic designer, and Stephanie Wade, 25, cook and student, Muskegon, Mich.
RELATIONSHIP Met in high school and were married the day of the Supreme Court ruling. “We were the first couple in our county to be married in our local courthouse,” Ms. Hazelton said.
Crystal Zimmer, 27, who works in the restaurant field, and Lena Williams, 37, a heavy equipment operator for Johnson Controls, Cincinnati.
RELATIONSHIP Together almost seven years. Ms. Zimmer’s aunt played matchmaker; they were the first female couple to marry in front of a Hamilton County judge. “It was one of the most emotional experiences I’ve ever had in my life,” Ms. Williams said.
Cortney Tucker, 27, product manager, and Breanne Brodak, 28, senior underwriter, White Lake, Mich.
RELATIONSHIP Met through Ms. Brodak’s college friend. Together five years before they married. First female couple in Oakland County, Mich., to marry at the courthouse, on June 26, 2015.
Tom Fennell, 52, freelance legal translator, and Christopher Brown, 42, proofreader, accountant, Omaha.
RELATIONSHIP The couple met in a bar. They were together six and a half years before they married on Aug. 29, 2015, next door to their home on the Missouri River in Omaha.
Julia Troxler, 61, retired, and Barbara Schwartz, 65, federal employee, Fairhope, Ala.
RELATIONSHIP Met on Match.com and were together for nine and a half years before marrying on June 26, 2015, at the Fulton County Courthouse in Atlanta.
Natalie Marie Leslie, 34, and Christina Marie Leslie, 34, aircraft mechanics, Taylor, Mich.
Marge Eide, 79, retired, and Ann Sorrell, 80, retired, Ann Arbor, Mich.
RELATIONSHIP The couple, together for almost 45 years, met as players on opposing softball teams. They were married on June 26, 2015, in Ann Arbor.
Kenneth Denson, 40, and Gabriel Mendez, 35, in Dallas. Owners of Red Pegasus Comics.
RELATIONSHIP Met at a gay youth group at their local college and have been together for 16 years. In 2005 the couple gave themselves a “nongovernmental commitment ceremony” where they exchanged vows, “because it wasn’t legal yet in Texas and that’s what people were doing,” Mr. Denson said. They married legally in 2012 in San Francisco, and once more at the Dallas County Courthouse in 2015.
Julie Bliss, 48, personal trainer/stay-at-home mother, and Traci Bliss 47, nurse, Bay City, Mich.
RELATIONSHIP The couple, together for 16 years, met at church and were married at Base Camp Fitness Company in Bay City in September 2015.
Terrence McNally, 78, playwright, and Tom Kirdahy, 53, theatrical producer/lawyer, New York City.
RELATIONSHIP Mr. Kirdahy produced a panel discussion that included Mr. McNally. “Terrence claims it was love at first sight,” Mr. Kirdahy said. “I knew something special was happening.” They consider themselves married since December 2003, when they had a civil union in Vermont. In 2010 they were married in Washington by Mr. Kirdahy’s college roommate. Mayor Bill de Blasio renewed their vows on the steps of City Hall in June 2015.
