Theater|The Detective Was a Performance Artist. The Evidence Is Now a Show.
The Detective Was a Performance Artist. The Evidence Is Now a Show.
Aware of the artist Alison S. M. Kobayashi’s interest in “lost, discarded and donated objects,” as she put it, friends of friends of hers passed along a wire recorder — a clunky predecessor to the tape recorder — that came with two reels’ worth of chitchat. Nobody had any idea of where or when these recordings had been made, or by whom. Slowly she started identifying distinct speakers and figured out they were related.
“Listening to the tape, I was immediately in love with the family and knew I wanted to do something,” said Ms. Kobayashi, 33, the special-projects director at UnionDocs, a hub for documentary arts in Brooklyn.
She conducted extensive research in archives, both online and physical, but instead of presenting a video or a gallery installation, as she had done with earlier pieces based on found objects, she created an Off Off Broadway solo show. Now she is performing the gently humorous, enchantingly quirky “Say Something Bunny!” to 24 people at a time in a nondescript room in Chelsea.
After months of sleuthing, Ms. Kobayashi figured out she had been listening in on the Newburges from Woodmere, N.Y., captured on two separate occasions in the 1950s. The older son in the Long Island family, a teenager named David, was the recorder’s owner — he held onto it until his death in 2007.
A scene from Alison S.M. Kobayashi's solo show at the Undo Project Space in Manhattan.
Turning her investigation into a live performance was partly a result of the fact that David went on to dabble in songwriting and theater: One of his main achievements, to use the term loosely, was penning the book and lyrics for the 1971 “nudie” Off Broadway musical “Stag Movie” (“I cannot imagine a more dispiriting and dismal evening in the theater,” Clive Barnes wrote in The New York Times). 
Except there is no unsolved crime to be dissected here, only utterly banal everyday conversations that become strangely entrancing as Ms. Kobayashi illustrates their cultural context with videos, slides, audio clips and even costumed re-enactments.
When her detective work fell short, she had to make educated guesses, as when she hazarded that a tiny squeak on the second reel belonged to a pet bird. Happily, this was confirmed by a witness Ms. Kobayashi and Mr. Allen managed to track down.
“Alison should really be working for the F.B.I.,” said Larry Newburge, David’s younger brother. Now 78, he is the only person from the recordings still alive.
Theorizing that Mr. Newburge wasn’t dead only because they had found everybody else’s grave but his, they were keen to get his permission before reopening in New York. So they got on the horn.
A captioned excerpt from the wire recording on which Alison S.M. Kobayashi's show is based.
Idelle Newburge had met only two members of her husband’s family: his mother, Juliette, and David. “She knew about my brother’s show that didn’t go over very well, and his pornographic movie that didn’t go over very well,” Mr. Newburge said of his wife.
