While at the start of her career, Ms. Halo, a classically trained musician, preferred to work alone, she has had an unlikely collaborator for the past two years: Hatsune Miku, a 16-year-old pop star with calf-length blue hair who fills stadiums in her native Japan. Ms. Miku also happens to be a humanoid — an animated character who appears onstage via 3-D projection and was originally designed to sell a synthesizer application.
“I was excited to occupy the role of a pop songwriter or producer, rather than being the person onstage myself,” Ms. Halo said in an interview last month on the steps of the Art Institute of Chicago, where she was passing through en route to the Movement Festival in Detroit. Amid the concrete, Ms. Halo was a burst of color in a tie-dyed purple blouse and baggy blue slacks, a pink cap pulled low on her head with six braids jutting out from underneath.
Tangentially, “Dust” is a pop album, but one with detours through smooth jazz, broken beats, multilingual dance-pop, queasy ambience, twitchy funk and scrambled radio signals. Ms. Halo opened up the project to include other musicians and vocalists, like the percussionist Eli Keszler, the indie singer-composer Julia Holter, the British producer Klein, the Texas noise rocker Craig Clouse and others.
Previous albums featured emotionally wrought lyrics. Now Ms. Halo looked to random list generators, Anne Carson’s translations of Sappho and the work of the Brazilian concrete poet Haroldo de Campos to break up linearity. The album also features German, ancient Greek and — on “Moontalk,” the album’s most danceable moment — many iterations of how to say “congratulations” in Japanese.
“I wanted that song to be very light and nonsensical, but where you could read darkness underneath it,” Ms. Halo said, searching for a tension between being solemn and silly. There are allusions to charging tanks and the impermanence of life, punctuated by bright chords redolent of rave anthems and the shrill tone you get from disconnected phone numbers.
