A 66-year-old nurse in Texas who is suspected of killing up to 60 children has been indicted on murder charges in the deaths of two of them in 1981, prosecutors said.
The Bexar County District Attorney’s office said on Wednesday that the nurse, Genene Jones, was indicted on the charge of murder in the death on Sept. 16, 1981 of 2-year-old Rosemary Vega. A separate indictment in May charged Ms. Jones with murdering an 11-month-old boy, Joshua Sawyer, by injecting him with a “toxic level” of Dilantin, an anti-seizure drug, in December 1981 while she worked in the pediatric intensive care unit in the former Bexar County Medical Center, it said.
Ms. Jones is already serving concurrent prison terms in Gatesville, Tex., for the death of one child and the injury of another. Prison records and the district attorney’s office said that in 1984, a jury in Williamson County sentenced her to 99 years in prison for the death of a 15-month-old girl, Chelsea McClellan. The same year, a Bexar County judge sentenced Ms. Jones to 60 years in prison on charges of injury to a child for injecting a 4-week-old boy, Rolando Santos, with Heparin, a blood thinner. He was sickened but survived.
Ms. Jones worked as a nurse at a hospital in Texas in the 1970s and ‘80s, and the authorities suspect that she may have been involved in the deaths of up to 60 infants. Her trials in 1984, at which she maintained her innocence, drew national attention.
The new indictments come ahead of her scheduled mandatory release from prison in March 2018. The grand jury recommended a $1 million bond, and she will be extradited to a jail in Bexar County to await another trial, said Nicholas LaHood, the district attorney for Bexar County.
In a telephone interview on Friday, Mr. LaHood said he asked investigators in Bexar County after he took office in 2015 to re-examine the Jones case. They sifted through whatever medical records they could find and interviewed eyewitnesses, looking into the records of children who died either during or around her shift times, he said. There is no statute of limitations for murder in Texas.
“It was unconscionable that she was suspected of up to 60 murders, and everyone felt they could not do anything,” he said.
The district attorney’s office did not provide details of the death of Rosemary Vega, who was in an intensive care unit in 1981, recovering after an operation to treat a congenital heart defect. But Rosemary Cantu, the child’s mother, said in an interview published on Wednesday by Texas Monthly and ProPublica that she had watched Ms. Jones inject something into her daughter’s intravenous line shortly before she went into cardiac arrest.
It was not immediately clear on Friday if Ms. Jones had an attorney related to the latest indictments.
Ms. Jones worked as a licensed vocational nurse at the Bexar County Medical Center from 1978 through mid-1982 before transferring to a clinic in Kerrville, north of San Antonio. Some hospital medical records had been destroyed, complicating investigations at the time.
In the 1984 trial for the death of Chelsea McClellan, a toxicologist testified for the prosecution that residue of succinylcholine, a powerful muscle relaxant that is difficult to detect, had been found in tissue samples in the child’s body, The Times reported. During the trial, the child’s mother, Petti, then 28, testified that her daughter “went limp, like a rag doll, just like a rag doll — she looked like Raggedy Ann” after the intravenous injection.
