CANNES, France — The top hitters in media and advertising descended on the beaches of southern France last week, lounging on yachts and sipping wine and frozen rosé slushies as the sun sparkled on the cerulean water of the French Riviera. They networked and cut deals at parties in chic hotels — the type where rooms cost $500 a night.
But even in paradise, it did not take long for conversations at the annual industry conference to inevitably turn to the frustrations of the advertising world.
 They have been targeted on social media by partisan consumer groups based on where they place their ads. And they are demanding more transparency and accountability from digital platforms, especially Facebook and Google, which continue to dominate the online ad market.
The notion of “brand safety,” the industry term for ensuring that ads do not show up on or adjacent to objectionable content, remained a concern of executives here. Kristin Lemkau, the chief marketing officer of JPMorgan Chase, said during a discussion that Chase had yet to return to YouTube, which faced an advertiser exodus in the spring after ads for brands like AT&T were discovered on videos promoting hate speech and terrorism.
“The answer, and I think they agree, is just to raise the bar on monetization,” she said.
While the annual festival is ostensibly about honoring the best marketing work from the past year — State Street’s statue of a girl staring down the Wall Street bull won several awards — it was physically dominated by technology companies. Attendees could visit branded swaths of sun and sand called Facebook Beach, YouTube Beach, Pinterest Pier and #TwitterBeach, or ride a bright yellow Snapchat-branded Ferris wheel.
Hoopla aside, several advertisers said they were taking a harder line with such platforms, though they were eager to continue working with them. Google and Facebook, in particular, are trying to assuage advertisers’ concerns around objectionable content.
Others are more concerned with creating standards for determining how effectively ads reach people online and being able to compare metrics across platforms — basically, what a Facebook video view is worth versus an ad viewed on Snapchat.
Still, while marketers are more outspoken, the giant online advertising platforms continue to reign supreme — and attract hundreds of millions of dollars in marketing.
The lavish setups from those companies contrasted with a pullback by some advertisers. Publicis Groupe, the ad giant based in France, caused a stir during the week when its new chief executive, Arthur Sadoun, said the firm would take a yearlong break from award shows like Cannes. Publicis will instead invest in developing a sort of Amazon Echo for business called Marcel, using artificial intelligence and machine learning.
While Mr. Sorrell likened the timing of the Publicis announcement to a dinner guest’s insulting the host midway through a meal, he noted in an interview that his firm had sent 500 people to Cannes this year, down from 1,000 last year.
Amazon had no prominent beachfront presence, nor a yacht nor a party with a high-profile musical guest, but the company was top of mind for many, especially after it announced its plan to buy Whole Foods Market for more than $13 billion.
Advertisers are eyeing ways to work with Amazon, as well as how they can take advantage of the Amazon Echo, particularly as Google and Apple follow the company’s lead in selling voice-activated devices for the home.
“We’re working with Amazon as a retail partner — which we have a big booming business with them — and we’re working with them as a media partner,” said Marc S. Pritchard, the chief brand officer of Procter & Gamble. He said Procter & Gamble was moving money there.
Mr. Weed of Unilever said he had just returned from a West Coast trip where he met with Amazon representatives. He pointed to two Alexa apps the company has developed that cite Unilever products, including a recipe tool called Recipedia and one for cleaning instructions called Cleanipedia.
Ms. Lemkau of JPMorgan Chase pointed to Amazon’s data, the millions of verified Chase cardholders who are spending on the site, its media and content arm, its ad serving platform and the potential for marketing through packaging.
