Bahrain, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates have severed diplomatic ties with Qatar, accusing it of fueling extremism and terrorism.
All four countries also suspended travel to and from Qatar.
The reaction so far: Oil prices are up; Qatar’s stock market is down.
The Wall Street Journal reports that oil traders are looking to see whether Qatar maintains agreed-upon reductions in production and that gas traders are on high alert as well.
The coordinated effort to isolate Qatar underlines other Arab countries’ disapproval of its support for the Muslim Brotherhood and accusations that Doha supports Iran’s agenda. Bloomberg has an explainer here.
Just like many other banks, Vnesheconombank has a presence on Wall Street: It has an office in a Manhattan skyscraper, bonds available to investors and ties to major American lenders.
But Vnesheconombank, the Russian state-owned lender known as VEB, is under greater scrutiny these days.
VEB’s chief, Sergey N. Gorkov — a prominent graduate of Russia’s spy school — met with Jared Kushner, President Trump’s son-in-law, during the presidential transition.
That meeting is a focus of a federal counterintelligence investigation about possible collusion between the Trump campaign and the Russian government.
Three years ago, in response to Moscow’s military intervention in Ukraine, the Obama administration imposed sanctions on VEB that have prevented it from taking on most new business in the United States.
Since then, the bank has quietly kept up appearances on Wall Street in case sanctions are to be lifted, according to interviews with American bankers and former government officials.
But not everyone is convinced that the bank is just a bank.
The founder of Oculus VR, a start-up making virtual-reality equipment, is back.
Palmer Freeman Luckey became something of a persona non grata in Silicon Valley after news spread that he had secretly donated to an anti-Hillary Clinton organization. But, espousing his politics more freely now, he is working on a start-up that is developing surveillance technology to monitor borders between countries and around military bases, according to three people familiar with the plan.
They say that Mr. Luckey believes his system, which can be mounted on telephone poles, can be built far more cost effectively than Mr. Trump’s proposed wall on the Mexican border.
They also said that the investment fund run by Peter Thiel, a technology adviser to Mr. Trump, planned to support the effort.
In an emailed statement, Mr. Luckey confirmed that he was working on a defense-related start-up.
“We need a new kind of defense company, one that will save taxpayer dollars while creating superior technology to keep our troops and citizens safer,” he said.
— Mary T. Barra, chief executive of General Motors, on the automaker’s efforts to be at the forefront in the development of self-driving cars. The company is trying to fend off a campaign by Greenlight Capital to create two classes of its stock, a fight that will culminate on Tuesday at G.M.’s annual shareholder meeting.
• Apple will show off its latest software and hardware, including Macs and iPads, at its annual conference for developers.