Ball courts and cages in London are a hotbed of soccer talent, the kind that could change the way England plays the game.
LONDON — The best games, by common consent, are at Tabard Gardens, not far from the Elephant & Castle tube station, and a couple of miles southeast, on the AstroTurf field at the Damilola Taylor Center in Peckham.
They are where the standard is highest, the competition fiercest and the talent brightest. In the summer, especially, the matches can get even better, when some of the players who have left the housing projects of south London and gone on to reach the Premier League, or the divisions just below it, return. They come to remember where they began and to play with their friends. But most of all, they come to prove they can still cut it in the white heat of the cage.
London, increasingly, dominates English soccer’s landscape. For all the many millions of pounds spent by Manchester United, Manchester City and Liverpool, the season just ended with one London team, Chelsea, beating another, Tottenham, to the Premier League title, and then falling to a third, Arsenal, in the F.A. Cup final.
This city’s most significant contribution to the sport’s future, though, may be far from the state-of-the-art stadiums and space-age training grounds of its three most powerful clubs. It is on the other side of the Thames, in the ball courts and cages that dot the urban sprawl of south London.
Abdoulaye Coulibaly, 13, right, and Amir Hughes on a field at Stockwell Park Estate, a housing development in south London.
The boroughs of Lambeth, Southwark and Lewisham are gentrifying rapidly. Property prices are soaring. Artisanal coffee houses and trendy pop-up restaurants are flourishing.
The hipsters, the artists, the writers and the start-up entrepreneurs started arriving a few years ago, a sort of flat white expeditionary force. Now the financiers and the lawyers are starting to follow, claiming traditionally working-class areas and immigrant communities as territory for a booming London.
The transformation, though, is only skin deep. The concrete bleakness of the area’s run-down housing projects still brushes up, uneasily, against the new glass-fronted apartment complexes.
Goals at various courts in South London, a hotbed of young talent.
In those areas untouched by change, a new generation of English soccer players and, perhaps more important, a new kind of English soccer player are starting to emerge.
According to The Guardian, about 14 percent of the English-born players in the Premier League last year hailed from the 10-square-mile stretch that composes south London. Among them are Victor Moses and Wilfried Zaha, both now internationals for other nations, Moses for Nigeria and Zaha for Ivory Coast; Manchester United’s Chris Smalling; Liverpool’s Nathaniel Clyne and Joe Gomez; and Jordon Ibe of Bournemouth.
Most of them grew up in these housing complexes, with their first exposure to soccer coming not on lush green fields but on the ball court — an AstroTurf field enclosed by a wire mesh fence — that is at the center of many of them. These modest, worn spaces are often the only sports ground available to the thousands of children, often black or another minority, who live in the surrounding tower blocks.
It was here that these players first learned the game, first starred in it, first attracted attention, first developed the skills that would make them famous. It was once assumed that future professionals were sourced mostly from the asphalt streets of Merseyside, the mining and shipbuilding communities in the North East or cheek-by-jowl East London; increasingly, though, south London is England’s hotbed of talent.
Two players in Kicks, a youth program, waiting for a training drill to start at the Bells Garden ball court in Peckham.
The reason for that is simple: The cages provide the perfect breeding ground for young professionals. Games take place most nights, and for much of the day on weekends, either in chaotic pickup matches or impromptu winner-stays-on tournaments.
The cages with the loftiest reputations — Tabard Gardens, the Damilola Taylor Center — draw players and teams from across south London, competing not just for personal pleasure but also for local pride.
Watched by dozens of onlookers, the games are raucously competitive and a chance to enhance social status. Speed and strength are paramount, but the emphasis is on individual brilliance, imagination, technical mastery. It is a macho, unforgiving environment, where losing collectively or individually — being nutmegged, for example — carries a social stigma.
The field at Canute Garden Estate, in Southwark.
At Millwall, the club is keenly aware of the resources on its doorstep. Like all teams, Millwall runs a number of community programs to reach out to disadvantaged local children. Its Kicks program, supported by the Premier League, hosts sessions at 14 locations in Southwark and Bermondsey and works with 1,400 young people.
The program’s primary aim is “to engage and to mentor,” Gary Otim, the project manager, said. His official target, he said, is to guide children toward qualifications in soccer or in formal education; his personal hope is that his team of 17 coaches can help them “make friends.” Both, he feels, help to keep participants in the program away from the darker pastimes that plague the housing estates.
The club agreed. One of Dunne’s first acts when he took up his post at Millwall’s youth academy was to change the focus of its scouting away from the traditional patches of organized Sunday league soccer — where registration fees often freeze out poorer families — and toward the children from the tower blocks who were attending the Kicks sessions.
A number of Otim’s prodigies are now in Millwall’s academy, hoping for a professional contract; he has had others sign for clubs as far afield as Huddersfield Town, four hours north in West Yorkshire, and Norwich, more than 100 miles northeast in Norfolk. All of them carry with them the stamp of the ball courts, the telltale signs of where they came from.
A match at Tabard Gardens, which draws players and teams from across south London, competing not just for personal pleasure but also for local pride.
That presents coaches with a challenge: Dunne describes ball court players as “rough diamonds,” often lacking knowledge in some of the more formal, perhaps less fun, aspects of the game, like man-marking and positional discipline, even if their talent is not in doubt.
It is that, after all, that makes them stand out in the first place, and brings the scouts to the courts of south London, scouring for talent. It is that talent they are taking to the rest of the country, to the professional game.
And it is that which is, slowly, transforming the idea of what English players look like, and what they can do.
