Charlie Sheen, Lindsay Lohan, Tom Cruise and Paris Hilton were among the scores of celebrities captured by E. L. Woody’s roving lens — whether they liked it or not.
Mr. Woody, a photographer and videographer, was a Hollywood fixture — or an annoyance, depending on one’s point of view — who chronicled the after-hours exploits of the glitterati for decades, a period when unauthorized celebrity coverage by the so-called paparazzi expanded from tabloid newspapers to the nightly news and became a major driver of internet traffic.
He died at 70 on May 23 at a hospice facility in Los Angeles. J. D. Ligier, who helped Mr. Woody form a company called Papparazzi TV in the 1990s, said that the cause was complications of colon cancer.
To Mr. Woody, a scruffy, gray-goateed former Green Beret who saw duty in Vietnam, photographing starlets teetering out of a club in the wee hours was not a frivolous pursuit but a historical imperative.
“We’ve been recording the history of Hollywood, frame by frame,” he told CNN in 2011.
During the 1990s, Mr. Ligier said, the company’s three employees took in as much as $500,000 a year (more than $800,000 today) while scoring scoop after scoop.
Mr. Woody was also competitive. He was in one of the handful of helicopters used to photograph Elizabeth Taylor’s wedding (her eighth and last) to the construction worker Larry Fortensky at Michael Jackson’s Neverland Ranch in 1991.
Many stars came to appreciate Mr. Woody’s work. Mark Wahlberg gave him cameo appearances as a photographer on his HBO comedy “Entourage.” But others were irritated by the intrusion, and a few were furious.
In 1990 Mr. Woody was involved in a high-speed chase with Sylvester Stallone after photographing him leaving a Sunset Boulevard nightclub in Beverly Hills, Calif. Mr. Woody filed a lawsuit saying that Mr. Stallone had rammed his car, a rented Honda Civic, with his Mercedes. Mr. Stallone claimed that Mr. Woody had repeatedly smashed into his car. The case was settled out of court for an undisclosed sum.
Edward Lee Woody was born on Sept. 1, 1946, in the East Texas city of Orange. His mother, Dorothy Hildebrandt, divorced his father when he was very young, and Mr. Woody grew up in the Houston area.
He graduated from Vidor High School in 1964 and enlisted in the Army in 1966, where he joined the Army Special Forces, known as the Green Berets. He served as a medic in Vietnam and helped train a large group of indigenous Montagnards to fight with the American and South Vietnamese forces. He also started experimenting with photography while in the military. He received a Bronze Star before he was honorably discharged in 1969.
After working for a time as a bail bondsman in Texas, Mr. Woody moved to New Orleans in the mid-1970s. He began traveling around the country to photograph models and eventually settled in Malibu, Calif., in the 1980s.
Working in security and production at the Trancas Roadhouse, a Malibu music club, he began taking pictures of actors and musicians like Nick Nolte, Kris Kristofferson, Gary Busey, Bob Seger and Eddie Van Halen.
In 1989 Mr. Woody moved to Hollywood to focus on celebrity photography. He lived there at his death.
A brief marriage after he left the military ended in divorce. He is survived by his mother; a sister, Linda; a brother, Richard; a daughter, Sabrina Levert; and a grandson.
Mr. Woody said that celebrities were embracing paparazzi-style coverage as their own, which sometimes dried up the market for traditional paparazzi.
