Because of his name, which, in the view of the learned if eccentric Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II, marks him as a messenger sent by Christ, Christian is invited to court and is even housed in the same room once used by Dr. John Dee, a master alchemist “steeped in the mysteries of the kabbalah.” There’s not much magic in this tale and Christian never gets a chance to study the occult arts, but he encounters plenty of intrigue, enough to convince this naïve hero that he’s landed at “the center of an intricately devised, immensely subtle and cruelly malicious game.” He’s introduced to Turkish coffee (which hits him like “a bolt of lightning”) by the papal nuncio, seduced by the emperor’s concubine and charged by the emperor with finding the murderer.
Don Winslow’s New York cop novel THE FORCE (Morrow/HarperCollins, $27.99) is a scorcher, and if his sources are on the level it’s time for another Knapp Commission. Winslow’s charismatic hero, who is also the chief villain, is Detective First Grade Dennis John Malone, proud leader of the Manhattan North Special Task Force, which has recently made the biggest heroin bust in memory.
They own the city, these roughnecks whose minds are deep in the gutter and whose language is as ripe as rotten fruit. But they’re also crooked, having taken 50 kilos of heroin and close to $2 million in cash from that same haul. Just because these detectives are crooks doesn’t mean they can’t police their turf. In fact, the task force handles quotidian misdeeds like regular gentlemen, and the way Malone deflects an all-out gang war is genius. Like so much else in the story (the Christmas envelopes of cash, the payoffs to the wiseguys, even the turkey giveaway), Malone’s methods are thoughtful and inventive. They just aren’t entirely lawful.
St. Denis, the picturesque town in the French countryside where Martin Walker sets his enchanting mysteries, is blessed, and occasionally burdened, with a history that dates back to the early cave dwellers. In THE TEMPLARS’ LAST SECRET (Knopf, $25.95), an unknown woman falls to her death while scaling the cliff to Commarque, a medieval fortress that was once a stronghold of the Knights Templar. Bruno Courrèges, the chief of police, learns that the last master of this very rich order was burned at the stake in Paris in 1314, and legend has it that there’s buried treasure at this local landmark.
