Nearly a year has passed since an 18-year-old tourist from Virginia stepped off a boulder in Central Park onto a plastic bag, setting off explosive material inside that tore through his left leg. On Wednesday, Police Department officials stood by the same rocks, still baffled by how explosives ended up in the park and largely devoid of clues, to ask for the public’s help.
In particular, the police asked for visitors to the park to look at their photos from the days and weeks before the July 3, 2016, explosion to see if they had pictures of the rock formation. They raised the reward for successful tips to $40,000 from $10,000 offered 11 days after the explosion.
The young man, Connor Golden, now 19, was exploring the park with friends while on vacation from the University of Miami. He had set up a slackline, a tightrope about a foot off the ground, between some rocks near a crag where the bag of explosive material lay unseen. The explosion destroyed his foot and left his bones exposed; passers-by applied a tourniquet to his leg as he lay on the rocks until emergency service workers arrived.
Initially after the explosion, the police and Mayor Bill de Blasio said homemade fireworks were to blame. But at Wednesday’s news conference, John Miller, the deputy commissioner of intelligence and counterterrorism, said the bag had been filled with a compound familiar from terrorist attacks, including the recent bombing at a concert in Manchester, England, which killed 22 people.
Mr. Miller noted, though, that it lacked elements usually found in improvised explosive devices: It was placed in an out-of-the-way nook, 50 feet from a major roadway, and the chemicals were held loosely in a bag.
“It was not formed into an I.E.D.; there wasn’t a trigger, shrapnel and other things,” Mr. Miller added.
Kevin Golden, Connor’s father, has long pushed back against initial assessments that the explosives may have been firework material accidentally left in the park. The powerful chemicals, he says, were intentionally set out to injure or kill someone, and the renewed push for clues has bolstered the family.
Connor Golden, who lost most of his left leg, now walks with a prosthesis, his father said, and has returned to the University of Miami, where he will be a junior next year. He is looking forward to getting a new prosthesis that will make going to the beach easier, Mr. Golden said, and one that will permit him to jog.
