Edith Shiffert, an American poet whose work was profoundly influenced by the half-century she spent in Japan, died on March 1 in Kyoto, where she had long made her home. She was 101.
Her death, announced on the website Writers in Kyoto, was not publicized outside Japan. Ms. Shiffert, who had dementia, had been in a nursing home for about a decade, her American publisher and literary executor, Dennis Maloney, said on Friday.
The author of nearly two dozen volumes of poetry, Ms. Shiffert was published in The New Yorker and — at midcentury, when newspapers routinely printed poems — in The New York Times and elsewhere. She was also known as a writer on, and translator of, Japanese poetry.
Ms. Shiffert was a quiet sensualist, her verse characterized by spare simplicity and a deep, abiding affinity with the natural world. Her poems were inclined to be short (she was keenly influenced by haiku), and were often organized around unobtrusive — and therefore highly effective — rhyme or half-rhyme, the prosodic device in which two words are united by a shared final sound.
be nothing, but for summer they show green.
belonging to the season while they grow.
They wear the light, and that is what they are.
as air moves, and when winter comes it falls.
Grow is not a word to lightly say.
The tree is there. It uses what it is.
branches rise and spread. The tree is there.
The daughter of John Benjamin Marcombe and the former Annie Marie Drew, Edith Marion Marcombe was born in Toronto on Jan. 9, 1916. Her family moved to the United States when she was a young child, and she lived variously in Rochester, Detroit and Redondo Beach, Calif.
Ms. Shiffert moved to Kyoto in 1963. The sights and sounds of her adopted home would infuse her work.
Ms. Shiffert began writing poetry in her teens. An adventurous young woman, she lit out for Hawaii in 1938, remaining until 1945. Her time there inspired a poetry collection, “For a Return to Kona,” published in 1964.
She married Steven R. Shiffert, her first husband, in 1940, and over time lived with him in Hawaii, Alaska, California and in a log cabin they built in the Washington State wilderness.
In the late 1950s and early ’60s, she studied at the University of Washington, where her teachers included the poet Theodore Roethke.
each temple strikes its bell.
common sins and fugitive delights.
With Yuki Sawa, Ms. Shiffert compiled and translated the volumes “Anthology of Modern Japanese Poetry” (1972) and “Haiku Master Buson” (1978), a study of the 18th-century poet that is considered the first important explication of his work in English.
Ms. Shiffert’s marriage ended in divorce; she was married to Minoru Sawano from 1981 until his death in 2004. Her survivors include a sister, Alice Sindzinski.
Her other volumes of poetry include “The Kyoto Years” (1971), “Forest House With Cat” (1991) and “The Light Comes Slowly” (1997).
after a week in my room.
frailty, and going away.
of all brightnesses, persons, myself.
each still vivid orange.
and it all must be swept up and thrown away.