WASHINGTON — Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson was subjected to a full day of rough, bipartisan criticism on Tuesday as senators from both parties denounced the Trump administration’s plans to cut the State Department’s budget by about 30 percent.
Senators repeatedly asked whether issues such as the promotion of human rights, the protection of democracy, the campaign against human trafficking or efforts to halt the spread of nuclear weapons were priorities for the administration.
Mr. Tillerson assured the lawmakers that they were. But Republican and Democratic senators pressed a fundamental question: How can the Trump administration say it champions those efforts if it is cutting budgets for a range of important diplomatic initiatives — and eliminating others outright?
Each time, Mr. Tillerson patiently answered that priorities should not be judged only by dollars spent.
But he also urged other nations to do more.
Senator Bob Corker, the Tennessee Republican who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee and was among those considered by President Trump for secretary of state, began the day’s first budget hearing by describing how he and his staff members gathered on Monday to go through the administration’s budget request in detail.
At the day’s second hearing, Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, became almost derisive as he pointed out what he said were the contrasts between global needs and resources in the president’s budget.
Despite the deaths at the American diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya, in 2012, for instance, the budget reduces funding for embassy security, Mr. Graham noted. Despite a looming famine for nearly 20 million people, he said, the budget cuts funding for disaster assistance.
Mr. Graham listed the wars in Syria and Afghanistan, the fight against the Islamic State, China’s rise and the conflict in Ukraine, among others.
“You’re going to do all that and cut the budget by 29 percent?” Mr. Graham asked with incredulity.
He concluded by accusing Mr. Tillerson of putting lives at risk. Mr. Graham was followed in his remarks by Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, the ranking Democrat on the committee.
“Well, I was going to be tough, but. …” Mr. Leahy said to laughter in the hearing room.
An exchange with Senator Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, was typical of sentiments from the senators, who largely spend their public lives trying to align priorities and budgets.
“Yes,” Mr. Tillerson replied.
Senator Todd Young, Republican of Indiana, asked how the State Department was addressing the political obstacles that had prevented food and medical aid from reaching millions of people starving in Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen.
Mr. Tillerson answered that the department had spoken to the United Nations, an organization for which the Trump administration has proposed cutting support. But as with many issues, he repeated that other countries needed to do more.
“Again, on this issue, we’re trying to elicit participation by others, have others bring their own capacity as well,” he said.
In response to a question from Senator Christopher S. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut, about whether the Trump administration was withdrawing the United States from its longtime leadership position in global affairs, Mr. Tillerson said it was not. “I think as there’s a realistic and honest examination of what the American people have been asked to do relative to what some of our allies and partners have been asked to do, there’s a lack of alignment there,” he said.
Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, mentioned an international school lunch program intended to save girls in the world’s poorest countries from slavery and prostitution.
Mr. Tillerson’s delays in naming his leadership team came in for some criticism, as did his new structure for the department. Senators said that with the fiscal year nearing an end, they would need some hint of how the department would be organized to fund it appropriately. Mr. Tillerson, an engineer, described the careful process he was undertaking for his reorganization.
“And when you say this year, you mean this fiscal year?” Mr. Corker asked hopefully, which would mean an announcement in September.
“This calendar year,” Mr. Tillerson answered — or three months later.
“Calendar year,” Mr. Corker repeated, his eyebrows rising.