In the 72nd game of their season, the Yankees fielded a starting lineup that would have seemed perfectly reasonable in spring training.
Mason Williams was the center fielder, Austin Romine was the catcher, and less than 12 hours after he had been a member of the Class AAA Scranton/Wilkes-Barre RailRiders, Tyler Austin was at first base. Luis Cessa was the starting pitcher, and the average age of the 10 players was 26. Only one player had reached his 30th birthday, and at 37, Matt Holliday seemed out of place.
For the last several years, the Yankees have said their goal is to get younger, and they achieved that objective Saturday afternoon against the Texas Rangers.
But younger does not necessarily mean better. The Saturday squad showed promise — Williams stole two bases; the 26-year-old reliever Tyler Webb, making his major league debut, retired all four batters he faced; and Aaron Judge, 25, hit his major-league-leading 26th home run of the season. Ultimately, though, the Yankees could not keep up with the veterans on the other side of the field.
Carlos Gomez, who is 31 and an 11-year veteran, belted a two-run homer off the 24-year-old Cessa in the fourth. Robinson Chirinos, 33, lined a solo home run off Jonathan Holder, 24, in the seventh. And Texas starter Austin Bibens-Dirkx, technically a rookie at age 32, limited the Yankees to five hits — including Judge’s towering home run to left — in seven innings as the Rangers won, 8-1, at Yankee Stadium.
The loss was the Yankees’ ninth in their last 11 games, but they remained tied for first place in the American League East because the Boston Red Sox lost to the Los Angeles Angels, 6-3.
The Yankees’ youth movement began last year when they shed the aging bodies and bloated contracts of Alex Rodriguez, Carlos Beltran and Brian McCann and bade farewell to the retiring Mark Teixeira. A half-hour after Friday’s rain-delayed, 10-inning victory over the Rangers, the Yankees designated first baseman Chris Carter for assignment and named Austin their everyday first baseman, at least until the return of the 24-year-old Greg Bird, who sustained a bone bruise on his ankle in spring training.
On Saturday, Manager Joe Girardi gave the day off to Brett Gardner, a 33-year-old left fielder who, in his 10th season, has the longest tenure on the team, and third baseman Chase Headley, also 33. Gary Sanchez was given the day off, too, because not even 24-year-old catchers are expected to play day games after night games.
Making just his fourth major league start, Bibens-Dirkx kept the young Yankees off balance with a collection of off-speed pitches. He struck out Austin twice and, in his third at-bat, got him to rap into a double play, right after the Yankees had gotten Didi Gregorius aboard on a single to start the seventh. Beyond Judge’s home run, only twice did a Yankee reach second base, both times because Williams, who walked and singled, stole second.
Cessa, thrust into the starting rotation when C. C. Sabathia went on the disabled list with a hamstring strain, was at times baffling and overpowering — his first six outs were by strikeout — but he walked the first batter he faced, Delino DeShields, who wound up scoring on a single by Elvis Andrus. Cessa also hung a 1-2 slider that became Gomez’s 10th home run of the season, in the fourth.
The Rangers added four runs in the ninth off Tyler Clippard, who has allowed nine earned runs in his last one and a third innings.
After a day of looking at young players, things should return to a semblance of normalcy at Yankee Stadium on Sunday. It is Old-Timers’ Day.
