WASHINGTON — An American communications company in 2014 balked at an “expansion” of the National Security Agency’s warrantless surveillance program, but was ordered to comply by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, a newly declassified document shows.
The previously secret fight, which played out quietly amid a public debate over surveillance that was prompted by the 2013 leaks by the intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden, was described in a 37-page ruling issued in 2014 by Judge Rosemary M. Collyer.
The ruling was heavily redacted when it was made public this week. Its uncensored portions did not say whether the challenge was brought by a telecommunications provider like AT&T that is part of the program’s “upstream” system or by a Silicon Valley internet company like Google that is part of the program’s “Prism” system.
It also did not say what the “expansion” was or what legal arguments the company had made about it.
Still, the disclosure was significant. Although several users and privacy groups have tried to sue to block spying under the FISA Amendments Act, the 2008 law that legalized a form of the Bush administration’s post-Sept. 11 warrantless surveillance program, the 2014 fight is the first time that a communications company that works with the N.S.A. is known to have challenged it.
That act expires at the end of 2017. Congress is starting to debate whether to reauthorize it and, if so, whether to impose new restrictions on it.
“The anonymous tech company that brought this challenge should be commended for defending its users’ privacy, and other companies must do the same by fighting for critical reforms in the courts and in Congress,” said Ashley Gorski, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union.
The ruling, focusing on the 2014 fight over the FISA Amendments Act, came to light because of separate but overlapping Freedom of Information Act lawsuits by the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the A.C.L.U.
The dispute traces back to Stellarwind, the secret post-Sept. 11 program through which the N.S.A. collected international phone calls and emails linked to terrorism suspects from American telecommunications providers without the warrants required by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, or FISA.
After Stellarwind was exposed and prompted legal controversy, Congress responded by enacting the short-lived Protect America Act in 2007, and then the FISA Amendments Act the next year.
Those laws permitted the government to collect, without a warrant and on domestic soil, the communications of foreign citizens abroad who have been targeted for intelligence collection — even when they are talking to Americans. And the laws permitted the government to extend the surveillance to Silicon Valley firms — not just the N.S.A.’s longstanding telecommunications partners.
In a then-secret fight in 2007 and 2008, Yahoo challenged an order it received under the Protect America Act, but lost. The dispute came to light in 2013, and the government in 2014 declassified that information and additional details about the litigation.
Over time, the government has continued to expand the surveillance program, such as when the Justice Department in mid-2012 secretly approved using it to sift cross-border internet traffic for “cybersignatures” associated with foreign government hackers. That expansion came to light as part of Mr. Snowden’s disclosures.
Mark Rumold, a lawyer for the Electronic Frontier Foundation, said the details of the legal fight over the further expansion in 2014, whatever it was, should be part of the public debate as Congress deliberates extending the FISA Amendments Act.
