Otis Redding performing at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967.Credit...Bruce Fleming/Associated Press.
Fifty years ago this month, the rock community held its first large-scale gathering at the Monterey Pop Festival. For several of the performers — Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, the Who — the event marked the moment of their discovery, at least by American listeners. For Otis Redding, though, Monterey represented a transformation of his audience.
Later that summer, Redding retreated to a houseboat in Sausalito and, inspired by the brand-new “Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band” (“You got to listen to this,” he said to his wife, Zelma. “This is bad.”), began to explore new directions in his songwriting. Six months after Monterey, though, Redding was gone, killed at the age of 26 when his rickety private plane crashed into a frigid lake en route to a show in Madison, Wis. “(Sittin’ on) The Dock of the Bay,” released a few weeks after his death, would fulfill the promise of Monterey and go all the way to the top of the pop charts.
Access to Redding’s surviving family helps Gould flesh out his upbringing and offstage personality; he comes across as more quick-witted (“nobody ever taught him anything; he just knew everything,” his sister Louise says) and cocky (while working as an orderly at a hospital, he slapped one of the doctors) than his usual simple, solid image.
Exhaustive research into Redding’s early years as a performer reveals both his dedication and his uncertain musical vision. One fascinating figure is Johnny Jenkins, a local guitar hero in Redding’s hometown, Macon, Ga., who takes Redding under his wing — opinions vary widely as to whether Jenkins was an underappreciated genius or an overrated showboat. He plays a key role in the story, though, when he blows his 1962 audition at Stax Records in Memphis and Redding, who had driven Jenkins and his band to the gig, is allowed a turn at the microphone just to fill time at the end of the session.
Music historians like Peter Guralnick, Rob Bowman and Robert Gordon have all done essential work on the history of Stax, but Gould takes a contrary and provocative position on the label’s relationship to its greatest star. He argues that while the Stax co-founder and head honcho Jim Stewart was scrupulous in paying his artists, creatively he was in way over his head; “his consistent misjudgment of records that proved to be hits” illustrated that he was “content to sit and wait for songs to walk in the door.” Gould makes a convincing case that, while Redding’s recordings are never less than compelling thanks to his remarkable voice, Stewart’s shortcomings — he couldn’t fathom the contemplative, almost folk-based “Dock of the Bay” — held Redding back as a songwriter and repeatedly stymied his popular momentum.
Though Redding wrote or co-wrote classics like “Respect” and “I’ve Been Loving You Too Long,” certainly much of his greatest work came as an interpretive singer, often of such seemingly unlikely material as “Satisfaction” (a rare example, Gould writes, of “a black artist soliciting the attention of white listeners by riding roughshod over one of the great pop songs of the day”) or his showstopping, sweat-drenched version of “Try a Little Tenderness” (“an act of cultural appropriation, not accommodation”).
