• Read updates from Day 11 of the Bill Cosby trial.
• The fifth day of deliberations in the Bill Cosby sexual assault trial ended Friday with the jury still at an impasse, but Judge Steven T. O’Neill expressed hope that the jurors were coming closer to consensus on whether the entertainer had drugged and sexually assaulted Andrea Constand.
• It’s unclear what the deadlock is about, but the jury asked the judge Friday morning to explain the standard of proof in a criminal trial. What does proving something “beyond a reasonable doubt” mean?
• The jurors also asked to be read sections of Mr. Cosby’s deposition from a 2005 lawsuit filed by Ms. Constand in which he discussed how he had obtained quaaludes in an effort to have sex with women, and also the testimony from Ms. Constand’s mother, Gianna.
• Judge O’Neill said he would let the jury deliberate as long as they wanted to and he denied defense motions seeking a mistrial.
Judge O’Neill spoke about reasonable doubt for the jurors.
He said the prosecution does not have to prove its case beyond all doubt to a point of absolute certainty.
A reasonable doubt, he said, is one that causes a juror to hesitate, but it must be real.
The judge then reread Mr. Cosby’s own words from previous deposition testimony in which he discussed obtaining several prescriptions for quaaludes, ostensibly for his back, but he used them instead as a party drug with women in order to have sex.
The jury had previously asked for other parts of the deposition testimony to be read, but this was the first time they had asked for his words about quaaludes. As the judge read the testimony, jury members paid close attention, looking at the screen where the words were projected.
Mr.  Ms. Constand, her mother and her sister were also in court.
Judge O’Neill rejected another defense motion for a mistrial and punctured any notion that he was in any kind of rush.
Later, the jury asked to hear the testimony of Ms. Constand’s mother again.
She had confronted Mr. Cosby in a phone call in which he apologized for his encounter with her daughter, offered to pay for therapy and schooling, but did not acknowledge any assault. The jurors also asked to review phone records that the defense had cited to show that Ms. Constand had continued contact with Mr. Cosby even after the evening in early 2004 when she says he drugged and assaulted her. Ms. Constand said many of the calls were associated with her need to keep in contact with Mr. Cosby because he was a trustee of Temple University, where she worked.
The defense has said that the jury is basically replaying the entire trial with its repeat requests to hear evidence. The judge had agreed to all the jury’s requests to go back over things until Friday afternoon when he refused to let them review a section of Mrs. Constand’s testimony a second time. It concerned a phone conversation between Mrs. Constand and Mr. Cosby, where he gave his version of what had transpired on the night Andrea Constand says she was assaulted.
The media gathering outside of the Montgomery County Courthouse during jury deliberations on Thursday in Norristown, Pa.
Everyone will be back Saturday as the jurors will continue their deliberations.
“We will decide what tomorrow brings when tomorrow comes,” Judge O’Neill said as he released the jurors Friday night to return to their hotel.
It’s not clear whether he meant the length of the deliberations or the professionalism of the jurors, or both. Certainly there have been criminal cases outside of Norristown where deliberations extended past six days.
Nonetheless, the deliberations have been a long, exhausting process for all concerned. And they are not over.