CHICAGO — Tonya Harding has a message for anyone who thinks she was in on the 1994 attack that injured her figure skating rival Nancy Kerrigan.
“Get over it,” she said in 2014.
Leah Raidt and Kelli Simpkins in Dan Aibel's play about the American figure skater Tonya Harding.
The enduring fascination with the case is, of course, fueled by ’90s nostalgia and the feverish draw, much accelerated since 1994, of watching a celebrity behave badly. But “T.” continues a longstanding conversation about Ms. Harding as a misunderstood, class-cornered dark horse to Ms. Kerrigan’s endorsement-deal princess.
Whether they’re campy or cold sober, here’s a look at how other projects are rethinking, and have rethought, the real Ms. Harding.
‘THE PRICE OF GOLD’ Part of ESPN’s “30 for 30” series, this 2014 documentary focuses mostly on the travails of Ms. Harding, who agreed to be interviewed. (Ms. Kerrigan did not.) Writing in The New York Times, the television critic Mike Hale called it a “crisp, smart, comprehensive account” that makes clear that “the Harding-Kerrigan story is as much about class and its resentments as it is about sports.” It’s available for streaming on Amazon.
‘TONYA AND NANCY: THE ROCK OPERA’ This darkly comedic piece, with music by Michael Teoli and a book and lyrics by Elizabeth Searle, had its premiere in 2008 in Portland, Ore., and has been mounted in Los Angeles, New York and Chicago. Ms. Searle said Ms. Harding herself attended a performance. “She got onstage, and said everyone here deserves a big applause,” Ms. Searle said. “We went out drinking with her at a pub, and she played video poker.” Ms. Searle is eyeing productions next year in Toronto and Washington.
The greeting card designer Taylor Hamilton said her cheeky artwork was meant to celebrate, not pick on, Ms. Harding. “She was an underdog,” said Ms. Hamilton, whose card company is called Tay Ham. “I know what she did was really bad, but she was super talented and she had a rough go of things.” Ms. Hamilton said the card is one of her best sellers.
