WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court dealt North Carolina a setback on Monday in a voting rights case for the third time in recent weeks, affirming a decision that struck down many state legislative districts for relying too heavily on race.
The court also ordered a lower court to reconsider whether racial gerrymandering in North Carolina required a special election this year. And in a third, separate ruling, the justices agreed to decide a major case on the privacy of cellphone records.
The court’s summary affirmance of the ruling to strike down the North Carolina voting districts gave no reasons, and there were no noted dissents. But the question in the case was similar to one the justices addressed last month, in which the court struck down two of the state’s congressional districts as racial gerrymanders.
The new case presented the same basic question in the context of the state’s General Assembly.
Last August, a three-judge Federal District Court unanimously struck down 28 State House and Senate districts drawn in 2011 by the Republican-led legislature, saying the districts violated equal protection principles by using race as the predominant factor without good reason. The trial court rejected the state’s argument that the districts, as drawn, were justified as an attempt to comply with the Voting Rights Act.
That court said it made “no finding that the General Assembly acted in bad faith or with discriminatory intent in drawing the challenged districts,” which it noted were approved by the Justice Department under a part of the Voting Rights Act that was later effectively struck down by the Supreme Court. “Nor do we consider whether the challenged districts involved any impermissible ‘packing’ of minority voters,” the trial court added.
Nonetheless, the court said, lawmakers had violated the Equal Protection Clause by focusing too heavily on race in drawing the contested districts. The Supreme Court affirmed that ruling, in North Carolina v. Covington, No. 16-649.
The justices also took action in a separate appeal in the case, North Carolina v. Covington, No. 16-1023, dealing with a late November order by the trial court for special elections in 2017, about halfway through what would ordinarily be two-year terms for state legislators.
The trial court set a March 15 deadline for state lawmakers to draw new maps. But the Supreme Court intervened in January, blocking the November decision. At the time, the justices did not explain the move, and their order said that the temporary stay of the lower court’s decision would last only as long as it took the justices to consider an appeal from state officials.
On Monday, in an unsigned opinion without noted dissents, the Supreme Court said the trial court had acted too hastily and ordered it to reconsider the matter of whether a special election was warranted.
“Although this court has never addressed whether or when a special election may be a proper remedy for a racial gerrymander, obvious considerations include the severity and nature of the particular constitutional violation, the extent of the likely disruption to the ordinary processes of governance if early elections are imposed, and the need to act with proper judicial restraint when intruding on state sovereignty,” the opinion said.
“Rather than undertaking such an analysis in this case, the District Court addressed the balance of equities in only the most cursory fashion,” it added.
The decisions were the latest in a series of voting rights cases from North Carolina. Last month, the Supreme Court also declined to hear an appeal of yet another decision concerning the state, one that had struck down parts of a restrictive state law that tightened voter identification requirements and cut back on early voting.
In the privacy case, the Supreme Court will decide whether the government needs a warrant to obtain information from cellphone companies showing their customers’ locations.
The case, Carpenter v. United States, No. 16-402, concerns Timothy Carpenter, who was convicted of nine armed robberies in Michigan and Ohio based in part on phone location records that showed his movements over time, and helped place him at the scenes of the crimes.
Nathan Freed Wessler, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union, which represents Mr. Carpenter, said the Fourth Amendment requires more. “Because cellphone location records can reveal countless private details of our lives, police should only be able to access them by getting a warrant based on probable cause,” he said.
The Supreme Court has limited the government’s ability to use GPS devices to track suspects’ movements, and it has required a warrant to search cellphones.
In 1979, in Smith v. Maryland, the Supreme Court ruled that a robbery suspect had no reasonable expectation that his right to privacy extended to the numbers dialed from his phone. The court reasoned that the suspect had voluntarily turned over that information to a third party: the phone company.
In rejecting the argument that the relaxed standard violated the Fourth Amendment, which bans unreasonable searches, a divided three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, said the Smith decision answered the question in Mr. Carpenter’s case.
“For the same reasons that Smith had no expectation of privacy in the numerical information at issue there, the defendants have no such expectation in the locational information here,” Judge Raymond M. Kethledge wrote for the majority when the case was before the appeals court. Judge Kethledge has appeared on lists of potential Supreme Court nominees compiled by the Trump administration.