LOS ANGELES — There is a photograph taken on the coast of Cuba with the lights of Miami in the distance — what a refugee would see just before setting out. Taken by Virginia Beahan, a large-format photographer, it hangs in the home of Bruce Berman, chairman and chief executive of Village Roadshow Pictures and possibly Hollywood’s most ardent photography collector. Mr. Berman said that he acquired Ms. Beahan’s photo because its desolate beauty spoke to him. “A very magical picture — it fit into the collection nicely,” he said.
Mr. Berman has overseen more than 100 movies — including “Ocean’s Eleven,” “Training Day” and Steven Spielberg’s coming “Ready Player One” — but considered becoming a fine-art photographer himself while an undergraduate at U.C.L.A., Bennington College and the California Institute of the Arts in the 1970s, when he shot roll upon roll of Kodak Tri-X and Ektachrome film on road trips. “Those were great opportunities to take photographs of a part of America you don’t see if you’re born and raised in New York,” he said.
Mr. Berman’s collecting aesthetic runs to the unsparing Americana of Walker Evans, William Eggleston and Dorothea Lange, as well as the contemporary acolytes Christian Patterson, Sheron Rupp and Joel Sternfeld, whose haunting photo of a condemned house in the toxic Love Canal neighborhood of Niagara Falls, N.Y., remains a favorite. Mr. Berman and his former wife, Nancy Goliger, amassed 2,600 photographs that they auctioned after their divorce in 2007 or donated (source for the J. Paul Getty Museum’s 2006-7 exhibition “Where We Live: Photographs of America”). This year, Mr. Berman donated 400 additional photos from his collection to the Getty and other institutions.
These are edited excerpts from a recent conversation.
What inspired you to collect?
When I was president of production at Warner Bros., a producer gave me a [Edward S.] Curtis print of an Indian tepee. It was a beautiful picture and I sort of put two and two together and said, I guess you could actually buy pictures that museums show.
A person that worked for me said, “For the same amount of money you’re spending on these hundreds of photographs, you could buy a really important and valuable painting.” And he was right, but it just wasn’t the way that I wanted to collect, because I was drawn to photography first and didn’t really know that much about painting. There is a good feeling you get when you might have been a fine-art photographer, like you’re enabling somebody do their passion.
You advocate directly commissioning works from emerging photographers.
All you’ve got to do is ask. I would have never thought of asking until I found that this was something they welcome. A lot of photographers teach at universities and use their summers or sabbaticals to do their real, serious work.
You’ve made more than 100 movies. How do still photographs compare?
I can be really visually turned on by the imagery that the director and cinematographer have teamed up to put on. But there’s a narrative to a lot of the pictures that I collect or admire. And it’s not something like, “Hmm. I really like that picture — I’ll think about it over the weekend.” If it’s a picture that I instantly connect with and if it’s available and I can afford it, I buy it.
Henri Cartier-Bresson, Joel Meyerowitz and others were famous for never cropping their photos.
That’s brilliant composition. Part of the skill of the photographer is to put in the full frame — like a painter would — of what you’re going to see.
How do you account for the differing styles of photographers when they are all using, more or less, the same device?
Let me analogize to music. Take a Fender guitar. Jimi Hendrix played a Stratocaster one way and Eric Clapton played it another way. And one of the other interesting ingredients, besides who the photographer is, is the subject.