A Bronx man conducted surveillance of military and intelligence outposts in New York City as well as Kennedy International Airport in support of anticipated terrorist attacks by Hezbollah, the federal authorities said in a criminal complaint released in Manhattan on Thursday.
The man, Ali Kourani, a 32-year-old naturalized citizen from Lebanon, told the F.B.I. in a series of interviews that he believed he had been recruited to join Hezbollah’s Islamic Jihad Organization as part of an effort to develop “sleepers” who lived ostensibly normal lives but could be “activated and tasked” with conducting operations, the complaint said.
Islamic Jihad Organization is a Hezbollah group that is responsible for the planning and coordination of intelligence, counterintelligence and terrorist activities outside Lebanon, the office of Joon H. Kim, the acting United States attorney in Manhattan, said in the complaint.
Prosecutors said that a second man, Samer El Debek, 37, of Dearborn, Mich., had also been charged with working on behalf of Hezbollah. Mr. El Debek had traveled on missions for the group, including a 2011 trip to Panama where he surveilled security procedures at the Israeli Embassy and the Panama Canal, the authorities said.
Both men were charged with providing material support to a terrorist organization and other counts and were ordered held without bail, Mr. Kim’s office said.
Mr. Kim announced the charges along with William F. Sweeney Jr., the head of the F.B.I.’s New York office; James P. O’Neill, the New York City police commissioner; and Dana J. Boente, the acting assistant attorney general for national security. A lawyer for Mr. Kourani declined to comment. Mr. El Debek’s lawyer could not be reached for comment.
The complaint against Mr. Kourani stated that he gave several voluntary interviews to the F.B.I. in 2016 and 2017. Five interviews were conducted this year, according to the complaint, after a lawyer representing Mr. Kourani approached the bureau and said his client wanted to provide information in hopes of securing financial support and immigration benefits for some of his relatives.
“No promises were made to Kourani regarding such benefits,” the authorities said in the complaint, adding that the five interviews had been conducted in the lawyer’s office, with the lawyer present. The complaint did not indicate why the government had decided to charge Mr. Kourani when it did.
Mr. Kourani said in the interviews that he had been allowed to attend a Hezbollah “boot camp” in Lebanon when he was 16 years old because of his family’s connections to a high-ranking Hezbollah official, according to the complaint.
“Kourani considers his family name to be akin to the ‘bin Ladens of Lebanon,’ and one of his brothers is the ‘face of Hezbollah’ in Yater, Lebanon,” the complaint said.
Mr. Kourani said he had been recruited to join the organization in 2008, in light of his education and because he lived in the United States, the authorities said in the complaint. They said that he had told the authorities that one of his first instructions from his “handler” in Lebanon, a man called Fadi, was to obtain American citizenship as soon as possible, which he did in 2009.
The complaint said that Mr. Kourani had also obtained a bachelor of science degree in biomedical engineering in 2009, and in 2013, a master of business administration. The complaint did not identify the colleges, but a LinkedIn page for a man with his name who obtained those degrees in those years identifies the schools as City College of New York and DeVry University’s Keller Graduate School of Management.
Among the locations Mr. Kourani said he had surveilled were a government site that includes F.B.I. offices and an Army National Guard center, both in Manhattan, and a Secret Service site in Brooklyn.
He said that he had also provided detailed information to Fadi about Kennedy Airport’s security and baggage screening protocols and on the locations of surveillance cameras and law enforcement officers.
Mr. Kourani said he had also been told to develop contacts in New York who could provide guns for use in potential future operations in the United States, the complaint said.