Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s TV and movie recommendation site.
In the middle of her run on “Alias” as a C.I.A. double agent of peerless skill and professionalism, Jennifer Garner pulled an appealing reversal in this fantasy/rom-com, which casts her as an insecure 13-year-old transported to the body of her 30-year-old self. Although it owes something to the body-swapping comedies of the ’80s, like “Vice Versa” or “Like Father, Like Son,” “13 Going on 30” is a little smarter and funnier, with Mark Ruffalo as an earnest love interest and Judy Greer doing her customary scene-stealing in support.
Two of the predominant trends of the late ’80s and ’90s — the sexy thriller and Michael Douglas’s putting himself at the center of controversy (“Basic Instinct” was both) — got kicked off by “Fatal Attraction,” a psychological thriller about infidelity and its murderous consequences. It seems startling now that a film this flagrantly sordid and provocative got enough respect to earn six Oscar nominations (including one for best picture), but Douglas and Glenn Close sell their mislaid passions convincingly, and the ending is still a guaranteed conversation-starter.
At Sundance last year, this scorching biopic from Nate Parker about Nat Turner and his slave rebellion looked like an early Oscar favorite. By the fall, when details of a rape allegation from Parker’s college days resurfaced, the film could find no champions. The controversy notwithstanding, “The Birth of a Nation” can be seen as a deeply flawed but invigorating passion project about a slave whose religious conviction was weaponized — first by his oppressors, second for violent liberation.
There’s barely a moment in this ruthlessly economical — and just plain ruthless — 76-minute debut feature from Nicolas Pesce that isn’t primed to unsettle or disturb. Photographed in black and white, “The Eyes of My Mother” opens with a shocking home invasion in an isolated farmhouse, then follows a girl who carries that trauma into young adulthood, when her intense loneliness, combined with her late mother’s surgical skill, feeds a gruesome obsession.
This coming-of-age comedy from Kelly Fremon Craig didn’t make much of an impact last year, but it’s one of those movies that will inspire oral histories and tribute articles 10 or 15 years from now. Comparisons to John Hughes are appropriate but diminishes Fremon Craig, who has written and directed a funnier, more foul-mouthed and more insightful portrait of adolescent woes than Hughes ever managed. Hailee Steinfeld plays its irascible hero, a high-school outcast who clings to a single friend and turns to her history teacher (Woody Harrelson) for counsel.
After telling his own Vietnam story in the Oscar-winning “Platoon,” director Oliver Stone told America’s Vietnam story in “Born on the Fourth of July,” an emotional epic about one man’s 40-year odyssey from flag-waving idealist to wounded warrior to disillusioned activist. Stone’s weakness for the big statement becomes an asset here: The fireworks, home runs and other all-American clichés work to underline the allure of military service for volunteers like Ron Kovic (played by Tom Cruise) while setting him up for much harsher realizations about his country.
Over the past 10 years, the candor and raunch of “Knocked Up” has been so widely imitated — and its director and many of its stars have become so famous — that it’s hard to remember how refreshing it seemed at the time. Romantic comedies had become tame, contrived, PG-13 affairs with little connection to real-world problems, so witnessing a mismatched couple (Seth Rogen and Katherine Heigl) take an unwanted pregnancy to term was a minor revelation. Writer-director Judd Apatow isn’t afraid to provoke discussion, and “Knocked Up” is livelier and funnier for it.
Sketch comedy has been historically ill-suited to the screen, but the hit-to-miss ratio of this anthology film from Monty Python is remarkably high, covering the subjects of birth, death and everything in between. Highlights include the Roman Catholic musical anthem “Every Sperm Is Sacred,” John Cleese’s delivery of an exceedingly formal lecture on sex education and the lower-than-low comedy of a morbidly obese diner eating just one wafer-thin mint too much for dinner.
The latest season of this women-in-prison series reportedly continues the darker tone set by the fourth season, which ended with the chillingly evocative drama of a guard’s killing an inmate and a riot staged by the women of Litchfield. The fifth season bottles the tension by narrowing the entire season’s time frame to span just three days.
Audiences might have expected a diverting pastel shoot-‘em-up from the film version of the hit ’80s television show “Miami Vice,” if not a full-blown parody. But director Michael Mann denied them both, which may explain why the film had trouble recouping its budget. Mann’s grandiose style, defined by the sleek wonders of South Beach and the hard-hitting gunfights, helps distinguish this version of “Miami Vice” from its small-screen source.
In adapting Dennis Lehane’s novel about a United States Marshal (Leonardo DiCaprio) and his partner (Mark Ruffalo) investigating a disappearance at a secluded mental hospital, director Martin Scorsese takes the opportunity to squeeze Lehane’s pulp thriller for every drop it’s worth. As the procedural goes deeper into the island and into the hospital’s dark inner workings, Scorsese uses his expressive powers to bring psychic stress to vibrant visual life.
Extending a Disney animation hot streak that includes “Tangled,” “Wreck-It Ralph,” “Big Hero Six,” and “Frozen,” this beautiful Polynesian adventure respects the burdens of leadership placed on its young heroine and the courage necessary for her to secure her subjects’ future. It also has one of Disney’s most playful and affecting soundtracks, courtesy of Mark Mancina, Opetaia Foa’i and the creator of “Hamilton,” Lin-Manuel Miranda.
 Driven by Annette Bening’s performance as a bohemian single mother in 1979 Santa Barbara, “20th Century Women” allows a certain plotlessness in order to serve as a repository for Mills’s specific memories of the time and the people he recalls so vividly.
In their vastly entertaining take on the Charles Portis novel, the Coen brothers delight in the violence and vernacular of the Old West while preserving the melancholy at the heart of its journey. As a 14-year-old girl searching open territory for her father’s killer, Hailee Steinfeld’s Mattie Ross stands in beautiful and comic contrast with Jeff Bridges’s recalcitrant Rooster Cogburn. The film gets funnier still once Matt Damon’s Texas Ranger attaches himself like a third wheel.
Children of the ’80s might remember “G.L.O.W.” or the “Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling” as a syndicated source of grappling beauties in spandex and silly comic sketches. This new Netflix original series goes behind the scenes of this haphazard operation, following a wannabe actress (Alison Brie) who auditions for the nascent circuit and gets roped into its peculiar and dysfunctional culture.
Fresh from its premiere at the Cannes Film Festival in May, the latest from Bong Joon-ho, the superb Korean director of “The Host” and “Snowpiercer,” is an experiment in sweet, family-friendly adventure. The “Okja” of the title is a massive, pig-shaped animal that’s taken from its home in the South Korean mountains by a corporation. As the company’s chief executive (Tilda Swinton) transports the creature to New York, its young caretaker (An Seo-hyun) follows along in an effort to bring her beloved pet home.
“Burlesque” (June 1), “Homeland” Season 5 (June 1), “Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children” (June 1), “iZombie” Season 3 (June 7), “Animal Kingdom” Season 1 (June 14), “A Man Called Ove” (June 16), “Uncle Buck” (June 22), “We Are Your Friends” (June 27) and “The Curious Case of Benjamin Button” (June 29).
