Though a bill to terminate the remaining travel restrictions to Cuba garnered 55 votes in the Senate last week, President Trump is considering reviving limits on travel to the island, potentially disrupting investments in Cuba made by travel companies since President Barack Obama relaxed restrictions in 2014.
Since that time, Starwood Hotels & Resorts struck a management deal with two hotels in Cuba. Airlines including American, JetBlue, Southwest and United began direct flights. Cruise traffic, too, is growing; in addition to several smaller lines, Norwegian Cruise Line now travels to the island, and Holland America Line just announced its intention to begin cruising there in December.
“Now there are a lot of investments and a lot of skin in the game, and it’s a more complicated picture,” said Tom Popper, president of Insight Cuba, which has been operating tours on the island since 2000.
What a change in policy would look like with respect to travel remains unclear. It’s possible the White House could impose stricter regulations on travel licenses, several tour operators say, or return to the restricted licensing in place before December 2014.
Currently, Americans can visit Cuba under a general license that requires them to self-certify that they will engage with Cubans on a people-to-people basis for educational purposes. In practice, customs and immigration agents don’t ask for proof that a traveler’s itinerary includes meetings with Cubans. Stricter enforcement is one possible change.
If licensing reverts to a pre-Obama-agreement system, group tour operators, including cruises, might continue to operate under the people-to-people license for which they apply.
It may be much harder for people to travel solo, however, as qualifying under one of the 12 acceptable reasons for travel, which include the people-to-people provision, requires documentation of an educational itinerary. But interest remains high among individual travelers. Airbnb announced that demand for Havana over the Memorial Day holiday was up 940 percent over last year.
Cabdrivers, guesthouses and private restaurants in Cuba patronized by individual travelers would most likely feel the impact of restrictions.
Should travel to Cuba slow, the pressure on hotels and restaurants — where demand outstrips supply — may ease and prices fall. Mr. Lubbers said prices had risen 300 percent in the past two years.
