On the Lower East Side of the 21st century, within the context of multimillion-dollar condominiums, luxury hotels and purveyors of $26-a-pound cheeses arriving one after the other, near the very housing projects that replaced the tenements Riis described, an animosity has taken shape not solely between the rich and the struggling, but between the poor and the marginally better off. One indicator of this tension exists in the presence of a set of gates, erected last month, with little notice, at the opposite ends of Masaryk Towers, a complex of about 1,100 low-equity co-op apartments built in the 1960s, under the Mitchell-Lama program, an initiative underwritten with state and city funds to provide affordable housing for those of moderate income.
Masaryk Towers is bordered by others — the Gompers Houses and the Baruch Houses, properties of the New York City Housing Authority whose residents for the most part lack the capital to purchase shares at Masaryk, however modest the cost (about $14,000 for a three-bedroom apartment, essentially an entry fee, supplemented by monthly maintenance charges). The income limit for a household occupying a one-bedroom is close to $97,000 a year, meaning that the complex accommodates members of both the professional and working classes.
The gates are more than a matter of symbolism, blaring the words “Private Property.” They have cut off the passage between Columbia Street to the west and Pitt Street to the east, along a stretch of Rivington Street that was “de-mapped” by the city 50 years ago, when Masaryk was built. The passage had served as a pathway for residents of Gompers and Baruch, the largest public-housing development in Manhattan, to get to the various locations of the Grand Street Settlement, a century-old provider of social services to the Lower East Side’s poor.
The Baruch Houses contain at least one building designated by the city as a NORC, the sociologist’s acronym for a naturally occurring retirement community. Residents of the building, many of whom were relocated from their original homes during the urban renewal drive of the 1950s and ’60s, have come to depend on the services for older people — meals and bingo and exercise classes — that Grand Street offers. As Carmen Sotomayor, who is in her 70s, explained to me, a trip that used to take her five minutes when the path was open now takes 15, and she merely suffers with arthritis and doesn’t require the canes and wheelchairs her friends do. Another woman, Edna Gay, a tall 79-year-old, said her trip is now 30 minutes, and she is accustomed to going to Grand Street twice a day.
Since the gates went up, the senior center has lost about 30 regular patrons, Ines de la Nuez, who runs Grand Street’s programs for older people, said; she worries about the isolation that could afflict those who no longer come, and about the greater falloff that is inevitable during the winter. Grand Street provides early childhood services as well, and now mothers and their children, cut off from the most convenient route, must walk a polluted and shadeless stretch of Delancey Street, where the drug trade flourishes on one particular corner, to get where they are going.
What is the reason for all of this? A letter from the Masaryk Towers board of directors that went out to the community late last month said Masaryk has had problems with crime, vandalism, alcohol use, rowdiness and trash for years, “largely attributable to nonresidents.” Discussion about the gates had gone on for a decade, Mitch Magidson, Masaryk’s property manager, explained, but the complex had suffered financial problems for a long time. Maintenance increases over 16 months in 2011 and 2012, totaling 28 percent, eased some of those stresses, allowing for the resources to build the gates. Since they were installed, “the quality of life here has improved so dramatically that it’s unbelievable,” he told me.
Settlement houses were created during the progressive era as a means of building an intimacy between the fortunate and the less so, an intimacy that hasn’t merely seemed to vanish, but whose vestiges now seem under attack.
