Food & Wine is moving to Birmingham, Ala., joining a stable of other publications owned by Time Inc.
Food & Wine, the glossy, chef-focused food magazine, is moving to Birmingham, Ala., joining a stable of other publications owned by Time Inc. that includes Cooking Light and Southern Living.
Hunter Lewis, the editor of Cooking Light, will become Food & Wine’s new editor in chief, replacing Nilou Motamed, who is leaving the company after a little more than a year. Ms. Motamed had taken over from Dana Cowin, who edited the magazine for more than 20 years. The magazine started in New York in 1978 as The International Review of Food and Wine.
Food & Wine will take up residence in the multimillion-dollar complex — housing 28 test kitchens and 13 photography bays and video studios — that Time opened in 2015. The center produces food-related content for a wide variety of Time publications, not just its food titles.
Around the time the complex opened, Time was moving out of its longtime home in the Time-Life Building at Rockefeller Center, and as part of that move, Food & Wine got a new test kitchen and photography studios in Lower Manhattan. Mr. Lewis said that those operations would remain after the magazine moved to Alabama and that the magazine’s digital team would stay in New York.
Ruth Reichl, the former New York Times restaurant critic who was the editor of Gourmet magazine when it closed in 2009, said it made sense for Time to consolidate its food publications in Birmingham, where costs are cheaper.
“The kitchens are an amazing vehicle for creating not just recipes but also creating stories,” Mr. Lewis said, pointing to Well Done, an Epicurious-like site that Time introduced three months ago with a focus on how-to cooking videos. Mr. Lewis said the videos on Well Done had already attracted 265 million views.
The relocation is a gamble, though. Unlike Time’s other food titles, which cater more to home cooks and those beginning to cook, Food & Wine has developed a following among chefs, wine connoisseurs and restaurateurs. Its New York offices have for almost 40 years been a sort of crossroads for visiting chefs and high-end advertisers like Rolex.
Like all media businesses, Time has struggled to replace declining revenue from print advertising. Its goal is to cut $100 million in costs this year, and Food & Wine’s move is clearly part of that. The company said that it was still working out details of the move and that some employees in New York would most likely be offered the chance to move to Birmingham.
Since Condé Nast closed Gourmet in 2009, traditional food magazines have struggled to retain readers attracted to online publications like Food 52 and to magazines like Rachael Ray Every Day that are affiliated with television cooking shows. The prosaically named Food Network Magazine, for instance, now has the largest circulation of any food magazine.
Efforts to start magazines have faltered, too. Modern Farmer, a lavish homage to farming and food, almost went dark until it found a backer in Frank Giustra, a Canadian billionaire. And in May, Lucky Peach, a magazine whose quirky approach to its subject won legions of fans in the food world, closed its Chinatown offices and announced plans to fold after a final issue in the fall.
Adam Sachs, the editor in chief of Saveur, said there was room for all these publications in a variety of permutations, given the explosion in interest in food.
