Charlotte Hoffman’s claim to brilliance: In 1984, she got her daughter on a waiting list for an apartment in a Mitchell-Lama cooperative in Chelsea. “I wanted to be an actor despite what my mother wanted,” said Ms. Hoffman, whose credits include roles in the Broadway musicals “The Addams Family” and “Hairspray.” “She always used this phrase ‘you need a place to hang your hat.’  I was more focused on buying weed and picking up men who weren’t Jewish than I was on an apartment.
To hear Ms. Hoffman tell it, the studio apartment was the home of unfortunate paint choices — the sage gray that was more green than it had any right to be, the red that looked like a nice ripe tomato in the sample, yet resembled a weathered barn when applied to the wall. But mistakes are how you learn, and since moving to a larger place, Ms. Hoffman has learned to outsource.
“I have fancy gay friends who do everything perfectly and have impeccable taste and had their apartment in Elle Decor, so they told me what to do,” she said. They urged her toward Chelsea Gray for the living room and Habanero Pepper for the foyer.
Perhaps eager to avoid another unfortunate scene with a furniture salesman, Ms. Hoffman eagerly accepted two Danish modern chairs from her Aunt Judy. “She told me, ‘I have a feeling that these are very valuable, and when I die my kids will throw them in the garbage, so I want you to have them,’” Ms. Hoffman recalled. “We had them redone. There was a lot of drama about having them redone.” Previously cushioned in what she described as “a hideous, beaten-down, green-checked tweed,” they’re now a sprightly turquoise.
Ms. Hoffman’s father was a graphic artist and owned an ad agency. The wall opposite the sofa holds three sketches that he drew on the spot at a party in the mid-’50s; in the foyer is a portrait he painted of Ms. Hoffman’s two older brothers. “A cornball portrait,” she said.
Ambulances, sirens blaring, speed up the avenue day and night, giving Ms. Hoffman the sense that she’s smack in the middle of a television series about a hospital. She says she thinks about moving to an apartment deeper in the complex, or perhaps somewhere else entirely, but there’s not much conviction in her voice.
While in Los Angeles shooting “Feud,” she stayed for a time at a hotel, then decided to rent a place. “The building was charmless, a concrete tower,” she recalled. “And when my husband came out to see me, he stood in the living room and said, ‘This is just like our apartment in New York.’ I had simply transferred my life.
