In this era full of baby boomers caring for frail parents, we’ve seen plenty of documentaries, plays and memoirs about dementia, infirmity, loss. But in the HBO documentary “If You’re Not in the Obit, Eat Breakfast,” Carl Reiner and friends take up another side of the phenomenon of longer life spans: the many people in their later years who are still sharp and vigorous and engaged.
The film, which has its premiere on Monday night, doesn’t pussyfoot around when setting its bar; no “life after 65” theme here. Mr. Reiner is interested in people 90 and above. What are their secrets for staying so energetic for so long? What are the frustrations of living in a society that tends to marginalize this age bracket?
Mr. Reiner, who acts as host in the film, with Danny Gold directing, is himself Exhibit A for his study: He recently turned 95. In this breezy, anecdotal film, he chats with others in their 90s and beyond, many of them friends from show business, like Mel Brooks (90), Dick Van Dyke (91) and Betty White (95).
They reminisce a bit, flash a little song-and-dance ability and share observations about how they view themselves and how society views them. There is chagrin on occasion; no one likes the condescension that is often showered on people of this age.
Of course, celebrities are not particularly representative of the 90-and-older population, so Mr. Gold brings a few nonshowbiz people into the film as well, like Ida Keeling, who took up running at 67 and last year, at 100, set a record for her age group in the 100-meter dash. A lot of the advice heard in this film is fairly vague, but not that from Ms. Keeling.
“You’ve got to be the boss of your body,” she says, urging people to put effort into physical fitness if they want a robust old age.
The film does acknowledge, though, that not everybody in this demographic can run a 100-meter dash.
To address that question, he checks in on Kirk Douglas, 100, who performed a one-man show in his 90s even though a stroke two decades ago impaired his speech.
The film would have been better if it had gone further into this and some other areas, like health care costs for noncelebrities, but at least it starts the conversation. It provides delightful evidence that there is plenty of life yet in the population born before the Great Depression. Now the broader culture needs to consider how to change its preconceptions if 90 is the new 65.