Samantha Schaible, 25, is an experiential marketing and design manager with Cannonball Productions in New York.
Q. What do you do as an experiential marketing and design manager?
A. Our company produces festivals such as the Bacon and Beer Classic, at professional baseball fields and football stadiums. I handle logistics that involve music or entertainment. Months before an event, I start working with our partners around the country, such as adult coed sports leagues. We have volunteers, fans who get a free ticket for helping us set up, and I also run that program. A big part of my job involves designing the creative elements, such as the signage for the sites, logo designs for new concepts, and print and banner ads.
How did your job change in 2016?
I signed up for Remote Year and began traveling. The program required that I be able to perform my job while away. I also had to put down a $5,000 deposit and pay $2,000 a month for transportation and housing. My boss gave me permission, and I left in August. Country stops and side trips have included Thailand, Cambodia, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Portugal, Bali, Italy, Germany and Switzerland. My last stop is Argentina.
How do you manage work?
I like to sightsee in the morning and work in the afternoon, when I overlap with East Coast time for a few hours. My team in New York has been great; I’ve only been on calls with them at 3 a.m. three times.
Do you see any drawbacks?
Not really. It’s strange to work on the back end and not see a festival come to life, but it works out. I do miss my family, but they’ve visited.
What are your living and working arrangements?
I live with from one to five roommates in an apartment or similar accommodation in each city. In each location, we have access to a 24-hour work area with reliable Wi-Fi, and I use Google Hangout, the Gchat app and local data plans. There are about 60 program participants from various countries.
Has this experience changed you?
I think I’ll be more open to things, and I won’t sweat the small stuff anymore. When you travel, you need to be extremely flexible and comfortable with last-minute changes. If you run into a problem, it requires you to think about other solutions and open your mind.