Can a New Generation in the Banlieues Change French Politics?
A Muslim city councilor in a stagnant Paris suburb makes the case for modernizing the nation’s Republican values.
On Feb. 2, around a quarter to 5 in the afternoon, just as the day began to darken, police officers approached four young men outside a recording studio in the Rose des Vents, an agglomeration of chalky cités, or public-housing projects, that covers a remote expanse of the northeast Paris suburb Aulnay-sous-Bois. The police asked to see one man’s identity papers. Within minutes, another was on his stomach. The officers put handcuffs on the 21-year-old, whose family, of Congolese origin, lived nearby. When they arrived at the station, staff members noticed that he was in a lot of pain. He was rushed to a hospital, where an examination revealed a 10-centimeter tear in his rectum. It had been caused by a police baton.
The protesters began to sing “The Marseillaise.” Someone set off a mortar that burst red into the sky with a pop like gunfire, close enough to shed ash on the crowd. A humming sound floated up from behind. Everyone turned to watch a group of kids rush up the steps of the walkway toward the gendarmes, hurling stones at their riot shields until the officers charged, forcing them back down. A truck belonging to the radio station RTL went up in flames, sending a dark column of smoke skyward. Police reinforcements arrived and set off tear-gas, pushing the crowd out of the courtyard, into the surrounding streets and down into the metro station.
Bouteghmès had gone to the protest with several friends with whom he recently started a new local political party, which they called the Élan Populaire Courneuvien. They had wanted to assert their ability to improve life in their community, even if their ideas tended toward the prosaic and technocratic: making governance more transparent as a way to draw in more local residents; offering incentives to businesses relocating to the banlieues to hire locally rather than bring in commuters; and striking deals with vendors to give food that remained unsold at the end of the day to needy residents. Such preoccupations seemed almost quixotic as explosive demonstrations continued throughout the next few weeks, with more than 50 incidents in 30 towns around the country. Bouteghmès was seized with a dismaying sense of déjà vu. In 2005, a month of protests rocked La Courneuve and other suburbs, following the deaths of two teenagers, Zyed Benna and Bouna Traoré, who were electrocuted in a power station while fleeing police. Thousands of cars were burned, and there were several deaths. Now, even though the election campaign provided an unusual opportunity to be heard, things were unfolding in much the same way: a bold expression of anger, which would surely be followed by inaction.
The campaign season in France this spring revolved around the meaning of “Frenchness,” a perennial question given new urgency by a refugee crisis, terrorist attacks that resulted in the highest number of deaths on French soil since the 1940s, the year-and-a-half-long state of emergency that followed and a generalized economic anxiety. Every week seemed to bring a new polemic about “mass immigration” (in reality, France granted refugee status to only 26,000 people who applied in 2016, and the total immigrant population has increased only slightly in the last 10 years) or the role of France’s Muslims (estimated at less than 6 percent of the population, half of whom are largely secular) in formulating an Islam compatible with the French Republic or the importance of affirming French “culture,” whatever that might be. In one way or another, politicians were often talking about the banlieues, which served as a kind of boogeyman, a stand-in for the social currents unsettling France. Bouteghmès, himself a product of these forces and a consummate proponent of French Republicanism, was, like many of the people he represents, an object of much of this discussion if seldom an equal partner in it.
I met Bouteghmès through a former student with whom I kept in touch after teaching English at a high school in La Courneuve nearly a decade ago. Earlier, I had spent a semester in Paris, studying the French language and way of life, my English girlfriends and I mimicking the proper methods for knotting scarves and pairing wine, to see if we could pass for natives. A month or two after I returned home, the banlieues erupted in the violent protests of 2005. I felt a sense of shame that my frivolous game was in reality an urgent political matter: an invitation to be part of French society was not available to just anyone, particularly if you happened to have non-European, non-Christian roots.
Three years later, I returned to France to teach in La Courneuve, which Nicolas Sarkozy had famously promised to clean up with a “Karcher,” a German industrial-strength street-cleansing machine. In the high school where I worked, the election of Barack Obama had generated a new sense, among my students, of what was possible for members of a minority with a complicated historical relationship to their country. But change, symbolic or otherwise, failed to materialize, and by 2014, halfway through Obama’s second term, La Courneuve and other suburbs were struggling with a wave of radicalism. While the reasons any one individual may be seduced by jihadism are complex, it was hard to ignore that many of the young French citizens leaving for Syria were coming from the banlieues. And after the terror attacks of 2015 and 2016, whatever sympathy existed in broader French society for the plight of the banlieues seemed to harden into apathy.
La Courneuve’s mayor for nearly two decades was Gilles Poux, a stalwart of the French Communist Party, the labor-oriented segment of the French left that once enjoyed broad popularity but whose membership had declined everywhere except in the Paris banlieues. The party took over La Courneuve in the 1950s when the town still had factories producing metalwork and boilers. To Bouteghmès, there was a disconnect between the way things were run and the needs of the people who now lived there. He began to think about running for office. He was 23 and studying philosophy at the Sorbonne. Two years later, he was on the ballot.
The mayor encouraged Bouteghmès and his friends to run on his ticket; he needed to join forces with young men of their background to win a majority in a town that has more than 100 nationalities. Once elected, though, they felt constrained by a decades-old political machine. In the fall of 2015, Poux shut down the Samaritain Roma camp in La Courneuve that was home to 300 people; he stated that what was needed was a national, not a local, solution. For months, Bouteghmès had helped organize protests to keep it open, and as it became clear the Roma would not prevail, he worked with local nongovernment organizations to help find temporary squats. He felt that he could no longer share a political identity with the mayor, and he and three others split off to form the Élan Populaire Courneuvien, on the theory that as a bloc they could wield some power. Eventually, one of them might even run against the mayor.
The problems facing the suburbs, Bouteghmès asserted, could not be addressed without taking on the larger national malaise. “For me, today, being named Mehdi Bouteghmès, my father was born in a French colony, my mother was born in a French protectorate, if I want to question the political methods, practices, Republican institutions, people will say I’m an Islamist,” Bouteghmès told me. “It’s not normal.” At 18 he joined the Young Muslims of France, a community youth group, and during a phase in college read extensively in Islamic philosophy and theology. Islam was part of his identity, but now, 10 years later, he was certain this would be used against him if he decided to enter national politics. “They’ll attack me, twist positions I may have taken before, activities I might have been involved in in the past,” he said.
To Bouteghmès, the hysteria in France about Islam, on display most recently in the “burkini” controversy, smacked of the anti-Semitism of the ’30s. “They are attacking people who don’t represent what people are saying they represent,” he said. Women in head scarves had become symbols, flash points, everything except individuals with complicated personal reasons for expressing themselves in a particular way. Even for the people who did turn to fundamentalism, religion was often a question of economic and political exclusion. Solve the economic problems — find people jobs, help them educate their families — the “woman question” would resolve itself.
The banlieues have a singular geographic and demographic makeup. There are the town centers, whose residents tend to be wealthier and more European in origin, and there are the stereotypical, gargantuan Le Corbusier-inspired buildings. Constructed primarily in the 1960s and subjected to an urban-renewal program in the ’80s that involved demolishing some developments on live television, most were built for the city’s working-class population, which exploded after World War II, and later housed the foreign guest workers who arrived around the same time.
In the 1960s, there were more than 80 bidonvilles, or shantytowns, sheltering an estimated 30,000 guest workers from Spain, Portugal, North Africa and elsewhere, often organized by country or region; Algerians from Oran, for example, would live together. But La Campa in La Courneuve, one of the poorest, was always a mix of nationalities, as the architectural historian Jacob Paskins details in a recent book, “Paris Under Construction,” and it often accommodated those rejected from their ethnic bidonvilles. The town has maintained that diversity, though its composition is always changing — from Italian and Spanish, to Algerian and Tunisian, to, most recently, Chinese and Pakistani. Sunday is market day, and when you emerge from the subway into the commercial plaza, its sidewalks crammed with tents and pedestrians, it’s as if the entire borough of Queens had been squeezed into a single roundabout. You will hear Urdu and Tamil, Portuguese and Romanian, Wolof, Bambara and Sango, and as many dialects of Arabic as exist in the world. “No one here is French,” an Algerian municipal worker in a hot orange vest and aviator sunglasses, told me. You could buy goods there to feed, clothe and clean an entire household for a week for under 50 euros: bins of Polish leather slippers and nude-colored bras, cake pans, memory-foam pillows and child’s dresses in turquoise leopard print, as well as Egyptian sweet potatoes, Moroccan mint and Italian fennel.
A 20-minute walk to the other side of town brings you to the Cité des 4000, a cluster of towers that opened in 1962. Its barren landscaping and roadways are dotted with construction sites. The area has undergone a series of renovations since 2005, when the government enacted a “plan for social cohesion.” “Sarkozy said he would clean it with a Karcher, and he did,” Kamel Hamza, a conservative member of the La Courneuve City Council, told me. Hamza and his colleague Mustapha Benlafkih belong to Sarkozy’s center-right party, Les Républicains, a rare species in the banlieues, though less and less so. They offered to drive me around the 4000 in Benlafkih’s gray Peugeot. “You can see the sun now,” Benlafkih said, pointing westward. The government had knocked down a massive tower built to house repatriated pieds-noirs (Europeans living in Algeria who were forced to leave during the war of independence) and replaced it with smaller rowhouses and apartment buildings. There were a few stores — a supermarket, a Muslim butcher, a discount bazaar and Billy Exotique: Spécialités Africaines. But because residents could stay in the area without ever having to go to the livelier part of town with the cafes and kebab shops, Hamza said, the problems that destroying the towers was meant to address — high unemployment, social isolation, the exhausting complications of poverty — remained.
The French are obsessed with preventing “communautarisme” — any division of the Republic into individual identity groups — but if such a things exists, it is as much a result of city planning as cultural politics. People living in the older, wealthier centers of suburbs like La Courneuve sometimes regard newcomers with suspicion. First-generation French-born citizens of North African descent see businesses that used to be Italian and Tunisian becoming Pakistani and grow alarmed that things aren’t as they were, that they are no longer “chez nous”: a phrase that happens to echo a slogan of the National Front.
In a strange turn, the National Front has been gaining ground in the banlieues. In the 2014 European elections, the party came in first in more than half the towns in the 93. The party’s candidate in La Courneuve came in second in the first round of the regionals in 2015. And in the first round of the presidential election, on April 23, Marine Le Pen won 11.6 percent of the vote in La Courneuve, coming in third. In some ways, the change reflects a larger trend: former strongholds of the left deserting the Socialist Party, whose leadership proved impotent over the last five years, for the economic protectionism and strong sense of identity of the National Front.
In early March I attended a conference dedicated to de-Islamizing Europe. It was organized by a Catholic activist group and held in Béziers, a southern town whose famously provocative mayor, Robert Ménard, warmly welcomed the attendees. The conference offered a daylong workshop in which to learn how to become a “vector” in society to fight against a plot cooked up by Islamic nations to set up colonies across Europe, by way of European Muslims, who were adherents of Sharia law. In attendance were a number of local officials from across the south, people who considered Marine Le Pen a liberal and were sworn devotees of her father. But there was also a couple sitting behind me who supported Fillon. They lived in Figeac, a small town north of Toulouse, and they had observed worrisome changes there over the last decade. There was more drug dealing, more crime, more incivility. The solution, they said, was to fight the spread of Islam.
More than elsewhere in France, apathy toward the presidential election was potent in the banlieues. Even if Marine Le Pen won, some Courneuviens said, well, things couldn’t get much worse. The state of emergency had deepened social divisions. Everywhere in Paris, soldiers stalked the streets in tight quadrangles, assault rifles at the ready. A high-school teacher wrote in Libération that while taking her students on a field trip, three of the five boys in the group were asked for their papers by the police; she had a feeling it wasn’t a coincidence that one was of Moroccan origin, one Malian and one Comorian. One teacher from the banlieue told me that because of the state of emergency, he was not permitted to take a large group of students on public transport into central Paris. With the high cost of renting a bus, they organized trips elsewhere in the suburbs. He later discovered that students attending high school within the city limits faced no such restrictions.
The ambivalence that many residents of La Courneuve exhibited toward the presidential campaign was reciprocated. Most of the candidates on the left made some effort to meet with organizations and businesses in the suburbs, but the candidates on the right mostly didn’t bother. Marine Le Pen suggested that many of the terrorist attacks of the last few years could have been prevented by getting rid of “the birthright,” automatic citizenship for anyone born on French soil.
Fighting a sense of inertia, Bouteghmès and the Élan Populaire Courneuvien decided to organize a grand débat for the banlieues, five days ahead of the first round of voting. They invited each of the presidential candidates to send a representative to La Courneuve, a request to which most of the left-leaning ones and none of the right-leaning ones assented. On a chilly Tuesday evening, in a meeting room on the ground floor of an Escheresque 1970s-era cité, Bouteghmès was setting up a sound system. By 7 p.m., when the debate was to begin, only four people had shown up. The debaters dutifully introduced themselves. Most were from marginal parties on the eclectic French left that everyone knew would never win. But Emmanuel Macron had sent his representative for the 93, Alexandre Aïdara, a polished man of Senegalese origin. Dozens of people trickled in, and by 8:30 it was clear that they had come to have their say with Aïdara, who delivered Macron’s ideas in clean bullet points: For each person hired from the banlieues, a company would be relieved of certain taxes; companies that discriminated would be subjected to a public “naming and shaming” campaign; and so on.
Bouteghmès was pleased with the way the debate had gone — more than one shouting match erupted — but he knew it wouldn’t necessarily get more Courneuviens out to vote. And he understood why. In the end, they knew that none of the candidates would offer them much. In 2012, François Hollande dangled numerous promises during his presidential campaign, including the right to vote in local elections for foreigners who had been in France and paying taxes for years; once the banlieues helped elect him, they heard little until the November 2015 ISIS-led attacks in central Paris, when Hollande proposed a terrorism-related constitutional amendment that would effectively turn dual nationals into second-class citizens. His promise to lower the national unemployment rate hadn’t fared much better; in five years, and especially in the banlieues where the rate was far higher, the numbers had hardly budged.
Emmanuel Macron and Marine Le Pen came in first and second respectively, and, two weeks later, on the Saturday before the final runoff, the neighborhood association that Bouteghmès works for organized a Fête de la Cité, a kind of spring block party for families in La Courneuve. It was raining on that early May afternoon, and when I arrived, Bouteghmès was soaked, his hair dripping and his T-shirt weighted down with water, but he was smiling. Kids were performing acrobatics on uneven bars with the help of a coach and jumping around with an inflatable sumo wrestler, pausing to eat skewers of strawberry-and banana-shaped marshmallows. These children, many of them first-generation French-born, were playing in a small park between several cité towers. The symbolism was almost too stark: The towers blocked the view of Paris — they couldn’t see it, and it couldn’t see them.
