DALLAS — Scott Beck, the chief executive of a local real estate company, remembers riding his bike as a child to Valley View Center, a shopping mall in North Dallas. Cars filled the vast parking lot and anchor stores like Bloomingdale’s, J. C. Penney and Sears teemed with customers.
Now, the bustle of shoppers has been replaced by the din of construction — led by Mr. Beck, whose company is clearing the way for a new $3.5 billion development of restaurants, offices and housing.
Many malls across America have hit tough times, squeezed by changing demographics and competition from e-commerce, discount stores and newer malls with more diverse offerings. Morningstar Credit Ratings recently called the changes in the industry a “seismic shift” and warned of more financial pain ahead. Hundreds of department stores, mall anchors for decades, are expected to shut their doors this year.
Several shopping centers in Texas give a peek into how mall owners and developers are responding. In spots where the shopping activity has slowed, the response is clear: Move away from strictly shopping, and expand the mix to include more restaurants and entertainment, or health care and education. Or, in the case of Valley View Center, start over from scratch.
At Grapevine Mills, a popular shopping destinations in North Texas, the “experiential” formula is a major part of the marketing strategy.
Owned by Simon Property Group, one of the country’s biggest retail real estate owners, Grapevine Mills feels almost like an amusement park. In addition to more than 200 retail outlets and restaurants, it has a Sea Life aquarium, a Legoland and a Round One Bowling and Amusement, which includes 24 lanes of bowling, billiards, video games and a karaoke studio.
What was once a J.C. Penney Store is now Fieldhouse USA, a 106,000-square-foot indoor sports complex with nine volleyball and nine basketball courts.
The mall, about two miles from Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, is one of 16 Mills-branded shopping centers nationwide. Gregg Goodman, president of the Mills division of Simon Property, said Grapevine Mills drew from a “very wide distance,” including surrounding states, with a strategy focusing heavily on families and intended to encourage repeat visits and longer stays in the mall.
On a recent Friday morning, dozens of schoolchildren escorted by teachers and parents trooped through Entrance Five to visit the aquarium and Legoland.
“You get the kids here, the parents here, everybody’s happy,” said Stephanie Zafiridis, a preschool teacher from nearby Flower Mound.
About 200 miles to the south in Austin, Highland Mall is getting a different kind of makeover. It is being reincarnated as the 11th campus of Austin Community College, under a nearly $900 million public-private initiative that has stirred new life into the surrounding North Austin neighborhoods.
Highland Mall opened in 1971 as Austin’s first enclosed suburban mall, but, like Valley View Center in Dallas, it was ultimately outflanked by competition from newer malls. It closed in 2015.
In 2009, RedLeaf Properties paired up with Austin Community College to convert the mall buildings into a campus to ultimately serve up to 20,000 students. The first phase opened in 2014 in a former J. C. Penney anchor store and serves about 6,000 students per semester.
The vision Mr. Beck had for Valley View Center in Dallas is even more ambitious.
That is a far cry from the Valley View that opened in 1973, riding a wave of retail expansion and grabbing national attention when a shoe store at the mall offered a free eight-ounce steak with any purchase of $5 or more.
About a decade later, Galleria Dallas popped up as a competitor. And while the two coexisted for many years, the Galleria eventually won out.
Today, Sears is the only remaining store, though not for long. It is scheduled to close in two weeks, and a black-and-yellow “Store Closing” banner hangs just under the roof near the entrance.
Louis Schultz, 71, a retired Navy officer, walked down a near-deserted corridor after seeing a movie at the AMC theater.
