Andrew Essex believes that “the end of advertising as we know it” is “somewhere between five minutes and five years” away. That’s what this former chief executive of the influential creative agency Droga5 writes in “The End of Advertising: Why It Had to Die, and the Creative Resurrection to Come” (Spiegel & Grau).
“Life is better without bad ads,” he writes. “It’s simply irrefutable.” Consumers have increasingly effective ways to avoid ads, and an entire generation has been raised with a different expectation of how — and how often — it will have its viewing, reading or listening interrupted. Yet brands still spend vast amounts of money in diverse ways to promote their products, and entire industries (like journalism) are struggling with how to replace traditional ad revenue. (In fact, in the past Essex has done consulting work for The New York Times Company.) These sea changes are the subject of Essex’s highly opinionated treatise. Below, he talks about how this era of television has inspired him, the origin stories of aspirin and heroin, and more.
I got the idea after spending a summer making compost. I had left my previous job after 10 years to recharge my batteries: driving kids to camp, making compost and trying to write a book. It just seemed that it was time to reflect on the state of advertising. It was around the time “Mad Men” went off the air and ad blocking started to enter into the public discourse.
That history repeats itself. We had invented the “correct way” to advertise, then took a 50-year detour pursuing a model that, in retrospect, seems kind of insane. For the past 50 years, we’ve essentially pursued a model called “command and control,” which is to interrupt people in the rudest possible way with something they didn’t ask to see, which is most exemplified by interrupting a TV program at a moment of great interest to show you a 30-second toilet-paper spot.
But that model of adjacency is irrelevant and increasingly superfluous in a world in which there is so much content. Years ago, brands were making the thing. Not the thing that interrupts the thing. The old model was General Electric Theater; the new model is “The Lego Movie,” and that’s the same thing — making things people want to see, and adding value to their lives, as opposed to making something they actively don’t want to see.
I wanted to write a book about the untold story of the dual origin story of aspirin and heroin. The company Bayer is famous for inventing aspirin in 1898, which is arguably one of the world’s most beloved brands, and for good reason. But I was surprised to learn that just two weeks earlier, the same three guys who gave the world aspirin also created Bayer’s other big brand, heroin, which was marketed for about eight years as the world’s best cough medicine. This is a true story, and that seemed to me a perfect metaphor for advertising’s ongoing tension between authenticity and artifice. But all the protagonists are dead, and Bayer won’t talk about it.
It was originally a book about unintended consequences and origin stories. So that theme never really changed. But the news kept staying ahead of the book, which had the unintended consequence of making it even more relevant than I intended. Fake news came along, and that seemed relevant to this rapidly shifting role of advertising in the culture. Google and Safari added ad-blocking software. Advertisers found out that YouTube videos with racist and terrorist content were adjacent to prominent A-list advertisers, in a context that the advertisers didn’t want.
David Chase or Vince Gilligan or David Simon. David Milch, Matthew Weiner. Any of the avatars of the golden era of television. They took a medium that was perceived to be second class and turned it into a genuine art form. One of the reasons they did was because they were freed from the encumbrance of the commercial interruption. Devoid of advertising, television was elevated to arguably the world’s most relevant mass art form. It changed 100 percent the way I think about advertising. On-demand television — HBO, Netflix, Amazon Prime — got rid of the interruption, and that forces advertisers to think about how to communicate more effectively when their canvas is erased. Donald Barthelme talked about the theft of the reader from the writer; the theft of the audience from the advertiser forces the advertiser to think more creatively.
Persuade someone to read the book in less than 50 words.
It’s the only place where you can learn about the origins of heroin and Ivory soap and the future of the internet in one tight little 200-page package. And also, hardcover is the new black.