Media|After Reality Winner’s Arrest, Media Asks: Did ‘Intercept’ Expose a Source?
After Reality Winner’s Arrest, Media Asks: Did ‘Intercept’ Expose a Source?
Journalism in the Trump era has featured a staggering number of leaks from sources across the federal government, providing bombshell revelations about everything from clandestine meetings with Russian officials to petty infighting at the White House.
But the arrest of Reality Leigh Winner, an intelligence contractor accused of leaking a classified report about Russian meddling in the 2016 election, has raised concerns about the measures taken by news organizations to protect confidential informers, with some reporters worrying about a chilling effect on potential sources.
Veteran journalists did not hold back on Tuesday in criticizing The Intercept, the online news outlet that published an intelligence report from the National Security Agency. About an hour after the report’s publication on Monday, the Justice Department said it had charged Ms. Winner, 25, with violating the Espionage Act, saying she had leaked the report.
The Intercept said it did not know the identity of its source, who mailed the document in a plain envelope. But an F.B.I. affidavit released on Monday described a series of actions by the news outlet, such as sharing a copy of the document with the National Security Agency, that allowed the document’s provenance to be quickly deduced.
“I haven’t seen a mistake this consequential before,” said Barton Gellman, who reported for The Washington Post on the leaks provided by Edward J. Snowden.
“So it’s baffling that they didn’t make use of them,” he added.
National-security reporting is specialized, but journalists in the field said Tuesday that The Intercept had appeared to ignore some basic tenets.
Sharing an original document when asking questions of government officials, as The Intercept appears to have done, can expose metadata and high-tech watermarks that may reveal a leaker’s identity. And an affidavit asserts that The Intercept revealed to a second contractor that the document was mailed from Augusta, Ga., where Ms. Winner resides.
The Intercept’s editor in chief, Betsy Reed, said she was unable to comment further on Tuesday, citing the continuing investigation. But in a statement, the news organization sought to cast doubt on the government’s account of its reporting methods.
News organizations, including The New York Times, have moved to establish secure channels for sensitive news tips and documents. But those efforts hinge on the perception that sources can be protected, especially when cases emerge like that of Ms. Winner, who could face prison time.
The Winner episode appeared to heighten the sensitivities of many journalists.
One detail attracted particular interest: Agents analyzed the document and discovered creases, suggesting it had been printed out by someone with access.
