Twenty-five years after luxury labels sued his Harlem boutique out of existence, Gucci looks to him for inspiration.
The Harlem couturier Daniel Day, better known as Dapper Dan, was all over social media last week after Gucci unveiled a jacket that looked very much like one he designed nearly three decades ago for the Olympic sprinter Diane Dixon.
The fur-lined piece with balloon sleeves created by Mr. Day in the 1980s made use of the Louis Vuitton logo without the brand’s permission. The new Gucci jacket, designed by Gucci’s creative director, Alessandro Michele, remakes the Dapper Dan jacket, but with the interlocking double-G Gucci logo in place of the Louis Vuitton markings.
Things have come full circle. Litigation by luxury brands ran Dapper Dan’s Boutique out of business in the ’90s, and now here comes a major fashion house trying to grab the attention of a generation steeped in hip-hop by finding inspiration in a onetime fashion outlaw.
Perhaps surprisingly, Gucci acknowledged its debt to the designer. A post on the brand’s Instagram account called the jacket, which had its debut during its cruise collection runway show, “a homage to Dapper Dan.” Further, a Gucci spokesman told The New York Times that Mr. Michele had reached out to Mr. Day with the idea of collaborating with him.
Mr. Day in his shop, Dapper Dan’s Boutique, which closed in 1992. He is wearing his own custom clothing.
Mr. Day confirmed on Friday that Gucci has contacted him. “We’re at the table,” was all he would say about it.
Mr. Day started down the road to sartorial splendor from 129th Street and Lexington Avenue, where he grew up with three brothers, three sisters, a homemaker mother and a father who worked as a civil servant. In 1982, after an apprenticeship that took him across Africa, he opened Dapper Dan’s Boutique on 125th Street. It lasted 10 years before lawyers from luxury brands moved in.
At his Harlem brownstone a few days before the Gucci controversy, Mr. Day described how his ideas on fashion, business and life in general came to be.
Another experience with shoes gave him an understanding of how clothes reflect social status.
With a group of other children from the neighborhood, he used to go downtown and break the windows of haberdasheries such as Phil Kronfeld and Fred Leighton.
His childhood friend, the Harlem basketball legend Richard Kirkland, known as Pee Wee, corroborated those stories in a short documentary made for Jay Z’s Life & Times blog in 2013. “They called us Ali Baba, like Ali Baba and the 40 thieves, because it would be like 40, 50 guys breaking the windows of clothing stores and jewelry stores downtown, yelling, ‘Ali Baba! Ali Baba!” Mr. Kirkland said.
Much of what Mr. Day and Mr. Kirkland talk about regarding the need to dress to impress is part of a generational mind-set for many black men who grew up in Harlem.
He earned his nickname while playing craps, he said.
Mr. Day grew tired of running the streets after witnessing speeches by Malcolm X. “Malcolm X once said, ‘If you want to understand the flower, study the seed.’ I was getting high at the time, but once I heard that, it stuck with me. I started going to the Countee Cullen library, and began reading about opium and the Boxer Rebellion in China. I said, ‘Oh, this is where it comes from.’ I connected myself to the problem of addiction globally. And I went back to school, courtesy of a program sponsored by the Urban League and Columbia University.
“I wanted to be a writer. I read books by Dr. John Henrik Clarke, Lerone Bennett. One of my favorite journalists was Earl Caldwell,” the pioneering black investigative reporter known for his articles in The Times on the Black Panthers.
Mr. Day gave up drinking, smoking and drug use, and became a vegetarian. He toured Africa in 1968 as one of the students chosen by the Columbia University-Urban League program and returned for the Muhammad Ali-George Foreman bout in 1974.
He decided that he wanted to be a clothier in his home neighborhood. He knew all the “boosters” — people who shoplifted from department stores — and he bought garments from them and resold them at a profit. He went from selling clothes out of his car to opening the boutique.
In the ’80s he had enough capital to get serious about fur and leather, but many merchants would not sell to him. The exceptions were Fred Schwartz (known as Fred the Furrier), his brother Harold, and Harold’s son, Andrew Marc Schwartz, who started the Andrew Marc label.
Mr. Day began selling Andrew Marc leather jackets with possum lining for $800. A Harlem competitor, A. J. Lester, was offering the same goods for $1,200, and its representatives demanded that Mr. Schwartz stop supplying the upstart competitor. When Mr. Day and Mr. Schwartz considered a compromise — removing the Andrew Marc label from the jackets’ insides — Mr. Day had an epiphany about the importance of brands.
Around that time, a man entered the boutique carrying a Louis Vuitton pouch. “This dude was bragging about the pouch,” Mr. Day said. “And it occurred to me, if that’s how he feels about the pouch, how would he feel if that Louis Vuitton pouch became a whole outfit?” He laughed at the memory. That was the moment everything changed. Mr. Day hired group of tailors, including Africans he had met in Midtown, family members and a friend from the Nation of Islam.
Mr. Day saw an irony in the fact that he was on the rise at a time when Reagan-era economic policies were damaging his home neighborhood.
At the same time, the crack epidemic was tearing neighborhoods apart.
Big Daddy Kane, Eric B. and Rakim, KRS-One and LL Cool J were among the clients who came for Mr. Day’s unique retrofits of Gucci, Louis Vuitton, Fendi and MCM. He worked the logos into his leather coats, hats, suits and even car interiors.
When asked to describe what he has been up to in the 25 years since his boutique closed, Mr. Day looked at his son and brand manager, Jelani Day.
