Day after day, subway riders in New York City have voiced a steady drumbeat of grievances as the century-old system has descended into disarray.
Trains are unreliable. Rush hour malfunctions paralyze the city. When a train derailed in Manhattan this week, injuring dozens of people, it raised concerns over whether the subway was even safe.
On Thursday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, the person most responsible for the subway’s fate, signed an executive order declaring a state of emergency, pledged $1 billion for improvements and moved to make it easier for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority to buy badly needed equipment.
But even as Mr. Cuomo sounded the alarm, it remained to be seen whether his call to action would actually reverse the subway’s decline and change the daily experience of frustrated riders.
It had taken some prodding and a fusillade of criticism to bring Mr. Cuomo to this moment, but in his comments he seemed to acknowledge the immensity of the problem — and the potential political fallout if he did not address it quickly.
Mr. Cuomo ordered Joseph J. Lhota, the new chairman of the authority, to provide a reorganization plan within 30 days.
Mr. Lhota should “design the best organization to get the job done,” the governor said, denouncing the performance of the authority, which he has controlled for more than six years. Within two months, Mr. Lhota is to present a detailed plan to address the subway’s most pressing ills.
Mr. Lhota said the authority would focus on customer communication, new technology and training of personnel. Transit officials also are examining new approaches to upgrade the subway’s antiquated signal system — a frequent reason for delays — and to buy new subway cars.
The governor’s comments came days after the derailment, an accident in Harlem that subway officials blamed on the failure to secure equipment during track repairs. 
The number of subway delays has skyrocketed, and several recent disruptions snarled service across the city, exacting an economic and mental toll on many residents. Transit activists have urged riders to send their complaints to Mr. Cuomo, since he controls the authority.
Mayor Bill de Blasio has quarreled with Mr. Cuomo over who should be held responsible for the subway’s dismal condition. But he praised the decision to hire Mr. Lhota, who helped bring the subway back after Hurricane Sandy during his previous tenure as chairman — and whom Mr. de Blasio defeated in the 2013 election. A spokesman for the mayor, Ben Sarle, said on Thursday that New Yorkers deserved a transit system that worked.
“We are heartened to see these new resources and focus to reverse the deteriorating state of our subways,” Mr. Sarle said in a statement.
After facing criticism over choosing chauffeured rides over the subway, Mr. de Blasio has recently tried to display empathy for suffering riders. On Thursday, Mr. de Blasio took the subway from Madison Square Garden to City Hall, and his spokesman posted a photo of the mayor’s trip on Twitter to make sure it did not go unnoticed.
Mr. Cuomo’s executive order would allow the authority to accelerate efforts to improve service by temporarily suspending certain laws that might “hinder or delay action necessary to cope with the disaster.” Mr. Cuomo said the authority would need more resources to improve the system and called on state lawmakers to identify new funding sources.
“Today, New York State is going to put its money where its mouth is,” Mr. Cuomo said in announcing an additional $1 billion for the authority’s $32.5 billion capital improvement plan.
Still, transit activists wanted to know more details about where the money would come from and how quickly riders would see improvements in their daily commutes.
Mr. Cuomo left the conference immediately after he addressed the group, to return to Albany. Mr. Lhota said the executive order’s easing of procurement rules was “probably worth more than the billion dollars.” He said it would allow the authority to hire contractors to make repairs faster.
Parts of the signal system date to the 1930s, and without modern signals, the subway cannot run more trains to accommodate surging ridership.
Mr. Cuomo said it was unacceptable that it took seven years to install modern signals on a single line, and five years to build a subway car.
Richard Ravitch, the former M.T.A. chairman credited with turning around the subway system in the 1980s, urged Mr. Lhota to focus on analyzing the immense needs and prioritizing “state of good repair,” an industry term meaning a system is receiving proper maintenance.
