To begin at the end, the desserts at the new Empellón in Midtown are some of the most exciting New York has seen in a long time.
Empellón is the flashiest, fanciest and newest of Alex Stupak’s three restaurants, and the one that provides the fullest expression of his dreamscape vision of Mexican food. He doesn’t reproduce or translate the cuisine; he builds a fantasy version of it, coupling deep technical skills with imagination to create a slightly unreal version of reality, the way the best animated movies do.
Dessert lends itself to fantasies better than other kinds of cooking, a fact that Mr. Stupak and his pastry chef, Justin Binnie, have exploited to the hilt.
One of the desserts is a frozen parfait that looks like half an avocado on a snowy bed of ice. The illusion is almost perfect, with tones of green that fade from the near black of the peel to a grassy pale color in the divot where the pit should go. The mimicry isn’t just visual. The parfait is as creamy and smooth as the flesh of an avocado left on the counter for four days. But of course it’s sweeter and tastes of butterfat, so it’s a relief when the ice crystals melt on your tongue into a bright limeade. Under the ice is yogurt infused with eucalyptus. Although making all this can’t possibly be simple, the flavors are, and they’re wonderfully balanced.
Another dessert comes in the form of a taco, because why not? A waffle cone folded into the shape of a hard-shell tortilla is stuffed with a delicious ice cream flavored by corn and salt. It might be Empellón’s answer to the corn husk meringue at Cosme. It might be a tribute to Corn Pops. Either way, it’s great.
“Strawberries for the table” is a plate of seven one-bite sweets with different permutations of the fruit. One is a raw, red berry. Its leaves have been replaced by shiso, it’s been stuffed with yuzu jelly, and it’s electrifying. Another is a birch-flavored marshmallow dusted with powdered, dried strawberries. Eating all seven took me about four minutes (including pauses for such penetrating insights as “Wow!”) and completely restored my faith in the power of a good pastry chef to amplify and extend the themes that started with vegetables and meat.
Restaurant reviews don’t usually turn over so much space to desserts, but the ones at Empellón deserve it. They also illustrate how much Mr. Stupak has matured as both chef and restaurateur since he left a career in pastry to tackle Mexican food.
Before it closed recently, Empellón Cocina in the East Village was Mr. Stupak’s statement restaurant, and boy, did he have a statement to make. He had come out of the pastry kitchens of two of the country’s most determinedly avant-garde restaurants, Alinea and WD-50, and many of his dishes were self-consciously arty and tightly clenched. Even the action-painting bloops of salsa and mole radiated tension. I loved the flavors, but sometimes it seemed as if Mr. Stupak didn’t have the heart to tell his food that somebody was going to try to eat it.
Maybe it’s the competition from Cosme, which takes a much less formalist approach to high-end Mexican cooking. Maybe Mr. Stupak has more empathy for his customers now. Maybe setting up shop in a big, two-level space in Midtown in March triggered a dormant crowd-pleasing gene. Whatever the cause, the food he is cooking at Empellón wants to be liked.
There’s no doubt that you’re supposed to knock back the oyster shooter in tomato-and-orange-flavored water with drops of ketchup oil floating on the surface. A distillation of the flavors in a Mexican seafood cocktail, the shooter disappears in one fast gulp.
Another seafood cocktail is made from poached lobster and curls and spears of cucumber jutting out of a lovely lobster cream that functions like a party dip. Served in a vase like a flower arrangement — there are even some purple star-shaped blossoms scattered around — it’s as striking as anything at Empellón Cocina, but the relaxed generosity feels new.
There’s a wild salad of yellow beets under a snow pile of green-chile granita and coconut crema. And there’s a tart heap of salmon tartare chopped with gooseberries; it’s dotted with crema and a gooseberry-pasilla chile salsa.
One dish puts young red-leaf lettuces spritzed with lime and salted water next to what looks like the icing on a birthday cake: It’s salsa verde creamed with butter, spread smooth and ringed with crema in tiny piped rosettes. If there is anyone who hasn’t yet figured out that butter makes salads better, spreading this salsa verde icing on lettuce leaves should be persuasive.
Larger courses don’t have built-in structural barriers to sharing, as some dishes at Empellón Cocina did. Roasted sea bream is served whole under pickled onions, thin wheels of tomatillo and miniature salsa-verde-soaked chilaquiles. Short-rib confit pulls apart into rich purplish hunks that you eat with a version of picadillo in which every ingredient tastes more delicious than it’s supposed to.
Pork belly slices attached to ribbons of crunchy skin come inside a kind of taco bowl made from a single, plate-size chicharrón. You can crack the chicharrón and use the shards as chips, or you can fold it into a warm tortilla with watermelon radishes, sliced chiles and some habanero salsa that gives the pork the get-up-and-go it needs.
In one section of the menu, Empellón’s desire to please does not quite translate into actual pleasure: the tacos. I used to think Mr. Stupak did not know what tacos are. He’s been serving them for so long, though, that now I suspect he just wants them to be something else.
He seems to have the idea that because people love tacos, he can fill them with weird things — curled tendrils of octopus on spicy peanut butter, or dense and dry falafel balls with grasshopper hummus — as an invitation to the rest of the menu.
Yes, anything can be turned into a taco, but perhaps not everything should. The best taco I had at Empellón, not counting the corn ice cream, was one I made from the peppers and onions sizzling on an iron plate on which a server had briefly seared a Wagyu steak. This is a great, witty take on fajitas, although the joke would be funnier if it didn’t cost $125.
You can write off the tacos completely, and what’s left is still a very enjoyable restaurant. The architecture firm Glen & Company has brought some Broadway boogie-woogie to the space, creating rhythm with colors and suspending a theatrical scalloped balcony over the main floor. There’s enough room between the tables for a bar cart to trundle around loaded with bottles of mezcal and other hard stuff. It’s another way for Mr. Stupak to show that he’s serious now about bringing the party to the table.
