DealBook|Morning Agenda: Pound Suffers on Hung Parliament in U.K.
Morning Agenda: Pound Suffers on Hung Parliament in U.K.
Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain has lost her gamble, and the pound is paying for it.
The British currency hit an eight-week low against the dollar early Friday after Mrs. May said she had no intention of resigning, deepening a drop that began after an exit poll late Thursday showed that the governing Conservative Party had unexpectedly lost its parliamentary majority.
Now that it has been confirmed that Britain has a hung Parliament, the country is in an awkward position as it prepares to negotiate an exit from the European Union.
Jameel Ahmad, vice president of market research at ForexTime, called the election results “one of the worst possible outcomes” because of the uncertainty over the withdrawal talks, according to the website MarketWatch.
The pound’s direction depends heavily on the negotiations with the European Union, said Stephen Gallo of Bank of Montreal, The Financial Times reported. A minority Conservative government implies a “softer Brexit,” he said, which points to a stronger pound.
Who will succeed Jamie Dimon as JPMorgan’s chief executive?
Matt Zames, the bank’s chief operating officer, has unexpectedly resigned after 13 years at the bank, rekindling speculation about who will take over from Mr. Dimon.
In an interview, Mr. Zames said he had left the bank because he wanted to operate his own business, either at a financial company or perhaps in a role that combined finance and technology.
Members of the family that founded Nordstrom are looking at options that would move the high-end retailer into private ownership.
The decision comes as the American retail industry is in decline as physical stores struggle to compete with online shopping giants like Amazon.
“This is a clear signal that the changes that retailers need to make are much more extensive and expensive than public shareholders have the appetite for,” said Joel Bines, a managing director focused on retail at AlixPartners, an advisory firm.
It’s a good time for Nordstrom insiders to think about going private, according to Lauren Silva Laughlin of Breakingviews.
Nordstrom is in better shape than many other retailers, but the sector’s problems have pushed down the company’s stock price.
“The weakened share price helps the numbers add up for the Nordstrom family and any partners they bring in,” Ms. Silva Laughlin writes.
— Matthew Dyckman, a lawyer in the financial services practice at Goodwin, referring to the House’s version of legislation to eliminate core financial regulations put in place by the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act. Even though it passed in the House, the legislation faces long odds in the Senate, where Republicans hold only a slim majority.