The morning mist had turned into a steady rain as Philip D. Murphy, a Democratic candidate for governor of New Jersey, drove his family to their local polling location in his black sport utility vehicle.
He took his youngest son, Sam, into the voting booth with him, as cameras flickered outside, while his wife, Tammy, voted in the booth next to his.
On the most critical day of his nascent political career — the Democratic primary election for governor — Mr. Murphy chose to surround himself not with fans or staff members, but initially with his family, and then an aide, a reporter and a photographer.
It’s the first question Mr. Murphy asked every time he hopped into the idling S.U.V.
For a politician, he is obsessed with timeliness and punctuality, something he said he gleaned from his years as United States ambassador to Germany.
Equally as important is his BlackBerry.
“I am the last man in America with a BlackBerry. I want to make sure that gets in the article,” he told the reporter. His phone buzzed incessantly throughout the day with early vote total updates and messages from well-wishers.
Early returns were positive, but turnout was low, and the weather was a concern. He dashed off a message to his campaign manager, Brendan Gill, about reports of a bomb threat at the biggest polling location in Trenton, before turning back to final revisions to his speech.
His punctuality rubs off on his staff. His deputy campaign manager was waiting outside a nondescript office building in Hackensack in the slowing rain to provide a polling update.
Inside, more than 50 volunteers were chatting with voters on flip phones, the final step in the get-out-the-vote effort for Mr. Murphy and other Democrats endorsed by the powerful Democratic chairman of Bergen County, Lou Stellato.
Mr. Murphy offered a quick dose of encouragement to the volunteers, making his way around the room for selfies, handshakes and hugs.
The candidate rarely grabbed snacks while on the run, fueled by an early, prevoting meal and a large Starbucks coffee. But he couldn’t turn down Marie Schrieks’s signature coconut macaroons.
In Union City, aside from the disagreeable weather, Mr. Murphy encountered what looked like the first schedule hiccup of the day. Mayor Brian P. Stack was now two minutes late to meet him for a door-knocking swing through his town, mildly irritating the punctual Mr. Murphy.
That was forgiven immediately as Mr. Stack emerged more than a block away, strolling confidently in the middle of the street. The mayor wore a black overcoat despite the moderate temperature, with roughly 200 supporters mostly in blue “Phil Murphy” shirts.
It was his most energized 20 minutes of the day so far, and he was buoyed by shouts of support from windows and honks from slowly rolling cars.
For the rare pedestrian who was a little dumbstruck at the two suited men darting around their town, Mr. Murphy offered an assessment.
For his final public pitch to voters in the primary campaign, Mr. Murphy met Mayor Ras J. Baraka of Newark to swing through Newark Penn Station.
He moved about the station relatively unnoticed; more commuters seemed to recognize Mr. Baraka than Mr. Murphy, a stark contrast from the man he’s trying to replace, Gov. Chris Christie.
For anyone who called out his name, Mr. Murphy beelined for a handshake, even if that meant halting traffic for a moment.
Like the president, though perhaps for different reasons, Mr. Murphy hates teleprompters. Even when he has to use them, he marks up a white page as part of his preparation, and as a fail-safe.
He sped through his concession speech, before taking more time to practice his victory speech, in a nondescript hotel meeting room with two hours to go before polls closed.
As he practiced, he fact-checked lines with his aides. He read the line about officially accepting the nomination and paused.
As he wound his way through a hotel kitchen heading down to give his victory speech, Mr. Murphy’s phone rang.
It took just over an hour before polls closed and Mr. Murphy was declared the winner by The Associated Press.
He spent most of that hour with his family in a suite at the Robert Treat Hotel in Newark, with the Yankees-Red Sox game playing loudly in the background. Constantly typing on his phone, he checked in with his wife, who would be introducing him, and his oldest son, Josh, who played an active role in his campaign.
Josh said he enjoyed the experience so much he is taking a semester off to volunteer on the general election campaign. He hopes to run for office someday.
At 9 p.m., when it became official, Mr. Murphy convened a brief family meeting — no aides or reporters allowed — before returning to his chair and hammering away again on his phone.
Downstairs at his victory rally, Tammy Snyder Murphy introduced her husband to the crowd, with their four children behind her. Backstage, Mr. Murphy pressed his ear against the metal door to try to listen to her speech, gesturing sharply to the few staff members and hotel workers in the hallway with him to quiet down so he could hear her.
Once he heard her announce his name, he looked down for a brief second and waited. The cheers grew, but he still waited. Finally, when the beat of Sugar Hill Gang’s “Rapper’s Delight” dropped, he pushed open the door with a wave.
