He was part of the Knicks’ only championship era, and won a mind-boggling 11 titles as a coach of the Bulls and Lakers. But even Phil Jackson couldn’t resurrect the Knicks. He was dismissed as team president on Wednesday. It was a rocky three-year ride.
Hopes are high as Jackson comes to New York. His credentials are sterling, and his Knicks pedigree has fans talking about a return to glory.
Owner James L. Dolan, left, said he was “willingly and gratefully” ceding all basketball responsibilities to Jackson.
After three straight trips to the playoffs, Knicks miss out by one game, finishing 37-45.
Steve Kerr turns down the Knicks coaching job, and opts instead for the Warriors, where he builds one of the best teams in N.B.A. history. “It just felt like the right move on many levels,” Kerr says. The Knicks instead hire Derek Fisher, below, in June.
The team’s star, Carmelo Anthony, agrees to re-sign for $124 million over five years. The move locks up an outstanding player, but also limits the team’s flexibility to pick up other players. The contract also includes a no-trade clause.
The Knicks begin the season playing Jackson’s favored triangle offense, the scheme that helped him win his titles with the Bulls and Lakers.
Jackson acknowledges things aren't yet working out.
“So far, my experiment has fallen flat on its face,” he said.
The Knicks bottom out, finishing 17-65, the second worst record in the league. and the worst in Knicks history.
The Knicks, with the fourth overall pick, select Kristaps Porzingis, a 7-foot-3 Latvian. He is jeered by hometown fans, and by Anthony.
The Knicks are better, and Porzingis is playing like a star, but Jackson fires Fisher with the team 23-31. Kurt Rambis is brought in as interim coach. “I’m still in it, and I’m in it to win it, so to speak,” Jackson says in March.
The Knicks select Jeff Hornacek, below, as their new coach. “Am I going to run the triangle?” Hornacek said. “I would say I wouldn’t call it the triangle. There’s a lot of aspects of the triangle — the spacing, the cuts off hitting the post — that are not unique to the triangle.” The team also trades for guard Derrick Rose.
Jackson’s big free-agent signing is 31-year-old Joakim Noah. He will average 5 points a game.
Jackson spars with Anthony, chiding him for holding the ball too long. “Any negativity that’s coming toward me or the team, I don’t think we need it at this point,” Anthony says.
Also this month, Jackson’s long-term relationship with Jeanie Buss, the president of the Lakers, comes to an end.
Rose, below, does not show up for a game against the Pelicans without informing the team. He later cites family issues.
Jackson tweets his approval of an article critical of Anthony.
Jackson says Anthony “would be better off somewhere else.” The players’ union calls the remarks “inappropriate.” The Knicks finish 31-51, a game worse than the previous year.
The Knicks shock fans by saying they are open to trading Porzingis, in many ways the team's lone bright spot. “As much as we love this guy, we have to do what’s good for the club,” Jackson said.
At the end of the month Jackson is dismissed. “After careful thought and consideration, we mutually agreed that the Knicks will be going in a different direction,” Dolan says.