WASHINGTON — Not long after President Trump took the oath of office, a busload of women’s health advocates made the first of a series of 860-mile round trips from Las Vegas to the Nevada capital, Carson City. Their mission: to push state legislators to expand insurance coverage for contraception.
Nevada is not the only state where birth control is suddenly on the legislative agenda. With the future of the Affordable Care Act — former President Barack Obama’s signature health care legislation — in doubt and the Trump administration planning to roll back the act’s mandate that employers cover contraceptives, the battle over birth control is shifting to the states.
Currently, 28 states have some type of “contraceptive equity” law, aimed at making birth control cheaper and more accessible. Many of those measures — including one in Nevada — were adopted in the late 1990s. Mr. Trump’s election has again brought the issue to the fore.
“We are on the cusp of seeing another push, a more aggressive push at the state level to protect affordable access to contraception, just like we saw in the late ’90s when women realized Viagra was getting coverage and birth control wasn’t,” said Andrea Miller, president of the National Institute for Reproductive Health, a New York nonprofit that advocates for reproductive rights.
Several states are expanding access by requiring insurers to cover a year’s supply of contraceptives at a time, as opposed to the customary three months. In Washington, Gov. Jay Inslee, a Democrat, last month signed a bill that would do just that, and Colorado’s Democratic governor, John Hickenlooper, signed a similar bill this week.
Lawmakers in Massachusetts and New York are also considering “contraceptive equity bills.” In New York, Eric Schneiderman, the attorney general, has proposed far-reaching legislation that would cover all forms of birth control, including vasectomies, without co-pays and at no cost to the patient. (Obamacare does not require insurers to cover vasectomies.) The bill has passed the New York Assembly, but awaits action in the state senate.
Mr. Schneiderman, a Democrat, called for similar legislation last year, but said in an interview that Mr. Trump’s election increased his sense of urgency.
“We were anticipating this attack would come,” he said.
But hundreds of thousands of women, many of them poor, could lose access to no-cost birth control if the rule goes into effect. For women like Tacy Geesaman, a 34-year-old mother of two in Las Vegas, who took one of the lobbying bus trips to Carson City, and is contemplating a run for public office, the Trump administration’s draft rule is a call to action.
The Affordable Care Act, which passed in 2010, did not explicitly call for insurers to provide birth control free of charge; it called for “preventive services,” like mammograms, to be offered without co-pays.
But the Obama administration interpreted “preventive services” as including birth control; insurers are now required to cover 18 birth control methods approved by the Food and Drug Administration, including birth control pills, implantable devices and so-called morning after contraceptives, at no cost to the patient.
A series of lawsuits filed over the last five years by priests, nuns, charitable organizations, hospitals, advocacy groups and others helped chip away at the contraceptive coverage requirement. In 2014, the Supreme Court ruled that family-owned businesses could not be forced to pay for coverage that included contraception if doing so violated the business owners’ religious beliefs.
That same year, California became the first state to pass birth control legislation codifying Obamacare’s requirements, which provided a blueprint for other states to do so.
Since then, Illinois, Vermont and Maryland have adopted their own contraceptive equity laws. Maryland’s is among the most expansive; beginning in 2018, all forms of birth control — including vasectomies and Plan B, the so-called morning-after pill — will be free for those with insurance.
Women’s health advocates credit Obamacare’s birth control provisions with helping to reduce rates of teenage pregnancy and abortion, especially among poor women.
In an interview earlier this year, Dr. Raegan McDonald-Mosley, the chief medical officer for Planned Parenthood, said that shortly after Mr. Trump was elected, the organization had experienced a “huge surge in demand” for intrauterine devices and other birth control implants, covered without co-pays under the Affordable Care Act.
“Prior to the A.C.A., those methods were not accessible; they were very expensive due to deductibles and co-pays,” Dr. McDonald-Mosley said.
Lora M. Pellegrini, president of the Massachusetts Association of Health Plans, an industry trade group, said the bill pending in that state’s legislature “was cloaked as protecting coverage that was part of the Affordable Care Act,” but instead “covers everything under the sun.” Her group is fighting the measure, arguing that it will raise premiums.
