WASHINGTON — Congress has until mid-October to raise the statutory borrowing limit or the United States will risk defaulting on its debt obligations, the Congressional Budget Office said in a report on Thursday.
The hard deadline comes as lawmakers have been under pressure from Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, to lift the debt ceiling before leaving Washington for the August recess. Republicans have been wrestling among themselves over whether to have a “clean” increase or to attach other policy priorities or spending cuts to legislation that lifts the limit.
The Treasury has been using “extraordinary measures” since this spring to avoid breaching the debt ceiling, and Mr. Mnuchin has said that his ability to do so was expiring sooner than anticipated because tax revenues have been trickling in slowly.
Weaker than expected tax collection — which could be related to expectations by taxpayers of tax cuts later this year — have also resulted in a larger than expected budget deficit this year and a bigger shortfall compared with 2016.
The updated numbers follow dire projections released by the C.B.O. at the start of the year. Those showed the United States adding $10 trillion to the federal debt over the next 10 years, thanks to a swelling federal budget deficit. Expectations of rising interest rates could make it even harder to chip away at the debt.
The figures present a challenge to Republicans as they work to move an ambitious legislative agenda: agree upon a budget, overhaul the tax code and fund the rebuilding of the nation’s crumbling infrastructure this year.
The C.B.O. projections assume that Congress will abide by the current law on spending, but more spending seems to be on the way. The House Appropriations Committee on Thursday approved a defense-spending bill that blew through the caps imposed by the Budget Control Act of 2011, which the White House Office of Management and Budget is supposed to enforce.
But the White House has also called for military spending that exceeds the caps, raising the prospect that an austerity law once hailed as the crowing achievement of the Republican Congress under President Barack Obama may just die from neglect under the watch of Republicans.
The Trump administration’s other legislative priorities could also prove costly if the pace of economic growth does not pick up. Mr. Trump wants to spend $200 billion as part of a public-private infrastructure investment program. His proposed tax cuts could reduce federal revenues by as much as $7 trillion over a decade, according to nonpartisan analysts. The White House has also promised to avoid cuts to Social Security and Medicare, limiting its ability to find savings.
As a candidate, Mr. Trump promised to eliminate the national debt in eight years. However, with tepid economic growth and an aging population, the United States faces a minefield of fiscal problems.
By 2027, the federal debt held by the public is expected to reach $25.5 trillion, according to the C.B.O.
Advocacy groups that preach fiscal prudence warned that the new figures were alarming and criticized lawmakers for neglecting the situation.
“The C.B.O.’s latest projections, while not surprising, are an important reminder that the federal budget is on an unsustainable path and that policy makers have no plans to deal with this problem,” said Robert L. Bixby, executive director of the Concord Coalition.