A bad night for the Mets on the field only got worse when the club’s longtime mascot, Mr. Met, was caught on video making an obscene gesture toward a fan in the late stages of the Mets’ 7-1 loss to the Milwaukee Brewers at Citi Field on Wednesday.
The Mets issued a statement after a fan posted a video on Twitter of the mascot, known for his large baseball-shaped head and his oversize white hands, as he appeared to raise his middle finger while heading down a tunnel at the end of the game.
The fan who posted the video, who goes by the name Tony T on Twitter, said he and his companions had not goaded Mr. Met in any way.
More than one person plays Mr. Met in a season. The Mets would not release the name of the person in costume on Wednesday night or comment further on any disciplinary action, or whether he was still employed by the team.
Mr. Met will be on the field and in the stands for Thursday afternoon’s game against the Brewers, but inside will be a different performer.
And the Mets can only hope that he doesn’t do something inappropriate.
For what it’s worth, Mr. Met was not the team’s original mascot. Back in 1962, when the franchise played its first season in the Polo Grounds and quickly made its mark as the worst team in baseball, maybe ever, the Mets had a beagle named Homer.
He was the mascot, and was supposed to run the bases when a Mets player hit a home run. According to Roger Angell’s book “Game Time,’’ Homer did well in rehearsals, but in his first real test, he touched first base and second, then ran into center field, where “three fielders, two ushers and the handler’’ had to reel him in.
When the Mets moved into Shea Stadium in 1964, they decided it was time for a new mascot. Thus, Mr. Met came into existence. He was modeled after a caricature previously used in team publications.
For reasons unknown, Mr. Met disappeared in the 1970s, and in 1979, a new mascot was introduced — a mule named Mettle, whose job was to stride up and down the foul lines before games. But just like Homer, Mettle didn’t stick around long.
The Mets went through the 1980s without a mascot and actually did just fine, winning a championship in 1986 with the best team in franchise history.
But in 1994, during another down period for the Mets (and there have been many), Mr. Met returned. He was inducted into the Mascot Hall of Fame in 2007 and was voted the No. 1 sports mascot of 2009 in a survey by Forbes magazine.
And on Wednesday night, he lost his cool.