
The German Foreign Ministry confirmed on Friday that it has admitted one man, who arrived in the country on Tuesday, on a special visa on humanitarian grounds. Three other men have met with officials at the German Embassy in Moscow, a ministry spokeswoman said, while another man’s application is being reviewed.
In mid-May, Lithuania’s foreign minister announced that his government had granted visas to two Chechens who “suffered persecution because of their sexual orientation.” And last week, Joël Deumier, president of the French gay rights group SOS Homophobie, said a Chechen refugee had arrived in France.
Officials with ILGA-Europe, a gay and transgender rights group, said that in recent weeks, several other European countries had also entered into discussions to admit gay refugees on grounds of persecution. But they declined to name the countries because to do so, they said, could put the refugees at risk.
Gay men in Chechnya, a deeply homophobic republic, have long been at risk of so-called honor killings by family members and of abuse by the local authorities. 
In April, the independent Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta reported that more than 100 gay men in Chechnya had been arrested, and that at least three had been killed. The government of the Chechen leader, Ramzan A. Kadyrov, denied the reports, as well as the fact that any gay men live in Chechnya.
Since then, human rights advocates have mobilized to help such men leave the region.
Officials with the Russian LGBT Network, an advocacy group based in St. Petersburg, said that about 100 people had applied to it for assistance, and that the organization was helping them seek asylum in other countries. They declined to give further details because, they said, they had received reports that Chechens had been tracked by hostile relatives in Russia and could be targeted once outside it by members of the Chechen diaspora.
Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President Emmanuel Macron of France have pushed Vladimir V. Putin, the Russian president, to intervene personally.
“I also spoke about the very negative report about what is happening to homosexuals in Chechnya and asked Mr. President to exert his influence to ensure that minorities’ rights are protected,” Ms. Merkel said in May at a news conference in Sochi, Russia, after meeting with Mr. Putin.
“As for me, I will be constantly vigilant on these issues, which are in keeping with our values,” Mr. Macron said.
