Philip Gossett, a musicologist whose shoe-leather detective work in musty archives and Italian villas helped bring long-lost operas back to the stage, died on Tuesday at his home in Chicago. He was 75.
Ellen T. Harris, a professor emeritus of music at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, confirmed the death. She said he had long been treated for progressive supranuclear palsy.
Mr. Gossett made it his life’s work to recover scores that had disappeared or become messy — marred by years of bad copies, mistakes, revisions for different singers and productions, later interpolations and lost passages — and return them to something close to what their composers had intended.
He was a pioneer in the creation of scholarly critical editions of opera scores, and served as the general editor of new editions of the works of Verdi and Rossini. He had a distinguished academic career as a professor at the University of Chicago. And he became a familiar figure in rehearsal rooms around the world, sought after by top conductors, singers and opera companies working to bring his discoveries to life.
Mr. Muti lamented that many Italian operas had become corrupted over the years by bad scores and inauthentic performance traditions.
He gave one example of the kind of restoration Mr. Gossett specialized in: Traditional productions of Verdi’s “Rigoletto” had the lascivious Duke of Mantua appear at a tavern in the last act and ask for “Una stanza, e del vino” (“A room, and some wine”), a seemingly innocuous request that is oddly met with disgust by the others on stage.
The original line, which was cut by censors, made more sense when it was restored in the critical edition of the score: “Tua sorella, e del vino” (“Your sister, and some wine”). Mr. Muti conducted the premiere of this version — which was edited by Martin Chusid, and was the first volume to appear in a Verdi series of which Mr. Gossett was general editor — in 1983.
The opera, based on a play by Voltaire, was originally given a happy ending for its 1813 premiere in Venice. For a revival in Ferrara, Rossini rewrote it, giving it a tragic ending closer to Voltaire. But it was not deemed a success and was soon lost.
A few years after Mr. Gossett’s meeting with Ms. Horne, an Italian count discovered the tragic finale at his family’s villa in Brescia. Mr. Gossett and officials from the Fondazione Rossini visited the villa, where they were able to authenticate the manuscript. He then incorporated it into a new critical edition of the score, which Ms. Horne sang at the Houston Grand Opera in 1977.
Mr. Gossett often took an active role in helping opera houses bring his discoveries, and those of his colleagues, to the stage, working with singers, including Cecilia Bartoli, Joyce DiDonato, Renée Fleming, Juan Diego Flórez and Samuel Ramey, and conductors like Mr. Muti and Claudio Abbado.
When the Metropolitan Opera staged Rossini’s “Semiramide” in 1990, after an absence of nearly a century, it used the critical edition that Mr. Gossett and Alberto Zedda had created, and when it staged that composer’s “La Cenerentola” for the first time, in 1997, Mr. Gossett was a stylistic adviser.
“Philip, in a way, founded the critical approach to Italian operas,” he said.
Mr. Gossett fought battles over the music he loved. In 2001, he resigned from the board of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra when it did not use his edition of Verdi’s Requiem, and in 2006 he was effectively dismissed from the Rossini Opera Festival in Pesaro, Italy, after accusing festival officials of ignoring scholarship. But he cautioned against being doctrinaire.
Mr. Gossett was born on Sept. 27, 1941, in Brooklyn to Harold and Pearl Gossett. His father was a furrier. After his family moved to Queens, he attended Forest Hills High School.
Mr. Gossett graduated summa cum laude from Amherst College, earned his doctorate from Princeton University after spending a year in Paris as a Fulbright scholar, and joined the faculty of the University of Chicago in 1968, where he remained for the rest of his academic career.
Suzanne Gossett, a professor emerita at Loyola University of Chicago, survives him, as do his sons, David and Jeffrey, and five granddaughters.
Mr. Gossett never seemed to lose the thrill of the chase. He once recalled his first encounter, for example, with long-lost parts of Rossini’s “Il Viaggio a Reims” in a library in Rome.
