The man who opened fire last summer on law enforcement officers in Baton Rouge, La., killing two policemen and a deputy sheriff, carried out his ambush “to create substantial change within America’s police force and judicial system,” according to a suicide note that investigators released on Friday.
In a handwritten letter that ran to a third page, the gunman, Gavin Long, said his attack was “a necessary evil” that he hoped would compel “good” law enforcement officers to confront wrongdoing and misconduct in American policing.
“Therefore I must bring the same destruction that bad cops continue to inflict upon my people, upon bad cops as well as good cops in hopes that the good cops (which are the majority) will be able to stand together to enact justice & punishment against bad cops b/c right now the police force & current judicial system is not doing so,” Mr. Long, 29, wrote in the letter, which the authorities retrieved from his car after the assault on July 17, 2016.
The suicide note of Mr. Long, who was killed by the police, was included in the trove of evidence that the authorities made public at the end of their use-of-force inquiry. No officers will be charged in connection with Mr. Long’s death, a conclusion that was never in serious doubt in the Louisiana capital.
The suicide note written by Gavin Long, who was fatally shot by police in Baton Rouge, La., after he killed three police officers and a deputy sheriff in July 2016.
“This was a no-brainer,” Hillar C. Moore III, the East Baton Rouge Parish district attorney, said during an 83-minute presentation on Friday.
Although the police had already described many details of the attack, and although Mr. Long’s motive seemed clear, Mr. Moore’s report represented the end of the inquiry into the episode, which came 10 days after a fatal ambush of officers in Dallas.
Mr. Long, a veteran of the Marine Corps, arrived July 12 in Baton Rouge, according to Mr. Moore’s report. There, he floated between hotels before driving along Airline Highway on July 17, beginning a fatal sequence of events that Mr. Moore said lasted nearly 14 minutes and included at least 149 gunshots by Mr. Long and the police.
According to Mr. Moore’s report, and photographic and video evidence released Friday, Mr. Long kept firing and moving, striking more officers, before members of a special response team shot him.
Officer Gerald died in the attack, along with Deputy Brad Garafola and Corporal Montrell Jackson. Three other law enforcement officers were wounded. Mr. Long, who was shot 45 times, according to an autopsy report, died at the scene, his left hand resting atop his legally purchased semiautomatic rifle.