In his first television appearance since he was widely criticized for using a racial epithet on the air, the HBO late-night host Bill Maher was by turns contrite and defiant, apologizing for his remarks while arguing that comedians should be allowed the freedom to transgress and offend.
On Friday’s episode of “Real Time,” Mr. Maher followed his customary opening monologue with a conversation with Michael Eric Dyson, the author and Georgetown sociology professor who writes often about racial issues.
Mr. Maher went on to describe comedians as “a special kind of monkey” and “a trained thing that tries to get a laugh” and in doing so, “sometimes we transgress a sensitivity point,” he said.
He compared himself to Kathy Griffin, who has been castigated for appearing in a violent photograph where she is holding what looks like the bloody, decapitated head of President Trump.
Later, during a panel discussion with several guests, the rapper and actor Ice Cube told Mr. Maher that, while he accepted his apology, he did not condone the host’s use of the epithet.
Mr. Maher, who in 2012 gave $1 million to a “super PAC” supporting the re-election of President Barack Obama, has a longstanding reputation for saying things, both jocular and sincere, that his viewers have found offensive. Over the 15 seasons of “Real Time,” he has been accused of various forms of bigotry, especially Islamophobia.
This latest controversy occurred last week during an interview on “Real Time” with Senator Ben Sasse, Republican of Nebraska. Mr. Maher said he needed to travel to Nebraska more often.
Mr. Maher answered, “Work in the fields?” And then used a pejorative.
Like other TV shows that are left-leaning and critical of Mr. Trump, “Real Time” has seen its ratings grow this year. Mr. Maher prides himself as a defender of free speech, including those forms of it that may offend a liberal audience.
But other industry observers and peers gave Mr. Maher slightly more leeway.
At the end of Mr. Maher’s panel discussion on Friday night, David Jolly, the Republican former Representative from Florida, defended the comedian.
