It was a windy spring afternoon, though that’s not why Malcolm Gladwell’s hair was standing straight up as he hurried into a recording studio in Downtown Brooklyn.
The podcast, which examines historical events he deems “overlooked and misunderstood,” and things he has personally obsessed with, like a forgotten Elvis Costello song, now take up half of Mr. Gladwell’s year.
He spent that entire sunny day in a beige room with fabric walls and no outdoor views doing “pickups” (re-recording problematic portions) in preparation for the June 15 premiere of the second season.
“It’s fun though,” he added.
Mr. Gladwell’s show is part of the Slate Group’s podcast division, and its chairman, Jacob Weisberg, stopped by that afternoon to see Mr. Gladwell, his friend of several decades.
The men, sitting in orange chairs in the soundproof recording room around a table topped with green felt and several microphones, chatted and laughed as two podcast producers and one editor prepared for the session in the adjoining control room, visible behind a picture window.
After Mr. Weisberg said his goodbyes, Mr. Gladwell waved his arms above his head like an air-traffic controller to signal he was ready to record.
Mr. Gladwell writes the approximately 45-minute scripts, and they had recorded nine of this season’s 10 episodes, which dwell on topics as varied as the economics of private golf courses in Los Angeles, the family behind Brown v. Board of Education, and how friendships influence political power.
Wearing a dark gray wool jacket open over a striped crew neck T-shirt, he sat at the head of the recording table. A stack of scripts and a two plastic water bottles were scattered before him. His iPhone, within reach, remained untouched. The band of the large professional-grade headphones was hidden behind his hair.
Mr. Gladwell sometimes looked down and simply read, a black Sharpie in his left hand ready to edit or strike through words. Other times he sat slumped, as he intoned each word into the microphone.
When he got excited, which happened when he offered a reveal or surprising fact (like how physicist Frederick Lindemann wrote Winston Churchill 2,000 memos), he gestured broadly as if conducting an orchestra, punching the air with a closed fist.
Some lines had to be re-recorded because of minor hiccups, like a throat-clearing or a popped “p” in the word policy. Others masked regional pronunciations, like Mr. Gladwell’s saying résumé as “res-ew-me” — a holdover from his rural Ontario roots.
For much of the afternoon, he plodded along, recording most changes without question, pushing back when he thought it harmed the flow or muddled a point.
Around 4 p.m., the production team suggested a break. Once peppy and animated, Mr. Gladwell seemed drained. He won’t, he said, record more than two full episodes in one sitting.
Over the next few weeks, he planned to travel to Nashville to report on the season’s last episode, an examination of a country song he thinks should be taken more seriously. He wouldn’t divulge the song (“It’s got to be a surprise!”), but said it was well known and highly sentimental.
Has David Remnick, the magazine’s editor, suggested he take off the headphones and return to his laptop? “I think he keeps those thoughts to himself,” Mr. Gladwell said.