One of the great villains of life in New York is Earlier Incident.
 It could be anything. It could also be any time — “earlier,” after all, is blurry, like peering into deep space.
So let’s go cosmic with incarnations of Earlier Incident that have shaped our lives.
The subway signal system is one big fat Earlier Incident.
About a decade ago, subway signals were inspected every 30 days; after a batch of new ones were installed, officials changed the schedule to every 90 days. So instead of once a month, signals are now checked four times a year. They have emerged as the second most common cause of delays; officials say we need a more modern system, but the adequacy of maintaining what we have now gets little attention.
A Stitch in Time, Etc.
Subway cars used to be checked for problems every 12,000 miles, or 66 days. But with a new fleet of cars, officials decided in 2008 they did not need as much T.L.C., and the inspection frequency was reduced to 15,000 miles, or 75 days. “It may have made sense at one time, but it doesn’t make sense any more,” said John Samuelsen, who is president of both the transit union local in New York and the international.
The performance of those cars, now older, has declined by 40 percent: On average, they were breaking down every 120,000 miles in November 2016, a drop from 200,000 miles in November 2010. The city should pitch in more for day-to-day maintenance, Mr. Samuelsen argues.
Maybe you think this inspection cycle stuff makes for a drab Earlier Incident, compared with, say, a cute puppy on the tracks.
Don’t worry, glamour is on the way.
But how is this an Earlier Incident? Because to help pay for it, the subway capital program was raided and cut by more than $1 billion in 1999, the first time that had happened since 1980. The subways serve about 35 times as many commuters as will be accommodated in the new station. But former Senator Alfonse D’Amato, whose political base was on Long Island, got a pot of federal money for it. You can also send thank-you cards to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov. George E. Pataki. “If they had built a way to get to Grand Central from Penn Station 20 years ago, they wouldn’t have had to spend so many billions on the East Side Access,” Richard Ravitch, a former chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, said.
The PATH station at the World Trade Center was quickly and inexpensively rebuilt after 9/11 and served about 46,000 people. But that wasn’t good enough. That perfectly fine station was replaced at a cost of nearly $4 billion — without serving a single new passenger or laying another inch of track.
Then there is the new Second Avenue line — you know, The Little Subway That Could (Go From 63rd Street to 96th). The tunnel and track were not outlandishly expensive, but the line’s three new stations have enormous mezzanines that turn each stop into a two-story structure that runs for blocks. The stations alone cost $2.4 billion, as Josh Barro wrote in Business Insider, more than half the project’s $4.5 billion cost.
This one goes into the Earlier Incident Hall of Fame.
For a long time, New Jersey had one of the lowest gasoline taxes in the country, but in 2010, there were signs that the state might have to raise it. The reason? The existing rail tunnels under the Hudson were in dire condition, and an urgently needed new tunnel was in the final stages of planning. But cost overruns on that project might have required a higher gasoline tax to help defray them. Swooping in to save the day, Gov. Chris Christie abruptly canceled the new tunnel.
Five years later, Mr. Christie and Gov. Andrew Cuomo agreed that it really had to be built — in a different configuration, at a cost that could be double the 2010 version. Today, the old tunnels are seven years more decrepit and are doing a fine job of making commuters miserable. In September, Mr. Christie, by the way, was forced to raise his state’s gas tax, which is now well above the national average.
With ridership declines in Brooklyn and Queens during the late 1970s and early 1980s, officials openly discussed shutting certain lines, including the Franklin Avenue shuttle and the G line. Neighborhood activists fought back — and today’s thriving populations in Queens and Brooklyn can thank them for heading off this Earlier Incident.
Did the Earth Move for You in This Earlier Incident?
The transit advocate Gene Russianoff reports that one day in 2011, he heard an announcement, “Due to an earlier incident in Virginia, trains are running normally." Virginia? That’s a long way from Brooklyn. Turns out there had been earthquake in Virginia that day. Why it would cause trains in New York to run normally is a puzzle. “Maybe a deranged dispatcher,” Mr. Russianoff suggested.
Or maybe a little tectonic plate shifting is just the kind of Earlier Incident that we’ve been missing in New York City.