“Live Archiveography,” written and staged by David Gordon, is a compelling, bewildering achievement. Astonishingly layered, its overlapping elements connect rehearsal and performance, historical film and prepared script, dance theater and personal life to become part of the history not just of Mr. Gordon but also of dance and theater. It’s both new and all about recycling; it’s live and all about the past.
This production, presented by Lumberyard at the Kitchen, is a sequel to the “David Gordon: Archiveography — Under Construction” exhibition that ran last winter at the New York Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center. Like that installation, this show, which opened on Thursday, turns Mr. Gordon’s own performance history into a hall of mirrors. But the exhibition, nonetheless, felt like something for specialists: fascinating if you were fascinated by Mr. Gordon. “Live Archiveography,” by contrast, has a poignant openness of spirit; it works quite as well for people who have never seen Mr. Gordon’s work as for those who have.
Who’s David Gordon? A founding member of Judson Dance Theater in the 1960s, he has been variously a part of dance postmodernism, performance art and experimental theater. He and his wife, Valda Setterfield, a British dancer who moved here in 1956 and danced for Merce Cunningham, have had a stage partnership for over 50 years, appearing around the world.
Their marriage and their partnership have been central subjects of his work for decades. And though this sounds pathologically self-referential and narcissistic, there are many meanings to be found in the complexity with which Mr. Gordon fragments and reorders his career and private life. In “Live Archiveography,” Mr. Gordon no longer performs with his wife; he sits at the front of the stage, his back to the audience, while she and other dancer-actors dance and act.
But some of what the others do are David-and-Valda numbers, while films and photographs remind us that the performing arts have been steeped in husband-and-wife teams who are both marriages and acts. To what extent is marriage itself a public performance? To what extent does performance falsify or reveal real life? And, inevitably, what’s real in real life, anyway?
A breathtaking element in “Live Archiveography” comes when we learn that “Chair” (1974), one of Mr. Gordon’s seminal creations, was made to help Ms. Setterfield recover from a serious accident. She feared that she was losing her dancer’s ability to remember steps — which would mean losing her lifelong identity as, first and foremost, a dancer. “Chair” began with the idea of using a “He loves me, he loves me not” routine — sitting and standing, in mime gestures — from the ballet “Giselle,” but it was also therapy.
The act of rehearsal became part of the “Chair” fabric. (It’s all about practicing and repeating.) In due course, that fabric entered into the mainstream of dance. We’re shown film of Mikhail Baryshnikov performing “Chair” in “PastForward” (2001), the superbly creative retrospective in which he, Mr. Gordon and others honored the New York postmodern dance tradition.
Conversations between Mr. Gordon and Ms. Setterfield come back to haunt “Live Archiveography.” Memories of trust become memories of fear; re-enactments become routines, falsehoods that may have grown out of other falsehoods but that are now as real as everything else. George Burns and Gracie Allen are among the most endearing but artful of the many theatrical couples included here: We see several sides of how they turned naïveté into art and knowledge into seeming innocence.
It’s all work as long as it works. In a recurrent metaphor here, Mr. Gordon tells his team that he’s just a plumber, mending pipes. That’s what the choreographer Frederick Ashton called himself, too, in a 1963 interview. Art is work; life, too.