The surprise result of Britain’s snap election that backfired on Prime Minister Theresa May and weakened her Conservative Party may have stunned no one more than the Democratic Unionist Party of Northern Ireland, which now holds the unlikely role of kingmaker.
After the disastrous result on Thursday, Mrs. May turned to the D.U.P. to shore up her leadership position and her party, even as word came on Saturday that two of her top aides, Nick Timothy and Fiona Hill, had quit or had been pushed out.
Before the polls opened on Thursday morning, the D.U.P. — a socially conservative, fundamentalist Protestant bloc that is fiercely loyal to dreams of Britain’s lost empire — was merely the largest party in a small, inward-looking and mostly neglected backwater of the United Kingdom.
But on Friday, the D.U.P.’s 10 members of Parliament — three more than in the last election — found themselves holding the winning ticket. Their seats became crucial to Mrs. May because they could give her depleted Conservative Party the margin needed to form a minority government.
The D.U.P. later said, however, that talks were continuing, and Downing Street clarified its earlier statement to say that the details of any deal had yet to be finalized.
An agreement could put the D.U.P., led by Arlene Foster, 46, in the co-pilot’s seat for Mrs. May’s negotiations to take Britain out of the European Union, a process known as Brexit. So as the world strives to make sense of the election and its implications for Europe and beyond, the tiny D.U.P. has improbably become a factor in global geopolitics.
Robin Wilson, a commentator on Northern Ireland and European affairs, has a stark vision of the D.U.P. as bigoted, xenophobic, homophobic, isolationist and corrupt.
The Democratic Unionist Party was founded in 1971 as a radical, hard-line Protestant political faction in the Troubles, the 30-year-long sectarian conflict that began in 1968. The conflict was mainly fought between Catholics who wanted a republic that encompassed all of Ireland and Protestants determined to keep Northern Ireland in the United Kingdom, along with Scotland, England and Wales.
At least 3,532 people, most of them civilians, lost their lives to paramilitary killings and terrorist bombings, with the violence at times spilling over into England and the Republic of Ireland.
The party’s founder was Ian Paisley, a self-made evangelical preacher whose virulently sectarian speeches, and sometimes violent demonstrations, helped stoke interfaith tensions in the early years of the Troubles.
Yet for all Mr. Paisley’s anti-Catholic rhetoric (which moderated later in his life), the religious conflict that truly defined the birth, growth and eventual triumph of his movement was not the struggle between Protestant and Catholic, but the bitter local rift between rival Protestant traditions.
The patrician Ulster Unionist party, which ruled Northern Ireland after its creation in 1922, was dominated by wealthier, gentrified members of the Church of Ireland, the local branch of the Anglican Communion. Mr. Paisley’s supporters came from dissenter stock: Presbyterians, Methodists and evangelical Protestants whose British ancestors colonized Catholic Ireland during the 17th-century wars of religion.
His followers were uncompromisingly hostile to Catholicism and liberalism, and resentful of the Church of Ireland’s ruling class, which had discriminated against their dissenter ancestors, yet they were fervently loyal to the military myths of the fading British Empire. These rank-and-file Protestants became increasingly distant from the more moderate Ulster Unionists and from the British government, which sought compromise among all factions.
Years later, the D.U.P. proved to be the main beneficiary of the Good Friday Agreement of 1998, which ended the Troubles. The deal stipulated that the largest Protestant and Catholic parties should jointly share power in Northern Ireland. But it soon became apparent that this would push voters from both sides to the political extremes, for fear of losing local influence to religious rivals.
For some, this was a poor outcome to a quarter-century of building peace in Northern Ireland.
“I think it’s a disaster for Ireland in that we are now back in the old sectarian swamp in the north, with one party effectively representing Protestants and another representing Catholics, and nothing moderate or nonsectarian in between,” said Andy Pollak, a former director of the Center for Cross Border Studies.
Others take a more sanguine view of the party. Paul Bew, an emeritus professor of history at Queens University Belfast, said many senior D.U.P. members and party cadres, including their leader, were Church of Ireland members who once belonged to the Ulster Unionists. For Protestants who want to work in politics in Northern Ireland, he says, the D.U.P. is now the pragmatic choice of party.
The D.U.P. has vetoed attempts to bring same-sex marriage legislation into effect in Northern Ireland since a referendum in the Republic of Ireland legalized gay marriage in 2015.
A similar law was passed in Westminster in 2013, but the D.U.P. blocked it in Northern Ireland. The party has also blocked attempts to extend Westminster’s 1967 Abortion Act — which legalized abortion in the rest of the United Kingdom — to Northern Ireland.
Although the D.U.P. supported Brexit in last year’s referendum, few Irish observers, north or south, think the D.U.P. really wants a “hard Brexit” — a total separation from European markets and customs unions.
This would almost certainly require the reintroduction of border controls between northern and southern Ireland, damaging their economies and perhaps rekindling violence.
Beyond that, the price that the D.U.P. would demand for supporting a new British government remained a matter of conjecture.
