Uber and its investors are facing a backlash over Travis Kalanick’s departure as chief executive — particularly from employees.
Starting late Wednesday, Uber employees circulated a petition asking the company’s board of directors to bring back Mr. Kalanick in an active role. More than 1,000 employees clicked to support Mr. Kalanick’s return in that capacity. In addition, Uber workers took to social media to express their dismay at the departure of Mr. Kalanick, who helped found Uber and made it a transportation behemoth.
“He worked day and night in creating this company to what it is today,” the petition said.
The reaction followed a tumultuous few days at Uber. Late Tuesday, Mr. Kalanick, 40, said he would step down as Uber’s chief executive after a coterie of investors — including Benchmark, one of the company’s biggest shareholders — pushed for him to resign. They acted after months of controversy at Uber over legal and workplace issues, including sexual harassment claims, which have prompted firings, investigations and promises to reform.
Mr. Kalanick’s resignation stunned many in Silicon Valley who viewed his position as secure, because he holds plenty of Uber’s stock and because he built the ride-hailing service into a nearly $70 billion company in just eight years.
His departure plunges Uber into uncertainty. The company does not have an interim chief executive, with management responsibilities being shared among a committee of executives. Uber is recruiting to refresh its highest ranks with other executives as well, and the company’s board is also undergoing several changes.
The employee petition began when Michael York, a product manager, called for people to rally their support around Mr. Kalanick.
A series of scandals have toppled executives, including Travis Kalanick, Uber’s co-founder.
The 1,000 clicks the petition received represent a small fraction of Uber’s more than 15,000 employees.
Mr. York is close to Mr. Kalanick. The former Uber chief persuaded Mr. York to drop out of school at 18 to join Uber in 2012. With Jeff Holden, a product executive at the company, Mr. York helped Mr. Kalanick formulate Uber’s now-infamous list of 14 cultural values a few years ago, according to two people familiar with the matter, who asked not to be named because they were not authorized to speak publicly. That list is being reformulated after an internal investigation into Uber’s culture.
On Wednesday night, Uber employees in San Francisco, where the company is based, also held at least two small, informal gatherings to discuss the state of the company and, in some cases, mourn the loss of its leader, according to three current and former Uber employees.
Uber management has rushed to address employee concerns.
The post was liked by more than 700 people on Facebook, including Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, and Joe Lonsdale, a well-connected venture capitalist in Silicon Valley.