LeBron James and Kyrie Irving were nearly unstoppable for most of Game 3 of the N.B.A. finals. But even as the Cleveland Cavaliers kept an iron grip on the lead in the fourth quarter, Coach Steve Kerr of the Golden State Warriors repeatedly told his players that the Cavs’ stars would eventually wear down as long as the Warriors stuck to the game plan and never gave up.
■ Follow our live coverage of the N.B.A. finals Game 4 here.
At times Kerr’s advice must have seemed unrealistic, as James raced to 39 points, with Irving right behind him at 38 points. But his words eventually proved prophetic as the Cavaliers unraveled in the game’s final minutes, allowing the Warriors to go on an 11-0 run, erasing what had been a 6-point lead for Cleveland and putting the Cavaliers in a 3-0 hole in the series.
The Cavaliers, who left the crowd at Cleveland’s Quicken Loans arena stunned by the improbable collapse, will have people looking for things to blame, and there were a few moments in the closing seconds that appeared to seal the team’s fate.
Kyrie Irving put on a show all game, repeatedly getting to the basket and throwing up shots that were as improbable as they were accurate. It was the same demoralizing manner in which he helped engineer Cleveland’s comeback in last year’s finals, with nearly every Golden State shot being answered by one from Irving or James.
But with just under two minutes remaining, Irving’s magic ran out and his driving layup failed to find its way through the hoop as he fell out of bounds. Despite Draymond Green having been in perfect position for a rebound, Irving dove back to the ball and wrestled it away from the larger forward, but the possession ended for Cleveland when LeBron James missed a 12-footer.
—Following a missed 3-pointer by Kyle Korver, Kevin Durant collected the rebound and took care of things himself, dribbling to the other side of the court before simply pulling up in front of James for a 3-pointer that gave the Warriors a 114-113 lead with 45 seconds remaining.
The boldness to even take the shot, let alone make it, was exactly what the Warriors were looking for when they signed the former M.V.P.
James, who claimed fatigue did not play a part in the collapse, failed to make a strong attempt to contest the shot. He claimed it was strategy, not exhaustion, which gave Durant some room to work with.
Andre Iguodala won a Finals M.V.P. award in 2015 largely because of his containment of James, and while he may not have had quite as much of an impact in this series, he showed he could still dial it up when necessary. Coach Steve Kerr played the versatile wing for the entire fourth quarter and it paid off when James got the ball in the corner with 10 seconds remaining and his team down by 3 points. James started to elevate for a 3-point attempt but before he could get the ball in position to shoot, Iguodala swatted it away cleanly.
James, who kicked Iguodala between the legs on the shot attempt in a body movement more typically associated with Draymond Green, pushed past Iguodala to regain possession of the ball, but in doing so he stepped out of bounds and ended any realistic chance of his team tying the game.
Any Hope for Cavaliers?
The Cavaliers now find themselves down 3-0 in the series. ESPN Stats & Information reminds us that N.B.A. teams that have fallen behind 3-0 in a seven-game series are a perfectly imperfect 0-126 at mounting a comeback.
The Warriors, meanwhile, will have a chance to finish off an unprecedented 16-game sweep of the N.B.A.’s postseason if they win Game 4 on Friday, which would also make them the ninth team to sweep the N.B.A. Finals. Talk of an undefeated postseason had been brushed aside prior to Game 3, but with a 3-0 lead, Stephen Curry was finally willing to acknowledge it as a worthy goal.
“Now that we’re in that situation, why not take care of business and finish the job?” he asked.
But if there is a glimmer of hope for the stunned Cavaliers, no team had ever come back from a 3-1 deficit until last year — when Cleveland did that against Golden State.
At least one member of the Cavaliers seemed (briefly) confident in the team’s ability to come back from the 3-0 deficit. J.R. Smith tweeted — then immediately deleted — a bold prediction: “Cavs in 7.” Smith told reporters that his Twitter account was hacked and claimed he didn’t send the tweet.
Game 3 tipped off at 9:11 p.m. Eastern, with Zaza Pachulia of the Warriors winning the opening tip over Tristan Thompson of the Cavaliers. Despite that, the Cavaliers were first on the board with a layup by Kyrie Irving, and after Pachulia was called for a traveling violation, J.R. Smith knocked down a 3-pointer. It was Smith’s first field goal since the opening points of Game 1.
The Cavaliers have an early 13-9 lead with 8:30 remaining in the first quarter, but in a potentially bad omen for the Cavaliers, the Warriors are hot from 3-point range with Kevin Durant hitting two and Klay Thompson hitting one.
At the game’s first timeout, LeBron James and Kevin Durant seem determined to put on a show. James is up to 9 points and 2 assists, while Durant has 8 points on two 3-pointers and an alley-oop he managed to complete despite initially coming up short.
For the Cavaliers to keep their nice flow on offense, keeping Draymond Green out of the game as much as possible is key, and with the power forward already having picked up one personal foul he will undoubtedly be less aggressive in the game’s early going. That gives Cleveland an opportunity to push the ball inside to take advantage of his caution. Or benefit from his inability to control himself.
On a Klay Thompson 3-pointer that tied the game at 19-19, LeBron James collided with Tristan Thompson and stayed on the ground for an extended period. James was holding his head, and it appeared Thompson’s right shoulder had collided with James’s jaw, but after a commercial break he was back on the court, having been checked out on the bench briefly by medical personnel.
On Cleveland’s first possession after the break, James hit a shot in the lane over the outstretched arms of JaVale McGee, drawing a foul and proving that he was fine.
The Cavaliers were expected to try to slow things down at home after allowing 35 and 40 points in the first quarters of Games 1 and 2 on the road. Game 3 looks a lot like the first two games, however, with Cleveland trailing Golden State 39-32.
LeBron James is once again doing a tremendous job offensively, with 15 points, but Golden State set an N.B.A. finals record with 9 3-pointers in the quarter, and Cleveland may want to set their sights on slowing down Klay Thompson.
When he is hot, Thompson can be an even more devastating shooter than Stephen Curry, and the shooting guard lived up to his position’s name in the first quarter with 16 points on just seven field goal attempts. Cold for must of the postseason, Thompson started to come alive in Game 2, and is now 4 for 5 from 3-point range in Game 3, while the Warriors as a group are 9 for 14.
James will need more help in terms of scoring, but the larger problem may be Golden State continuing to win the battle for rebounds. They had 10 to Cleveland’s 6 in the quarter despite Zaza Pachulia being sent to the bench after 5 minutes because of foul trouble.
The game was immediately more physical at the start of the second quarter, with a lot of contact on both ends of the court. The change in mood greatly benefited Cleveland, with a 7-0 run bringing them back to a tie score.
The quarter’s first minute included a pass by LeBron James that went through the basket for two points and a dunk by Kyle Korver, who dunked just once during the regular season. The game was briefly tied at 39, but after a 3-point play by David West the Warriors are back up to a 4-point lead with 10 minutes left in the quarter.
The pace of the game may have slowed, but LeBron James continues to be able to do seemingly anything he wants against Golden State’s formidable defense. The Cavaliers’ forward has 23 points on 10 of 11 shooting while the rest of his team has combined for just 22 points. His teammates are shooting 5 of 18 from the field and no other player has more than 6 points.
The most stark stat in favor of James, however, may be plus/minus. The Cavaliers trail by 1 point — and James has only sat out 2 minutes — but he is a plus-9 so far. Kevin Love is a minus-8 and Kyrie Irving is a minus-5.
There was not a lot of scoring in the second quarter, with Cleveland shrinking the Warriors’ lead to six points at the half. Despite the downturn in points, there was plenty of action, with both teams aggressively going after the ball on defense, and bodies simply crushing into each other in what was almost assuredly an attempt by the Cavaliers to slow things down and take advantage of the smaller Warriors players.
While the quarter included an extended argument between Stephen Curry and Iman Shumpert following a foul by the Cleveland guard, the biggest development for Cleveland was Draymond Green talking his way into a technical foul for arguing about his third foul. Green has not necessarily been at his best in these finals, but he is Golden State’s most important player on defense and one of their key playmakers on offense. He had been a model citizen in the finals before the technical, but the Cavaliers will have to hope they have ignited his combustible personality.
For all of the physicality in the game, the Cavaliers were still been unable to disrupt the Warriors’ ability to move the ball around rapidly on every possession. Golden State had 21 assists on their 23 field goals in the half, and they are nearly unbeatable in any game in which they top 30 assists as a team.
LeBron James led all scorers in the half with 27 points, but Klay Thompson was right behind him with 21. Kyrie Irving had 17, including a last-second layup that improbably found the basket despite the star guard throwing it up over a swarm of Warriors defenders.
Third quarters have been difficult for Cleveland in this series, with Golden State racing off to huge leads, but things are off to a good start in Game 3 with the Cavaliers narrowing the Warriors’ lead to one point thanks to a 7-2 run. Cleveland even got some help from Golden State when a monstrous dunk by Kevin Durant was waived off thanks to a moving screen by Zaza Pachulia. Draymond Green also drew his fourth foul of the game.
Getting Green into foul trouble was a priority for the Cavaliers, and the star power forward may be forced to miss a large amount of the second half if Coach Steve Kerr wants to ensure that he will be available for crunchtime.
Cleveland’s Kyrie Irving driving for a layup past the Golden State defense in the second half.Credit...Tony Dejak/Associated Press..
The Kyrie Irving of last year’s finals appears to have finally arrived for this year’s series. The star guard now has 27 points and has repeatedly answered any scoring by Golden State with a series of circus layups that find friendly bounces through the rim.
While Games 1 and 2 were mostly defined by LeBron James’s best going against the best of Kevin Durant and Stephen Curry, Game 3 has had some variety with James and Irving combining for 54 points while Klay Thompson and Curry have combined for 43.
Cleveland has also gotten far more help from J.R. Smith, who has 12 points and is 4 of 5 from 3-point range. Smith has also has picked up three fouls which could be an issue.
The Cavaliers were written off by plenty of people after falling behind 2-0 in the series, but the third quarter finally belonged to them as Cleveland outscored Golden State 33-22 and will enter the fourth quarter with a 94-89 lead.
Cleveland has gotten 65 points from LeBron James and Kyrie Irving, and just 29 from the rest of the team, but Kevin Love chipped in with 8 rebounds and an astounding 6 steals. He has also drawn fouls in several instances by letting the smaller Warriors fight just a bit too hard while battling with him under the basket.
Golden State was clearly frustrated on the court in the third, with shots missing and the ball not moving around nearly as much. They finished the third with just 4 assists after they had 21 in the first half.
For Cleveland to hold onto the lead in the fourth quarter, they will need to keep Golden State frustrated offensively, while keeping James and Irving at maximum intensity for as much of the quarter as possible.
A needless loose ball foul on a rebounding attempt in which he was outnumbered three-to-one under the basket resulted in Draymond Green picking up his fifth foul of the game. Despite that — and Kevin Durant and Stephen Curry opening up the fourth quarter on the bench — the Warriors actually kept pace over the first four minutes, keeping Cleveland’s 5-point lead in place.
For the Warriors to keep their 14-game postseason winning streak going, they will need Durant and Curry to get back into the game and for them to get back to the two-man wrecking crew that they were in Games 1 and 2.
With the Cavaliers leading for much of the second half it appeared Cleveland would finally win a game, but an improbable run in the final seconds of the game has the Golden State Warriors leading by 3 points with one possession remaining in Game 3 of the NBA Finals. Kevin Durant got hot at the end of the game, hitting a huge 3-pointer to give the Warriors the lead late in the game.
The crowd in Cleveland was eerily quiet as they realized the Warriors were now likely to win a 15th consecutive postseason game.