MIAMI — Mets Manager Terry Collins punctuated his postgame comments on Tuesday with several heavy sighs, having watched his team sustain yet another injury in a loss to the Miami Marlins. Robert Gsellman, the Mets’ youngest player, was equally dejected after he pulled up lame with a left hamstring strain running to first base trying to beat out a ground ball.
A day later, the Mets placed Gsellman on the 10-day disabled list, making him the sixth of the team’s main seven starters to do so at some point this season. Jacob deGrom is the only one who has not joined them.
Steven Matz, who returned from an elbow injury early this month, allowed just six hits, all singles, over seven innings in an 8-0 victory against the Marlins. Asdrubal Cabrera and Curtis Granderson each hit two-run homers to provide more than enough support.
But the injury to Gsellman prompted yet another round of questions for Mets officials about the team’s medical and training practices. As of last weekend, the Mets ranked 10th in Major League Baseball with 568 combined games missed by players because of injury, according to ManGamesLost.com, which tracks professional sports injuries. The Mets rank higher when the quality of the injured players is factored in.
Reiterating comments by General Manager Sandy Alderson earlier in the season, the assistant general manager John Ricco said the team had “a lot of confidence” in its training and medical staffs.
Although Ricco did not specify any changes, there have been some during this season, such as Alderson’s meeting daily with the team’s conditioning and medical staff before games.
To help combat injuries, the Mets hired Mike Barwis, who was a consultant before, to oversee the organization’s strength and conditioning program before the 2015 season.
Injuries have been large themes of every season since. But Ricco commended Barwis’s work with the Mets, citing his helping to improve the conditioning of infielder Wilmer Flores and prospect Dominic Smith.
Barwis had previously trained the football teams at West Virginia University and the University of Michigan. Ricco said it was “a little bit of a misconception” to think Barwis was using football training techniques with the Mets.
Two prominent Mets who are also big weight lifters have missed time this season. Outfielder Yoenis Cespedes, who appeared in videos squatting 900 pounds at Barwis’s facility in Port St. Lucie, Fla. in the off-season, returned earlier this month after six weeks away with a left hamstring strain. Starter Noah Syndergaard, who bulked up in the off-season, has been out since May 1 with a right latissimus tear.
Ricco noted that some of the Mets’ injuries were natural consequences of playing the sport, like those of outfielders Juan Lagares (broken thumb making a catch) and Cabrera (bruised thumb diving for a ball). But the soft-tissue injuries — such as the hamstring strains sustained by second baseman Neil Walker, Cespedes and Gsellman — are the ones the team wants to avoid.
Pitching, especially at modern velocities, may inevitably wear down the body. Matt Harvey (right scapula stress injury), for example, may have pushed himself too hard coming back from last year’s thoracic outlet syndrome surgery.
That trend is what led to pointed remarks from Ron Darling, a former Mets pitcher who is now an analyst for SportsNet New York, the television network majority owned by the Mets.
During Tuesday’s broadcast, Darling said it was “a joke” to see new injuries daily and that teams were doing a “disservice to the million-dollar athletes they’re paying” with training that built weight lifters and not baseball players. Fans interpreted this as an indictment of the Mets’ training staff.
Asked about Darling’s comments, Ricco’s answer mirrored those of Collins, and many people around the Mets these days.
