1. President Trump lashed out at the deputy attorney general over the investigation into Russian election meddling.
We obtained a memo showing that members of Mr. Trump’s transition team were ordered to preserve materials related to the investigation.
The administration also released new memos stating that it would allow “Dreamers,” or undocumented immigrants who came to the U.S. as children, to stay — for now.
2. In a speech in Miami, President Trump announced that he was revoking parts of the “terrible and misguided” Obama-era policy of rapprochement with Cuba.
Arguing that the détente had enriched the Cuban military, Mr. Trump said he would reinstate travel and commercial restrictions to force concessions from the Castro government.
But the reversal could hurt small businesses on the island too. There were mixed reactions in Miami’s Little Havana.
The news that Amazon is buying Whole Foods for $13.4 billion inspired legions of armchair comics on social media.
And we asked Amazon’s founder about his philanthropic plans. Jeff Bezos, who is on his way to becoming the richest person in the world, then took to Twitter to solicit ideas.
4. Russia says it might have killed Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State, above, in an airstrike in the Syrian desert.
The strike occurred on May 28 outside Raqqa, and the Russian military says it also killed 30 field commanders and as many as 300 fighters. But rumors of Mr. Baghdadi’s death have circulated before, and the Pentagon said it had no indication that this one was true.
5. Anger surged over the government’s response to the Grenfell Tower fire in London.
Hundreds are homeless and the death toll stands at 30, a figure that could rise to 70. The police said they were opening a criminal investigation to determine if negligence had led to the blaze.
Among the first victims to be identified: Mohammed Alhajali, a 23-year-old Syrian refugee, above, who had reached Europe by sea.
That was Valerie Castile, above, the mother of Philando Castile, whose name became known around the world when he was fatally shot by a police officer — and his girlfriend streamed the aftermath on Facebook Live.
The Minnesota police officer, Jeronimo Yanez, was acquitted of second-degree manslaughter and endangering safety by discharging a firearm.
7. A young woman in Massachusetts was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter for urging her boyfriend to kill himself.
Michelle Carter, who was 17 at the time of Conrad Roy III’s suicide, faces up to 20 years in prison. It was a rare legal finding that, essentially, a person’s words alone can directly cause someone else’s suicide.
8. Helmut Kohl, the leader who reunified Germany, died at 87.
Mr. Kohl was chancellor from 1982 to 1998. He was remembered as a giant of epochal times that redrew Europe’s political architecture and dismantled the minefields and watchtowers of the Iron Curtain.
That was the prevailing sentiment at Flint Northwestern High School in Michigan when the time came to plan the prom. The students wanted to escape their anxiety about the city’s water crisis, poverty and gun violence.
They donned elaborate, color-coordinated outfits for their milestone bash, aboard a riverboat in Detroit. Some had never been to the city before, though it’s only an hour away.
The movie, about a bachelorette party weekend gone wrong, flips the gender roles, but leaves the cliché-ridden script intact.
Instead, you might consider the latest Pixar movie, “Cars 3,” which is “both breezy fun and a pain-free life lesson delivery vehicle” for adults as well as children.
