Good morning, good morning, on this misty Monday.
Lend me your ears and I’ll sing you a song about all the New Yorkers in the iconic Beatles album cover above.
In honor of the 50th anniversary of “Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band,” which was released in the United States in June 1967, we took a close look at the many faces on the cover, and we were amazed to discover that there are almost a dozen New Yorkers among the motley crew.
The artist Wallace Berman — a poet, painter, photographer and collagist who died in 1976 — was from Staten Island.
The singer-songwriter Dion DiMucci and the actor Tony Curtis were born in the Bronx. The poet Edgar Allan Poe not only spent the final years of his life living in a cottage in the borough, but he also did some of his best-known writing as a Bronx resident.
The actor Huntz Hall, a movie star and Broadway great, was born in Manhattan. The novelist Terry Southern, a city transplant, became a fixture in Greenwich Village and a familiar face at New York University and Columbia, where he taught screenwriting.
Richard Merkin, an artist and professional dandy, was a Brooklyn native through and through, before heading to Syracuse University. The actress Mae West, also born in Brooklyn, started her career there, performing often at a theater on Fulton Street.
Mr. Riley said that the Beatles chose the celebrities by making a list of their favorite famous people and then sneaking in a couple of Liverpool residents.
They must have been fond of us New Yorkers: We made it, and prominently so, onto what Mr. Riley said is one of the most famous Beatles images, equaled only by the Abbey Road cover.
“It’s become a totem, an instantly recognizable symbol of the ’60s,” Mr. Riley said of the “Sgt. Pepper” cover.
“The Beatles posing in front of the celebrities was a way of them saying, in their arrogant yet completely charming manner, ‘We know we’re the most famous people in the world right now, and we also know that we will be joining this parade, that this is not going to last, and that we will be in the back of this line someday,’ ” he said.
It’s getting better all the time — but not today.
Look for showers this morning and the chance of thunderstorms in the afternoon.
But even without the sun, today’s high will be near 73.
And if you don’t mind the rain, this drippy week’s for you. Light showers are forecast for the next two days.
• Scoreboard: Blue Jays rob Yankees, 3-2. Pirates pummel Mets, 11-1. Liberty contain Mercury, 88-72.
• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Monday Briefing.
• Watch out for Lovely Rita, meter maid: Alternate-side parking remains in effect until June 25.
• Lenny Bruce, who was born on Long Island but earned the label of “coolest comic in America” after gaining his footing in the city.
• The Beat writer William S. Burroughs, once a resident of Greenwich Village.
• The painter Richard Lindner and the writer Stephen Crane, who also spent considerable time living and working in New York.
New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. You’re such a lovely audience: If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.