U.S.|A 12-Year-Old Came Out to Her Mormon Church. Then Her Mike Was Cut Off.
A 12-Year-Old Came Out to Her Mormon Church. Then Her Mike Was Cut Off.
An image from a YouTube video of a 12-year-old girl telling her Mormon congregation that she is a lesbian.
On the day in May that Savannah stood up to speak in front of her Mormon congregation, she did not get through everything she had wanted to say.
As Savannah, now 13, was nearing the end of her comments, after she had come out to her fellow worshipers, her microphone was switched off. She tapped it and then looked to a church leader to see what had happened.
He told her that she could return to her seat.
The story of Savannah’s speech began to spread beyond Utah after the blog “I Like to Look for Rainbows” — named after the lyrics of a Mormon song, and dedicated to “queer Mormon experiences” — featured an interview with Savannah on a podcast episode in May. It has highlighted an issue that gay Mormons have been struggling with for years: how to balance their sexuality with the teachings of a church that prohibits gay relationships.
The blog’s founder, Britt Jones, said he was surprised the story went on to get so much attention.
The bishop at Savannah’s church did not immediately respond to an email seeking comment. A spokesman for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had no comment.
Savannah first told her parents she was gay shortly after she turned 12, said her mother, Heather Kester, who asked that Savannah’s last name not be identified to protect her privacy.
At testimony meetings, which are often held by Mormon churches on the first Sunday of every month, worshipers are encouraged to give “verbal expression of what he or she knows to be true concerning the divinity of Jesus Christ, the restoration of the fulness of his gospel in our time, and the blessings that come from living its principles,” according to the Encyclopedia of Mormonism.
Ms. Kester said that her daughter had been asking for months to identify herself as a lesbian at one of these gatherings.
Savannah said she decided to make her speech because life can be difficult for people who are lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender.
In October, the church’s official website rolled out a new section dedicated to gay or bisexual Mormons and their families. “Identifying as gay, lesbian, or bisexual or experiencing same-sex attraction is not a sin and does not prohibit one from participating in the Church, holding callings, or attending the temple,” the website says.
But that language came less than a year after the church unveiled a policy equating gay marriage with apostasy and barring children of gay parents from joining the church until the age of 18. That policy hasn’t changed, which means that Savannah’s comments at the meeting last month, which included her dreams of getting married as a lesbian and raising a family, were in conflict with official Mormon doctrine.
Some critics of Savannah’s coming-out speech have objected to more than just its content, arguing that a testimony meeting is no place for prepared speeches, and that Savannah is too young to understand the full impact of her words, now immortalized in a video online.
Comments like those have been hurtful, Ms. Kester said. “It’s been hard, but in the ultimate scheme of things, I think positive change in the church can happen because of this,” she added.
In the last part of her written speech — the part that was never delivered at the testimony meeting — Savannah, who still considers herself a member of the church, explained that she was thinking about how to find happiness.
“I had dreams of going to the temple and getting married, and was very sad when I found out that would never happen for me,” she wrote in her prepared notes.
