Good morning. This is an important day in the history of Cooking, though I confess it may prove an annoying one for you. Today, we have erected a virtual wall around a lot of the recipes, collections and features we offer on our website, and we are asking that you pay for a subscription in order to access them.
What that means for you is maybe not much, or not much more than the cost of a single, monthly trip to the coffee shop for a latte. It might mean a lot. Whichever, I’d like to explain what’s happening and why.
It is a core belief of The New York Times that we produce journalism good enough that people are willing to pay for it. That journalism includes our recipes and instruction here on Cooking, and the digital features we use to support them on all your devices, same as it does our reporting from the nation’s capital and around the world.
So here is the deal. If you are already a subscriber to The Times, you will retain access to Cooking.
If you are not a Times subscriber, the next time you visit Cooking you will receive a free, 28-day trial subscription to Cooking, at the end of which you will be prompted to subscribe. A subscription to Cooking costs $5 a month.
The Times did not make this decision to charge for access to Cooking lightly. Our desire from the start of this enterprise was to give our users access to the very best recipes in the world, along with the ability to save and organize them, and to use them on whatever device they wanted to, with accompanying instruction to make them delicious, every time. It would be great to be able to give all that to you for free, forever.
But we simply cannot. The work we do is expensive, and we want to do more of it. We travel ceaselessly, and cook every day. We test our recipes relentlessly. We photograph and make videos about them, we think beautifully. And we build features that help make cooking, and planning, and shopping for meals easier, more enjoyable, even fun. Your subscription will help us continue to do that, and better, and more.
So I hope you’ll join us for the free trial, and then stick around to cook with us as a subscriber for many years to come.
Letters of indignation, or notes of thanks and understanding, can be sent to me at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Now, how about a recipe for tonight? You could make Julia Moskin’s recipe for an avocado fattoush with mint vinaigrette. At some point you should make Melissa Clark’s recipe for pasta with green puttanesca. And if it’s me deciding? Tonight, I’m making Mark Bittman’s recipe for salmon burgers.
See you on Friday. I’ll have a ton more recipes for you then, for the weekend and beyond. Thank you for reading, and I hope for understanding. We are very much in this together.