The past week was to be a feel-good time for Mayor Bill de Blasio and other politicians to connect with Hispanic voters, culminating in Sunday’s Puerto Rican Day Parade.
Instead, the week has magnified a growing rift between the mayor and his top Hispanic ally, the City Council speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, who will leave office at the end of the year.
Ms. Mark-Viverito and the mayor differed on whether to bestow an honor at the parade on a former member of a militant Puerto Rican nationalist group that conducted a series of deadly bombings in New York City in the 1970s and 1980s. And they clashed over how far to go in providing legal services to undocumented immigrants in the city’s budget.
Both issues have come to the fore at an inopportune time — as Mr. de Blasio seeks to shore up his support among Hispanic voters for his re-election in November. As an illustration of the level of tension, the mayor in both cases felt compelled to issue behind-the-scenes threats in an effort to get his way.
For most of Mr. de Blasio’s term as mayor and Ms. Mark-Viverito’s as speaker, relations between the two have been warm. Mr. de Blasio backed her for speaker in a tight race for the job in 2014, and she has tried to help on contentious issues before the Council. In contrast to the tenure of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, no legislation has passed that Mr. de Blasio did not eventually sign.
One difference now is that the mayor is running for re-election and the speaker, because of term limits, is not — meaning he faces all the political calculations of a candidate and she may feel more free to stand on conviction.
In one dispute, the mayor did not want to fund legal services in immigration court to undocumented residents who have been convicted in the past five years of any of 170 serious crimes.
Ms. Mark-Viverito disagreed, and on Tuesday she placed a last-minute condition that would extend the legal services to undocumented residents based only on their income and regardless of their criminal history.
Mr. de Blasio called Ms. Mark-Viverito on Tuesday during the Council’s vote to adopt the budget, according to a person familiar with the matter, urging her not to add the condition, which had not been part of the customary give-and-take of budget negotiations. He threatened to use his veto — something he has not done as mayor — if she went ahead with it.
Ms. Mark-Viverito did not back down, attaching the condition to $26 million in spending on immigrant legal services.
Mr. de Blasio said on Thursday that he would not veto the measure, but the dispute may outlast Ms. Mark-Viverito’s tenure: It could result in a court fight over whether the Council overstepped its authority.
The disagreement over the Puerto Rican Day Parade and its decision, supported by Ms. Mark-Viverito, to honor the former militant, Oscar Lopez Rivera, centers on an issue of deep personal significance for the speaker. For years she crusaded to have Mr. Lopez Rivera freed from prison, culminating in his release this year after President Barack Obama commuted his sentence.
But the parade’s decision to name Mr. Lopez Rivera a National Freedom Hero brought a storm of protest because the group he belonged to conducted a bombing campaign in the 1970s and 1980s that killed five people in New York City and wounded many others, including several police officers.
The police commissioner, James P. O’Neill, called Mr. Lopez Rivera a terrorist and said he would not march.
The Brooklyn district attorney, Eric Gonzalez, and many police and firefighter groups said they would skip the parade, and the event’s large corporate sponsors pulled out.
Mr. de Blasio initially insisted he would march and dismissed the controversy as a distraction. As pressure mounted, however, he began to work behind the scenes to push Mr. Lopez Rivera aside, and he publicly stated that Mr. Lopez Rivera did not deserve to be named a hero. Behind the scenes he issued an ultimatum: Mr. Lopez Rivera must step aside or the mayor would not march.
That put him at odds with Ms. Mark-Viverito, who continued to lionize Mr. Lopez Rivera, whom she calls a freedom fighter and a political prisoner. The mayor’s threat to skip the parade foreshadowed the ultimatum he would make several days later when he threatened to veto Ms. Mark-Viverito’s budget provision on legal services.
Ultimately, the sides came to an awkward resolution in which Mr. Lopez Rivera said he would pass along his hero honor to others, including Puerto Rican activists and the people who had fought to free him from prison.
“It’s a parade. It’s not an actual thing — it’s a parade,” the mayor said on Thursday during an unrelated news conference at City Hall.
He said he and Ms. Mark-Viverito had spoken about Mr. Lopez Rivera but would not give details. “The relationship is fine,” he said.
A day earlier, Mr. de Blasio and Ms. Mark-Viverito appeared briefly onstage together during a Puerto Rican heritage event at Gracie Mansion. They air-kissed and smiled, although Ms. Mark-Viverito left early. An aide said that the mayor had arrived late and that Ms. Mark-Viverito had another event to attend.
