It is accurate to say that Scooter Gennett was unlikely to hit four home runs in a game. His team, the Cincinnati Reds, claimed him off waivers in March. Before Tuesday, he had 38 homers in five seasons. He takes his name from the “Muppets” character.
But it is also accurate to say that nobody is likely to hit four home runs in a game. Barry Bonds never did it. Neither did Hank Aaron or Babe Ruth or Alex Rodriguez. Pitching a perfect game is easier. That has happened 23 times. Gennett’s big night at Great American Ball Park was the 17th time a major leaguer had hit four home runs in a game.
In the third inning of the Reds’ 13-1 victory at home against the St. Louis Cardinals on Tuesday, Gennett connected for a grand slam to right-center off Adam Wainwright.
In the fourth inning, he blasted a homer to center off John Gant. Facing Gant again in the sixth, he sliced a home run to left.
Then, with the crowd on its feet in the eighth inning, Gennett drove a high fastball from John Brebbia into the second row above the fence in right-center.
Gennett, 27, entered the game in a 1-for-20 slump. Before his grand slam, he had gone 93 at-bats without a home run. He said he was trying to relax, hit good pitches and not swing too hard.
“I think I might be onto something here,” Gennett said.
Gennett, who spent his first four seasons with the Milwaukee Brewers, now has 42 career home runs. The previous 16 players to accomplish the feat averaged 309 career homers. The list includes just two players with at least 500 (Willie Mays and Mike Schmidt) but seven with at least 300: Joe Adcock, Rocky Colavito, Carlos Delgado, Lou Gehrig, Shawn Green, Gil Hodges and Chuck Klein.
The last to hit four in a game was Josh Hamilton, for the Texas Rangers in Baltimore on May 8, 2012. Hamilton has not played since 2015 because of injuries, making Gennett, effectively, the only active player to have done it.
Only one other player has hit four homers while driving in at least 10 runs, and he also did it at a Cardinals-Reds game in Cincinnati. On Sept. 7, 1993, at Riverfront Stadium — which stood next door to where Great American Ball Park was built — Mark Whiten of the Cardinals hit four homers and drove in 12 runs.
But Gennett, who singled in the first inning, stands alone as the only player ever to have four home runs, 10 R.B.I. and five hits in one game. He also did it in his hometown, where an encounter with a police officer at age 5 led to his unusual name. His given name is Ryan.
“One day, I was in the car with my mom; she would always put on my seatbelt, and I would click it off,” Gennett told The New York Times in 2014. “I was just a defiant kid; I always wanted attention, never really did what I was asked to do, just to see what would happen. So my mom actually took me to the police station to scare me a little bit.
Now, it will stick in the record books, for a night that defied imagination.