Politics|What Was Behind Those Befuddling McCain Questions?
What Was Behind Those Befuddling McCain Questions?
Senator John McCain became an unexpected focus of befuddlement and concern on Thursday after a line of questioning that appeared to conflate two separate F.B.I. investigations during James Comey’s testimony before the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Mr. McCain, 80, Republican of Arizona, said he believed there was a “double standard” because an investigation into the use of a private email server by Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee for president, was completed in July, while an investigation into Russia’s meddling in the presidential campaign continues.
“It’s hard to reconcile: In one case you reach a complete conclusion, and the other side you have not,” he said.
Following a yearlong investigation, Mr. Comey, then the director of the F.B.I., announced on July 5 that he recommended no criminal charges for Ms. Clinton for her handling of classified information while she was secretary of state.
The questioning briefly befuddled Mr. Comey. “I’m a little confused, Senator,” he responded to one of Mr. McCain’s questions. He clarified that there were two separate investigations, but the senator continued the muddled questioning.
The instant reaction on Twitter was highly critical of Mr. McCain.
Some of his colleagues, who didn’t want to be identified, were worried about his well-being after his performance. Others on social media, including political critics, shared the sentiment.
COMEY: The Clinton investigation was a completed investigation that the FBI been deeply involved in. And so I had an opportunity to understand all the facts and apply those facts against the law as I understood them. This investigation was underway, still going when I was fired. So it’s nowhere near in the same place. At least, it wasn’t when I was...
COMEY: ... correct, so far as I know. It was when I left.
COMEY: No, that one was done. The...
And, obviously, she was a candidate for president at the time, so she was clearly involved in this whole situation where fake news — as you just described it, “big deal,” took place. And you’re going to have to help me out here. In other words, we’re complete — the investigation of anything that former Secretary Clinton had to do with the campaign is over and we don’t have to worry about it anymore?
COMEY: With respect to Secretary — I’m not — I’m a little confused, Senator. With respect to Secretary Clinton...
COMEY: ... we investigated criminal investigation in connection with her use of a personal e-mail server...
COMEY: ... and that’s the investigation I announced the conclusion of on July 5th.
In the case of Mr. Comey, you — President Comey (sic)...
MCCAIN: ... I mean (ph) — excuse me — case of President Trump, you have an ongoing investigation.
COMEY: I don’t know how far the — the FBI has to go, but yes, that — the Clinton e-mail investigation was completed. The investigation of Russia’s efforts in connection with the election, and whether there was any coordination, and, if so, with whom, between Russia and the campaign...
MCCAIN: You just made it — you just made it...
COMEY: ... was ongoing when I left.
MCCAIN: ... No, but — they may not have been involved with her campaign. They were involved with the entire presidential campaign, obviously.
