RIO DE JANEIRO — President Michel Temer of Brazil probably benefited from a bribery scheme aimed at helping a conglomerate with a business project, according to a preliminary Federal Police report released on Tuesday that has already intensified pressure on the beleaguered leader as he struggles to push austerity measures through Congress amid a political crisis.
The preliminary report, written by an officer of the Federal Police, Brazil’s equivalent of the F.B.I., and made available by the Supreme Court on Tuesday, examined wiretaps, testimony and other evidence from executives of the food giant JBS, who have agreed to a plea bargain with prosecutors.
It said that “conclusions should be drawn about the payment of undue advantages” to Rodrigo Rocha Loures, a close aide to the president and former lawmaker who was jailed after being filmed taking delivery of a suitcase containing more than $100,000, and also indirectly to Mr. Temer.
The latest scandal to befall Mr. Temer, who became president after the impeachment of Dilma Rousseff last year, unfolded in May when O Globo, a newspaper, reported that the president had been caught on tape appearing to endorse efforts to obstruct a corruption investigation.
The secret recording was made by Joesley Batista, an heir to the JBS empire, during a late night meeting at the president’s residence in Brasília. During the conversation, Mr. Temer indicated that Mr. Batista should deal with Mr. Loures for help with his company’s problems.
The report said that after the meeting, Mr. Loures then intervened with a government antitrust body to help resolve a problem that a power plant owned by J&F Investments, the holding company that controls JBS, was having getting gas supplied by Petrobras, Brazil’s state-run oil company. The suitcase of money was the first of a series of weekly payments, the report added. It asked for more time to continue investigating other elements of the conversation.
If Brazil’s prosecutor general decides to indict Mr. Temer, a two-thirds majority in the lower house of Congress needs to approve the indictment. If the Supreme Court confirms that decision, he will be suspended for up to 180 days.
Rafael Cortez, a political analyst and partner at Tendências, a consultancy in São Paulo, said Mr. Temer probably has just enough support in Congress to block the indictment, but that may not last long. “The signs of the government’s low political capital are becoming visible,” he said.
Mr. Temer, who traveled to Russia on Tuesday, has repeatedly and vociferously denied all allegations against him. His lawyer, Antônio Mariz, dismissed the report. “The Federal Police report has no technical nor juridical value as an element of accusation,” Mr. Mariz said in a statement.
Mr. Temer attacked the lax terms of Mr. Batista’s plea bargain, saying he had been given 300 months to pay back the billions he earned from corruption at subsidized interest rates.
Mr. Cortez said the real danger for Brazil was that Mr. Temer’s ambitious economic program, including an overhaul of the country’s generous pensions system, was in jeopardy. Financial markets see the changes as essential to restoring Brazil’s economic credibility, but they are strongly opposed by labor unions.
Mr. Temer’s legal troubles are the latest in a series of scandals that began in 2014 when the police unveiled a multibillion-dollar graft scheme at Petrobras. Many of Brazil’s leading politicians and businessmen have been caught up in the investigations, and some are now in prison.
Fury over corruption helped bring about Ms. Rousseff’s impeachment, ostensibly for breaking budget rules. But since Mr. Temer assumed office, accusations of wrongdoing have been repeatedly leveled at his government and investigations have been approved into eight members of his cabinet.