Jorge Luis Arzuaga, a former managing director at the Swiss bank Julius Baer, pleaded guilty to money laundering conspiracy in Brooklyn federal court on Thursday, revealing his role in the United States’ sweeping criminal case focused on FIFA, the governing body of international soccer.
Mr. Arzuaga, who admitted to arranging the financial transfers of more than $25 million in bribes and kickbacks from 2010 to 2015, became the first banker publicly convicted in a case that has felled dozens of soccer officials and marketing and media executives since it was announced two years ago. His conviction suggests a new phase for the case, shifting its focus to the financial institutions through which bribe money traveled.
The Swiss have pursued similar charges against Mr. Arzuaga, the United States Justice Department said Thursday, and a resolution is expected to be announced soon. The conviction of Mr. Arzuaga, a citizen of Argentina who worked for the Zurich bank until 2015, would be Switzerland’s first in its parallel investigation into FIFA, which has its headquarters in Zurich. Switzerland’s Office of the Attorney General did not immediately respond to a request for comment Thursday.
Over the last two years, the Swiss authorities have provided significant assistance to the United States in carrying out arrests, extraditing defendants and responding to requests for information otherwise protected by the nation’s strict privacy laws. Switzerland’s Office of the Attorney General announced its own investigation into FIFA, after early-morning raids at a five-star hotel in 2015 that resulted in the first wave of arrests and upended soccer’s global leadership.
Appearing in United States District Court in Brooklyn on Thursday, Mr. Arzuaga, 56, promised to pay more than $1 million to the government, adding to the hundreds of millions of dollars so far pledged by the convicted defendants. Mr. Arzuaga joins dozens of international soccer officials and marketing and media executives — predominantly from South and Central America — who have been convicted to date.
A 236-page indictment released by the Justice Department in 2015 named numerous financial institutions, including Julius Baer, one of the banks at which Mr. Arzuaga worked, as having handled bribes paid to officials charged in the case. Mr. Arzuaga left Julius Baer that spring, shortly after the Swiss police had carried out the first surprise arrests at the behest of the United States Justice Department.
On Thursday, William F. Sweeney, Jr., the head of the F.B.I.’s New York office, emphasized that the case was continuing.
The United States investigation — a coordinated effort of the Justice Department, the F.B.I. and the I.R.S. criminal investigation division — has relied heavily on financial forensics and the tracing of bribe payments through the international banking system to America. The 2015 indictment specifically highlighted a $5 million wire transfer to a Julius Baer bank account in the name of a company affiliated with Torneos y Competencias, an Argentine sports marketing firm that has already pleaded guilty in the American case and promised to pay the government more than $112 million.
The indictment does little to disguise the identity of one of the soccer officials who received the payments: Julio Grondona, a longtime FIFA and Argentine soccer association official who died in 2014. The indictment said Mr. Arzuaga also arranged for money in accounts held by Mr. Grondona to be distributed to his heirs after his death.
Julius Baer itself has been scrutinized by American prosecutors, who may have considered charging the bank for its role in helping to launder bribe money to soccer officials.
Unrelated to the soccer case, Julius Baer is under a deferred prosecution agreement with the Justice Department after admitting last year to having helped American clients evade taxes and hide billions of dollars in offshore accounts. Under that agreement, the bank promised to pay $547 million to the United States for assisting clients with hiding money and filing false tax returns from at least the 1990s to 2009.