I’m Jonah Engel Bromwich, filling in this week for Mike McPhate, who is on vacation. Today’s introduction comes to us from Scott Heller, the deputy Arts & Leisure editor and theater editor.
On Sunday night, Christopher Ashley started his acceptance speech for the Tony award for best director of a musical by thanking the La Jolla Playhouse. Mr. Ashley has been artistic director of the theater since 2007.
The first show he directed there, “Memphis,” went on to win the Tony Award for best musical. On Sunday, the 9/11-inspired “Come from Away,” another musical that made its debut at the theater (in a co-production with Seattle Repertory Theater) was up for that top award and six others. It won one, for Mr. Ashley’s fluid direction.
Next season the La Jolla production of “Junk,” a look at high finance by the Pulitzer Prize winner Ayad Akhtar, will open on Broadway; “Escape to Margaritaville,” a Jimmy Buffett musical on stage in San Diego now, will arrive in New York in the spring.
We checked in with Mr. Ashley before he took his seat for the ceremony at Radio City Music Hall.
What does a La Jolla audience like in a production?
We have very smart, very inquisitive audiences and they like to be there at the birth of something new, whether a play or a new musical. Our talkbacks are passionate, and our audiences track what happens to shows that start with us.
Why do you think “Come from Away” has resonated so much?
Americans have such strong feelings around 9/11. People can tell you exactly where they were, not just on that Tuesday, but on that Wednesday, that Thursday. Everybody wants to tell you their story at the stage door.
What’s striking about the show is how quickly and seamlessly it moves. Is that a hallmark of your directorial style?
I really hate boring an audience. Velocity is always a thing in my work.
“Escape to Margaritaville” is on your stage now and you have a Donna Summer musical coming up. Are you a Parrothead or a disco fan?
I was not cool enough to spend a lot of time in discos as a teenager, but disco was dead center as the music of my teenage years. Jimmy Buffett music I have always loved, but I was not one of those people who could quote the lyrics to 150 of his songs. But meeting the hard-core Parrotheads has been an amazing experience. Their capacity for joy and for being the life of the party is absolute.
On Tuesday, the Race Across America kicks off in Oceanside. The 3,000 mile ultramarathon cycle race takes competitors through 12 states and ends in Annapolis, Md.
The 25th annual Pasadena Chalk Festival begins on Saturday, uniting hundreds of street painters who will spend the weekend creating beautiful murals.
The first Boots and Brews country music festival is Saturday in Santa Clarita, featuring performances from Easton Corbin and Maddie and Tae, among others.
Guitarist Jimi Hendrix plays his Fender Stratocaster guitar while performing at the Monterey International Pop Music Festival in 1967.
Fifty years ago this week, Jimi Hendrix lit his guitar on fire, Janis Joplin put on a showstopping performance and a full complement of rock ’n’ roll luminaries descended on the central coast.
It was the inaugural go-round of the Monterey International Pop Festival. And with performances from The Who, The Grateful Dead, Simon & Garfunkel, Otis Redding and Jefferson Airplane, it was a gathering that set a remarkably high standard for what a rock festival could be.
The festival’s anniversary will be celebrated this weekend at the Monterey fairgrounds. But in a saturated festival environment, it’s safe to say that no one is expecting this weekend’s festivities to match the excitement of the original.
“With its crowds of face-painted hippies and slogan of “music, love and flowers,” Monterey defined the look, spirit and sound of the Summer of Love,” he wrote.
