A little-known former economy minister who surrendered his Ph.D. after plagiarism accusations was confirmed by Parliament on Thursday as Romania’s prime minister, a decision that disappointed reformers.
Mihai Tudose, 50, will succeed Sorin Grindeanu, who was forced out last week as a result of a split in the governing party, the Social Democrats.
The party’s leader, Liviu Dragnea, is widely seen as Romania’s de facto leader, though he is ineligible to be prime minister because of a fraud conviction.
Corruption is arguably the greatest issue in Romania. Giant protests, the largest in the country since the fall of communism in 1989, erupted this year after the government tried to push through proposals that would have pardoned officials imprisoned for bribery and raised the financial threshold above which official misconduct is punishable by prison.
Mr. Tudose, a member of Parliament since 2000, served two stints as economy minister since 2014, but remains a relatively obscure figure despite his time in public service.
The appointment of Mr. Tudose and his cabinet disappointed some observers, who had in mind a requirement announced by the country’s president, Klaus Iohannis, for the prime minister to be a figure of integrity and competence.
“Plagiarism, fraud, no connection whatsoever with the field that they are supposed to manage,” Oana Suciu, an associate professor of political science at the University of Bucharest, said in assessing the new government.
Mr. Tudose asked in 2016 for his doctoral degree to be rescinded following allegations that he plagiarized parts of his thesis. However, his 2010 dissertation, in the field of military intelligence, is still listed on a parliamentary website.
In Mr. Tudose, Mr. Dragnea has found a prime minister who is seen as malleable, one who will allow him to lead from behind the scenes. That arrangement, however, could make the government vulnerable to continued infighting among the Social Democrats.
“There is a structural tension that leads to the sort of situation that we saw, the conflict between Dragnea and Grindeanu,” said Paul Ivan, a senior policy analyst at the European Policy Center, a Brussels think tank.
A case in which Mr. Dragnea is accused of abusing power and instigating forgery will continue in September.
The Social Democrats won election last December on a platform of bread-and-butter issues, including wage increases for state employees.
But before Mr. Tudose’s government was confirmed, his new finance minister, Ionut Misa, caused alarm by proposing a new income tax. He also hinted at changes to the country’s pension program, only to be quickly contradicted by Mr. Dragnea.
Analysts were immediately skeptical. “They’re trying to raise money from new sources because they promised that they were going to increase salaries and realized that they didn’t have the money,” Ms. Suciu said.
Observers predicted that the change in power would have minimal impact on the economy, which relies heavily on funding from the European Union and foreign investment. “While the political turmoil is a cause of worry, Romania offers a combination of low wages, a good business infrastructure and consumers with strong affordability, which are usually hard to match,” said Oru Mohiuddin, an analyst with Euromonitor, a market research firm.
In February, hundreds of thousands took to the streets in Bucharest, Romania’s capital, and in provincial capitals, to protest perceived backtracking on Romania’s decades-long fight against corruption.
So far, however, the handling of the new tax and pension proposals suggests that opponents are watching closely and are ready to react. “Giving people the impression that you are going to take the money they’ve saved is never a good idea,” Mr. Ivan said.