211 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.
“Chemistry,” a debut novel by Weike Wang, begins with a question. A boy asks a girl to marry him. Very quickly, a second question emerges. Why won’t she say yes? The boy seems perfect. Even the girl does not fully understand her ambivalence. She makes a list of pros and cons. The list is all pros.
The girl refers to herself as “I” and the other characters by titles: mother, best friend, math student. Eric, the boy, is the only named character in the book. Eric is not a boyfriend, husband or ex. He is only Eric. The girl is an adult woman, but one who is still very much in the process of growing up. She is a chemistry Ph.D. student in Boston. It was in this Ph.D. program that she met Eric, who has graduated and is applying for a job in Ohio. This creates a third question — will she follow him to his new job? Her mother had followed her father from China to America, and it caused both of them grief.
“Chemistry” is a novel about an intelligent woman trying to find her place in the world. It has only the smallest pinches of action but generous measures of humor and emotion. The moody but endearing narrative voice is reminiscent of Jenny Offill’s “Dept. of Speculation” and Catherine Lacey’s “Nobody Is Ever Missing.” Fans of those novels will find a lot to enjoy.
Questions are the pulse of this book. Should the girl marry Eric? Why was her parents’ marriage a long and vicious battle? How do you love your parents and hate how sad they make you?
The girl recites facts about science and history to understand her life: Bears give birth while they’re in hibernation; the buttons on the uniforms of Napoleon’s army broke in the Siberian cold, and all the men died of frostbite.
When facts don’t work, she turns to memory. Her parents appear in the present day only via the telephone, but are vivid in recollection. The fear of replicating their unhappy marriage worries the girl. She describes the possibility as “bad news bears.” She watches a Chinese-American chef on TV talk about going against parental commands. The girl has been arguing with her own parents about whether she can give up her Ph.D. The chef spits out the usual clichés about a strict father and a quiet mother. The girl remembers her Chinese roommate saying: “We are our own worst propagators of those clichés. We are constantly throwing each other under the bus.” The girl’s parents were also strict and sometimes quiet. The girl sees the parallel to the chef’s story, but also bucks against it. She does not want to throw her parents under the bus.
It often feels as if Wang is negotiating between the chef’s and the roommate’s points of view. Is it possible to write about a Chinese-American family with strict parents without being a propagator of clichés? Wang describes a severe math-loving father and a mother who can’t or won’t assimilate, but they are far too specific, too human to be dismissed as stereotypes.
When the girl asks her mother what she looked like as a baby, the mother replies, “Like a potato.” Yet this woman who hates America watches the American movie “Stepmom” again and again. In “Chemistry,” moments of tenderness are repeatedly juxtaposed with moments of misery. The mother took the girl out of school early to go to an amusement park. But then the mother left the family for a week. Wang never allows the reader to dismiss her as just a “quiet” Asian mother.
The girl tells us there is a phrase for family love in Chinese that in translation means “I hurt for you.” This love, rather than romantic love, feels like the true subject of the book. “Chemistry” will appeal to anyone asking themselves, How do I create the sort of family I want without rejecting the family I have?