ERIN, Wis. — A 94-year-old man watching the United States Open died Friday afternoon, according to the United States Golf Association.
Rescue personnel and deputies from the Washington County Sheriff’s Office were dispatched to a grandstand near the sixth green, according to a statement from the police. The man, who was said to be from Wauwatosa, Wis., but was not otherwise identified, was not breathing and did not have a pulse. He was pronounced dead after being transferred to a nearby ambulance.
Police said the death appeared to be of natural causes.
Friday’s second round was being contested under bright sun and little wind, with temperatures in the mid-80s.
FAMILIAR FEEL There is something about new U.S. Open venues that brings out the best in Jamie Lovemark.
Two years ago, Lovemark tied for 18th at Chambers Bay in the Open debut for the Washington State course.
He is in contention again going into this weekend at another new Open course, Erin Hills. Lovemark shot his second straight three-under 69 to pull within a shot of the lead.
Not bad for someone who had to claim one of the 14 qualifying spots at the tough Columbus, Ohio, sectional last week to make it to Wisconsin.
The top of the leaderboard is bunched up, with four players tied for the lead at seven under and three more a stroke behind, including Lovemark. Five players were two shots off the lead.
WILLETT WITHDRAWS Back problems caused Danny Willett to pull out of another tournament.
Willett, the 2016 Masters champion, withdrew before his tee time in the second round. Willett had a terrible opening round, shooting a nine-over 81.
The 29-year-old Willett has had recurring back issues during his career.
ROOKIE SHINES Xander Schauffele, a PGA Tour rookie, spent part of Friday’s second round sharing the lead. He followed an opening 66 with a 73 to get to five under, three shots out of the lead with the afternoon players still on the course, and ensured of a late tee time Saturday.
Not bad for a golfer who had to go through qualifying to make it to Erin Hills.

Don not let the aw-shucks stuff fool you. Pretty much everyone around him insists the arrows have long pointed toward Schauffele’s making it big in pro golf.
But soccer is the Schauffele family’s first sport.
Stefan Schauffele’s grandfathers each played elite-level soccer in Europe. Stefan was an elite soccer player and decathlete, but a car accident on his way to decathlon training changed things. Among a multitude of injuries, Stefan Schauffele lost the sight in his left eye. With the prospect of competing for Germany out of the picture, he moved to the United States, where he discovered golf.
