The Boston Red Sox arrive at Yankee Stadium on Tuesday for the first of three visits, but their homegrown third baseman just left town. Travis Shaw spent four games in New York last week, helping keep his Milwaukee Brewers atop the National League Central.
When the Red Sox traded Shaw to Milwaukee in December, they expected Pablo Sandoval — a $95 million free-agent extravagance from the winter after the 2014 season — to reclaim third base. Instead, Sandoval has missed most of the season’s first two months with a knee injury and now shares time with Deven Marrero, who is hitting .181.
Shaw, meanwhile, looks a lot more like the budding star from the first half of last season than the hitter who struggled down the stretch. He batted .333 in May, and Saturday he went 3 for 4 with a grand slam, raising his average for the season to .296, with 10 home runs and 40 runs batted in — just the type of production the Red Sox have been missing.
In return for Shaw and two prospects, the Red Sox acquired Tyler Thornburg, a reliever who averaged 12.1 strikeouts per nine innings last season, with a 2.15 earned run average. But Thornburg is on the 60-day disabled list because of an impingement in his right shoulder, with no signs of returning soon.
The Red Sox could not have predicted his injury, but the deal has been a steal for the Brewers, who also added a left-handed-hitting first baseman, Eric Thames, as a free agent from South Korea. Thames has cooled after a fast start, but he still entered June with the best on-base plus slugging percentage in the division.
Shaw started well last season, too, but hit just .184 from Aug. 1 through the end of the season. Pitchers baited him with off-speed pitches away, and Shaw had trouble adjusting. He acknowledged that he had also been unnerved by Boston’s trade for a veteran third baseman, Aaron Hill, in July.
Learning from his father, Jeff, has helped Shaw handle life in the majors. Jeff Shaw spent 12 seasons as a major league reliever and made two All-Star teams. Travis Shaw said he never had much interest in pitching, doing it only as a senior in high school, after he had committed to be a position player at Kent State.
The Red Sox drafted him in the ninth round in 2011, and he played mostly at first base in the minors before beating out Sandoval for the starting third baseman’s job in spring training of 2016.
Shaw said that he had stayed in touch with some friends from the Red Sox, like Mookie Betts and Brock Holt, and that he had checked their box scores now and then. Third-base woes aside, the Red Sox seem likely to be in a pennant race all summer. Shaw is trying to do the same with the Brewers, who are 29-27, hanging onto a slim division lead as the champion Chicago Cubs have stumbled.
Kyle Freeland was born May 14, 1993, in Denver. The new baseball team in town, the Colorado Rockies, played that night in Cincinnati and allowed five runs in the first inning of a blowout loss. The Rockies lost a lot that first season — 95 times — but drew more than 4.4 million fans to Mile High Stadium for a single-season major league record.
Before long, Freeland would latch on, too. He was 14 when the Rockies reached their only World Series, a four-game sweep by Boston in 2007.
Carroll, a reserve infielder in 2007, went to the University of Evansville, where Freeland ended up starring for his brother, Wes Carroll. When the 2014 draft came around, Freeland hoped the Rockies would draft him with their top pick, No. 8 over all. They did, and now Freeland is helping them take charge in the National League West.
Freeland is 6-3 with a 3.53 earned run average, and has even hit a home run. His specialty is inducing ground balls, a trait that plays well with the Rockies’ skilled infielders and the thin air at Coors Field.
Freeland has also developed a changeup since signing with the Rockies, experimenting with several grips before learning to release the pitch with his ring finger and pinkie, using his thumb as a rudder. Throwing the changeup off his weaker fingers diminishes speed and helps the pitch fade, giving Freeland another weapon to handle the rigors of high altitude. His background helps, too.
Two months into his major league career, Freeland said, the thrill of playing for his favorite team has not worn off.
Last December, when the Yankees needed a spot on the 40-man roster for closer Aroldis Chapman, they traded reliever Nick Goody to the Cleveland Indians, eventually acquiring a Class A pitcher, Yoiber Marquina, in return. Goody had not done much to distinguish himself in 34 games with the Yankees, posting a 4.67 earned run average and allowing more than a hit per inning.
Things have changed for him in Cleveland.
Before giving up a home run on Saturday, Goody was the only pitcher in the majors to have worked at least 20 innings this season without allowing an earned run. In 21 innings, he has allowed just 10 hits and five walks, with 23 strikeouts. The Indians were attracted by Goody’s minor league numbers (13.2 strikeouts per nine innings) and his ability to throw fastballs and sliders past hitters.
In the fourth inning at Angel Stadium on Thursday night, Minnesota third baseman Miguel Sano fielded a sharp grounder down the line by the Los Angeles Angels’ Jefry Marte. Because there were runners on first and second and no outs, Sano stepped on third and fired to second baseman Brian Dozier, who then threw to first baseman Joe Mauer for a triple play.
It looked so easy — routine, even. But it served as a reminder of the extraordinary nature of a different day in Twins history. On July 17, 1990, at Fenway Park in Boston, the Twins pulled off two triple plays, both in the same manner as Thursday’s: third baseman (Gary Gaetti) to second baseman (Al Newman) to first baseman (Kent Hrbek).
That is the only instance in major league history of a team turning two triple plays in the same game. The Twins would need 4,265 games to turn their next two triple plays: one on May 27, 2006, against Seattle, and then on Thursday, when pitcher Adalberto Mejia threw down and in to Marte, just as Sano hoped.
Sano and the Twins got it. They may not get another for a long, long time.