Beth Ditto did not set out to make her first full-length solo album. When she went into the studio a few years ago, Ms. Ditto, the powerhouse singer and feminist glamazon, planned to make another record for Gossip, the Portland, Ore., disco-punk trio she had fronted since 1999.
Between albums, Ms. Ditto, 36, honeymooned with the fashion world: She walked the catwalk for a Marc Jacobs show and started an eponymous clothing line, made in New York, for plus-size women. After years with short raven hair, she’s become a longhaired brunette. “I wanted everything colorful and flowing and free,” she said.
For “Fake Sugar,” Ms. Ditto was inspired by her relationship with her wife of four years, Kristen Ogata; by her first-ever visit to Graceland (and by listening to Paul Simon’s “Graceland” on the way there); and by seminal punk artists like Alan Vega of Suicide, for whom she wrote a song, “Go Baby Go.” She spoke by phone from tour stops in Minneapolis and Dallas, where her family surprised her with a visit (and her 11-year-old niece joined her onstage for a song). These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
When Nathan moved, did you consider starting a new band or taking Gossip in a new direction?
I never even thought about doing another band, or about replacing Nathan. I’m loyal to Gossip. It’s not just like a creative partnership where you fight about the sounds of the songs — we never fought about that kind of that stuff, ever. It was more sort of a family. We always joked about people who were like, “It’s about the music, man,” and we were like, no, it’s about a lot more than that.
Did you have a sound in mind for this album?
I didn’t want to make a soul record; I didn’t want to pick up on anybody’s thing. I just wanted to make a record that was not cool. I just wanted it to have good guitar riffs and nice noises.
It has some sexy songs, but it also has some toughies about grown-up love.
A lot of it is about being insecure and being married and like, how scary that can be, to trust somebody with your whole life. One of the best parts about songwriting, I think, it’s the time capsule that it is, what you’re going through in the moment.
How do you feel, as a punk and queer artist, about doing your work during the Trump era?
This administration, the political state of the world, feels so overwhelming, I don’t know where to start. Honestly, sometimes I’m at a loss for words. I have so much anxiety and so much anger that it’s hard to focus. What has gone right at all? Nothing! It’s the actual meaning of outrageous! [But] I feel empowered and inspired by what people around me are doing. My nieces, my mother and sister [went] to the women’s march in Little Rock. I feel positive in the future of activism. I am definitely part of the resistance.
The album has some great Southern slang, like “Yankee dime” (a kiss). Got any more?
Is your fashion line coming back?
I don’t think so. We’ll see what happens. For me, it was a labor of love that was not the easiest to do. It’s not like we were open to getting investors. I don’t know if we would’ve been able to find them. We just tried to do it the right way, what we thought was ethical, and it got really hard. If I did it with a group of people, maybe it would be easier, but I think I’m too controlling about aesthetics.
Do you think the fashion industry is making any headway toward diversity?
The fashion industry never makes enough strides as far as size, visibility, race and gender are concerned. But it definitely makes more strides than music, honestly. What’s more exciting is how we aren’t waiting for it to be changed. The power of people doing it for themselves cannot be ignored.