MANILA — Islamist militants seized an elementary school in the restive southern Philippines on Wednesday, holding 31 hostages, including students, for about 12 hours before escaping into a vast marshland area, the military said.
The militants, from a splinter group called the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, seized Malagakit Elementary School in the town of Pigcawayan as they were retreating from a nearby government outpost they had attacked, the military said.
Capt. Arvin Encinas, a military spokesman, said the gunmen took over the school at dawn on Wednesday, triggering skirmishes and the evacuation of about 1,000 residents in the area.
They took hostages, including six students, to prevent troops from advancing. Two pro-government militiamen were wounded in the firefight, the military said.
“Pursuit operations are ongoing,” he added.
Pigcawayan is about 50 miles south of the city of Marawi, where the military has spent weeks fighting militants who have declared allegiance to the Islamic State. A spokesman for the Bangsamoro group, Abu Misri Mama, said its “tactical offensive” in Pigcawayan had nothing to do with the Marawi offensive, though he said he welcomed the “struggle” of fellow Muslims on the southern island of Mindanao.
“This is our offensive, not the Maute or Abu Sayyaf’s,” he said, referring to two groups fighting in Marawi.
A Manila-based spokesman for the military, Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla, called the attack “opportunistic,” suggesting that the group had struck now because the military was busy in Marawi.
General Padilla said as many as 200 guerrillas from the Bangsamoro group had attacked the government outpost in Pigcawayan early Wednesday, before being driven away and seizing the school. General Padilla played down the attack as “harassment” and said the fighting was nearly over.
The Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters broke away from the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the country’s largest Muslim rebel force, after the latter group signed a peace deal with the government in 2014, giving up its fight for a separate homeland in the Muslim-majority south. The rest of the Philippines is mostly Catholic.
On Monday, the Philippine government included the Bangsamoro group on a list of 20 armed organizations said to be allied with the Islamic State, along with Abu Sayyaf and the Maute group. The list was part of a memorandum filed to the Supreme Court in support of President Rodrigo Duterte’s recent declaration of martial law on Mindanao, in response to the Islamist takeover of Marawi. The Bangsamoro group is not known to have made any public declaration of allegiance to the Islamic State, unlike Abu Sayyaf and the Maute group.