From the start, there appeared to be something slightly off about the street sign unveiled by Mayor Bill de Blasio in late May in honor of Jimmy Breslin, the muckraking journalist and Queens-born columnist for The Daily News.
It was green, while two others at the intersection in Midtown Manhattan — one bearing the names of Nelson and Winnie Mandela and one for Yitzhak Rabin — were blue. And though the site was chosen for its proximity to the old Daily News building on the southern side of 42nd Street near Second Avenue, the sign for Jimmy Breslin Way hung on the northwest corner because of scaffolding around the southern post.
Still, it came as a shock to Quinn Breslin, the journalist’s grandson, when he discovered during his first return to the spot that the scaffolding had lasted longer than Mr. Breslin’s sign.
The family’s resentment over the missing street sign added an unfortunate coda to a public event that appeared, to some of Mr. Breslin’s former colleagues, to be laden with irony from the start: Mr. de Blasio, in hailing the great journalist, refused to take questions from any reporters at the sign’s unveiling.
The sign was always meant to be temporary, but Mr. de Blasio did not mention that point in his remarks.
The process of securing a sign for posterity — or until the next renaming — is far more cumbersome than obtaining a temporary one through mayoral edict. Although a council member must sponsor a permanent renaming, local community boards weigh in. It is almost always a fraught affair.
The Council has approved around 100 new street names each year in recent years, with 92 accepted this year and 107 the year before.
To avoid confusion, such renamings preserve the original street name and are referred to by the city as co-namings. The resulting markers — for those with international fame or local repute — can provide a reminder to those involved that some of the least important things in life are often the most bitterly contested.
Perhaps that is why Mr. de Blasio opted to use his authority to temporarily bestow Mr. Breslin’s name on the corner for a few days in late May, an approach that has been employed by mayors at least as far back as the administration of Robert F. Wagner. Last year, the de Blasio administration similarly conferred the name of Bill Cunningham, a New York Times photographer, on another Midtown corner.
Eric F. Phillips, the mayor’s press secretary, said City Hall would support a Council effort to permanently rename that section of 42nd Street.
Kevin Breslin, Quinn’s father and a son of Jimmy’s, said his family had not lobbied for the sign but had embraced the idea after City Hall officials brought it to them. He said the family knew it would be temporary but believed the local council member, Daniel R. Garodnick, would support it.
“No one said officially that it would come down,” he said before turning his ire to Mr. Garodnick, who had no part in the ceremony or the decision to put up the sign.
Mr. Garodnick said that he was not opposed to honoring Mr. Breslin but that he, like some other council members, had adopted a blanket policy of rejecting applications for street renamings.
“My community boards object to them, and I have followed their lead,” he said. “They create visual confusion for people looking to navigate the streets.” He said he had not sponsored a renaming in his 12 years on the Council.
Mr. Garodnick offered to find another way to permanently honor Mr. Breslin, with a plaque or a sidewalk marking. “This is not personal,” he said.
Gilbert Tauber, a retired city planner who has created a database to try to account for every new street name, agreed.
“I regard street names as a kind of public utility,” he said. “Street names exist for people to find their way around, and the more you fiddle with them, the more you raise the opportunity for confusion. With all due respect to Isaac Bashevis Singer, that’s not going to be very much help,” he added, referring to the permanent ceremonial name for a portion of West 86th Street.
Mr. Tauber, who worked in the city’s old New York Convention and Visitors Bureau, recalled Mr. Wagner presiding over temporary street renamings for special events.
