The photographer Marie Cosindas in an undated picture.
Marie Cosindas, a photographer whose painterly, artfully composed still lifes and portraits, made with Polaroid film, broke with the dominant black-and-white aesthetic of the early 1960s and opened up a new world of color, died on May 25 in Boston. She was 93.
The death was confirmed by her nephew Julius R. Teich Jr.
Ms. Cosindas, a painter by training, turned to photography early in her career and was immediately stymied by an unwritten law: For the medium to be true to itself, images must be black and white. Color was for advertising.
She rebelled. “The world in black and white did not totally satisfy me, and color seemed the way to add more feeling and mood to what I was already doing,” she later wrote in an introductory note to the book “Marie Cosindas: Color Photographs” (1978).
A solution arrived when Polaroid, in 1962, asked her to test a new product, Polacolor, that it was planning to introduce for its instant cameras. Within three years, after much experimentation, Ms. Cosindas was working exclusively in color, producing highly stylized images that broke radically with the documentary approach then in vogue.
In her portrait series “Dandies,” and the later series “Grandes Dames of Couture,” she posed well-known subjects — Richard Merkin and Tom Wolfe among the dandies, and Coco Chanel and Elsa Schiaparelli among the grandes dames — in carefully arranged interiors with luxurious fabrics, furniture and paintings, captured in natural light.
In her still lifes, she turned the lens on beautifully arranged flowers or mysterious assemblages of masks, dolls, perfume bottles or jewelry.
Marie Alexia Cosindas was born on Sept. 22, 1923, in Boston, the eighth of 10 children of Greek immigrants. Her father, Alexander, who spelled the family name Kosintas, was a carpenter. Her mother, the former Stavroula Kostandakakis, was a homemaker. Ms. Cosindas is survived by a sister, Esther Teich.
Marie grew up in the city’s South End and, after graduating from the High School of Practical Arts in Roxbury, enrolled in the Modern School of Fashion Design in Boston, where she studied dressmaking. At night, she took courses in painting, drawing and graphic design at the School of the Museum of Fine Arts.
She held a variety of jobs after leaving school. She designed textiles and worked as a color coordinator for a firm that made museum reproductions in stone. At one point she designed children’s slippers with animal faces on them.
Her design studio was in the same building as the Carl Siembab Gallery, one of the first in Boston devoted to photography, and she soon fell in with the artists who showed there, although her own use of the camera was to produce visual aids for her design work and her paintings.
On a family trip to Greece in 1959, she produced images that, she decided, could stand on their own. She gave up painting and began studying photography with Paul Caponigro. Edward Steichen, after looking at one of her black-and-white portfolios in 1961, bought three photos, one for himself and two for the Museum of Modern Art, where he was director of the photography department.
The work was almost immediately recognized as a thrilling departure.
Her portrait subjects included both celebrities and nonentities, all swathed in the same luxe wrapping. One of her most famous early photographs, “Sailors, Key West” (1966), showed two shirtless swabbies, one reclining on a worn Oriental rug, the other half-kneeling next to a floral still life. To capture Andy Warhol in natural light, she shifted a pile of junk blocking a fire door at his studio the Factory, then moved Mr. Warhol onto the ledge, his back to the fire escape. The resulting image pulsated with louche glamour.
“Marie Cosindas: Polaroid Color Photographs,” consisting of 40 images, traveled from the Museum of Modern Art to the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston and the Art Institute of Chicago. Mr. Szarkowski later included her work in the landmark exhibition “Mirrors and Windows: American Photography Since 1960” at the Museum of Modern Art in 1978.
Her work fell out of fashion after the 1970s, and serious back problems interfered with her career, but in recent years curators and critics began taking a second look at her legacy. In 2013, she was the subject of two major exhibitions: “Marie Cosindas: Instant Color,” at the Amon Carter Museum of American Art in Fort Worth, and “Marie Cosindas: A Life of Color,” at the Photographic Resource Center at Boston University.
