DealBook|Morning Agenda: Mickey Drexler to Resign as J. Crew C.E.O.
Morning Agenda: Mickey Drexler to Resign as J. Crew C.E.O.
It’s the end of an era in the world of fashion: Millard Drexler is stepping down as J. Crew’s chief executive.
The move by Mr. Drexler, known as Mickey, is the second major executive change at J. Crew in recent months — Jenna Lyons, the American retailer’s longtime executive creative director, resigned in April.
Mr. Drexler will remain J. Crew’s chairman and will retain his significant equity stake in the retailer, but his resignation is an acknowledgment that the brand needed to go in a new direction, especially with the retail industry struggling.
Succeeding Mr. Drexler at J. Crew, which is backed by the private equity firms TPG Capital and Leonard Green & Partners, will be James Brett, president of the home furnishing brand West Elm. Mr. Brett will take over in July.
When President Trump appointed Marc E. Kasowitz as his private attorney to represent him in investigations into associates’ ties to Russia, Beltway insiders scrambled to learn more about the lawyer, a newcomer to politics.
Mr. Kasowitz is well known, though, in Wall Street and Manhattan business circles.
In his DealBook column, Andrew Ross Sorkin describes Mr. Kasowitz as “the Donald Trump of lawyering,” minus the tweets.
“In case you didn’t get the message, he likes a good fight, the nastier the better,” Mr. Sorkin writes.
Kushner Companies, which is owned by the family of Jared Kushner, son-in-law and senior adviser to Mr. Trump, is looking for $250 million to repay the backers of a Jersey City apartment tower that was financed by Chinese investors.
Kushner Companies spent about $225 million to build the luxury building, called Trump Bay Street, in which Mr. Kushner maintains a stake.
It financed the project with about $190 million in loans, including $50 million through the so-called EB-5 visa program, which gives foreign investors preferential treatment in obtaining permanent residency if they invest at least $500,000 in American development projects.
Kushner Companies must repay a $140 million construction loan from CIT Group, which is due in September.
It also wants to pay off its EB-5 loans, which are all from Chinese investors, even though the loans are not due for several years.
Kushner Companies’ refinancing plans were reported earlier by Bloomberg News.
• Results of a fight between General Motors and Greenlight Capital will be announced at the automaker’s annual shareholder meeting in Detroit.