The Metropolitan Museum of Art excels at discreet introductions: modest, magnetic shows that enable us to make the acquaintance of artists many of us have barely heard of. Occasionally these shows establish an unexpected reciprocity, their commonalities and differences evolving into a lively dialogue.
An odd pairing of this sort is the gift of two small shows of mostly small paintings by two 19th-century artists. “Peder Balke: Painter of Northern Light” presents the work of a Norwegian artist revered in his homeland for his renderings of some of its most dramatic coastline vistas in his first show in the United States, and it has been organized by Asher Ethan Miller, a curator of European paintings. “City of Memory: William Chappel’s Views of Early 19th-Century New York,” organized by Amy Bogansky when she was a research associate in the American Wing, is the first time the Met has shown all 27 of its paintings by this American tinsmith and amateur artist — his extant work — since acquiring them in 1954. Together they illuminate different ways of being an artist, the role of observation and memory in art, the importance of size, the difference between trained and untrained talent, and also the growth of nationalism.
Balke (1804-87) and Chappel (1801-78) were almost exactly the same age, and shared humble origins and an inborn romanticism, but they worked in different styles, under vastly different circumstances on opposite sides of the Atlantic. Balke, who led something of a charmed existence, came to paint the natural sublime of coastal Norway, a region then struggling to achieve independence and national identity. Today he is considered one of its greatest Romantic artists. Chappel had a more hardscrabble life, probably spent entirely in Manhattan, and toward its end he painted scenes of everyday life in the budding metropolis of his childhood. Neither man was destined to be an artist; both worked largely from memory and died in obscurity. Chappel’s was lifelong; Balke’s was not.
Born to landless peasants, Balke was lifted from rural life by talent so evident that the locals bankrolled the early phase of an artistic education that took him from Oslo to Copenhagen and Stockholm. He loved Norway’s wildness, making several walking treks through it. But his formative experience came in 1832. Traveling by boat up Norway’s west coast, he found his own Mont Sainte-Victoire: the big, startlingly rectangular headlands of the North Cape (NordKapp), jutting into the North Atlantic — and thought at the time to be the northernmost point of Europe. He saw it only once and may have made sketches (although virtually none survive), but it, and the waves crashing around it, haunted his work from then on. In “The North Cape” (1853), the first of the 17 Balke paintings in the show, we see this promontory as a broad horizontal seemingly formed by a single brush stroke. It announces Balke’s interest in paint as material, even if the scene’s moonlight is so excessively bright and sharp that you may be forgiven for thinking it has a small light attached to its frame. It gives you the feeling Balke sometimes had more talent than he could control.
He traveled to Paris, London and Düsseldorf, but his most important trips were to Dresden, Germany, where in 1835 and 1836 he met Romanticism’s biggest star, Caspar David Friedrich, through the Norwegian painter Johan Christian Dahl, who became his mentor. Balke returned several more times to Dresden over the next 16 years and spent 1843-44 painting beside Dahl, who is represented here by five works. Two other contemporaries weigh in with single canvases that mostly show how sure and unfussy Balke’s hand was. And an especially awe-inspiring sight is a two-part map of Norway, showing its wildly crenelated coastline, which was made around 1850 by Peter Andreas Munch, Edvard Munch’s uncle.
Some of Balke’s best large paintings may have come in the late 1840s, suggested by the hallucinatory “Seascape,” in which a crown of mountains seems to float above land, sea and clouds like a vision, and “The North Cape in the Moonlight” — a gentler, larger, earlier version of the show’s first painting.
Chappel was an artist-worker who might have qualified for a house in Balkeby.
All 27 of the paintings here are oil on sheets of slate paper measuring just over six inches by nine inches and seem to depict New York from about 1806 to 1813. If that’s true, Chappel was a very observant child with a photographic memory, who might have benefited from artistic training but did perfectly well without it.
With beautiful colors, a soft consistent light and lively clouds, Chapell’s stage-set-like scenes alternate largely between rows of houses and views down long streets and are mostly sparsely populated. New York is remembered as far quieter and cleaner than it probably was.
The scenes depict vendors selling baked pears (in Duane Park), hot corn and buttermilk, and little baskets of strawberries hung on a long pole. There are night watchmen trudging through the snow and a lamplighter with his ladder and lantern. Looking at them, you feel the wide-open spaces of unsettled Manhattan, especially in one painting that shows a house raising. Charming and precise, they form a valuable, rare, if somewhat Romanticized, visual document of New York in the early 19th century before photography. The show also includes a map from around 1808 of Lower Manhattan, with the sites that Chappel painted marked by red dots.
The consistency of Chappel’s style from picture to picture is impressive, as is his instinct to document a bygone era and its trades; this is why his paintings are sometimes used to illustrate histories of the city. Despite using paint and a brush, he can seem like a precursor to the photographers Eugène Atget, who recorded a Paris that was disappearing at the turn of the 20th century, and August Sander, who set out in the 1920s to record people representing all the trades and professions of Germany.
Chappel was racing against time and the changes wrought by people; Balke painted images of relatively timeless nature in all its grandeur and indifference. But what you remember is the palpable tenderness each brought to the task.