LONDON — Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain, trying to pacify her Conservative Party after a major setback in the country’s election on Thursday, on Saturday let go her top two aides, who had earned reputations for secrecy and arrogance.
The aides, Fiona Hill and Nick Timothy, Mrs. May’s co-chiefs of staff, resigned after reports that senior Conservative ministers in the prime minister’s cabinet had warned her that they would challenge her leadership of the party unless she became more inclusive, consulted more widely and fired Ms. Hill and Mr. Timothy.
When she became prime minister, Mrs. May brought the two loyal aides with her from the Home Office, which she had run for six years. She relied heavily on them, and they were fiercely protective of her but offended many.
The British Election: What Happened and What’s Next?
Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain suffered a humiliating setback in the 2017 general election. Her opponent Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, re-energized his party and altered the landscape of British politics. So what's next?
Theresa May lost Britain’s elections on Thursday but her opponent Jeremy Corbyn didn’t win. That’s a recipe for chaos. Because what it means is that no single party won an outright majority. May had a majority in parliament. But she wanted an even greater majority. So she took a big risk and called a snap election three years early. She was expected to win at least 50 seats. She ended up losing 12. The humiliating defeat means she no longer has the momentum to negotiate a strong exit from the E.U. It also means she no longer even has a majority to push other parts of her agenda. So what happened? The U.K. saw its largest turnout in 25 years, over 1.5M people registered to vote just in the month leading up to the election. The biggest chunk of those were young people. After Brexit, many doubted younger voters would come out this time around. But the apathy turned into action for the 2017 general election. Jeremy Corbyn saw a significant increase for Labour (the biggest since 1997 when Tony Blair won). Key districts flipped or gained significant ground. Wales, university towns like Sheffield and Manchester, and areas with pro-Europe voters, like London. The U.K. moved back towards a distinctly two-party system. So what’s next? May is still the Prime Minister, but her position has become precarious. In order to create a majority, she’s trying to form a government with the Democratic Unionist Party of Northern Ireland, an extremely socially conservative party that favors Brexit, but wants to maintain free trade agreements with Europe. The disarray in Britain gives the E.U. new leverage over Brexit. The Brexit negotiation table has turned. After Macron’s win in France, the E.U. looks less under threat as it did six months ago. Ten days before negotiations are set to start, the conversation has changed. May’s “Hard Brexit” is now likely to be a lot softer.
Mrs. May announced on Friday that she would seek to form a new government with the support of the 10 members of Parliament from the Democratic Unionist Party of Northern Ireland, a predominantly Protestant party with conservative social views.
Rather than simply rely on the D.U.P. for support on key votes, which could mean a negotiation each time, Mrs. May is seeking to form a more formal coalition with the party, according to reports in the British news media.
The prime minister sent a team of officials to Belfast to negotiate the details of an alliance with the party. Robert Peston of ITV News reported that a senior minister had told him that a coalition would be far preferable to a looser alliance, as it would be more stable.
Mrs. May has also confirmed that she will retain key members of her cabinet, some of whom were expected to be fired or moved had she won a solid majority.
The prime minister is now considered too weak to make enemies of senior party figures. On Saturday she filled out more junior posts, some of them vacant because their holders lost their seats on Thursday.