An Arkansas prison escapee who eluded the authorities for more than 30 years was taken into custody at a home in a quiet neighborhood in Springdale, Ark., on Sunday, officials said.
How the inmate, Steven Dishman, had been getting by and where he had been for more than three decades were not immediately clear.
A spokeswoman for the Arkansas State Police, Trooper Elizabeth S. Chapman, said in an email that a person who met Mr. Dishman about five years after his 1985 escape came forward during the weekend, which led the police to the home in Springdale, about 200 miles northwest of Little Rock.
She would not elaborate on the person’s relationship to Mr. Dishman or why the tipster came forward. She said that information was under investigation.
“Special agents of the Arkansas State Police Criminal Investigation Division have begun to question individuals who may have known Dishman by another name,” she wrote.
Mr. Dishman was serving a seven-year sentence for a 1984 conviction on theft of property and burglary charges when he escaped from a prison in Benton, Ark.
He was set to be released on June 28, 1991, Solomon Graves, a spokesman for the Arkansas Department of Correction, said in an email. He would have been eligible for parole on Dec. 28, 1987.
On the department’s website listing escapees, “Returned” in green letters appeared next to Mr. Dishman’s name. He was one of several outstanding escapees from the prison system, including one, Veal Lee, who escaped the year before Mr. Dishman.
Details on what other charges he may face were unavailable on Monday.
The passage of time was reflected in the differences between Mr. Dishman’s prison and booking photos. The dark beard, mustache and long hair from the 1980s were gone; his updated photo showed a balding man of 60.
Arther Galloway, who lives across the street from where Mr. Dishman was arrested, said he was at church with his wife on Sunday when the police came around 11:35 a.m. and did not learn what happened until he read the newspaper on Monday. “It’s unreal,” he said.
He said he saw a few police cars on Monday at the house, which is on a horseshoe-shaped street near a school.
He said the homeowner lived at the duplex with a longtime friend and that they both had health issues. The homeowner could not be reached to comment.
