Uzezi Elakeche Abugo and Jacob David Alderdice were married June 17. The Rev. Bijan Mirtolooi, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center and Botanical Garden in the Randall Manor section of Staten Island.
The bride and groom met at Harvard, from which each received a law degree. Both are now litigation associates in the Manhattan offices of law firms, she at Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, and he at Jenner & Block.
Ms. Abugo-Alderdice, 29, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Susan O. Abugo and Omoefe O. Abugo of Abingdon, Md. The bride’s father is the managing partner of CWR Technologies, an information technology company in Windsor Mill, Md. Her mother is a school nurse at Yorkwood Elementary School, Woodhome Elementary/Middle School and at the elementary, middle and high school of City Neighbors, a charter school, all in Baltimore.
Mr. Alderdice, 28, graduated from N.Y.U.
He is a son of Cynthia J. Postilnick of Cranford, N.J., and the late Paul W. Alderdice. The groom’s mother is the activities coordinator in the assisted living home operated by Daughters of Israel in West Orange, N.J. His father was an information technology consultant for eBECS, a British company that provides managed services to businesses.
The couple met in October 2011 at a weekly happy hour event, when a matchmaking friend of Mr. Alderdice approached Ms. Abugo and said that the groom was interested in her but shy, and then went back to Mr. Alderdice and told him the same story but with Ms. Abugo cast as the hesitant party.
The ploy worked. “We ended up going on a date a week or so later and have been dating ever since,” Ms. Abugo said.
The two found over time that they complemented each other well.
When he decided he wanted to propose, Mr. Alderdice knew he didn’t want to let anyone else in on the secret but realized he was at a disadvantage in selecting an appropriate ring because Ms. Abugo isn’t much of a jewelry wearer. He ended up taking an old ring of hers as well as a picture of her to the jeweler, and picked out a diamond-encrusted double band that has a central diamond where the two bands converge.
A few days later, having enlisted the staff at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx to assist in his plan, he got down on one knee and proposed, with “Marry Me Uzezi” spelled out in wooden letters covered in flowers behind him.
“I am a nervous laugher, so I immediately go into hysterics, laughing as he’s proposing,” Ms. Abugo said.
A few minutes later, Ms. Abugo realized that the blood had stopped flowing to her finger, which was turning a dark shade of purple, and a few minutes after that, after trying and failing to remove the ring, the two jumped into a cab and headed for the emergency room at Montefiore Medical Center.
Mr. Alderdice said that his practical concerns ebbed quickly.
