A Las Vegas police officer has been charged in the death of a man whom he chased last month from a hotel, shocked with a stun gun seven times and held for more than a minute in an unauthorized chokehold, the authorities said on Monday.
The officer, Kenneth Lopera, faces felony counts of involuntary manslaughter and oppression under the color of office in the death of Tashi Farmer, Sheriff Joseph Lombardo of the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department said at a news conference. The felony charges each carry a minimum of one year in state prison and a maximum of four years.
The charges were brought against Officer Lopera, 31, after the Clark County Coroner’s Office determined that Mr. Farmer’s death was a homicide caused by asphyxiation from the chokehold. Mr. Farmer, 40, had ingested methamphetamine and suffered from an enlarged heart, which both contributed to his death, Sheriff Lombardo said.
Officer Lopera, who is white, encountered Mr. Farmer, who was black, in the Venetian hotel on the Las Vegas Strip shortly before 1 a.m. on May 14. Mr. Farmer appeared panicked, was sweating heavily and told Officer Lopera and his partner that people were chasing him, according to an account of the episode that the Police Department provided last month. But Mr. Farmer ran off before the officers could talk to him, according to the account.
Officer Lopera, who caught up to Mr. Farmer behind the hotel, said he believed he was trying to carjack a pickup truck, though the truck driver said he did not think that was the case. When he did not immediately comply with the officer’s orders to get on his stomach, body camera footage shows, Officer Lopera approached him and discharged his Taser seven times, the authorities said. He then struck Mr. Farmer in the face with his hands and placed him in a chokehold.
The body camera did not record the chokehold, but Officer Lopera later described it as a “rear chokehold,” the police said. Officers are taught how to get out of the martial-arts maneuver but are not trained to apply the hold on someone, the police have said.
Additional officers who arrived discovered that Mr. Farmer, who was unarmed, was not breathing, and they administered aid. Mr. Farmer, who also went by Tashi Brown, was pronounced dead at 1:39 a.m. at a trauma center, the authorities said.
Officer Lopera, who had been on paid administrative leave from the Police Department, was placed on unpaid leave on Monday. The Police Department is also conducting an internal investigation.