James Blake, a retired tennis star, had the makings of a lucrative lawsuit when a New York City police officer roughed him up two years ago: vivid surveillance video, the officer’s history of force complaints, and hasty apologies from the mayor and the police commissioner. But Mr. Blake spurned a potential payout from the city for a less orthodox resolution: The city is set to announce on Wednesday that it will create a legal fellowship in Mr. Blake’s name within the agency that investigates police misconduct.
The agreement, which resolves Mr. Blake’s legal claim against the city, represents an unusual turn in a police-brutality case. Surveillance cameras caught clear film of Officer James Frascatore tackling Mr. Blake to the sidewalk in Midtown Manhattan, and the Civilian Complaint Review Board quickly determined that the officer had used excessive force.
The fellow, set to join the review board in January, will perform outreach in neighborhoods with a high volume of police complaints to help the agency close more of its investigations. Last year the agency cut short 55 percent of its investigations, mostly because victims or witnesses stopped cooperating and in other cases because the agency could not reach those people or because someone withdrew a complaint.
The night after he was thrown to the ground by Officer Frascatore, Mr. Blake began looking for alternatives to a lawsuit, his lawyer, Kevin H. Marino, said.
“He said, ‘I’m certainly not interested in filing a lawsuit against the city to recoup money for me, but I would very much like to use this fortuitous event to make a real difference,’” Mr. Marino recalled.
Mr. Blake, who is 37 and was once ranked No. 4 in the world in singles tennis, was waiting outside a Midtown hotel to be taken to an event at the United States Open when officers mistook him for a suspect in a credit card fraud ring case. The officers failed to report the mistaken arrest, as they were required to do, raising the possibility that it would never have come to light had Mr. Blake not spoken out.
Mr. Blake’s father is black, and his mother is white. Officer Frascatore is white.
Officer Frascatore, 40, has so far avoided a public disciplinary hearing on excessive-force charges that were brought in 2015 by the review board. He had been scheduled to go on trial last month in an administrative proceeding but instead is working toward a deal with the review board. The officer’s lawyers and prosecutors from the review board are expected to meet in the coming weeks.
As part of the agreement, under which Mr. Blake agreed to withdraw a notice of claim he had filed against the city, the city will also pay a little less than $175,000 to cover travel costs for Mr. Blake and fees incurred by his legal team over the nearly two years of negotiations.