That said, do we have any proof that these meetings make any difference whatsoever in changing their opinions? Travis Kalanick, Bob Iger, Elon Musk — all left the president’s economic council after they felt they were getting nowhere. It’s hard for me to see this little gathering as more than glorified public relations.
And to that end, the leaks around this have been highly orchestrated to shine a positive light on the tech companies involved. Kudos to the P.R. reps doing their jobs well.
Farhad: Big surprise, there was more Uber stuff this week. In an apparent preview of a highly anticipated report on the company’s culture by Eric Holder, the former attorney general, the company disclosed details of another internal investigation. It said it had fired 20 people for harassment, discrimination and other inappropriate behavior.
Then Recode reported a doozy: In 2014, Eric Alexander, until recently a top executive, obtained the medical records of a woman who said she had been raped during an Uber ride in India. Alexander showed the records to Travis Kalanick, the C.E.O., among other execs. Folks at the top even speculated that the woman’s story might not be true, and that the whole thing was somehow invented by Uber’s Indian rival, Ola. Stay classy, Uber.
Mike: Obviously Uber has to do an investigation into any legal matters that have to do with their company. But this whole thing is clearly beyond the pale. It pretty much speaks for itself.
I think we’ll see more come out in the Holder report, which is about as hotly anticipated in Silicon Valley as the Comey hearing. But I figure with all the explosive and often awful items leaking out of Uber right now, firing 20 midlevel employees across the organization is not going to fly with the general public as a solution. We’ll see for whom the bell tolls next — if anyone.
Farhad: Finally, Apple had a thing. At the company’s annual developer conference this week it showed off several improvements to its mobile and desktop operating systems, and it also unveiled a new voice-activated home speaker called HomePod. This is Apple’s answer to the Amazon Echo. It has much better sound quality than other small speakers — I got to hear it at the event and I was blown away by its sound. But that comes at a cost — when it goes on sale in December, it will sell for $349, about twice the price of the Echo. Plus, we don’t know yet how well Siri will work on it, or whether it will work with non-Apple Music services like Spotify.
So, any thoughts on this thing? Or Apple generally? Or Taylor?
Mike: Well, let me start with a confession: I have a Sonos, but my dog is scared of music so I can’t actually use the thing. It’s a serious point of contention in my life, considering I spend most of my waking hours outside of my house listening to music. So even if I were in the market for a new speaker, I’d have to wait till my dog took a vacation from my house to use it.
Farhad: Woof. That’s ruff.
Mike: Ugh, Farhad.
Anyway, at first glance I thought it was a bit silly for Apple to ask people to pay $150 more for a glorified Sonos, which starts at $200.  For one, this most likely competes with Sonos’s $300 to $500 offerings, which are rather decent and nice-sounding speakers.
But you have to look beyond direct music competitors to get the full scope of what Apple is doing. Some propose that marketing the HomePod as a music listening device is just a backdoor entry into Apple’s living room strategy, something on par with what Amazon is doing with Alexa and Google’s similar move with its Home device. It’s clever, too, as it can slowly learn over time and not stumble trying to do too much right off the bat, as we have seen a little bit with Google’s public stumbles.
Will I buy one? Probably not, but I have issues. Or rather, my dog does.
Farhad: Dogs scared of music — is this a common thing? Try playing “We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together” — not even Bruna could resist. See you next week!