The Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn announced a program on Thursday that will seek to compensate hundreds of victims who were abused as children by its priests and deacons.
The program is modeled on one begun last year by the Archdiocese of New York. Like that program, it will be run by Kenneth R. Feinberg and Camille S. Biros, mediators who administered the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund and awarded compensation to victims of abuse by Jerry Sandusky at Pennsylvania State University.
The Brooklyn program will initially consider the cases of about 280 abuse victims already known to the diocese, for claims of abuse that date to the 1930s. Each will receive a package detailing how to apply for compensation, which will only be granted if they pledge to bring no further legal action against the diocese.
At least 54 priests in the Brooklyn diocese, which also includes Queens, have been accused of child sexual abuse, according to BishopAccountability.org, a website that compiles lists based on litigation and news reports. The diocese told The Daily News last year that it would release a complete list of accused priests to the public, but it never did.
The compensation program is intended for those whose accusations do not fall within New York State’s statute of limitations for bringing a legal or civil case for molestation, which requires victims take action before age 23. New York has one of the most restrictive statutes in the country, and New York’s Catholic bishops are among those who have lobbied to keep it that way.
On Wednesday, the Republican leader of the New York State Senate, John Flanagan of Long Island, announced that lawmakers would recess this year without voting on the Child Victims Act, a bill that would extend the statute. The bill, in various forms, has failed to pass the Legislature for more than a decade.
Advocates for abuse victims consider compensation programs far inferior to legislative change. Unlike a lawsuit, these programs allow church officials to keep secret what they knew about the abuse and what they did about it.
“These programs amount to essentially damage control, and do absolutely nothing to expose or deter those who commit or conceal these crimes,” said David Clohessy, the former executive director of the Survivors Network of Those Abused by Priests.
But advocates also advise victims to carefully weigh whether applying for an award makes sense. Many survivors are struggling with medical bills and seek closure after years of being met with defensiveness from the church.
Michael J. Dowd, a lawyer who represents 64 victims from the Brooklyn diocese, said he is advising all of his clients to apply. In 2002, he filed two lawsuits, on behalf of 62 of them, against the diocese, but ultimately lost on appeal because of the statute of limitations.
He has told his clients, many of whom are now elderly, that they have nothing to lose by seeing what amount is offered. If they decline the offer, they are no worse off than they are now. “They want to still be breathing if there is some kind of compensation for their suffering,” he said.
Carolyn Erstad, a spokeswoman from the Brooklyn diocese, said that the program was a reaction to the victims, who “began asking Bishop DiMarzio to do for them what Cardinal Dolan did in the Archdiocese."
The diocese will borrow the money to pay the awards, and will not use money from regular collections for that purpose, a news release said. Independent mediators, not the diocesan administration, will determine awards.
In the New York Archdiocese, which includes Manhattan, Staten Island, the Bronx and seven upstate counties, mediators are still considering claims from victims who have not previously come forward to officials about their abuse. They have so far awarded compensation to 120 victims. Lawyers for the victims have said the awards have ranged from the low to mid-six figures.
Ms. Biros said that the main lesson learned by the mediators in New York so far was how hurt the victims are.
