PARIS — For all of the tumult in the French Open women’s draw and the unfamiliar names filling the quarterfinal slots, the men’s tournament has been much more about the usual suspects: Andy Murray, Novak Djokovic, Stan Wawrinka and, of course, Rafael Nadal.
The top-seeded Murray, a three-time major champion and last year’s runner-up at Roland Garros, and the third-seeded Wawrinka, whose three Grand Slam trophies include the 2015 French Open, moved into the quarterfinals with straight-sets victories on Monday.
While three of the winners in women’s fourth-round action on Monday — No. 2 Karolina Pliskova, No. 3 Simona Halep and No. 5 Elina Svitolina — are highly seeded, not one of the eight players left in that field has won a Grand Slam tournament.
And they are all well aware.
There is a lot more experience and hardware among the remaining men.
Murray and Wawrinka are in the top half of the bracket. On the bottom half, No. 2 Djokovic, the defending champion, and No. 4 Nadal, seeking a record-extending 10th title in Paris, would set up a showdown in the semifinals with victories on Tuesday.
Murray was barely tested in the fourth round, beating 21-year-old Karen Khachanov, 6-3, 6-4, 6-4. Wawrinka had only a bit more trouble, eliminating the last Frenchman, No. 15 Gaël Monfils, 7-5, 7-6 (7), 6-2.
Next for Murray is a match against No. 8 Kei Nishikori, who got past a slow start to defeat Fernando Verdasco, 0-6, 6-4, 6-4, 6-0. Murray’s head-to-head record against Nishikori is 8-2. Wawrinka, meanwhile, is 11-2 against his quarterfinal opponent, No. 7 Marin Cilic, who was leading, 6-3, 3-0, when Kevin Anderson stopped because of an injured left hamstring.
Cilic has not dropped a set in the tournament. He knows what it takes to win a major title — he topped Nishikori in the 2014 United States Open final — so he appreciates his easy path.
“It’s a huge bonus for me, looking to the rest of the tournament, knowing that, mentally and physically, I haven’t spent any energy at all,” he said.
Murray did not arrive in Paris at the height of his powers, struggling with a cold and some recent shaky results. But he appears to have found his form.
Dealing quite well with a swirling wind that other players complained about, Murray made only 14 unforced errors and broke the strong-serving Khachanov five times.
Wawrinka’s biggest difficulty was that his lower back locked up on him early against Monfils.
Wawrinka took a medical timeout midway through the second set for a massage from his trainer, but he played well the rest of the way, using his sweet-swinging one-handed backhand to great effect.
Svitolina, of Ukraine, dealt with sudden pain in her back about a half-hour before her match and said she panicked. Then it affected her play. But after trailing by 5-2 in the third set, and 0-30 while serving, she switched to what she jokingly called Svitolina mode and barely missed a shot the rest of the way.
She won 20 of the last 24 points.
Svitolina plays the 2014 runner-up, Halep, who defeated No. 21 Carla Suárez Navarro, 6-1, 6-1.
So what, exactly, is Svitolina mode?
