The photographer Daniel Arnold spent the month of May camped outside the New York City Clerk’s Office, documenting couples getting married in irreverent, wild, untraditional — and sometimes very traditional — ways.
There is also a cottage industry of people Mr. Arnold befriended during his time shooting who make their living selling flowers, pretzels and sodas, and by offering their services as photographers and witnesses to the couples. “We’ve got all kinds of characters, and it really made for a nice microcommunity for me to go to every day,” Mr. Arnold said.
“I thought it was such a charming thing that had never occurred to me before,” Mr. Arnold said of the identical outfits worn by this couple.
“How often do you see two unicorns in one place? Kind of rare,” Mr. Arnold said. City Hall’s many elevated spaces make for irresistible jungle gyms, one of which was used by the child in the background.
The complementary patterns of the women’s head scarves and the marbled side of the building caught Mr. Arnold’s eye, as did the humor in this moment. “Any time I see two people sharing one slot in a revolving door, I have to take a picture,” he said.
Although most of the couples choose to be less formal, this one was not. “These guys were taking this very seriously, and it was kind of a refreshing change of pace,” Mr. Arnold said.
The back of this woman’s jacket said “Till Death Do Us Party.” Mr. Arnold described this man and woman as one of the hipper, more fashionable couples he saw during his month. “There was something really nice about the detail of her pierced septum and her cigarette and her high-cut dress and leather jacket,” he said.
This man was wearing a gender neutral T-shirt (“Spouse A,” “Spouse B”). In the background is George Taxi, a merchant who shouts that his flowers are cheaper and better than the ones they sell inside.
“In the absence of a great planned church wedding, you kind of compensate with the little choices, and oftentimes that means a color theme,” Mr. Arnold said of this family in red.
Mr. Arnold was drawn to the gold color of this woman’s traditional head wrap, and how it was reflected in the marbled side of the building. “You’ve got this great backdrop for this sparkling silver bride,” he said.
“Thanks, I’m going to need it,” she said.
Mr. Arnold wasn’t sure if these two got married, but they did take advantage of the rose stand. “I thought this was kind of a nice, sweet, quiet moment that transcended the whole City Clerk scene,” he said.
Seconds before this photo was taken, this young ring bearer’s uncles were playing with his Frisbee, not giving it to him. But what initially caught Mr. Arnold’s eye was the bride on the right, who was wearing a sheer dress over biker shorts.
