The Trump administration made a terrible decision this spring when it killed a modest grant program that was intended to promote integration in this country’s profoundly segregated public schools.
Fortunately, districts in scores of states — including Dallas, a segregated city with a lurid history of fighting desegregation — have recognized the dangers of racial and socioeconomic isolation and are taking steps to bring together children of different backgrounds.
It may come as a surprise to many Americans who grew up in an era of court-ordered integration, but this country’s public schools are more racially segregated today than a half century ago, with three-quarters of black and Hispanic children attending schools where most students come from low-income families. That’s true for only about a third of white children.
Resourceful educators have achieved stellar results with some high poverty schools. But generally speaking, economic isolation undermines academic achievement among the poor while depriving all young people of experiences that would prepare them for living and working in a multiracial society.
A growing number of school districts are refusing to accept segregation. One hundred school districts and charter school networks in 32 states, particularly in California, Florida, Iowa, New York, Minnesota and North Carolina, are promoting integration by taking socioeconomic status into account as they assign children to schools, according to a 2016 analysis by The Century Foundation. Just two districts were doing that 20 years ago. These districts typically go about this by redrawing attendance boundaries or creating magnet schools.
Under Dallas’s ambitious plan, the district would start 35 new schools — including science-centered, Montessori and International baccalaureate schools — to attract white, college-educated families who are flocking to the region to work in the financial services and health care industries. Some schools will set aside seats for students from middle-class families who may already have moved to the suburbs or chosen private schools.
While the goal is to restore middle-class faith in the district, the program is rooted in the awareness that low-income students fare better in economically mixed classrooms and that high poverty schools struggle to teach children effectively.
Dallas has come a long way from the 1970s, when school officials proposed a faux integration plan in which white and minority students would view each others’ schools via television screens while never meeting in the flesh. The current administration, by contrast, has realized that racial isolation poses a threat, not just to children, but to the civic and economic viability of the city itself.
That has yet to happen in the hypersegregated city of New York, where Mayor Bill de Blasio put forward a “diversity” plan in which the word “segregated” fails to appear at all. The first step in grappling with such a problem is summoning the courage to call it by its rightful name.