Created as a quirky bonus hole, the diminutive-but-vexing ninth hole at Erin Hills is likely to be the most entertaining 135 yards of play.
The par-3 ninth hole at Erin Hills may be as short as 135 yards during the United States Open, which begins Thursday. For the world’s best golfers, making par from that distance would usually be as challenging as an uncontested layup for an N.B.A. player.
The diminutive ninth hole, in fact, was not part of the original 18-hole golf course when Erin Hills opened in 2006 in Erin, Wis., about 35 miles northwest of Milwaukee. At the time, it was designed to be a quirky extra hole, or a bonus hole, and was often called a “bye” hole that could perhaps be used to settle recreational golf matches tied after 18 holes.
But the elimination of one hole several years later, and the rearranging of other holes, brought the extra hole into the 18-hole layout. Despite its puny length for a par 3 that has no water hazard, the ninth hole will most likely take a star turn and be a featured element of the television broadcast this week when Erin Hills hosts its first major championship.

As any Erin Hills caddie will tell you, the hardest par 5 on the course is the ninth hole if you miss the green.
The ninth hole, which requires a tee shot over tall fescue grass to a green that sprawls very close to the edges of the seven harrowing bunkers, could easily be the most entertaining, or demoralizing, 10 minutes of every competitor’s round.
Not bad for a hole that was once an afterthought.
It took nearly three years for the former extra hole to become Erin Hills’ ninth hole. Zach Reineking, the course’s superintendent and director of course maintenance, was happy to see the novel hole brought into the fold in 2009.
“Aesthetically, it’s just a really attractive hole with all the bunkering and the way the green sits in the midst of it all,” Reineking said.
He has been at Erin Hills since its inception, and he has heard scores of golfers talking about the ninth hole after their rounds.
 The prevailing wind is right to left. Perhaps by devilish design, the most penal bunkers are the ones left of the green.
Short but highly challenging par-3 holes are commonplace throughout golf, and some of those holes are criticized for being tricked up or unfair. But Hanse said the ninth hole at Erin Hills was not gimmicky.
“The hole is based on sound principles of design,” he said. “The green is receptive to a short iron from an elevated tee, which theoretically should make the hole even shorter.
He conceded, however, that missing the green from the tee could lead to a random outcome, as some lies and some spots in the asymmetrical bunkers are worse than others.
Since its inclusion in the 18 holes for competitive play at Erin Hills, the ninth hole has become one of the course’s signature holes. It is frequently featured in photographs — a dazzling, if not necessarily beloved, little gem.
The hole that was originally created to settle bets may even become a turning point in a major golf championship.
