MOSCOW — A Russian jury convicted five men on Thursday in the 2015 assassination of Boris Y. Nemtsov, the opposition leader and former first deputy prime minister, but his family called the trial a cover-up and said that those who had ordered and arranged for the killing had not been brought to justice.
Mr. Nemtsov, 55, was gunned down on the evening of Feb. 27, 2015, as he walked across a bridge outside the Kremlin’s crimson walls after dining with his girlfriend in a restaurant on Red Square.
The shooting, days before Mr. Nemtsov was to lead a rally to protest the war in Ukraine, ended his two-decade career as a champion of democratic reforms, beginning after the Soviet Union’s collapse in 1991.
The assassination, the most prominent political killing since Vladimir V. Putin took power in 1999, brought thousands of mourners into the streets but also frightened the country’s embattled democratic opposition. Mr. Putin called the killing “brazen” and politically motivated, and the Kremlin has denied any involvement.
Mr. Nemtsov’s family has stopped short of directly accusing the Kremlin, but they made it clear that they did not think the trial of the five men would get to the heart of who was responsible.
In a Facebook post on Thursday, Mr. Nemtsov’s daughter Zhanna Nemtsova called the investigation a charade. “The order was given to find the executioners and conduct a court trial, and this is what was done,” Ms. Nemtsova wrote.
Prosecutors asserted that the men carried out the murder after Ruslan Mukhudinov — the driver for a prominent Chechen military officer — promised to pay them $250,000 for it. But the prosecutors have not explained why the driver would have the money, much less the motivation, to have Mr. Nemtsov killed.
Observers have long wondered whether the Chechen leader Ramzan A. Kadyrov — a Kremlin ally to whom Mr. Geremeyev was close — and his allies played a role in the killing.
Why Mr. Kadyrov would have wanted Mr. Nemtsov dead is not clear: Some have hypothesized that he might have wanted to test the limits of his powers, by showing his independence from, or even trying to embarrass, Mr. Putin; others say he might have wanted to help out his patron, Mr. Putin, by ridding him of a critic even though the killing embarrassed the Kremlin.
In some respects, the Nemtsov investigation resembled another prominent case, that of Anna Politkovskaya, a journalist who reported from Chechnya and who was murdered in her apartment building in Moscow in 2006. While hit men were found and convicted, it is still not known who ordered the crime.
“The main thing,” said Vadim Prokhorov, a lawyer representing Mr. Nemtsov’s family, is that neither those who ordered or arranged for the murder have been found.
“We will insist that Mr. Kadyrov’s closest entourage is involved in the murder,” he said after the verdict, according to Mediazona, a news website that followed the trial closely.
Svetlana Petrenko, a spokeswoman for Russia’s Investigative Committee, said after the verdict that the investigation into who ordered the crime would continue, the news agency Interfax reported.
Prosecutors will make sentencing recommendations next week. Lawyers for the five convicted men said they would appeal the verdict.