At the beginning of every month, subscription streaming services add a new batch of movies and TV shows to their libraries. Here are the titles we think are most interesting, broken down by service and release date. Streaming services occasionally change schedules without giving notice.
The actor, writer and director Christopher Guest likes to train his lens on American culture and create odd caricatures of slightly clueless people — rock musicians (“This Is Spinal Tap”); Hollywood actors (“For Your Consideration”); folk enthusiasts (“A Mighty Wind”); and, in his latest movie, sports mascots (“Mascots”). “Best in Show,” his fluffy mockumentary about the obsessive lives of competitive dog show participants, falls on the softer side of his filmography, thanks in part to the movie’s many four-legged co-stars.
After releasing the three-hour opus “Magnolia,” director Paul Thomas Anderson scaled back and made a very weird movie with a tiny cast.  At least he’s found a meaningful relationship with a kind woman (Emily Watson). If you’ve only known Sandler as a goofy comedian, seeing him in this drama will most likely prove surprising. Except for the rage part — that’s somewhere in all of his roles.
In this latest film from James C. Strouse, Jessica Williams makes her debut as a leading actress, continuing a winning streak that includes her popular run on “The Daily Show” and her role as a host of the hilarious podcast “2 Dope Queens.” Here, she plays an aspiring playwright in Brooklyn who’s struggling to get over a breakup and trying to move up in her career — while also holding down a demanding job working with kids at a nonprofit. Williams’s warm and energetic performance makes her character sympathetic even when she’s acting out or fantasizing revenge scenarios against her ex-boyfriend. Adulting: still difficult.
Writer-director Nicholas Stoller — who’s worked on films like “Forgetting Sarah Marshall” and “Neighbors” — mines his own experiences for this adult comedy, created in collaboration with his wife, Francesca Delbanco. Keegan-Michael Key and Cobie Smulders also star as spouses who reconnect with some of their old Harvard classmates in New York, discovering how middle age has changed them all.
Jason Bateman’s comic persona has always been tinged with desperation and egomania. That should make it fairly easy for him to jump from comedy to drama for this crime series, in which he plays a debt-ridden money-manager who finds himself obliged to some unsavory characters in a picturesque part of Missouri. In addition to taking on the starring role, Bateman produced “Ozark” with creator Bill Dubuque (a screenwriter for “The Accountant” and “The Judge”), and he is one of the show’s primary directors. Laura Linney also stars.
This baseball story includes a love triangle between a veteran catcher picked up by a minor league team (Kevin Costner), an upstart pitcher (Tim Robbins) and a local groupie (Susan Sarandon). “Bull Durham” is not your typical sports movie — it’s a little more grown-up and realistic about the limitations of talent. And the film drips with chemistry among the three attractive leads.
Sergio Leone’s “The Good, the Bad and the Ugly” was his third collaboration with a serape-draped Clint Eastwood as the Man with No Name. This finale of the “Dollars Trilogy” (which also includes “A Fistful of Dollars” and “For a Few Dollars More”) is its most grandiose — and bloodiest — entry.
If “Feud: Bette and Joan” piqued your interest in Bette Davis and Joan Crawford, then enjoy one of Crawford’s strongest roles. In this 1954 film from Nicholas Ray, she plays Vienna, the owner of a saloon in the Old West, which two of her former lovers, the “Dancin’ Kid” (Scott Brady) and Johnny Guitar (Sterling Hayden), have come to visit. The movie was pretty ahead of its time — characters openly discuss Vienna’s past affairs and she runs her own business — and it was filmed in gorgeous Technicolor. It’s one of the more colorful Westerns of its era, with eye-catching reds, yellows and greens popping against the saloon’s brown wooden boards.
This 1988 comedy from director Jonathan Demme (“The Silence of the Lambs,”) follows an unhappy widow (Michelle Pfeiffer) stuck between the mob and the F.B.I. Pfeiffer’s character is a world away from her chic role in “Scarface.” Here, she’s less glamorous, married to a working-class gangster. The movie is delightfully candy-coated in pink, turquoise and yellow hues.
This film by Asghar Farhadi follows a troubled married couple who, after relocating to a new apartment, run into problems left behind by its previous tenant. Each revelation becomes an invitation for the husband and wife to fight over their hidden frustration and distrust. The tension in the household escalates until their situation is out of control, and their marriage is thrown into potential jeopardy. This tense drama won an Oscar this year for best foreign language film.
Gwyneth Paltrow plays a mousy heroine stuck between two realities — one in which she moves on from her cheating boyfriend to a lively new suitor (John Hannah), the other in which she unwittingly stays in an unfaithful relationship. The only thing that separates the two lives is whether she catches her train on one particular day. In ”Sliding Doors,” we see both versions play out.
Summer is the best season for watching this sweaty movie about a rowdy road house and its hunky bouncer Dalton (Patrick Swayze), hired to help make it into a semi-respectable establishment. Any scene that features Swayze flexing his martial arts skills — or includes his scruffy co-star, Sam Elliott — is a good one.
Jane Austen! Period costumes! So many charming English actors! There is so much about this Austen adaptation to swoon over, I might get the vapors. Charming and warm, this 1995 adaptation from director Ang Lee tells the story of penniless sisters looking for suitors who are wealthy and half tolerable. Emma Thompson wrote the screenplay and stars alongside Kate Winslet, Alan Rickman and Hugh Grant.
With little to do but repaint a road scorched by wildfire, the two men in David Gordon Green’s “Prince Avalanche” (Paul Rudd and Emile Hirsch) have plenty to talk about — their pasts, their relationships and their differing life philosophies. Green filmed this buddy drama against the charred remains of a real wildfire, which gives the movie a beautiful yet haunting quality.
A depressed bride (Kirsten Dunst) finds comfort after her unhappy wedding from an unlikely source: the apocalypse. This morose work from Lars von Trier is quite the downer, but don’t let that dampen your enjoyment of the movie’s dark cinematography and Dunst’s aching performance.
Also of interest (from July 1, unless otherwise noted): “Bull Durham,” “The Good, the Bad and the Ugly,” “Johnny Guitar,” “La Bamba,” “Manhattan,” “Married to the Mob,” “Misery,” “Rosemary’s Baby,” “Star Trek” Parts 1-9, “Syriana,” “The Witches,” and “Sliding Doors” (July 9).
In one of his most unruly roles this side of “Bridget Jones’s Diary,” Hugh Grant plays a rich guy trying to remain carefree and childless as long as possible. Eventually, Grant’s man-child character learns a valuable life lesson from a lonely kid (a very young Nicholas Hoult) in a way that’s surprisingly not cheesy.
Joel Edgerton and Ruth Negga play Richard and Mildred Loving, a historical and profoundly ordinary couple whose interracial marriage was illegal in their home state of Virginia. These soft-spoken, average citizens changed history by challenging Virginia’s law all the way to the Supreme Court, bringing an end, in 1967, to anti-miscegenation laws. Rather than casting itself as a high-stakes courtroom drama, however, the film is low-key and lived-in, much like Negga’s performance, which earned her an Oscar nomination for best actress.
This film, made not long after the murder of the American-born Tejano singer Selena Quintanilla, is a loving tribute to her meteoric career and life. Beyond the obvious biopic beats, “Selena” includes commentary about the Latino experience in America, in scenes that, for example, show her being discriminated against while shopping, or dealing with insecurity over her struggles to speak Spanish in interviews. This movie helped launch the career of another Latina performer, Jennifer Lopez, who plays the singer.
Before director Catherine Hardwicke kicked off the “Twilight” series, she made this highly charged teen movie. In it, an innocent young girl (Evan Rachel Wood) falls under the rebellious influence of a wayward classmate (Nikki Reed). This emotional drama includes some pretty dark topics — like self-harm and drug use — so it might not be appropriate for kids who are actually 13.
Also of interest (from July 1): “American Gigolo,” “The Blair Witch Project,” “Born on the Fourth of July,” “The Dark Knight” and “Erin Brockovich.
Noel Murray contributed reporting.
Read our FAQs or contact us to let us know how we’re doing.
Your preference has been saved.