ERIN, Wis. — For all the hand-wringing about menacingly tall fescue grass and all the worry about malevolent blind shots and bunkers seemingly steeper — and deeper — than a mine shaft, the dastardly different Erin Hills golf course treated the majority of the world’s best golfers kindly in its United States Open debut Thursday.
But there were a few notable exceptions. Dustin Johnson, the world’s top-ranked golfer, who was forced to hit so many shots from the fescue it seemed as if his shins were only visible on the tee and the green. Jason Day, ranked third in the world, played even worse, with several messy misadventures in the Erin Hills terrain — stumbles that may lead to his ouster from the tournament by its midway point. Rory McIlroy, ranked No. 2 in the world, staggered through his closing holes and also might not be around for the weekend play.
For most of the top players, however, Erin Hills was a relatively benevolent host during its unveiling as a major championship site. With rain and possibly gusty wind in the weather forecast for the next two rounds, the golf course might yet expose its more punitive side.
But Thursday, it was the performance of Rickie Fowler, the first-round leader, that was most representative and symbolic of the day’s play. Fowler shot a seven-under par 65, which tied the lowest score to par recorded in the first round of the event.
Jack Nicklaus and Tom Weiskopf were also seven-under par after their opening rounds of the 1980 United States Open.
Another longstanding record was broken. Forty-four golfers, including two amateurs, were under par. The record for most players under par after the first round of a United States Open had been 39, at the Medinah Country Club in 1990.
For Fowler, it again started the conversation over whether he would finally win his first major golf championship. After his round Thursday, he was asked if he appreciated being called the best player in the field not to have won a major.
“I’ll take it as a compliment,” he replied. “There’s a lot of good players out here. It would be nice to get rid of that at some point.
If he did win, it would continue a trend in the sport. The last six major championship winners had not previously won a major.
Those who began their rounds Thursday morning appeared to have the most success attacking the quirky Erin Hills layout, as they took advantage of temperatures in the 80s, light winds and a golf course softened by rain earlier in the week. Golfers teeing off in the afternoon faced a more unpredictable, swirling wind, and for the most part, the scores reflected the change in weather.
Although two golfers, Paul Casey of England and Xander Schauffele, an American playing in his first United States Open, were among the last players on the golf course and each shot 66 to trail Fowler by one stroke. Casey has been steadily climbing the world rankings in recent seasons and finished sixth at this year’s Masters.
Three golfers who teed off Thursday morning were tied for fourth after shooting 67s: Brian Harman, Tommy Fleetwood and Brooks Koepka. Harman has contended repeatedly and won one PGA Tour event this year. Fleetwood, of England, has had a strong year on the European Tour, and Koepka is ranked 22nd in the world.
Four golfers were another stroke back, including Kevin Na, who had vocally fretted the most about the perils of Erin Hills before the championship began.
While scores of players were enjoying their way around Erin Hills – 14 golfers shot a one-under-par 71 — many top golfers suffered through disastrous blow-up holes. Billy Horschel hooked his opening tee shot into a pond, knocked his golf ball back and forth across the first green and then three-putted for a 9 on the par 5 first hole.
Johnson chipped from one patch of fescue to another patch of the tall, stringy grass on his way to a double-bogey on the 14th hole. He shot 75.
On the fourth hole, Day’s approach shot missed the green and trundled down a swale about 15 yards from the putting surface. His first two attempts to chip up the hill landed short with his ball rolling back near his feet. He made a triple bogey. Four holes later, he knocked a bunker shot sideways into another bunker and settled for bogey. He finished with a 79, one stroke behind McIlroy’s 78.
Fowler, who hit 12 of 14 fairways Thursday, conceded the conditions favored those with the early tee times.
Fowler credited his accuracy off the tee, which as usual was the most important United States Open skill, to a new driver shaft he began using in March and to his pre-tournament strategy.
Fowler, who had seven birdies and 11 pars Thursday, had been using a driver shaft that was 44 and one-half inches long before switching this spring to a shaft that is one inch shorter.
Fowler also said that he planned to use a two-iron off several tees at Erin Hills as well – again, to keep his golf ball in the shorter grass, and not in the daunting fescue.
