1. President Trump accused James Comey of lying under oath, and pledged that he would be willing to testify under oath to dispute some of the former F.B.I. director’s statements.
The president said the testimony “showed no collusion, no obstruction.” Nonetheless, several former prosecutors said Mr. Comey’s account of his interactions with Mr. Trump could present a prosecutable case of obstruction of justice.
Security experts worry that the buzz around Mr. Comey’s testimony is diverting attention from the Russian investigation.
2. A deepening diplomatic crisis surrounding Qatar has been complicated by the inability of top United States officials to get on the same page.
What drove the Saudi-Qatari breakdown? Max Fisher and Amanda Taub explain in the Interpreter newsletter.
3. The U.K. snap election, expected to bring political clarity to negotiations to leave the European Union, has managed to make “Brexit” even harder. Britain now has a hung Parliament, and Prime Minister Theresa May’s authority has been deeply damaged.
She turned to the Democratic Unionist Party of Northern Ireland to shore up her leadership position, and fired her co-chiefs of staff amid pressure from her cabinet. Above, protesters gathered in London on Saturday to voice their anger at her government.
4. Prosecutors rested their case against Bill Cosby on Friday. It’s unknown if the former actor will testify when his sexual assault trial resumes on Monday, but his lawyer did not rule it out.
The defense has focused on undermining the credibility of Andrea Constand, who accused Mr. Cosby of drugging and sexually assaulting her. The trial has raised emotionally charged questions of how sexual assault accusers are treated.
5. Interviews with 67 Tony Awards voters suggest tight battles for best new musical and best new play before the awards show on Sunday night. There appears to be a consensus around the year’s best performances; Kevin Kline and Bette Midler can probably clear room on their shelves.
6. The battle over birth control is shifting to the states.
The Trump administration proposed a rule that would allow more employers to be exempt from covering birth control by claiming a moral or religious objection. Hundreds of thousands of women, many of them poor, would be poised to lose contraceptive coverage.
But some states are countering the rollback, passing laws that would expand coverage.
7. As the nation’s opioid crisis worsens, authorities are confronting a resurgent player: the internet.
Online sales of powerful synthetic opioids like fentanyl are reaching nearly every part of the country. The drugs are mainly bought on the so-called dark web, where buyers can visit anonymously and pay with virtual currencies.
Two 13-year-olds, Grant Seaver, above left, and Ryan Ainsworth, died after taking a synthetic opioid.
8. Half of America’s black gay and bisexual men will be infected with H.I.V. in their lifetimes if current rates continue, a higher rate than any country in the world. The crisis is especially acute in Southern states.
In the Sunday Magazine, Linda Villarosa looks into the causes of one of America’s most troubling public health crises.
9. The Cleveland Cavaliers spoiled the Golden State Warriors’ hopes for a perfect postseason by winning Game 4 of the N.B.A. finals. A Warriors sweep would have put them in rarefied air. Game 5 is on Monday.
Jelena Ostapenko, above, won the women’s French Open on Saturday, becoming the first Latvian to win a Grand Slam singles title and the first unseeded player to win at this tournament since 1933. Rafael Nadal vanquished Stan Wawrinka in the men’s singles final for his 10th French Open title.
This week: The Pittsburgh Penguins meet the Nashville Predators in Game 6 of the Stanley Cup finals on Sunday night. And the U.S. Open golf tournament begins on Thursday.
10. A sad day for Gotham.
Adam West, the classically handsome actor who turned a comic-book superhero into live-action Pop Art in the 1960s television series “Batman,” died on Friday. The cause was leukemia, according to a spokeswoman. He was 88.
11. If you’re looking to kick back, Netflix released a new season of “Orange Is the New Black” on Friday. Before you binge, catch up on where the show left off.
You could also head to the theater to catch the reboot of “The Mummy,” but A. O. Scott, one of our film critics, would advise against that. You might be better off looking through what our critics named the top 25 movies of the 21st century, along with the picks of six directors.
And for Taylor Swift fans, you can once again play, play, play, play, play her music on streaming services.
12. Finally, air travel once seemed so glamorous. What happened?
To find out, our reporter Sarah Lyall spent eight days crisscrossing the country. Read her account of grumpiness, fatigue, skipped lunches, boarding nightmares, runaway luggage, packs of Savory Snack Mix and the adult onesie she promised her children she’d never wear in public.
Thanks for reading, and here’s hoping you have a much better week than she had.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing, weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Evening Briefing, weeknights at 6 p.m. Eastern.
Want to look back? Here’s Friday’s Evening Briefing.