BERLIN — The Austrian Constitutional Court said on Friday that the government had acted legally when it seized the apartment complex in which Hitler was born, the latest and probably the last chapter in the long battle for ownership of the Nazi dictator’s birthplace.
The court said in a statement that a law passed late last year allowing the expropriation of the three-story building was “in the public interest, commensurate and not without compensation, and therefore not unconstitutional.” Austrian law prohibits the promotion of Nazi ideology, including Holocaust denial or the display of swastikas.
Seizing the building enables the government to prevent it from becoming a site for neo-Nazi activity, the court said in its statement, after hearing arguments following its decision to take ownership from Gerlinde Pommer, the longtime owner who had refused to sell the property.
Ms. Pommer, whose home was seized in January, did not attend the hearing because of health reasons and to avoid the news media, Mr. Sablatnig said. The court is Austria’s highest body for constitutional matters, but Mr. Sablatnig said Ms. Pommer could appeal to the European Court of Human Rights or to an Austrian court with the aim of increasing her compensation for the home.
Hitler was born inside the complex, in Braunau am Inn, near the Austrian-German border — on April 20, 1889, in an apartment his parents had rented above a tavern on the first floor. Fearing that the structure would become a site for Nazi glorification, the Austrian government assumed its main lease in 1972.
Officials have tried to buy the building from Ms. Pommer on numerous occasions since 1984, but she has refused to sell, even when her last tenants left in 2011 after she forbade renovations. After negotiations to buy the building stalled last year, the government passed the law permitting it to be seized.
Gerhard Lebitsch, the lawyer representing Ms. Pommer, argued that expropriation should not have been allowed for reasons of public interest, as the home’s appeal as a pilgrimage site would remain even if the property changed hands.
But Austrian officials contended that a long-term rental agreement would be insufficient. “Far-reaching architectural transformations can only be made by the owner,” Hermann Feiner of the Interior Ministry said at the hearing, according to the Austria Press Agency.
Since assuming the main lease of the property, the government has paid Ms. Pommer 50,023 euros a year, or roughly $57,000. Mr. Lebitsch said that if the government were allowed to seize the property, compensation for Ms. Pommer should be determined by a court and based on current market valuations.
The future of the building has also been the subject of extended debate. Some officials, like Interior Minister Wolfgang Sobotka, have argued that it should be destroyed; a historical commission recently concluded that the building should be changed in a manner that would strip it of its “recognition and symbolism”; and others have suggested that it should be offered to an agency managing workshops for disabled people.
