CHICAGO — From almost the instant he received the news, Tom Reid knew his N.H.L. career was over.
For the better part of three years, Reid, a former defenseman with the Minnesota North Stars and the Chicago Blackhawks, lived with and tried to play through a rare skin condition that team trainers and doctors had no answer for.
So when Reid, who is now a broadcaster for the Minnesota Wild, learned Wednesday morning that Blackhawks forward Marian Hossa would be forced to step back from his N.H.L. career starting next season because of a progressive skin disorder, years of painful memories flooded back.
Hossa, 38, announced Wednesday that over the past few years, he had been undergoing treatment for the disorder and the side effects of medication he has taken to treat it. The condition developed from an allergic reaction to his hockey equipment.
As the side effects have grown more severe, Hossa determined that continuing his N.H.L. career — at least next season — was not possible. The condition could be career-threatening.
Hossa, a Slovak who has played 19 N.H.L. seasons, has missed only 46 games over the past six seasons. He signed a 12-year contract worth $63.3 million with the Blackhawks in 2009.
Among only five active players with more than 500 career goals, Hossa has 525 career goals and 609 assists in 1,134 regular-season games with five N.H.L. teams. He has played in 205 playoff games and has appeared in the Stanley Cup finals five times, winning the Cup three times with Chicago.
Hossa said in an interview last winter that as he got older, he looked at his playing career through a much smaller lens than he once did.
In his statement Wednesday, Hossa said he could not allow the severity of his condition to affect his life on and off the ice.
Hossa does not plan to speak publicly about his condition, his agent, Ritch Winter, said.
Reid, 70, can understand Hossa’s ordeal. But Reid said he did not know if Hossa suffered from the same rare condition that doctors of N.H.L. players referred to as “the gunk” or “the creeping crud” in the 1970s.
What started as a rash the size of a quarter on Reid’s bicep widely spread to other parts of his body, engulfing his torso.
The irritation forced Reid to sleep in a wooden, straight-back chair because he would not deal with the pain that came with sleeping in a bed.
During games, he would change undergarments after warm-ups and in between each period and squirt water on his skin between shifts to try to lower his body temperature.
Reid, who played through various broken bones and having his jaw wired shut for six weeks during his career, said he found the pain unbearable.
Doctors tried to treat the disorder with a number of methods, all to no avail. Reid spent 10-day stretches at the Marshfield Clinic in Wisconsin, where he received a series of steroid and cortisone shots.
His skin would heal and Reid returned to the ice, only for the condition to worsen.
“We don’t know what’s going on completely,” Dr. William F. Schorr, the dermatologist who treated Reid at the Marshfield Clinic said in an interview with The New York Times in 1976.
At the time, at least five N.H.L. players were hospitalized by the rash and as many as 300 players may have suffered from the condition in some form. The Times reported in 1976 that players, including Reid, were affected by the disorder after they came into contact with their hockey equipment.
But as Reid’s condition worsened, doctors told him that if he continued to be treated with steroid and cortisone shots, he would be dead by 40. In that moment, Reid knew his playing career was over.
“When they told me, it took me about 15 seconds,” Reid said of his decision to walk away from the game. He has not experienced any problems from the skin condition since his 11-year playing career ended in 1978.
Hossa now faces an uncertain future after making an indelible mark on the Blackhawks the past eight seasons. He was Chicago’s third-leading scorer in 2016-17, with 26 goals.
“He has played a major role in the success our franchise has experienced in recent years, which makes his departure from our lineup a significant loss,” Blackhawks General Manager Stan Bowman said in a statement on Wednesday.
