LAS VEGAS — The image marks a single moment in hockey’s long history. A smiling and shaggy-haired Connor McDavid, six weeks removed from his 16th birthday, posing for a photo while standing between the Pittsburgh Penguins star Sidney Crosby and the team owner and Hall of Famer Mario Lemieux.
Taken after a Penguins home game during the 2012-13 N.H.L. season, the photo has since been viewed widely on the internet. But for McDavid, who captured the Hart Memorial Trophy as the league’s most valuable player Wednesday night at the annual N.H.L. awards show, it was an opportunity to witness in person the standard he wanted to meet in his career.
Now the captain of the Edmonton Oilers and the most decorated young N.H.L. player since Crosby entered the league in 2005, McDavid was completing his first season with the Erie Otters in 2012-13. Back then, the comparisons of his game to Crosby’s were only beginning.
Granted exceptional-player status in 2012 by the Ontario Hockey Foundation following a review by Hockey Canada, McDavid was able to enter the Ontario Hockey League at age 15, a year earlier than typically permitted. As a member of the Otters, McDavid made regular trips to Pittsburgh to watch Crosby play.
After being picked first on 147 of 167 Hart Trophy ballots this year — Crosby was first on 14 — McDavid became the third player to earn M.V.P. honors before his 21st birthday, after Crosby and Wayne Gretzky. By winning the Hart Trophy as well as the Art Ross Trophy as the N.H.L.’s leading scorer and the Ted Lindsay Award for league M.V.P. as voted by its players, McDavid, at age 20, may have already bridged the gap between himself and his childhood idol.
But in the hours before the league’s awards showcase began, McDavid didn’t see a potential Hart victory inching him any closer to Crosby’s legacy.
There is one distinction afforded to McDavid that has so far eluded Crosby. Along with the awards he garnered Wednesday night, McDavid was named the cover athlete for the latest iteration of Electronic Arts’ hockey video game franchise. Crosby has never appeared on the game’s cover. For a confessed gamer like McDavid, the honor was almost as humbling as the hardware.
At the season’s close, though, the ultimate honor went to Crosby when he lifted the Stanley Cup for the third time and became the third player to win the Conn Smythe Trophy as playoff M.V.P. in consecutive years, a feat previously achieved only by Lemieux and Bernie Parent of the Philadelphia Flyers.
McDavid didn’t watch any of it; he said he effectively tuned out the playoffs after Edmonton was knocked out in the second round by the Anaheim Ducks.
That McDavid is already being mentioned in the same breath as Crosby, a three-time N.H.L. champion and two-time Olympic gold medalist who turns 30 in August, is no small feat. After a fractured collarbone forced McDavid to miss 37 games as a rookie, his trophy haul rewarded a first full N.H.L. season in which he helped the Oilers end a 10-season playoff drought, the longest in the league.
If his breakout season is any indication, McDavid should have plenty of opportunity to at least challenge the considerable standard that the player he grew up admiring has already established.
