Wu Xiaohui, the chairman of Anbang Insurance Group, has steered the conglomerate to global prominence, making splashy purchases like the Waldorf Astoria hotel along the way.
Now, he has joined the ranks of Chinese tycoons ensnared in the country’s anticorruption drive.
Mr. Wu was taken away on Friday in Beijing as part of a government investigation into Anbang, according to Caijing, a respected newsmagazine. Two people briefed on the matter confirmed that he had been detained.
The Anbang chairman counted Wall Street executives like Stephen A. Schwarzman among his business partners in the United States, so his detention was likely to reverberate through circles in China and the United States.
Mr. Wu also has political connections, which have helped with his business dealings: He married a granddaughter of Deng Xiaoping, China’s paramount leader in the 1980s, and tried to forge a relationship with Jared Kushner, President Trump’s son-in-law.
The move comes after China’s insurance regulator barred Anbang from offering new insurance products for three months as part of a clampdown on speculative wealth management products, of which Anbang is a major issuer. The conglomerate has also been dogged by questions about its internal workings and political ties.
It was unclear what would happen to Mr. Wu.
Some executives caught up in China’s crackdown on corruption have reappeared days after vanishing. Others have been held for months without any charges being made public.
Travis Kalanick will be taking a leave of absence as chief executive of Uber as the company tries to repair its reputation.
But even as the ride-hailing service promised a sweeping reorganization, its board members highlighted the problems it faced.
When Uber released the recommendations compiled as part of an investigation into sexual harassment and other wrongdoing, Arianna Huffington, a board member, talked at a staff meeting about how having one female director typically leads to the appointment of more female directors.
His remark left people aghast and set off a storm of criticism. Mr. Bonderman apologized before resigning a few hours later.
Mr. Kalanick did not appear at the staff meeting or specify how long he would be away, but said that he would take time off to work on himself and reflect on building a “world-class leadership team” for the company.
The full report, compiled by a former United States attorney general, Eric H. Holder Jr., and his law firm, was not published. But Uber highlighted the changes it would make in response.
Farhad Manjoo writes in his State of the Art column that customers have also failed to hold the company accountable. What Uber lacks in autonomous tech it makes up for in autonomous customers, he says.
What’s next for General Electric?
Could it be an AT&T-style breakup?
Investors and analysts are pushing for a smaller, simpler General Electric to lift its earnings and stock price.
• At the core, there are the machines that power the company’s technology and will help its progress in data and smart software.
• Somewhere near the core is its oil and gas business, which has come under pressure from depressed oil prices. A merger with a rival, Baker Hughes, has made the unit more attractive if G.E. decides to sell it, analysts say.
• Health care and lighting units could look attractive to potential buyers.
• GE Digital. It is not yet clear whether investment in G.E.’s software and data analysis capability will pay off.
— Alicia K. Glen, deputy mayor of New York City in charge of housing and economic development and a former Goldman Sachs executive. A new law signed by Mayor Bill de Blasio will prevent private employers in the city from asking prospective employees about their salary history. The change is intended to prevent pay inequality, but the new law annoys Wall Street.
• The Federal Reserve is set to announce the results of its policy-making committee meeting. It is expected to raise its benchmark interest rate and may provide more information about its plans to reduce its portfolio of Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities.