Frank Ntilikina, a presumptive lottery pick in Thursday night’s N.B.A. draft, was fresh off a meeting with members of the Knicks’ organization on Wednesday morning when he strode into a hotel ballroom in Midtown Manhattan.
Ushered to a dais that featured his name on a placard, Ntilikina, a teenage point guard from France, sat before a sea of reporters and took part in a perfunctory pre-draft tradition: saying incredibly kind things about every team that might select him in the draft.
Here was someone who had nothing negative to say about the Knicks, who pick eighth. Not a word about the triangle offense’s inadequacies. No mention of their losing record last season. As for the team president, who has a continuing rift with both of his star players, Ntilikina presented only earnest enthusiasm. He simply said that he had enjoyed meeting with Phil Jackson, the aforementioned team president, and added that the Knicks would be a fine fit for him.
If nothing else, Ntilikina would bring some fresh energy to the Knicks, who are sorely lacking in that department — among others. They also need a point guard. And while it seems unlikely that Ntilikina is developed enough to receive a lot of playing time right away, the Knicks, in their seemingly endless rebuilding process, would like to become younger and develop a core for the future. A player like Ntilikina would appear to make sense alongside Kristaps Porzingis, assuming Porzingis and Jackson mend their relationship.
Ntilikina is one of the draft’s more intriguing prospects. He is young (18) and rangy (6 feet 5 inches) and has developed a reputation in Europe for his pass-first mentality. He is also something of a mystery: Because of his commitment to Strasbourg, his club team in France, Ntilikina was unable to work out for N.B.A. teams before the draft. Instead, dozens of N.B.A. scouts and front-office executives visited with him overseas.
Even Ntilikina’s trip to New York for draft-week festivities required some logistical gymnastics. He arrived on Tuesday, but plans to board a late-night private plane bound for France after Thursday’s draft. The idea, he said, is to rejoin Strasbourg in time for the deciding game in its championship series against Elan Chalon on Friday night. But it was important, he said, to attend the draft.
Ntilikina dismissed the suggestion that he was letting down his teammates.
Strasbourg does not lean on Ntilikina, who is more or less a role player. In fact, he went scoreless in the team’s most recent playoff game on Monday. During the regular season, he averaged 5.2 points, 1.2 assists and 2.1 rebounds in 18 minutes a game.
But the European system tends to favor older, more experienced players — many of whom also have larger contracts. Porzingis, in his final season in Spain before he joined the Knicks, averaged only 11 points and 4.6 rebounds in 21.4 minutes a game.
Ntilikina said he was enjoying his time in New York. On Thursday, he will find out if it will be his new home.
