A 15-year-old boy was charged as an adult Friday with attempted murder and assault of a New York City police officer whom, prosecutors said, the teenager had dragged for more than two blocks in Brooklyn in a stolen car he was driving.
The boy, Justin Murrell, appeared in handcuffs and shackles at an arraignment in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn and pleaded not guilty to the charges. He was ordered to remain in custody.
The episode, on June 3, left the officer, Dalsh Veve, gravely injured. On Friday, he remained in critical condition in a coma with “catastrophic head and brain trauma,” according to Timothy Gough, an assistant district attorney who spoke at the arraignment.
Officer Veve (pronounced vay-vay) and several other officers from the 67th Precinct had responded to reports of gunfire in the East Flatbush neighborhood, where a number of people were attending a party. Officer Veve, 35, was questioning the driver of a black Honda sedan, who prosecutors said was Mr. Murrell, around 11:50 p.m. near the corner of East 53rd Street and Tilden Avenue when other officers saw the Honda begin to move, dragging Officer Veve with it.
While being dragged, Officer Veve fired two shots, and one of them entered Mr. Murrell’s mouth, lodging itself in his jaw, said Frederic Pratt, Mr. Murrell’s lawyer. The Honda crashed, and Mr. Murrell and three passengers fled.
Colleagues drove Officer Veve, who was in plain clothes, to Kings County Hospital Center. Mr. Murrell had tried to get treatment for his gunshot wound at the same hospital, but ran away when he saw a large number of police officers there, Mr. Gough said. He walked instead to Brookdale University Hospital and Medical Center and was released only hours before being brought to court on Friday.
Quoting information from the stolen car’s “black box” monitor, Mr. Gough said that Mr. Murrell had been driving at a top speed of 56 miles an hour and had the accelerator fully depressed while dragging Officer Veve. The car was “weaving from side to side” in what appeared to be an effort to shake the officer loose, Mr. Gough said.
Seeking to have Mr. Murrell released on bail, Mr. Pratt told Justice Dineen Riviezzo that despite the description of the weaving car, there was no evidence that his client had meant to kill or harm Officer Veve.
Mr. Pratt also said that Mr. Murrell was not a flight risk and had longstanding ties to Brooklyn. Mr. Murrell was born at Brookdale Hospital and lives in the Brownsville neighborhood with his father and his mother, Mr. Pratt said. Mr. Murrell’s mother attended the arraignment, sitting silently among police officers from Officer Veve’s precinct.
Two passengers in the car, Jeronda Oliver, 18, and Eboni Clinton, 19, were charged with hindering prosecution. A third passenger was not charged.
At the arraignment, Mr. Gough detailed Mr. Murrell’s criminal history, which included three Family Court convictions in 2015 for criminal possession of stolen property, robbery and menacing. Though he was sentenced to probation for those offenses, he was convicted again last year, of burglary, and was sentenced to “a nonsecure” juvenile facility for up to 18 months.
After the hearing, Mr. Pratt told reporters that he hoped Officer Veve would recover fully and quickly.
