BRUSSELS — A man detonated a bomb in the Brussels Central train station on Tuesday, officials said, leading the police and military to evacuate a popular tourist area of the Belgian capital months after coordinated terrorist attacks in the city killed more than 30 people.
“There was a person who set off a bomb,” Jean-Michel Michel, who was managing the station at the time of the explosion, said in an interview.
A platform worker at the station said that before the blast, he heard a man shout “Allahu akbar” (Arabic for “God is great”) and saw him try to enter an office with a rolling suitcase before detonating the device at another location.
The platform worker, Nicolas Van Herrewegen, said he did not see what happened to the man after the explosion, but a spokesman for Belgium’s federal prosecutor later told reporters that the man had been shot by soldiers patrolling the station.
The spokesman, Eric Van der Sypt, said the government considered the botched attack a “terrorist act.” A prosecutor’s spokeswoman, Ine Van Wymersch, said early Wednesday that the suspect had died, news agencies reported.
An official in the prosecutor’s office said the blast occurred near the person who detonated the device, around 8:30 p.m. The official said it was not yet clear whether the bomber was wearing an explosive belt or carrying a device in luggage.
No one else was wounded in the explosion, Mr. Van der Sypt said. Photographs posted on social media appeared to show a fire burning in the station.
“There was a situation involving an individual and the situation is under control,” the police said on Twitter.
Officers patrolling the area evacuated the station as well as the nearby Grand Place, a Unesco World Heritage site and a major tourist destination.
Additional police officers arrived quickly, stopping traffic and sending pedestrians running for cover, bringing part of Brussels to an eerie halt.
Belgium has been on alert since suicide bombers killed 32 people in coordinated attacks on the Brussels subway and an international airport in March 2016.