Walgreens Boots Alliance and Rite Aid said on Thursday that they had called off their long-planned merger after antitrust authorities indicated they were not likely to approve the combination of two of the nation’s biggest drugstore chains.
Instead, Rite Aid will sell 2,186 stores, out of a total of 4,600, and three distribution centers to Walgreens for $5.18 billion, ending nearly two years of negotiations between the chains.
“While we’re disappointed that we cannot complete the proposed merger with WBA, we believe that this asset sale is an important strategic transformation for Rite Aid,” John T. Standley, Rite Aid’s chairman and chief executive, said on a conference call with analysts, using the ticker symbol for Walgreens.
Shares of Rite Aid tumbled as much as 30 percent on Thursday — its steepest plunge since December 2007 — and closed down more than 26 percent.
The end of Walgreens’ bid to buy Rite Aid outright, and its replacement with a smaller transaction, highlight how regulators remain concerned — even under an administration that has pledged lighter regulation of business — about mergers creating dominant players in some sectors.
Though some dealmakers have hoped that antitrust regulation would ease under President Trump, regulators have not adopted radically looser approaches to examining mergers, according to Norman Armstrong Jr., a partner at the law firm King & Spalding who specializes in antitrust.
“The agencies continue to challenge mergers that they have reason to believe are anticompetitive,” he said in a telephone interview, citing the Federal Trade Commission’s challenge of the proposed merger of the fantasy sports sites DraftKings and FanDuel.
And this year, several health care deals were derailed.
In January, a federal judge blocked a $37 billion merger between the health insurance giants Aetna and Humana after the Justice Department said that it should not proceed based on antitrust grounds.
Less than a month later, another federal judge said that a $48 billion merger of two other big health insurers, Anthem and Cigna, should not go forward.
The new agreement between Walgreens and Rite Aid annuls not only their planned merger but also the sale of some Rite Aid stores to Fred’s Inc., a related transaction that was intended to help Walgreens and Rite Aid win antitrust approval.
“We believe this new transaction addresses competitive concerns previously raised with respect to the prior transaction and will streamline and simplify the transition for customers, team members and other stakeholders,” Stefano Pessina, Walgreens’ chief executive, said.
Shares of Walgreens closed up 1.7 percent on Thursday. Fred’s shares closed down 22.8 percent.
Walgreens and Rite Aid agreed to merge in October 2015, and analysts expected the $9.4 billion deal to meet resistance. It would have created a group with more outlets than CVS Health, the biggest drugstore chain by market capitalization at the time. Before Thursday’s deal, Walgreens had 8,175 stores.
In January, Walgreens and Rite Aid said they would reduce the price of the proposed sale to as little as $6.8 billion.
Mr. Armstrong of King & Spalding said that the smaller sale of stores probably was intended to pass regulatory muster.
“Based on Walgreens’ understanding of the F.T.C.’s concerns about their original deal and their proposed divestiture, the revised deal is likely to be in local areas where Walgreens knows the F.T.C. doesn’t have concerns and Rite Aid has certainty that the deal will close,” he said.
What Rite Aid will be left with, that company argues, is a smaller store base — but one with some of its best-performing locations. Its remaining stores will be concentrated on the West Coast, New Jersey, Ohio, Michigan and Pennsylvania.
And the revised deal will let Rite Aid buy generic drugs through a Walgreens affiliate, allowing the smaller chain access to the lower prices enjoyed by its bigger competitor.
With the merger called off, Rite Aid will also receive a $325 million termination fee relating to the old merger agreement. Rite Aid said the sale of its stores was expected to close within six months.