When the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn unveiled a program on Thursday to compensate victims of sexual abuse by its clergy, it chose a familiar name to oversee it: Kenneth R. Feinberg.
His six-person law firm has achieved national renown — and a near monopoly — in the curious business of devising ways to compensate disaster victims. He administered the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund and the payouts tied to the BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill between 2010 and 2012. More than 30 years ago, he set up the compensation program for American soldiers injured by Agent Orange, the noxious Vietnam War-era defoliant.
Yet the person who actually grapples with many of the most wrenching decisions in carrying out the compensation — Who is eligible? If someone died, who gets the money? — is rarely Mr. Feinberg himself.
Instead, it is Camille Biros. “I don’t think anyone could have anticipated a career like this,” said Ms. Biros, who has worked with the Feinberg firm for nearly 40 years.
Ms. Biros is not a lawyer. Her background is in business administration, and she doubles as the business manager for the firm. In contrast with her bigger-than-life boss, she is low-key and matter-of-fact. “Camille has a quiet reserve that does not invite a lot of casual socializing,” said Mayanne Downs, the city attorney of Orlando, Fla., who helped choose Feinberg to distribute charitable funds to victims of last year’s Pulse nightclub massacre.
The goal with many of these payments is grounded in stark financial reality: Offer victims enough compensation quickly enough, and they will agree not to sue. But the cases can be emotional and vexing.
And there are unexpected curve balls. How do you handle a case — such as the Orlando shooting — in which the parents of several victims who died didn’t want to acknowledge their children’s same-sex partners? In situations like those, who should receive the compensation?
In 1979 she got a job as the administrative assistant to Mr. Feinberg, who was then Senator Edward M. Kennedy’s chief of staff. The next year she followed Mr. Feinberg when he left to found the Washington office of Kaye Scholer, a major law firm. She accompanied him again, in 1992, when he went off to found his own law office, specializing in arbitration and mediation.
The first claims project Ms. Biros worked on was the Sept. 11 compensation fund.
The projects break down into two broad categories: those that the firm is paid to devise — for instance, with the Catholic Church clergy-abuse cases — and those done pro bono. Those have included such matters as the Pulse nightclub shooting, which involved the distribution of charitable donations.
“Whatever the issue is,” Ms. Biros said, “Ken and I brainstorm and come up with what we think is an appropriate protocol.” Those plans must be approved by the paying client, but after that the client has no authority over how the program is administered.
The research can be complex. In the system set up in 2014 to compensate victims of defective General Motors ignition switches, which led to 124 deaths and 275 injuries, the process started by researching what juries were awarding in similar cases, Ms. Biros said. Based on those findings, they decided the starting point would be $1 million for a death, plus $300,000 for a spouse and each child. Then, on top of that, economic modelers would compute a projected economic loss — in other words, estimating what the deceased would have earned if not for the catastrophe.
In cases in which people suffered life-altering injuries like brain damage or paralysis, the victims’ lawyer and she would each hire a “life-care planner” to compute the costs of a lifetime of home care, transportation, home renovations for access, and so on. “We’d go through line by line,” she said.
She declined to comment on how the factors translated into compensatory sums, citing the archdiocese’s confidentiality restrictions.
J. Michael Reck, a lawyer for victims of sexual abuse by members of the clergy, said the awards available from the New York Archdiocese program “are significantly less than would be considered full justice in the court system.” Seven of his clients have received sums ranging from about $150,000 to $350,000, he said, and he is still pursuing cases for about a dozen more. Plaintiffs in the diocese cases cannot, as a practical matter, sue in court because the statute of limitations has passed.
Many steps are involved in establishing a compensation protocol. Many hurdles, too.
The charitable fund administered for the Pulse nightclub victims presented a variation on this theme. Many victims had same-sex partners, but had never married — an option that had only just become legal in Florida a year earlier. “There were families who refused to acknowledge the relationship,” Ms. Biros said.
Though the Feinberg firm’s compensation is in most cases confidential, its noncharitable projects appear to pay well. At the height of the BP Deep Horizon project, the firm — which then consisted of three lawyers and about five staff members — was receiving $1.25 million per month.
Pro bono projects tend to be far simpler. Recipients don’t have to waive any rights, they receive no payment for economic loss, and the size of the awards in each category depends largely on how much money was donated.
For instance, One Fund Boston, created after the Boston Marathon bombing in 2013, paid each decedent’s family nearly $2.2 million. A fund set up after the 2007 shootings at Virginia Tech paid each decedent’s family $208,000.
For three of the charitable funds for which it devised protocols, the firm also recommended small payments to people who were “present on site,” in recognition of their mental anguish. Payments like these went to people at the Pulse nightclub who escaped “by stepping over the friends’ bodies, ” Ms. Biros said, or “students hiding under their desks in the actual classroom where the crazy gunman was” during the Virginia Tech rampage.
As a result, more than 30 states imposed, in effect, liens on those victims’ compensation payments. “In a lot of cases,” Ms. Biros recalled, “these people ended up being zeroed out.” In other words, all the compensation went toward their unpaid child-support obligations.