But in the weeks since I received it — weeks marked by knife-wielding terrorists, deadly careening vehicles, a suicide bombing at a Manchester concert, stepped-up surveillance and arrests — the volume has taken on an almost talismanic power. It is a reminder that nothing terrorists can throw at this island nation can compare with what it has already faced.
I have recently been traveling across England, spending time in London, Manchester, Leeds, Newcastle, Durham and other cities, incidentally surveying both the historical and the emotional landscape, taking notes on the country’s response to terrorism. It would be a gross oversimplification to suggest that the British are not rattled, that it is not unsettling to see police toting automatic weapons (a strange sight in a land where most carry no more than a baton), or that parents do not feel palpitations knowing their son or daughter is attending a public gathering. The Brits are not, after all, made of steel. Or are they?
What I have learned, above all, is that history — particularly World War II — carries an immediacy here that is incomprehensible to most Americans. And no wonder. A newly discovered World War II bomb had to be removed from the River Thames this spring before the famed Oxford-Cambridge rowing race could take place. Nine days later, trains to Stansted Airport were delayed while disposal units tended to another World War II bomb discovered near the rail lines.
My students here may not know when King John reigned, but they know their World War II. It is a defining element of the British psyche, the yardstick against which all trials and tragedies, including the recent carnage, are measured. For Londoners in particular, history is one long narrative of survival and resilience. That trait, captured in the ubiquitous “Keep Calm and Carry On,” steadies the country even now.
And pitched against a historical canvas that includes the Great Fire, the Plague and, oh, yes, the unspeakable mayhem of World War I, these attacks, shocking though they are, appear almost anemic and incidental. I read that during World War II the city was bombed for 57 consecutive nights, that more than a million houses were destroyed or damaged. Just off a bustling Piccadilly, I duck into a serene St. James’s church consecrated in 1684 and the design of the architect Christopher Wren. A tablet reports that it was damaged by a bomb on Oct. 14, 1940.
One is constantly reminded by such plaques and posts that the people here have known worse. Far worse. The subtext is unmistakable: Nothing mounted against the city by nature or man has yet brought it to its knees. London is nothing if not a testament to the long view.
Such sacrifices are part of so many families here, silently informing this and all generations. The BBC last year referred to “the myth of the stiff upper lip,” but it is neither myth nor cliché to observe that the spirit of indomitability is a British birthright.
At 66, my life has spanned more than a quarter of United States history. I think of that as I walk Hadrian’s Wall, where Roman soldiers stood watch nearly 2,000 years before. In its way, this, its history, remains England’s ultimate defense. It is what the terrorists cannot defeat. They are doomed to be no more than a footnote in that great book. And the Brits know it.