Finding an apartment in New York that does not drain your bank account can feel like a nearly impossible task.
Competition is fierce. And for what? Cramped spaces that deliver little more than a grinding commute to work. But knowing where to look — and when to act — can mean the difference between crummy or cozy quarters. Apartments for less than $1,500 a month do exist, as long as you’re willing to take on a roommate or two or explore neighborhoods that might be less than convenient to your work.
Price, of course, dictates most searches. Pay too much and a tight budget can spiral into an unmanageable one. More than half of all New Yorkers are considered “cost burdened,” meaning they spend more than a third of their income on rent.
As the city’s population grows, the number of apartments available shrinks, particularly the cheaper ones. The median income for New Yorkers in 2015 was $56,350 a year, which puts median housing costs at $1,409 a month for rent and utilities, according to the New York University Furman Center. Yet in May, the median rent for a Manhattan apartment was $3,475 a month, according to a Douglas Elliman report. To pay that much without being burdened, you’d have to earn $139,000 a year.
And what about recent college graduates moving to New York in search of jobs and housing? While someone starting out in finance is looking at a median starting salary of $70,000 a year, jobs in arts and entertainment, for example, offer a much smaller starting median wage of $29,700 a year, according to data provided by the job site Glassdoor.com. Do the math, and many New Yorkers should be paying considerably less than $1,000 a month in rent.
The search for apartments fitting a smaller budget often leads to pockets of the city that are rapidly changing, but often lack conveniences like express trains, shops and restaurants. Although rents have been stagnating over the last two years, they are still near historic highs. And neighborhoods that were considered reasonably priced options just a few years ago no longer are.
“We used to do studios in East Harlem all the time,” said Shawn Hindes, a founder of Teacher Space, a brokerage firm that helps new teachers find apartments. “But that’s not really feasible anymore on a teacher’s salary.” The same goes for many Brooklyn neighborhoods. “Five years ago, someone saying ‘I want a place in Crown Heights’ got the pick of the litter,” he said. But that is no longer the case.
In 2016, only about 14 percent of the one-bedroom apartments listed in Crown Heights on StreetEasy were asking less than $1,500-a-month rent; and in Washington Heights, around 10 percent of one-bedrooms asked less than $1,500 a month, according to data provided by StreetEasy.
But head over to a Brooklyn neighborhood like Northeast Flatbush, an area south of Crown Heights, and about 63 percent of the one-bedrooms were listed for less than $1,500 a month last year; while in Norwood in the northwest Bronx, almost 94 percent of them were, according to StreetEasy.
“These are predominantly residential neighborhoods with older housing stock,” said Grant Long, the senior economist for StreetEasy.
Mr. Hindes of Teacher Space said young teachers who once might have looked in East Harlem are now heading to neighborhoods like Morris Heights in the West Bronx. In Brooklyn, neighborhoods like Flatbush, Prospect-Lefferts Gardens and Kensington are getting more traffic, according to Harley Courts, the chief executive of Nooklyn, a brokerage firm that also helps renters find roommates. “Half of our inventory has shifted south in the last 18 months,” deeper into Brooklyn, Mr. Courts said.
Last month, Tess Bonn, 27, a television writer and producer, moved back to New York City from Washington for work. She had always lived in Brooklyn, but areas she once found affordable were suddenly out of reach. She found a listing on Craigslist for an apartment in Inwood in Upper Manhattan. “When I went to see that apartment, it was the first time I’d ever been that far uptown,” she said.
Erin Whitney, a saleswoman for Bohemia Realty Group, which specializes in Upper Manhattan, suggested other options. Among them was a one-bedroom on Vermilyea Avenue listed for $1,550 a month. “It was a really good place, and a really good price,” Ms. Bonn said. She moved in at the end of May.
Price isn’t the only deciding factor. When Katrina Shakarian and Jessica Franco needed to move out of their $1,650-a-month two-bedroom apartment in Woodside, Queens, by May 31, the roommates hoped to discover a new neighborhood. “We thought, ‘This is an opportunity to do something different,’” said Ms. Shakarian, 31, who works for the city and grew up in Queens. Ms. Franco, 31, who grew up in the South Bronx, works in health care.
But after looking at apartments in Inwood, the South Bronx and Jackson Heights, Queens, they ended up signing a lease on a two-bedroom just a few blocks away from their old apartment.
The other options they considered were cheaper, like a $1,700-a-month two-bedroom on Tinton Avenue in the South Bronx with no broker’s fee. But it was on the ground floor, with bars on the windows. “You feel like you’re in a cage,” Ms. Shakarian said. An apartment in Inwood was listed for $1,750 with no broker’s fee. But it was tiny. A larger Inwood apartment, also for $1,750 a month, was a fifth-floor walk-up.
One is the loneliest number — and also the most expensive. A renter who is willing to move in with one, two or even three roommates will invariably trade privacy for cash and space.
Not only might a three- or four-bedroom apartment end up costing less money for a group of roommates, it might be easier to find than a smaller apartment. Just consider Bedford-Stuyvesant. Last year, less than 6 percent of the listings for one-bedrooms on StreetEasy were asking under $1,500 a month in that neighborhood. But during that same period, 23 percent of two-bedrooms listed in the neighborhood asked less than $2,000 a month; about 75 percent of three bedrooms asked less than $3,000 a month; and 58 percent of four bedrooms asked less than $3,500 a month.
With more options available, the chances of finding a nicer-quality space go up. “You think when you move to New York your first place is going to have leaky faucets and broken everything,” said Jake Corcoran, who spent last summer looking for two-bedrooms apartments to share with a roommate, Andrew Perez.
Mr. Corcoran, 23, an actor, dancer and choreographer, did most of the apartment hunting while Mr. Perez, 23, was still living in Boston.
They ultimately settled on a two-bedroom in Washington Heights for $1,975 a month. “We got lucky in having new tiles, new appliances,” said Mr. Corcoran.
The apartment is on the first floor so that Mr. Corcoran would not disturb any downstairs neighbors when he choreographs tap dances.
Although the rental market has slowed considerably over the last few years, it is still tight for renters looking for apartments at the bottom of the market. Such apartments, when they become available, rent quickly. Seasoned renters know to show up at a viewing with a checkbook in hand.
Bring paperwork, checkbooks and all your roommates along with you on the hunt, said Brian Henninger, a salesman for Citi Habitats, who also suggested keeping financial information on a thumb drive as well as in print.
Organizing your paperwork can have another added benefit. It can alert you ahead of time to potential problems. When Kate Blemler, a graduate student and nanny, started apartment hunting last year, she had no idea that her tax returns would complicate her search.
She had been paying around $900 a month for a bedroom that was large enough for only a twin-size bed in an apartment on the Upper West Side that she shared with two roommates. She wanted space and privacy. She filled out an apartment application in Inwood only to get rejected by the landlord because her tax returns did not reflect her total income.
“That was eye-opening,” said Ms. Blemler, 29. She scrambled to get a letter from her employer verifying her income and asked her parents to guarantee her lease. Even so, it complicated her search, and limited her options. She got approved for a $1,650-a-month one-bedroom in a walk-up building in Inwood a few weeks later. “I jumped on it,” she said.
Most renters have to move within a matter of weeks. But the luxury of time can help, particularly for those who do not know what they want, like Hollis Heath, who works in youth development and still lives at home in West Harlem with her parents. Around January, she decided it was time to move, grudgingly.
On June 1, Ms. Heath submitted an application for a $1,500-a-month one-bedroom in Mott Haven in the South Bronx, which was approved a few days later. With new appliances, ample light and access to an express train, it hit all the “must haves” on her list. And the landlord will pay the broker fee. “It has everything I wanted,” she said. She will move in before the end of the month.