BOWMAN, S.C. — Weathers Farms grows corn, cotton, soybeans and peanuts off a dirt road called Wayside Drive. I stood at a gate alongside the property, peering past trees toward where a house once would have stood, teeming with three generations of a family now long gone.
In April of 1940, census workers — the official title is enumerator — set out all over the country to visit every home and record the names, ages and occupations of their inhabitants. Back then this area, called Cow Castle Township, was home to black sharecroppers, and the enumerator visited here after she had completed her work in the larger towns nearby. It was May 14, 1940, when she arrived at a stretch of dirt called Old Reevesville Road that cut through the middle of what is now Weathers Farms.
I came here at the end of my reporting on a story to learn more about its beginning. I was looking for any trace of a little girl named Evelyn Moore, a 4-month-old infant in that census. Her life would end far from here 30 years later, in the woods of Chester, N.Y., outside an old resort hotel, where she was bound with an electrical cord and shot dead.
Her murder remains unsolved. The state police asked for help last year, releasing her striking arrest photographs from the 1960s, which, coupled with police reports and interviews with a former lover and a cousin, sketched a rough outline of the life of this mysterious murder victim: a cross-dressing, gun-toting, bisexual heroin dealer in 1960s Harlem.
And she was born here.
Old Reevesville Road was in Orangeburg County. I had called the nearby historical society before my visit in January. Eric Powell, a historian there, looked at the page from the 1940 census that counted the busy Moore household: a grandmother, her children and her grandchildren, including Evelyn. Could he help find this house?
Two problems: Old Reevesville no longer existed, and the census did not include house numbers — they probably didn’t even have them back then. But Mr. Powell recognized the name of another family on the page, the Bairs, who were visited by the enumerator the same day. Five houses later, she had arrived at the Moore place. Knowing where the Bairs lived, Mr. Powell was able to isolate a patch of Old Reevesville as seen on a 1938 map. The Moores would have been there, he said.
He suggested calling Richard Reid, an archivist at Voorhees College, who knew the area. I did, and he offered to show me around. When I arrived in my rental car on a Monday morning, Mr. Reid met me with a smile on his face and a woman by his side, whom he introduced as Jenette Minus. Now 79, she, too, had once been a baby on Old Reevesville Road.
We drove to the home of her older brother, Walter Minus, 87. I pulled out the worn page from the 1940 census and ran my finger down the names. There they were: the Minus family, including Walter, then a 10-year-old boy.
In the stuff of a reporter’s dreams, the Minuses before me would remember little Evelyn and tell colorful tales of her adventures growing up. Alas, dreams they remained. Walter Minus remembered the Moore house but not Evelyn. Same with Ms. Minus. The Moores moved away shortly after the census.
Mr. Minus moved to Jersey City for work. At night, he visited clubs in Harlem. Walking up Eighth Avenue in the 1960s, he might have passed, with no way of knowing or recognizing, an old neighbor from back home.