Aitan D. Goelman, who was the enforcement director at Commodity Futures Trading Commission, is returning to his former law firm, Zuckerman Spaeder.
When a new administration comes to Washington, top government regulators flock to the exits to find new jobs, but they seldom have to look very far.
A few parlay their experience into corporate counsel jobs or trade up to a more rarefied law firm than the one they had left earlier.
But most of them, like Eric H. Holder Jr., the former United States attorney general, or Mary Jo White, former chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, simply return to their previous law firms.
In the latest high-profile transition, the law firm Zuckerman Spaeder has welcomed back Aitan D. Goelman, who was enforcement director at the Commodity Futures Trading Commission until February. In his regulatory role, Mr. Goelman oversaw cases using new enforcement powers authorized by the Dodd-Frank Act and other legislation that grew out of the 2008 economic crisis.
Mr. Goelman will be a firm partner in Washington focusing on the securities, commodities and derivatives industries, internal investigations and defense of cross-jurisdictional regulatory and criminal matters.
The revolving door between government and law firms is decades old, as the newest political overseers arriving in Washington recruit their own legal hands for savvy counsel to prevent — or rescue them from — misdeeds or mistakes. And, as white-collar practices at major law firms have been booming in the wake of the regulatory overhauls that followed the economy’s 2008 crisis, that swinging door typically means a big payday for most lawyers.
Government prosecutors, who earn around $150,000 annually, can gain coveted experience as a high-level government enforcer or regulator and later be rewarded with a Big Law partnership easily worth $1 million or more.
And many do. Robert S. Khuzami, formerly a terrorism prosecutor and general counsel of Deutsche Bank and — most important of all for law firms — once the top enforcement official at the Securities and Exchange Commission, was avidly courted by a raft of big firms when he left his post in 2013.
Mr. Khuzami chose a partnership at a major corporate law firm, Kirkland & Ellis, disregarding critics who say the government’s revolving door with private entities gives corporate interests undue influence. His salary, which started at about $5 million annually, drew attention, but the practice of trading in government service for a bigger private paycheck has showed no signs of abating.
Last month, Kirkland rehired W. Neil Eggleston, who most recently served as President Barack Obama’s White House counsel. He returned as a partner to the 1,900-lawyer firm.
As the Obama administration wound down, major firms stepped up their efforts to grab other star lawyers — the kind who have gone toe-to-toe with corporate attorneys and won.
Some corporations reach into government ranks and hire directly. PepsiCo hired Tony West, who was the associate attorney general in the Justice Department, as its general counsel in November 2014.
More routinely, top-tier firms embrace departing regulators, especially those with experience in securities and foreign corrupt practices law.
Cybersecurity is the latest hot commodity, said Jeffrey A. Lowe, the partner practice group leader at the legal search firm Major, Lindsey & Africa.
A recent hire in that field was John P. Carlin, the Justice Department’s top national security lawyer, who in January joined law firm Morrison & Foerster to lead its global risk and crisis management practice. Unlike most lawyers leaving high-ranking federal jobs, he had no law firm to return to because he had spent nearly his entire career in government service.
But many lawyers return to their “home” firms, and get a promotion. After she departed in February, Ms. White returned to the law firm Debevoise & Plimpton, where she had led the litigation department before her S.E.C. appointment. Ms. White is now senior chairwoman of the elite firm, counseling corporate boards and advising clients on government investigations and similar matters.
In 2015, Mr. Holder ended his six years as the nation’s highest law enforcement official with a return to his former law firm, Covington & Burling, as a partner focusing on investigations and complex lawsuits.
But his profile was again raised in January, when Democratic leaders of California’s Legislature hired him as their legal point person for matters involving the Trump administration.