VISTA, Calif. — Representative Darrell Issa was 2,500 miles away from his Southern California home the other day, on a fund-raising mission to Florida. Outside his congressional district office here, a light drizzle fell from the sky. It was a weekday morning.
But no matter. Close to 1,000 people were gathered for yet another weekly demonstration, a jumble of umbrellas, placards (“Repeal and Replace Issa”), honking horns and angry chants. They denounced Mr. Issa, a Republican who has held his House seat since 2001, for his support of President Trump and the Republican health care bill.
All 14 members of the California Republican congressional delegation voted to repeal the Affordable Care Act, including seven who, like Mr. Issa, represent districts that voted for Mrs. Clinton. Four of those come from districts that include Orange County.
“I’ve never seen it like this in Southern California,” said Doug Applegate, a retired Marine colonel turned trial lawyer who lost to Mr. Issa by just 1,621 votes in November. He and Mike Levin, also a lawyer, are running against Mr. Issa in 2018.
Mr. Levin said Mr. Trump’s tumultuous presidency had electrified the political atmosphere. “If there’s one thing we have to be grateful for with Trump, it’s that a lot of folks have woken up like never before and are ready to make progressive change,” he said.
Democrats said they were not discouraged by the party’s failure to score an upset in the special election for a House seat last week in Montana. There, Greg Gianforte, a Republican, won comfortably after enthusiastically embracing Mr. Trump. Montana was never viewed as hospitable ground for Democrats, in contrast to suburban districts with wealthier and more-educated voters.
California is also a state that has been on the leading edge of environmental policy – including measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Democrats said that the prospect that Mr. Trump might withdraw from the Paris agreements would give them another potent line of attack against Republicans already uncomfortable with their association with the president.
Some California Republicans have stuck close to Mr. Trump, asserting that Democrats were misreading the landscape. Representative Dana Rohrabacher, a Republican viewed as among the most vulnerable of the incumbents, said harsh attacks from “left-of-liberal Democrats who now control the Democratic Party” had helped him with his supporters. He predicted that his health care vote would not matter in 2018.
Representative Mimi Walters, who has represented Orange County since 2015, said she did not regret voting for the Republican health care bill. “I was very proud to stand with the president because that piece of legislation is going to provide relief to millions of Americans,” she said.
That said, Ms. Walters has declined to hold town hall meetings in her district, leading critics to stage mock empty-seat town halls to highlight her absence. “The rhetoric has become so vulgar, I’m not going to put myself in a position to be attacked,” she said.
And Democrats said the scene of Ms. Walters at the White House celebration after the vote for the new health care measure would feature prominently in the campaign ahead. “Mimi Walters has linked herself to Donald Trump,” said Katie Porter, a consumer advocate and one of a number of candidates running against her.
In 2016, Democrats struggled to find candidates. By contrast, these days they are seeing a surge of interest, including from many first-time candidates.
Republicans in Congress have displayed increasing concern over events in Washington. One of the seven Republicans from California districts won by Mrs. Clinton, Steve Knight, called for the appointment of a special counsel to investigate Russian intervention into the 2016 presidential election one day before the Justice Department appointed one. Mr. Issa made a similar request earlier this year.
Mr. Knight is facing a rematch challenge from Bryan Caforio, a lawyer who waged a spirited campaign to unseat him in 2016.
The flood of Democratic congressional candidates presents an opportunity for Democratic leaders, but it is not without its complications. For one thing, many in this new field have not run for office before, which can be a disadvantage in a fast-paced race against a more experienced incumbent.
For another, they represent a range of ideological views, which could reignite the internal divisions from last year’s presidential primary between Mrs. Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.
Both Mr. Applegate and Mr. Levin say they support a single-payer health care plan, a striking stand in the socially liberal but fiscally moderate district, which includes the cliffside precincts of La Jolla and Del Mar. Ms. Porter’s mentor is Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts. She has pledged — like Ms. Warren — to fight “powerful special interests” as a member of Congress.
By contrast, Harley Rouda, a real estate executive who is challenging Mr. Rohrabacher, said he would run a campaign based on the notion of “moving our country back to the center.” Mr. Rouda has a history of donating money to Republicans; he gave to the presidential campaign of Gov. John Kasich of Ohio.
“The challenge for us is going to be balancing the energy in our coalition with finding candidates that can win in moderate districts,” said Drew Lieberman, a Democratic pollster based in San Diego.
Jim Brulte, the leader of the California Republican Party, said that demographic changes in California were “very real,” but that Republicans had proved successful in broadening their appeal to adjust to changing times.
“I am frankly one of those who thinks this is not going to be an issue in 2018,” he said of the health care vote.
Democratic leaders said that if a wave were to sweep out dozens of incumbents, other Republicans here could be vulnerable, including Mr. Hunter. Josh Butner, a retired Navy SEAL, has declared his candidacy against Mr. Hunter, who served as a Marine in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Still, the big question for Democrats is whether the outrage on display every Tuesday morning in front of Mr. Issa’s office will still be burning a year from now. Robert Spencer, 64, a retired teacher and self-described independent who lives in the area and was there the other day, said he had no doubt.
