MOSCOW — In the 15th episode of his annual call-in show on Thursday, President Vladimir V. Putin was part Oprah, part King Solomon, part Avenger against an incompetent bureaucracy, and very much a modern czar, fielding questions mostly from aggrieved Russians and promising to personally solve their problems.
The televised town hall-style event included the usual cascade of mostly happy economic statistics, concern for social ills, a smattering of foreign policy pronouncements and a peek into Mr. Putin’s personal life.
He even allowed a question about relations with the United States from an American: Jeremy Bowling of Mesa, Ariz., submitted his query via video, saying he did not expect it to be used.
Mr. Putin again blamed domestic political battles in the United States for renewed Russophobia, and when asked about the recent testimony before Congress by James B. Comey, the fired F.B.I. director, Mr. Putin repeated his view that there was no evidence to support the accusations that Moscow interfered with the American presidential election.
In passing, he caustically offered Mr. Comey asylum in Russia, like that given to Edward J. Snowden for leaking classified materials, should Mr. Comey face legal problems for quietly passing information to the news media about his meeting with Mr. Trump.
As he often does, Mr. Putin pointed his finger at America for meddling abroad. “Just take a globe, spin it and poke your finger into it at any place — there are American interests there, and, for sure, they’re involved there,” he said.
Mr. Putin has used a series of recent interviews to press for better relations with the United States — based on common concerns like nuclear nonproliferation and the future of Syria — ahead of his first anticipated meeting with President Trump on the sidelines of the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hamburg, Germany, in early July.
During the call-in show on Thursday, he described the move by Congress to impose new sanctions as the latest chapter in an effort that has endured for centuries to contain Russia.
During the annual call-in show on Thursday, Vladimir V. Putin of Russia spoke about his daughters and grandchildren to the Russian public for the first time.
Despite all the gossip, my children, my daughters live here in Russia, in Moscow. I have grandchildren as well.  My daughters work in science and education. They don’t get involved with politics. They have a normal, ordinary life. Regarding grandchildren, some of them go to kindergarten. “As soon as I say their (grandchildren’s) age or name they will be immediately identified and they will not be left alone anymore. It will affect the child’s development. That’s why I’m fine and I ask for understanding in this issue.
Absent were the usual quips. Mr. Putin provoked laughter only toward the end of the four-hour broadcast, when he said he could not remember any jokes about himself, much less a favorite one. Perhaps the question-and-answer format has become rote for Mr. Putin — he let out a deep sigh at one point — after doing these shows almost every year he served as president or prime minister since the first broadcast in 2001.
It was all supposed to be spontaneous, with organizers announcing days in advance that a huge number of questions were pouring in. Ultimately, they said that about 2.6 million were submitted, from a country of around 143 million people. Some also came from the studio audience salted with important political and cultural figures.
At a news conference after the show, the president was asked pointedly about his reaction to the anti-Putin chants shouted during street demonstrations across Russia on Monday.
Any such protests should be legal, he said, and should not be motivated by personal ambition — an oblique reference to the opposition leader Aleksei A. Navalny, who wants to run for president. Mr. Putin also took a dig at the Western reporter asking about the protests, saying that the very question suggested support for the protesters.
Despite regular denials by the Kremlin, there were obvious signs that the call-in program was canned, not least the absence of really tough questions and the seemingly easy opportunities for the president to score points with the public. The show also featured some of his favorite topics like the development of the Arctic.
One studio anchor served Mr. Putin an easy lob at the beginning, by saying that people wanted to know about the future. Russia will hold a presidential election in March 2018, and although Mr. Putin has yet to declare his candidacy, he seems at times to be campaigning.
In virtually every case, he expressed wonder that the problem had not already been solved, given that the federal government had allotted money for whatever issue was raised, and he promised to address the problem — and the perpetrator — at once.
“What you just said is very strange,” he told one woman who said she was being made to pay to apply for relief from a flood last May that damaged her home. Mr. Putin suggested that the local governor pay her a visit before the end of the day.
The woman grinned, relieved. Later, she told a Russian newspaper that an unknown man had materialized at her door, vowing that the flood relief money had just been deposited into her bank account.
For those living with some manner of misery, being chosen to speak directly to Mr. Putin was akin to winning the lottery. The government officials who were singled out probably had the opposite reaction.
If there were any cracks in the format, it was the emphasis this year on questions and comments solicited via social media. The move seemed intended to show that state-controlled television is hip, but it allowed critical remarks to suddenly scroll across a large screen set up on one side of the studio.
Usually with the few questions on controversial topics, there is a sense that they are issues that Mr. Putin wants to address. The newspaper RBC reported this year that some questions that make it on air are rehearsed, and that certain people chosen to ask Mr. Putin a question are given pointers for their television appearance (avoid wearing plaid clothing, and do not drink alcohol the night before).
