C.S.D. Xejuyup players wearing uniforms that incorporate traditional K’iche’ Maya clothing. Antonio Perechú, the founder of C.S.D. Xejuyup, wanted his team to reflect its community.
XEJUYUP, Guatemala — It is a relief to take a detour and head toward a plateau, with its tropical vegetation, after driving through a steamy landscape of sugar cane fields in southern Guatemala. An hour later you arrive in Xejuyup, a town of about 4,000 people that is “under the mountains” or “at the feet of the hill” — which is what Xejuyup (pronounced shay-who-YOOP) means in the language of the K’iche’ Maya who live here.
The first thing I saw when I got out of the car was a huge banner with the official picture of the local soccer team, called C.S.D. Xejuyup. The first thing I saw in the banner were the team’s uniforms.
Members of C.D.S. Xejuyup soccer team.
Maya culture retains a strong presence in Guatemala. Colorful traditional clothing, usually worn by women, is among the first things tourists may notice upon their arrival. It is less common to see men wearing traditional clothing, and in Xejuyup only a few elderly men do so.
This worried Antonio Perechú. A former goalkeeper, Perechú played for several regional teams but gave up the pursuit of his dream of becoming a professional soccer player because his family could not afford it. He founded C.S.D. Xejuyup in 1982 as something of a community organization — the Spanish acronym C.S.D. translates as Sports Social Club — and today his son, Miguel, is the team’s captain.
Antonio Perechú’s ambition to have his team reflect, and respect, its community has been echoed in the team’s decision — since its first days — to incorporate Maya clothing into its uniforms.
Players wearing the coxtar, or skirt, in practice.
Xejuyup players resting at halftime.
Xejuyup, a village of about 4,000 people, in the evening.
The players explained to me that the coxtar (the skirt), the kutin (the shirt) and the pas (the sash) have meanings associated with the ancestral Maya worldview. Their colors, their embroidery and the weaving line patterns suggest the relation between humans and nature and its elements.
From 1960 to 1996, during Guatemala’s brutal civil war, more than 80 percent of the estimated 200,000 dead and missing were Maya, according to a report from Guatemala’s Commission for Historical Clarification.
Xejuyup was occupied by the army during that time. In 1982, the year Perechú started the soccer club, the civil defense patrols, or local militias, were formed nationwide. All male adults were forced to join; the conscripts included Perechú and other members of the current Xejuyup team.
Santa Ajtzalam, 49, weaving a shirt for her husband outside her home in Xejuyup. Completing such a shirt takes about two months.
Materials used in the making of traditional clothing.
Antonio Perechú Sui, 67, an assistant of C.D.S. Xejuyup, at his home. He had to serve in a paramilitary group in the 1980s during the Guatemalan civil war.
For years, Guatemala’s indigenous population kept a low profile. Parents refrained from teaching the Mayan languages to their children, and from wearing their traditional clothing. When a peace deal was signed, opening the country to a globalization boom, Guatemala was flooded with used clothes from the United States. The items cost less than one quetzal (about 14 cents) each, and even more people stopped wearing traditional clothing.
When I visited Xejuyup recently, the team was training for a Saturday game. Miguel Perechú, who works as the gymnastics teacher at a school and has attended several soccer courses, led the session.
His pride in his Maya identity matches his father’s. In our conversation he mentioned Hunahpu and Xbalanque, the twin gods.
In pre-Columbian oral history, the twins save the Maya people by defeating the Lords of Xibalba (the underworld) in an ancient ballgame. It is part of the reason Miguel Perechú feels a strong connection between the past and the present.
The logo of Barcelona, a dominant team in the Spanish league, was painted on a home in Xejuyup. The influence of major soccer clubs, especially from Spain, is strong across Guatemala.
Boys, some wearing Real Madrid T-shirts, returning to their school after a physical education class.
A picture of C.D.S. Xejuyup on a T-shirt.
The women in Xejuyup weave the shirts for the men in their families, a task that usually takes two months. The skirt is made of wool and bought in the region. A full uniform is worth about 2,000 quetzales (about $270), far more than the replica jerseys of the “new heroes” — players like Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo — that are cheap and ubiquitous.
But to the men of C.S.D. Xejuyup, it is also why the mission undertaken by Antonio Perechú is so ambitious, and so important.
And in small ways, it might be succeeding. Beyond being an example for youngsters in their small town, the team’s influence and message is evident each time it leaves Xejuyup. The club is not registered in any official league, but it frequently plays against amateur teams around the country. Most times, Miguel Perechú said, the players are supported, applauded and encouraged by their rivals’ fans.