By way of proof, look no further than Inua Ellams’s “Barber Shop Chronicles,” an exploration of black masculinity set in six cities across two continents. The all-male cast gets a (simulated) trim and shave, leaving the audience to share in the genuine, if sometimes sorrow-inflected, buoyancy of the piece as a whole.
By the time the performance — running just shy of two hours, with no intermission — has finished, you may feel caught up in the sort of giddy verbal jam session one associates with the plays of August Wilson. (Like that American dramatist, the Nigerian-born Mr. Ellams is a poet as well as a dramatist.) The production, directed with palpable empathy by Bijan Sheibani, runs through July 8 in repertory at the National Theater’s smallest space, the Dorfman, before transferring north for a further engagement at the West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds. It will return to the National in November.
But this is a work, full of humanity and glancing wit, that one can imagine traveling far and wide. Those who arrive early might even find themselves led to pride of place in a barber’s chair onstage — at least until the performance proper begins, and we find ourselves eavesdropping on musings that shift moods on a dime.
The connective tissue across the multiple storefronts is a decisive soccer match between Barcelona and Chelsea that is on TV in the background while the men gather to shoot the breeze about issues both personal and political, marital problems here and disenchantment with post-Mandela South Africa there.
Along the way, one notes a pattern: families severed, willingly or not; and various forms of disenfranchisement, be they racial, social, or linguistic. Many an unprintable racial epithet, and their effects on these men, gets folded into a cross-fire of chatter.
The set by Rae Smith, a 2011 Tony winner for “War Horse,” places the action in a central rectangle with the audience on all sides, above which hangs a globe that itself encases a glitter ball. Illuminated signs indicate which barber shop we happen to be inhabiting at that moment. The result is a dramatic collage, entirely unpolemical, name-checking the likes of Fela Kuti, Jay Z, and Tupac Shakur along the way.
How one assesses maleness is an ongoing topic for Mr. Ellams, who has moved on from self-performed solo plays to allow 11 actors the ensemble of a playgoer’s dreams.
It may seem unfair to single out any of them, but one simply has to commend the infectious appeal across four roles of the sweet-faced Hammed Animashaun, and the gathering tension at their South London workplace borne out by Cyril Nri, representing an older generation that has seen it all, and by Fisayo Akinade, playing a lippy young malcontent who is revealed to have a reason for his aggressive behavior.
And I shall not soon forget Patrice Naiambana as the reflective, slow-speaking Simphiwe, a South African suspended between memories of the father who threw him out and concerns about the son he has all but lost.
Around the corner from the Dorfman, the National’s thrust-stage Olivier has opened a new play, “Common,” which has in turn fed the oddest debate in the London theater world so far this year: Is D. C. Moore’s often-incomprehensible historical epic better or worse than the writer-director Yael Farber’s poorly reviewed “Salomé,” with which “Common” is currently running in repertory?
If I preferred “Common,” that’s largely because the National, as is its wont, has been able to throw at the material a team of A-list talent that includes the Olivier-nominated actress Anne-Marie Duff (“Saint Joan,” “Collected Stories”) as the foul-mouthed heroine, Mary, and an offstage team that can lay claim to a 2015 Tony nominee, Jeremy Herrin (“Wolf Hall”) as its director, and a 1998 Tony winner, Richard Hudson (“The Lion King”), as its scenic designer.
While the new play sometimes feels like a staged thesis about the societal effects of violence, it’s nonetheless trenchantly performed by an all-male trio dominated early on by Sion Daniel Young as a gangly man-child who has experienced firsthand the sadism from which the game maker Paul (a commanding Richard Mylan) has made serious cash.
In 2015, the Almeida Theater premiered a Mike Bartlett play, “Game,” that covered comparable terrain in the crossover of socially sanctioned thuggishness and the random savagery that plagues our streets. Mr. Owen is also pondering the apparent normalization of aberrant behavior.
You can’t help but feel that Mr. Owen has poured a lot of himself into the hectoring remarks proffered by Sean Gleeson, who plays Mr. Young’s largely absent dad. And in their interwoven monologues, the three actors move toward an ending accompanied by images of the celestial — a skyward vision of a solace unavailable on earth.
Barber Shop Chronicles. Directed by Bijan Sheibani. National Theater/Dorfman, in repertory through July 8.
Common. Directed by Jeremy Herrin. National Theater/Olivier, in repertory through Aug. 5.
Killology. Directed by Rachel O’Riordan. Royal Court Jerwood Theater Upstairs, through June 24.