‘GLORY DENIED’ aboard the Baylander IX-514 (June 2-3, 8:30 p.m.; through June 10). Tom Cipullo’s opera, based on a book by Tom Philpott, tells the story of Col. Floyd James Thompson, a long-serving Vietnam-era prisoner of war, and his return to America. Part of the New York Opera Fest, it’s staged by Opera Upper West on a tiny United States Navy vessel that once trained pilots to land helicopters at sea and is now moored at the end of the West Harlem Piers.
INTERNATIONAL CONTEMPORARY ENSEMBLE at Miller Theater (June 6, 6 p.m.). A free pop-up concert explores the animal-like behaviors of instruments, through music for solo and duo forces. There’s the premiere of Dai Fujikura’s “White Rainbow” for Indian harmonium, as well as scores by Drew Baker, Mikel Kuehn, Ann Cleare, Suzanne Farrin and Alex Mincek.
LOCRIAN CHAMBER PLAYERS at Riverside Church (June 2, 8 p.m.). This ensemble, one of the city’s best-kept musical secrets, gives infrequent performances of contemporary solo and chamber music in the tower of Riverside Church, free, and played to a very high standard. On the bill is music by George Crumb, Michael Gordon, Toshio Hosokawa and Brian Fennelly, with premieres from Carlton Wilkinson and David Macdonald.
THE MET ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (June 3, 3 p.m.; June 6, 8 p.m.). The players of the Metropolitan Opera continue their survey of Mahler, conducted by Esa-Pekka Salonen. Saturday afternoon, Schumann’s Symphony No. 3 prefaces “Das Lied von der Erde,” with the mezzo-soprano Karen Cargill and the tenor Stuart Skelton. On Tuesday, Mahler’s “Blumine” and the “Kindertotenlieder,” sung by Anne Sofie von Otter, come with Sibelius, in the form of the Violin Concerto, played by Christian Tetzlaff, and the Symphony No. 7.
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC at David Geffen Hall (June 8, 7:30 p.m.; through June 10). Alan Gilbert’s duties as music director don’t conclude until July, but he signs off at Lincoln Center with “A Concert for Unity,” in which musicians from across the world join together for Mahler’s Symphony No. 7 and more.
OPERA LAFAYETTE at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (June 2, 2 p.m.). Ryan Brown leads excerpts from Rameau’s 1735 heroic ballet, “Les Indes Galantes,” with help from Sherezade Panthaki, who sings Zima; Victor Sicard singing Adario; and Robert Getchell as Damon, as well as the Gallery Voices.
