Gov. Andrew Cuomo turned up the heat on New York’s subway managers — and also, he must have known, himself — by more than a few degrees on Thursday when he declared the subway system to be in a state of emergency. That the trains are in crisis will come as no surprise to the six million or so people who ride them each weekday. Nonetheless, the governor’s pronouncement is a welcome statement from on high that not only are fixes required — that much is painfully obvious to everyone — but also that they are needed right away.
Mr. Cuomo called on senior state officials to dispense with normal procedures for ordering new subway cars, replacing broken signals, installing new tracks and the like. All too often at the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, normal has been a synonym for slow. As an incentive to pick up the pace, he said Albany would add an extra billion dollars, on top of the billions already committed, to the authority’s capital plan. This new aid, its sources yet to be identified, would be part of next year’s state budget.
Mr. Cuomo reflected the frustration with train delays and breakdowns that now define daily life for New Yorkers. Breathes the soul who has not wondered why it takes years to get a new subway car on track? Or why it can take weeks, even months, for something as seemingly mundane as repairing an escalator? Rider anger neared overflow this week when an A train derailed in Harlem, injuring 34 people and unsettling travel for thousands of others throughout the system. That the trains could be unreliable was already a given. Now people asked: Are they unsafe, too?
It is tempting to point out that Mr. Cuomo’s focus on the subway — which is ultimately under his control — could have come a lot sooner. Though he has involved himself more actively in recent months, his imprint was scarcely discernible for years.
And it is tempting to arch an eyebrow over Mr. Cuomo’s M.T.A. Genius Transit Challenge, the prize of as much as $1 million he is offering for anyone with ideas to get the subway up to speed. Transit bosses do not need a genius to tell them what they surely know to do: Upgrade signals to allow more trains on every line to ease overcrowding; replace the prehistoric cars on the A and C lines and elsewhere; twist political arms to find new sources of money. The city’s economy — and by extension the state’s — depends on it.
That said, the governor’s state of emergency may prove a big step in the right direction. As with Samuel Johnson’s prospect of a hanging, it could focus everyone’s mind wonderfully.