ANKARA, Turkey — In 1990, Turkish authorities built a monument to human rights in the center of the Turkish capital. Since May 22, nobody has been able to reach it.
First, the police encircled it with a fence. For a time, they blocked the street it stands on. At one point they even shut a small square nearby that provided access to the street.
These moves carry obvious symbolism at a time of widespread rights abuses in Turkey, but the government also has a more practical goal in mind.
For over six months, a tiny group of former teachers and civil servants — a few of the more than 100,000 people who have been purged from their jobs during Turkey’s continuing crackdown on dissent — had assembled at the statue each day to ask for their jobs back.
Throughout the protests, the core group of demonstrators consisted of just six people. But the state still wanted them gone.
Before the statue was closed off, most of the six had been briefly detained around 20 times. Two of them — Nuriye Gulmen, an academic, and Semih Ozakca, a schoolteacher — began a hunger strike on March 9. As their strike neared the 80-day mark last month, and as their health faded, the two were arrested and, this time, have not been released.
The state’s response to such a limited expression of dissent illustrates how little space is left in contemporary Turkey for free expression and assembly. Around 150 private news outlets have been shut down and others co-opted. More than 120 journalists have been jailed, along with more than a dozen opposition lawmakers. A state of emergency is to be extended indefinitely.
Introduced as a temporary measure after the failed coup last year, the state of emergency was originally intended as a means of expelling from state institutions members of the Islamic group accused of leading the putsch. But it has been expanded to include people of various political persuasions, including leftists like Mr. Sacilik, Ms. Gulmen and Mr. Ozakca.
In 2013 thousands of protesters gathered in central Istanbul, in demonstrations that became a byword for opposition to President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his Justice and Development Party, or A.K.P. Four years on, the two hunger strikers have become the nearest contemporary equivalent — a sign of the extent to which the right to free assembly has been eroded.
“It’s the protest that people know most about,” said Ali Seker, an opposition lawmaker who visited them in jail this week.
It is also the protest that, by extension, most divides current Turkish discourse. In pro-government circles, many believe the crackdown is a necessary means of stabilizing a country roiled by treasonous plots, two militant campaigns, an economic slowdown and a refugee crisis. In such circles, the hunger-striking educators are simply leftist militants.
“We don’t send our children to school to become terrorists,” said the interior minister, Suleyman Soylu, in a recent speech to justify why Mr. Ozakca and Ms. Gulmen were purged from their jobs.
Opposition-minded Turks admire the six protesters for “their persistence,” said Mr. Seker, one of several opposition lawmakers who now join the remaining four at their daily sit-in. “Every day they are there,” he added.
Until, at least, the police bundle them off the street. The four who remain are rarely detained for more than a few hours, but their detention is nevertheless a nearly daily ritual. The police wait until the lawmakers leave before hustling the protesters into nearby vans, often roughly.
One day recently Acun Karadag, a purged teacher, could not see properly because she said her glasses had been lost during the scuffle the previous day.
Mr. Sacilik said his left shoulder had been dislocated and his eye badly damaged. He is already missing a limb: In 2000, while imprisoned for unrelated political reasons under a previous government, his arm was chopped off when a bulldozer knocked down the wall of his jail during a prison protest.
Mr. Sacilik and the other protesters are angry not only about their dismissals but also about other restrictions that have since been placed on them. Like most of the roughly 140,000 Turks caught up in the purge, their passports have been canceled and they have been blacklisted from working in the private sector, leaving them without a source of legal income.
Ms. Karadag said she believed the two hunger strikers were arrested so that the government could force-feed them if they become too frail.
After visiting them in jail this week, Mr. Seker, the opposition lawmaker, said that the two were already very weak and that Ms. Gulmen was constantly shivering. “There are signs that if they lose consciousness they will be force-fed,” said Mr. Seker, who is also a doctor.
Ms. Gulmen and Mr. Ozkaca have themselves been silenced since their imprisonment, but on the eve of their arrest they promised that jail would not break them.
