My first experience covering the N.B.A. finals for The New York Times remains vivid for me. It was 2014, and the San Antonio Spurs defeated the Miami Heat for the championship.
The series was lopsided — the Spurs won easily — but it was still packed with terrific basketball. The Spurs had Tim Duncan, one of the all-time great centers. The Heat employed LeBron James, who had firmly established himself as the game’s most dominant player.
On a personal level, I was enthralled, a feeling largely born of having spent the regular season chronicling the misfortunes of the Knicks. The Knicks were not very good that season. In fact, they were dysfunctional. (Some things never change.) So leaving them behind to cover the finals was like being introduced to another form of entertainment altogether.
The Knicks were a demolition derby. The Spurs and the Heat, with their selfless play and shot-making artistry, turned basketball into ballet.
During those 11 days — and the championships I’ve covered since then — I’ve found the finals to be a furious mix of adrenaline and anxiety. Many of the games start late at night, which means that reporters are pressed up against print deadlines. That often means filing stories at the final buzzer and hoping for the best. I root hard for blowouts. Last-second drama is great for viewers at home — but not so much for newspaper writers who are trying to crank out coherent summaries of the action for their section fronts.
But it was also a joy to watch the games — and to spend several spring weeks in Miami’s warm embrace. If you have to work remotely, palm trees and tropical cocktails make a big difference.
Things changed for the league, and for the reporters who cover it, not long after the Spurs won that title. In July 2014, James announced that he had decided to leave the Heat and rejoin the Cleveland Cavaliers. It was a seismic moment for the N.B.A., one that instantly shifted the balance of power in the Eastern Conference north from South Beach to the banks of Lake Erie.
For James, the move made sense. He grew up in Akron, Ohio, not far from Cleveland. He had spent the first portion of his career playing for the Cavaliers, and fans celebrated his return. The Cavaliers have since made three straight trips to the finals, and they won their first championship in franchise history last season. It was a glorious moment for the city.
It also reinforced just how much impact one player can have on an entire league. When James moved, he took the finals — and the reporters who cover them — with him. Cleveland and Miami are both fine cities with friendly, welcoming people. But they are very different cities.
The palm trees, the fruity drinks, the beach, the sun: All we have left are the memories.
And tickets to Ohio. Nobody on the planet is capable of playing with such refined ferocity as James is — and he has again positioned the Cavaliers on the sport’s biggest stage, as fans from around the world tune in for the finals this month.
For the third straight year, the Cavaliers are facing the Golden State Warriors. The Warriors’ emergence as a basketball superpower just happened to dovetail with James’s move back to Cleveland. In other words, N.B.A. reporters lost Miami but gained San Francisco.
On Thursday night, before a sellout crowd at Oracle Arena in Oakland, Calif., the Warriors defeated the Cavaliers in the first game of the series, 113-91. With the pop star Rihanna sitting courtside, James collected 28 points, 15 rebounds and 8 assists. It was not enough against the Warriors, a team that might just have the most fearsome assemblage of offensive talent in modern history.
The second game of the series is scheduled for Sunday night at Oracle Arena, before both teams — and all the league officials and all the reporters who are following the finals — pack up and head to Cleveland on Monday. I will be among them.
The forecast is calling for rain.