This is what passes for good news at Citi Field these days: On Friday, all the Mets lost was a baseball game.
For the first time all week, they came through an entire nine innings without a player getting injured and made it through the postgame news conference without having to announce a new addition to the club’s overflowing disabled list.
After all, on Tuesday it was Asdrubal Cabrera going on the disabled list with a sprained thumb. He was joined on Wednesday by Neil Walker (left hamstring tear) and Matt Harvey (scapular injury). Thursday it was Juan Lagares, who broke his thumb diving for a ball in center field.
By contrast, a 7-2 loss to the Washington Nationals and the formidable Max Scherzer seemed more like a shrug of the shoulders than a kick in the ribs.
Before the game, Manager Terry Collins had been asked how he has managed to keep his team’s morale up considering the recent run of injuries.
“I’ve been very lucky,” he said. “We have a good clubhouse. They don’t get down. Certainly, it’s a punch in the gut anytime you look up and you lose good players, but one thing, if you’ve been on this team for the last couple of years or three years, you’re pretty used to key guys going down.
Friday was Steven Matz’s turn to step up after the loss of Harvey, who might be out until August, as scapular injuries generally take four to six weeks for a full recovery.
Matz worked seven innings but allowed three home runs, putting the Mets into a hole too deep to climb out of, at least against Scherzer.
In the space of four third-inning pitches, the Nationals’ lineup gave Scherzer all the runs he needed to ensure a victory. Matt Wieters belted Matz’s first pitch of the inning into the left-field seats, and three pitches later, Michael Taylor did the same, only to right field.
In the sixth, Anthony Rendon belted a two-run home run. The Mets’ bullpen did the rest, with relievers Fernando Salas and Neil Ramirez allowing three ninth-inning runs.
It was Matz’s second start after missing the first two months of the season with left elbow inflammation. In his first, he limited the Atlanta Braves to one run and five hits over seven innings in an 8-1 victory on Saturday.
The Mets’ two runs Friday came on solo shots, one by Jose Reyes, who had not homered since May 1, leading off the eighth, and the other by Jay Bruce leading off the ninth. Scherzer worked eight innings, allowing four hits and striking out 10.
The loss dropped the Mets to third place in the National League East, 10 ½ games behind the Nationals.
Still, it did not seem as dispiriting as the news about Harvey. Before the game, Collins said the team had “no idea” when he might return.
“We talked to our doctors, and they’re saying they’ve got to strengthen his back muscles up, and that will be two to three weeks,” Collins said.
But Harvey’s agent, Scott Boras, who said his clients had included “four or five pitchers” with similar injuries, added that the standard recovery time for a scapular injury was four to six weeks. That would put Harvey’s return closer to August.
On Thursday, the Mets recalled outfielder Brandon Nimmo, a first-round draft pick in 2011, and infielder Matt Reynolds from Class AAA Las Vegas to replace Harvey and Lagares.
Asked what steps he might take to safeguard the healthy bodies in his clubhouse, Collins let out a laugh.
“Bubble Wrap,” he said.