Traces of the bacteria that cause Legionnaires’ disease have been found in the water at a Manhattan police station where an officer who recently fell ill works, the police and health officials said on Sunday.
The police officer, whose name was not released, was recovering from Legionnaires’ disease at a hospital outside the city, while city Health Department workers looked for the source of the contamination discovered at the 23rd Precinct station house on East 102nd Street in East Harlem.
The Health Department began investigating the water at the precinct on Friday night, when it was notified that the officer had been diagnosed with the disease and that the Legionella bacteria that cause it had been found in the police station’s water supply. In a statement on Sunday, the agency said this case of illness was “potentially associated” with the officer’s workplace.
Officers can still work in the building, but the Health Department has advised them to avoid taking showers there, and to use cold water for drinking and for preparing hot beverages and food until the investigation is complete. Hot water has been shut down at the precinct as a precaution, the police said.
“There is no public health risk to the larger community,” the Health Department said in its statement.
Officials did not say when the officer had become sick and received the diagnosis of Legionnaires’ disease, but the investigation began after the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association hired an independent contractor to test the precinct’s water. Preliminary results turned up traces of the Legionella bacteria, officials said, and the Health Department was studying those results and conducting its own tests.
According to the Health Department, most cases of the disease can be traced to complex plumbing systems in which conditions are favorable for Legionella growth, such as hot water tanks and cooling towers like those used in hotels and hospitals. The disease is contracted by breathing in water vapor containing the bacteria, but it is not contagious and can be treated with antibiotics.
Older adults, smokers and people with weakened immune systems are especially vulnerable to the disease, according to the Mayo Clinic. Symptoms occur two to 10 days after a person is infected, and include chills, fever, headache and muscle pain.
At the 23rd Precinct station house, investigators have ruled out a cooling tower that was installed during renovations last month as the source of the bacteria. The cooling tower, which supports the building’s heating and air conditioning system, has not been activated, and the previous tower was shut down in October, the police said.
An outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease in the South Bronx killed 12 people and sickened 128 others in July and August of 2015, the largest outbreak on record in the city, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
In response, the mayor and City Council passed a law to reduce and contain Legionella growth in cooling towers. The law requires building owners to register cooling towers with the Health Department, and to clean and test them quarterly for Legionella. The rule applies to more than 3,500 buildings in the city.