The Supreme Court’s decision to hear arguments on the travel ban is an answer in search of a problem. History since 2001 has taught us that our fear of immigrants is grossly, wildly exaggerated. Just as we have created laws to address nonexistent voter fraud, so too the justices now throw the president a lifeline concerning a travel ban grounded not in statistical confirmation but in bigotry, hatred and intolerance.
The justices want to apply a “bona fide relationship” test to determine which travelers are permitted to travel here. Let those who have suffered the most egregious deprivations know that there are many who find their travails the most compelling, “bona fide” reason to open our hearts and our borders to them. Our relationship with them is bonded not in whom they may know here, but in our common humanity.
The decision by the Supreme Court to allow parts of President Trump’s travel ban to proceed smacks of the favoritism that we saw just before the start of World War II. Because my family and I, refugees from Hitler’s Germany, had relatives living in New York City, we were allowed to immigrate in 1939 to the United States. Yet many German Jews who did not have connections in this country were not so lucky. Most of them never made it and perished in the gas chambers.
Is this a precedent that we should really follow?
Why does the travel ban litigation continue? Isn’t it moot? By its terms, the travel ban is a temporary, 90- to 120-day moratorium on certain travel. The professed purpose was to allow the government time to investigate and upgrade immigration procedures, on an emergency basis, while preventing malefactors from slipping into the country before this work was done.
About 150 days have passed since President Trump signed the first executive order, more time than the government said was needed to implement the necessary upgrades to immigration security. Assuming that the administration was reasonably diligent, shouldn’t the changes have been made by now, rendering the ban unnecessary?
The decision by the Supreme Court on immigration from certain Muslim-majority countries suggests that when interpreting the statute it is inappropriate to consider statements by President Trump on the campaign trail or in his tweets. But the issue is not whether discriminatory statements made in the heat of a presidential contest should determine the validity of a statute, but how those statements will affect the application of the law.
Every statute involves not simply questions of legislative intent but, more important, the application of discretion in its enforcement. A local official who wishes not to jeopardize his or her employment status will undoubtedly feel compelled to apply the law in the light of the president’s consistent and explicit utterances on the subject.
In the case of immigration that means being unable to avoid Mr. Trump’s views on Muslims. When the case comes before it, the court may then fairly consider the president’s consistently unconstitutional approach to migrants based on their religion and the pressure under which officials will be placed to fashion their decisions to fit that design.
LAWRENCE ROSEN, PRINCETON, N.J.
The writer is a professor of anthropology at Princeton and an adjunct professor at Columbia Law School.