An apparent move into mobile telephony by the cable giants Comcast and Charter Communications is bound for crossed wires.
The two companies are in talks with the wireless carrier Sprint that may include a range of options, according to news reports, including the use of airwaves and outright acquisition. Wherever they end up, a tie-up involving the moguls John C. Malone, Brian Roberts and Masayoshi Son is likely to be ungainly.
How these three got to this point is a bit odd. For starters, The Wall Street Journal reported, Sprint entered into a two-month exclusive period for negotiations with Charter, controlled by Mr. Malone, and Comcast, led by the Roberts family. Sprint’s shares popped 6 percent on Tuesday morning.
Charter and Comcast are bound by an unusual pact formed in May to jointly expand their cellular ambitions. The partnership forbids either from making a material investment or acquisition in a wireless outfit for a year without the other’s consent. Comcast rolled out a mobile initiative in April using Verizon’s network, and Charter has similar designs.
Mr. Son, who controls Sprint though Japanese conglomerate SoftBank, has been agitating to do a deal for ages, starting by merging Sprint with T-Mobile U.S. They are the No. 3 and No. 4 mobile carriers in the United States and have been locked in battle over the price-conscious clients of the rivals AT&T and Verizon.
However their discussions proceed, it is hard to imagine the three alpha executives easily coming to any agreement. Mr. Malone is known for whipping up complex structures that involve a maze of tracking stocks and holding companies. Mr. Malone is trying to convince a skeptical Mr. Roberts to buy the troubled Sprint, valued at $65 billon with debt, The Journal reported.
Mr. Roberts, though, could be tempted by the cost savings that a deal would bring. New Street Research estimated as much as $6 billion can be shed annually in network operating and capital expenses. Taxed at roughly 35 percent and capitalized, the current value of savings could reach nearly $40 billion.
With a potential windfall like that on the horizon, even the oldest of dogs might be convinced of a three-headed trick.