Gazpacho.Credit...Gentl and Hyers for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Rebecca Bartoshesky.
 That may seem like an odd way to start a food column, but let me explain.
In 2000, when I was 20, I begged Christopher Lee, the co-chef at Chez Panisse, where I had a job busing tables, to teach me how to cook. As a prerequisite to an apprenticeship, Chris gave me a list of two dozen classic cookbooks. He instructed me to carefully read and cook my way through them. Every night after my shift, still sticky with sweat from loading dirty dishes onto the dumbwaiter, I climbed into the bathtub and read. With their intoxicating prose, writers like Paula Wolfert, Marcella Hazan and Richard Olney transported me to kitchens thousands of miles and many decades away.
On my days off, I cooked, straining to follow each recipe to the letter. Most of the food I cooked was mediocre at best — I was a novice, after all, and made countless mistakes. But when on occasion I succeeded in making something delicious, I figured it was because I’d adhered to the recipe. Good recipes, I thought, were foundational — vital, even — to good cooking.
When eventually I began my kitchen apprenticeship, I expected to find the cooks dutifully referring to the canon of recipes with which I’d just familiarized myself, but they instead used something more abstract. Each day began with a menu meeting, at which Chris would describe his vision for the evening’s meal. He’d recount tales of memorable meals eaten in faraway lands. Like richly detailed headnotes, those stories gave us context and inspiration.
But ingredient lists and instructional steps never followed. When the stories were over, everyone headed into the kitchen and began to cook. They never used measuring cups and only rarely used thermometers or worried about precise cooking times. Yet of course, everything they made tasted extraordinarily delicious.
All we did was taste. We tasted fava beans to decide whether to long-cook them (if they were starchy) or serve them raw with pecorino (if they were tender and sweet). We tasted each new delivery of strawberries to determine which variety should be served unembellished in the fruit bowl. And of course, we tasted every single step of the way as we cooked.
Cooking without recipes wasn’t as hard as I’d feared. I learned to depend on my palate for the ratios and time cues that recipes had offered. One of the first dishes Chris let me cook in the restaurant was gazpacho. I started by tasting every variety of tomato in our storage shed to determine which were the most flavorful. The candy-sweet Sungold cherry tomatoes were the best I’d ever tasted, so I started with those. I tasted the peppers to make sure they were sweet, the cucumbers to ensure they weren’t bitter and the olive oil to be sure it was rich and fruity. And then I began to chop, dice, blend and strain, tasting and adding salt and vinegar as I went along.
I learned that salt and acid work like a seesaw; just when I thought I’d added the right amount of salt, I’d taste the soup and find it needed more vinegar. I learned to inch my way to the edge: The gazpacho should taste seasoned but not salty, tangy but not sour. When I thought I was done, I tasted the soup with Chris to make sure I was on the right track. He told me to add a grain of salt or a drop of vinegar to a few spoonfuls of soup and taste again. This portion tasted better, so we adjusted the entire batch.
Only when the flavors of the soup exploded in my mouth, when I could taste each element separately and yet somehow found the gazpacho to be more than the sum of its parts, did I know I was done.  Chris noticed. He said it was a sign that I was doing my job correctly.
After more than a decade in professional kitchens, I left restaurants several years ago. These days, I teach people how to cook the way I do — guided by flavor. My students regularly spend 20 hours or more in the kitchen with me. I try to teach them that even the most well-written recipe for, say, gazpacho can never take into account the ways in which a tomato that’s lapped each morning and evening by coastal fog will taste completely different from one grown in a hot, inland valley. That even from the same tomato plant, the third harvest of fruit in September will hardly resemble the first crop from several weeks earlier. This is why we have to taste. I watch amateurs learn to trust their palates.
And then, when we arrive at the end of the cooking course, someone inevitably asks for a recipe packet. This used to break my heart. Then I remembered the months, all those years ago, I spent building a foundation by mimicking Paula’s tagines, Marcella’s Bolognese and Richard’s beef daube. Just as recipes had paved a way into the kitchen for me, so they could for my students.
I now make a pact with my students as I hand out recipes: If you promise to use a recipe as a guide rather than a prescription, never to abandon your senses in the kitchen and to discard it when it no longer serves you, then I promise to write the most evocative, delicious and well-tested recipes I can. Who knows? Maybe after you learn to cook to taste, you’ll hate recipes as much as I do.
