ALBANY — The State Legislature has adjourned for the year without coming to an agreement on mayoral control of New York City’s schools, leaving a looming question mark over the chain of command for the nation’s largest public school system and its 1.1 million students.
The members of the State Assembly left the Capitol late Wednesday night, with the Senate following close behind. Neither chamber was due back until 2018, long after the deadline for an extension of mayoral control, which lapses at the end of the month.
Mr. Flanagan went on to blame the Assembly for its posture on mayoral control, but the fault for the lack of an agreement seemed likely to be spread among the many feuding parties in Albany and beyond, including the leaders of the state Senate and Assembly, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, and Mayor Bill de Blasio, both Democrats.
Each played a role in the breakdown: Mr. Flanagan, who demanded more charter schools in exchange for giving Mr. de Blasio an extension; Carl E. Heastie, the Assembly speaker, refused that demand, and said that he would no longer allow mayoral control to be used as a bargaining chip. By the same token, however, Mr. Heastie had linked mayoral control to local tax extensions, a maneuver that galled Republicans.
Mr. de Blasio had pleaded and prodded lawmakers to act — unsuccessfully — while Mr. Cuomo, who prides himself on deal-making, failed to lead the parties to an acceptable agreement.
Mayoral control was the central issue in end-of-session negotiations that had largely been devoid of drama after the state’s budget season — which usually ends in March — dragged on into April. The late budget nonetheless resulted in a variety of deals on contentious issues, including raising the age of criminal responsibility for minors.
That left state leaders few big-ticket items to serve as bargaining tools. Mr. de Blasio stayed away from discussions in Albany, but continued to press his case on the phone and in public rallies.
The mayor urged the leaders to stay in Albany until they reached an agreement — “Lock ‘em all in a room till they get it done,” he said — but by Wednesday evening, that hope evaporated.
The immediate impact of the soon-to-lapse mayoral control was unclear. In 2002, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg won control for seven years, but the policy was not renewed by its deadline in 2009. In that instance, however, little of substance changed: The school board, which had been faulted for its oversight of the system, was reconvened and met just once, for nine minutes. The Legislature soon renewed control, before school started for the 2009-10 term.
This time around, the next steps could be complicated by Mr. de Blasio’s fraught relations with the governor and Mr. Flanagan, both of whom have been backed by charter schools and their supporters. Mr. Cuomo has been in Albany, but if he has exerted any influence, it has been behind closed doors: He remained hidden from sight, offering no comment on the state of negotiations, leaving legislative leaders to offer periodic, and largely uninformative updates. The governor’s office had no immediate comment on the issue of mayoral control.
Mr. Heastie, who leads an Assembly dominated by Democrats and backed by public school interests, is the mayor’s closest ally in Albany. But he has not found common ground in meetings with Mr. Cuomo — who has suggested that charters should be part of a deal — and Mr. Flanagan and Mr. Klein, who form the leadership in the Senate.
Late Wednesday, Mr. Heastie said that he and his Democratic majority had avidly sought an agreement, but wouldn’t bend on charters.
Both chambers in Albany have actually passed bills to extend control: the Assembly granted two years in late May, the Senate offered one-, two-, and five-year deals earlier this month.
But each effectively had poison pills for the opposing chambers, with the Assembly linking the two years to tax extensions — vitally needed by communities around the state — and the Senate including an increase in charters with its promise of control. The stalemate meant neither side got what it wanted: There will be no increase in the number of charter schools, and numerous cities and counties may lose their ability to raise certain taxes that they rely on for their operations.
After the brief lapse in mayoral control in 2009, the Legislature approved a six-year extension for Mr. Bloomberg. But in each of the past two years, the Senate — which is ruled by Republicans and nine renegade Democrats — has given Mr. de Blasio only one year at a time, possibly in retaliation for the mayor’s attempt to elect a Democratic majority in the chamber in 2014.
That effort, like this year’s efforts to extend mayoral control, failed. On Wednesday, Mr. de Blasio seemed ready to castigate the state lawmakers for the lack of action.
“We might be on the verge of a level of Albany dysfunction that actually would set a new record,” he said.
That said, Brian Kolb, the Republican Assembly minority leader, seemed to speak to an Albany truism when he suggested that the Legislature might soon be back — in a special session — to take up mayoral control, regardless of how tired lawmakers were.
