KUTZTOWN, Pa. — There are only a few dozen international students at the medium-size university nestled here in the Berks County hills, where the clacking hooves of horse-drawn Mennonite buggies can be a more familiar sound than a car horn on the local streets.
But on weeknights at 11, the turf field at the center of campus transforms into something like a model United Nations. There, Kutztown students from England, Scotland, South Africa, Australia and Jamaica, along with American players from 22 states, gather to take part in a common affinity: rugby.
Despite the odd practice times, there is nothing ragtag about the Kutztown University rugby team. It crisscrosses the country every year for tournaments, and often wins them. The players take yoga classes and perform community service. Their coach, Gregg Jones, a retired chiropractor and former Marine, enforces a curfew, mandatory study halls and an all-too-serious requirement that players make their beds each morning.
“This is a varsity program,” said Paul Presinzano, the director of Rugby United, the program’s fund-raising arm.
Except, technically, it is not.
Kutztown rugby is a club, meaning it is not run out of the university’s athletic department, not provided access to varsity support staff members or trainers, and not governed under the wide umbrella of the N.C.A.A., the organization synonymous with intercollegiate athletics.
Yet, last Saturday and Sunday, Kutztown was one of 24 teams — most of them clubs — competing in the eighth annual Collegiate Rugby Championship at Talen Energy Stadium, home of the Philadelphia Union of Major League Soccer. More than 27,000 fans showed up for the weekend games — exceeding the attendance at 10 college football bowl games last year. And the event was televised nationally by NBC’s sports networks.
Yet there was a conspicuous absence at the college showcase: the N.C.A.A. Rugby, considered one of the fastest-growing sports in America, is a prime example of the proliferation of club sports at many universities that otherwise fail to compete on the increasingly tilted playing fields of college athletics. In 2015, all but 24 Division I athletic departments broke even or lost money, according to the N.C.A.A.’s most recent revenue report.
Kutztown, which plays other sports in the N.C.A.A.’s Division II and boasts a football stadium named after its most famous alumnus, the N.F.L. Hall of Famer Andre Reed, has found that certain club sports can be more vital than it ever anticipated. And in rugby’s success, a glimpse is offered into a future for college sports outside the N.C.A.A. bubble.
“Rugby has put us on the map,” said Kenneth Hawkinson, the Kutztown president.
It has done so on a shoestring budget that is made up largely of fund-raising by passionate alums like Presinzano, who set a goal of raising $100,000 in 2017. (The team is about halfway there.) The university supports the program, which has more than 50 players, with a modest contribution — $20,000, through its department of recreational services — and players pay dues of $200 each semester, which covers their uniforms and travel bags.
Jones, who goes by Doc, is a volunteer, as has been the case since he founded the program in 1986. At the time, college rugby was known for its mostly fraternity party-boy culture, heavy on the drinking and hooliganism. Jones’s team was composed of whoever was already on campus and had expressed even a passing interest.
“We were constantly coaching kids who never saw a rugby ball,” he said.
Now, Jones and his assistant coach, Larry Chester, scour the world for talent, starting with prospects as young as 13. And their recruiting pitch — come play for Kutztown — does not get as many raised eyebrows as it used to.
There are two N.C.A.A. Division I men’s rugby programs (California and Army) and a smattering of others across Division II, Division III and the lower-profile National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics. Other colleges, like Penn State, give men’s rugby a quasi-varsity status, with paid coaches and access to trainers and support staff in the athletic department.
But Jack Clark, the longtime coach at Cal, which has won 27 national championships since 1980, said the lines between varsity, quasi-varsity and club teams were becoming significantly blurred.
B. David Ridpath, an associate professor of sports administration at Ohio University, writes about the growth of so-called hybrid models of club sports in a coming book. The teams are affiliated with the university for marketing but do not have the connection to eligibility and “all the things I think are more problems than actually educational benevolence, as we claim,” he said.
The autonomy experienced by the clubs is not unlike that which the so-called Power Five conferences sought when they threatened secession from the N.C.A.A. in 2014, a move that won them at least partial self-governance. Though Jones demands that players maintain a solid grade point average and conduct themselves in a respectable manner, the club is technically student run and student led — and thus free to ignore the N.C.A.A. rule book.
Ridpath, a vocal critic of the N.C.A.A. who advocates protecting academic integrity from the commercialization of college sports, said it was a perfect example of a self-sustainable athletic ecosystem independent of the governing body.
There is, indeed, a viable commercial element. Tracey Thompson, executive director of the Kutztown University foundation, said the passion and support from former players had been strong enough to prompt a spinoff outlet, Rugby United, which raises money for the club team. Rugby merchandise is sold in the university bookstore, and, with each game from the college championships broadcast on national television, Kutztown’s national profile is growing.
“It is moneymaking for the university,” said Hawkinson, the Kutztown president. “Not only with the tuition that the students pay, but also the money raised” thanks to alumni support for the school.
From 1986 to 1998, Jones said, he paid for most of the program’s needs out of his pocket. But in recent years, the program proved to the university that it was a worthwhile investment.
“The university saw the value in really investing in a club that could recruit internationally and all over the country,” said Amy Sandt, Kutztown’s director of recreational services.
The team’s success has not hurt, either. Kutztown lost to Cal in the national title game in 2014 and 2015, and produced a member of the USA Rugby team that played in the 2015 World Cup (Niku Kruger).
Dan Payne, the chief executive of USA Rugby, has experienced this firsthand. When he was the coach at Life University, a small N.A.I.A. school outside Atlanta, he established a program that could hold its own on the national level and attract international talent.
The Running Eagles reached the final of the C.R.C. this year, where they lost to Cal. The competition between clubs, he said, is raising every team’s level of play.
For the most part, the Collegiate Rugby Championship looks like any N.C.A.A. tournament, with sponsors and vendors selling $30 T-shirts. Major conference club teams like U.C.L.A., Wisconsin and Clemson were represented this year, but so were clubs like Arkansas State, St. Mary’s of California, Lindenwood from Missouri and American International College from Massachusetts.
There was a concurrent 16-team women’s championship. The N.C.A.A. considers women’s rugby an emerging sport, especially for colleges looking to comply with Title IX deficiencies.
There was also one noticeable difference: Alcohol sales, prohibited at many N.C.A.A. sites, were strong (Irish whiskey a particular favorite).
United World Sports, a company based in White Plains, N.Y., runs the event, charging between $70 and $117 for a two-day pass. It would have been a lot to ask fans a few years ago. Not anymore.
“We’re at the right place at the right time,” the company’s president, Jonathan First, said, expressing relief that his company’s long-term investment in rugby was starting to pay off.
The teams play rugby sevens, a more open style of the sport that was reintroduced into the Olympics for 2016 after a 92-year hiatus. Featuring seven players to a side and seven-minute halves, it is fast, frenetic and — its promoters hope — more appealing to younger generations than the more physical, more plodding version of the traditional 15-on-15 game.
The action is almost nonstop, and for the uninitiated, it can be hard to follow. As Kutztown was running up the score against Tennessee on Saturday, an administrator was trying to toss T-shirts to fans in the stands after each try.
“We’re going to run out of shirts!” Thompson said.
Jones had said beforehand that this was one of the best teams he had coached. Though comparisons could be made to the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament, Kutztown no longer felt like a Cinderella when it faced a powerhouse like Cal, which beat Kutztown’s Golden Bears in the quarterfinals on Sunday.
David Snead, a Kutztown senior from Oxford, England, summed up how things had changed in the just the few years since he arrived.
That scope is widening.