These days, the preferred insult is a new addition to the canon: “snowflake.” It is simultaneously emasculating and infantilizing, suggesting fragility but also an inflated sense of a person’s own specialness and a naïve embrace of difference. It evokes the grade-school art classes in which children scissor up folded pieces of construction paper and learn that every snowflake is unique, and every person is, too. But in the Trump era, it feels as if the classroom bully has tipped over the craft table and is wielding the scissors triumphantly in the air.
This derogatory “snowflake” has its roots in a 1996 novel, “Fight Club,” by Chuck Palahniuk, whose narrator, beaten down into a shell of a man by his office-drone job and cookie-cutter condominium, finds himself by joining an underground men’s street-fighting cult. Club members repeat a mantra that begins: “You are not a beautiful and unique snowflake.” A 2005 afterword by Palahniuk said the book “presented a new social model for men to share their lives,” one that would give them “the structure and roles and rules of a game” but not be “too touchy-feely.” In the years since, a similar model has flourished in the online “manosphere,” a constellation of men’s-rights activist sites, pick-up-artist guides and bodybuilding forums that serves as a caldron for far-right politics.
These alignments between politics and gender are not natural or static: They have shifted, time and again, with changes in America’s society and economy. According to E. Anthony Rotundo, the author of the 1994 book “American Manhood,” colonial men were actually respected for a “communal manhood” that prioritized care for others, including children. It was later in the nation’s history that the ideal turned toward individual achievements and, eventually, toward toughness, competitiveness and symbolic displays of virility.
Even recently, the ideal of traditional conservative masculinity has still been mediated by notes of femininity: a manly man who was soft around the edges, especially to women and children. Reagan was a grandfather figure; George W. Bush a “compassionate conservative.” Former Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger appeared in countless films as a muscled killing machine, but he also humanized his image with movies that placed him in classically feminine roles, like “Kindergarten Cop” and “Junior,” in which he is actually pregnant. These days, the flagship model of the old-school G.O.P. man may be Vice President Mike Pence — an earnest patriarch who calls his wife “Mother” and won’t dine alone with other women.
With President Trump, however, the masculine archetype seems to have regressed. Trump is less the strict father than the petulant child: a boyish figure who rejects advice, shirks discipline and refuses to be beholden to behavioral norms. He is rarely even seen as the patriarch of his own family; as Melania Trump said after he was caught boasting about assaults on tape, “Sometimes I say I have two boys at home.” His supporters among the so-called alt-right, too, have, in addition to embracing racist views and conspiracy theories, worked to scrub away the sober adult trappings of conservative masculinity, branding them as compromised and conformist.
Talk of “snowflakes” — like “triggering” and “safe space” — conflates the school campus with progressive politics generally, as if the whole worldview were suspended in childhood. It also revives the idea of a culturewide wussification that must be fought with a return to aggression, physicality and ego. This is what the insult argues for — a rough-and-tumble world in which raw power reigns and nobody ever asks for help or complains of ill treatment. This pose isn’t merely aesthetic: There are those who truly believe that set free from etiquette, care and cooperation, they would prevail over others. The alt-right has even picked up the word “anti-fragile” and whipped it into a political strategy — embracing chaos and conflict because they think they’re better suited to thrive in those conditions than weaker people are.
Today’s tough-guy posturing seems rooted, paradoxically, in threat and fear: fear of defeat, fear of lost status and fear that society is growing increasingly ill suited to tough-guy posturing in the first place. The narrator of “Fight Club,” source of that “snowflake” mantra, was a delusional man coping with modernity by inventing a hypermasculine alter-ego, imagining himself as the man-cult leader Tyler Durden. But making an entire alternate masculine identity is a lot of work. It’s always much easier to just call other people wimps and snowflakes — and hope they’ll be intimidated enough to melt away.