For Freeform, the Walt Disney Company cable network known as ABC Family before its makeover last year, this frothy mash-up of “Sex in the City,” “Girls” and “Central Park West” is its most ambitious attempt to depict the millennial viewers the network was built for. If only they will put down their phones — or maybe pick up their phones — long enough to watch the show.
A scripted series based on Cosmopolitan had long been a dream for Joanna Coles, who was editor in chief of the magazine before ascending to the position of chief content officer of that title’s parent company, Hearst Magazines. Ms. Coles — who has been a guest judge and mentor on Lifetime’s design competition show, “Project Runway,” and appears on E!’s “So Cosmo” docu-series — first helped develop a Cosmo series as a comedy in 2014 and as a drama in 2015, both for NBC. Neither went forward. But when a former NBC executive moved to Freeform, the concept was rejiggered and eventually picked up by the cable network.
Ms. Coles is not just an executive producer of the show; she’s also the inspiration for a character, the editor of Scarlet, played by Melora Hardin (“The Office,” “Transparent”) as a bracing update on Meryl Streep’s ferocious, high-heeled taskmaster in “The Devil Wears Prada.” Ms. Hardin’s approach is kinder if not exactly gentler, and she pushes the lead characters to move out of their comfort zones.
“The Bold Type” fits perfectly into Freeform’s evolving programming strategy away from polite, inoffensive family shows (like “Melissa and Joey”) to bigger-budget, glossier shows aimed at millennials, and is particularly welcome because the network’s sultry, soapy drama “Pretty Little Liars” just finished its seven-season run.
Freeform’s first big shows after the rebranding were the supernatural drama “Shadowhunters” in 2016 and the sci-fi thriller “Beyond” in early 2017. In a first for a Disney cable network, Freeform made the 10-episode season of “Beyond” available on digital platforms and on Hulu the same day the series had its premiere on cable.
Freeform immediately renewed “Beyond” for a second season, which is in production now. “In all of the areas we measure — intent to view, would recommend to a friend, how much you like the show — the people who binge-watched liked it more,” Mr. Ascheim said.
There are no superheroes or special effects in “The Bold Type,” and the network is airing the 10-episode series weekly instead of all at once. But Freeform sees breakthrough potential in the new series’ engagement with social issues and the digital mirror it holds up for a younger audience.
