Soon after, Ms. Smith wrote a short poem, “Humor,” and showed it to her teacher, who urged her to keep writing.
More than 30 years later, Ms. Smith has published three volumes of poetry and collected some of the field’s most prestigious awards, including the Pulitzer Prize.
Now the Library of Congress has named Ms. Smith its new poet laureate, the nation’s highest honor in that field. With the appointment, announced on Wednesday, Ms. Smith will take on a role held by some of the country’s most revered poets, among them Rita Dove, Louise Glück, Billy Collins, W. S. Merwin, Charles Simic and most recently, Juan Felipe Herrera.
Ms. Smith, 45, said she planned to use the position to be a literary evangelist of sorts, by visiting small towns and rural areas to hold poetry events.
Ms. Smith is the 22nd poet to take on the position, which dates to 1937 and is officially titled poet laureate consultant in poetry. Carla Hayden, the Librarian of Congress, said that she had been drawn to Ms. Smith’s work because of the way her poems blended personal observations and experiences with weightier, universal themes.
Toi Derricotte, a poet and chancellor on the board of the Academy of American Poets, said Ms. Smith’s commitment to poetry organizations like Cave Canem, and her skill as a creative writing teacher, made her well suited to being an ambassador for the form.
Ms. Smith often plays with genre in her work and says it serves as “a distancing device.” Some of the verses in her 2007 collection, “Duende,” were inspired by westerns. Her 2011 collection, “Life on Mars,” which won the Pulitzer, is inflected with dystopian themes and tropes from science fiction. Many of the poems are meditations on cosmic affairs, like the incomprehensible vastness of space and humanity’s efforts to understand our place in the universe, but the collection is also anchored in the personal. The escapist, fantastical themes in the collection are blended with intimate reflections: mournful, elegiac verses about the death of her father, an engineer who worked on the Hubble Space Telescope.
Other poems in the collection are pointedly political. In a surreal section of “They May Love All That He Has Chosen and Hate All That He Has Rejected,” a long poem about racism and bias, the victims of hate crimes write postcards to their assailants.
Ms. Smith was born in Massachusetts and grew up in Fairfield, Calif., the youngest of five children. Her father worked as an engineer at a nearby Air Force base. Her mother, who was a teacher, died of cancer when Ms. Smith was just out of college.
Writing always came naturally to Ms. Smith. In elementary school, she read Dickinson and Mark Twain, and began to think of herself as a writer. As she developed her craft over the years, she drew inspiration from work by Elizabeth Bishop, Seamus Heaney and Rita Dove, among others.
She graduated from Harvard with a degree in English and Afro-American studies. She received her M.F.A. from Columbia University and published her first collection, “The Body’s Question,” in 2003.
Lately, Ms. Smith, who is the director of the creative writing program at Princeton University, has been working on a libretto for an opera composed by Gregory Spears, about the legacy of slavery in the South. “We live with this history and in some ways we are responsible for attending to it, even though it can be taxing,” she said.
History is also a recurring theme in her forthcoming collection, “Wade in the Water,” which Graywolf Press will release next spring.
Though Ms. Smith often takes on current social and political issues in her poetry, she doesn’t plan to use her position as poet laureate to advocate social causes, she said. Instead, she aims to be an advocate for the medium itself and to instill the same awe she felt when she read Dickinson’s “I’m Nobody! Who Are You?” as a girl.
