Good morning on this muggy Monday.
The NYC Pride celebrations continue this week, leading up to the march on Sunday.
Thousands of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender New Yorkers and their supporters are expected to attend the march, which will led by four grand marshals: Brooke Guinan, an activist, transgender woman and New York City firefighter; Krishna Stone, the director of community relations at Gay Men’s Health Crisis, a support center that fights AIDS; representatives from the American Civil Liberties Union; and Geng Le, a Chinese gay rights activist.
Mr. Geng, whose real name is Ma Baoli, is a former police officer who set up one of China’s first gay advice and networking websites, and later created Blued, which is one of the country’s most popular gay dating apps.
He was selected to be a grand marshal in recognition of his successful use of the internet to raise awareness among China’s gay community and of his passion for L.G.B.T. rights.
We caught up with Mr. Geng on Skype as he prepared to visit New York.

Afraid to talk about his sexuality with others, Mr. Geng began researching gay life online. He said his discovery of more positive depictions in Western culture led him to create Danlan.org, a website intended to let gay Chinese citizens talk freely with each other.
What is it like being L.G.B.T. in China today?
“L.G.B.T. people are much happier than when I was young,” Mr. Geng said. 
Things have gotten better since, Mr. Geng said, but the situation remains challenging. 
What do you think of gay life in New York City?
He also said he had noticed that gay New Yorkers went to bars during the week, often wearing work clothes. Gay night life in Beijing, he said, is mostly limited to the weekend.
What do you hope for the future of gay life in China?
“There are still many challenges we are facing now,” Mr. Geng said, citing several problems. Television shows and movies with L.G.B.T. themes are not allowed. School textbooks still teach falsehoods about L.G.B.T. people. And the H.I.V. infection rate in China is a concern.
It looks like the skies have a case of the Monday blues.
A flash-flood warning is in place for the afternoon, with storms expected in the evening.
Even if the rains hold off, expect another humid, overcast day, with a high near 83.
• Scoreboard: Mets exile Nationals, 5-1. Athletics outpace Yankees, 4-3. New York Red Bulls trample Philadelphia Union, 2-0.
• Mets at Dodgers, 10:10 p.m. (SNY).
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until June 25.
This spring has seen some big news in city bathrooms.
First, there was a sumptuous remodel in Bryant Park.
Then there was the brouhaha about the $2 million Brooklyn bathroom that, after seven years, has still not been renovated.
Now, you can pay a visit to Prospect Park’s new composting restroom facilities — the first of their kind in a city park.
“It looks like a normal restroom, with normal toilets,” said Deborah Kirschner, the assistant vice president of marketing and communications for the Prospect Park Alliance, a nonprofit that manages the park alongside the city. “But they work a bit differently,” she added.
Waste is transported to the basement, where solids are separated from urine and collected in three large bins where worms and bacteria get to work composting the remains. The process uses 97 percent less water than a normal toilet.
New York State does not currently allow the use of human compost in agriculture, Ms. Kirschner said, but there’s plenty of time to consider that problem: It will take 10 years for the waste to be ready for use.
The new toilets open to the public this afternoon.
New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.
