HARRISBURG, Pa. — A judge on Friday sentenced three former Pennsylvania State University officials, including a former president, to short jail terms followed by home confinement for their roles in the child molestation scandal that rocked the university.
In March, a jury found Graham B. Spanier, the former president, guilty of one misdemeanor count of endangering the welfare of a child, and not guilty of two other charges. His lawyers have said he will appeal the conviction, and they argued for a sentence of probation rather than jail time.
The officials were charged for failing to go to law enforcement after being told in 2001 that a former assistant football coach, Jerry Sandusky, had been seen molesting a boy in a locker room shower. The officials denied that they were told at the time that the episode in the shower was overtly sexual.
Mr. Sandusky went on to assault several other minors, and in 2012, he was convicted of 45 counts of sexual abuse. He was sentenced to 30 to 60 years in prison.
It is very rare for prosecutors to try to hold university leaders criminally liable for the misconduct of others, and the case is all the more remarkable for involving one of the nation’s most prominent universities, and one of its most vaunted football programs.
It has been a stunning downfall for Mr. Spanier, 68, who had spoken publicly about his own history of being abused as a child by his father, who beat him severely. He served for 16 years as president of Penn State, until he was forced out in 2011, and had earned a reputation as a skilled, energetic administrator who sometimes went too far in stifling criticism of the university.
Laura Ditka, the deputy state attorney general who was the lead prosecutor in the case, said Mr. Spanier had chosen to protect his and Penn State’s reputations, rather than protect children. “That is inexcusable,” she said.
The case also badly damaged the reputation of Joe Paterno, the revered head football coach, who was accused of knowing about allegations against Mr. Sandusky. He was fired in 2011, after 45 years, and died a few months later.
The university has paid tens of millions of dollars to settle lawsuits filed by Mr. Sandusky’s victims, and the total could eventually exceed $100 million. Mr. Spanier has also sued the university.
Gary Schultz, formerly a senior vice president of the university, and Tim Curley, a former athletic director, were charged along with Mr. Spanier. They pleaded guilty to related charges and testified at the trial of Mr. Spanier, who refused a plea deal.
Mr. Spanier’s lawyers had argued that he should not get jail time, in part because of health problems. Prosecutors said he should receive a penalty in the upper part of the allowable range for the conviction, which carries a maximum sentence of one year.
Judge Boccabella sentenced Mr. Spanier to four to 12 months’ confinement, with at least two months of that in jail followed by home confinement, and a $7,500 fine. He sentenced Mr. Curley to seven to 23 months, with at least three months in jail, and a $5,000 fine; and Mr. Schultz to six to 23 months, with at least two months in jail, and a $5,000 fine. In addition, he imposed two years’ probation on all three men.
The judge said he was not convinced that Mr. Spanier was as culpable as the other two.
Mr. Spanier, who arrived at the courthouse holding hands with his wife, Sandra, remained impassive throughout, and he and his lawyers declined to answer questions as they left. But Mr. Curley and Mr. Schultz made emotional appeals for leniency before the sentences were handed down.
“It sickens me to think that I might have played a part in children’s suffering,” Mr. Schultz said.