DUBLIN — A Protestant paramilitary leader and police informant from Belfast pleaded guilty to more than 200 terrorist crimes on Friday, including five murders. The plea was the first step in a legal process that could expose past collusion between the police and loyalist terrorists in Northern Ireland during the years of sectarian conflict known as the Troubles.
Gary Haggarty, 45, a former leader of the Ulster Volunteer Force in the Mount Vernon area of Belfast, appeared in Laganside Court on Friday to enter his plea, which covered crimes committed from 1991 to 2007. He has been cooperating with the police for more than seven years, the authorities said, giving 1,100 interviews whose transcripts run to 23,000 pages. During this period, he is believed to have been living in southern England.
The five murders — of four Catholic men and one Protestant man, who was handcuffed to a railing and beaten to death — each carry a life sentence. But the court is expected to reduce Mr. Haggarty’s prison time significantly if he provides testimony against other members of his group and about any collusion between the group and officers of the counterterrorist Special Branch of the province’s former police force, the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
He is scheduled to appear in court for sentencing in September, when the judge will establish the minimum number of years he must serve of his life sentences. It is possible that, having already spent some time in custody, he could walk free.
Niall Murphy, a lawyer representing the families of some of Mr. Haggarty’s victims, said it was traumatic for the families to sit in court on Friday and hear Mr. Haggarty plead guilty to the murders, knowing his sentence could be lenient.
But the plea deal will be beneficial, Mr. Murphy said, if it reveals the extent to which Mr. Haggarty, who was a paid informant for the Royal Ulster Constabulary throughout the period, was committing murders and other crimes with the knowledge, consent, protection or encouragement of the authorities.
The Ulster Volunteer Force is the oldest and most brutally prolific of the Protestant paramilitary groups in Northern Ireland. Along with other loyalist groups like the Ulster Defense Association, the Ulster Volunteer Force responded to the Irish Republican Army’s violent campaign to end British rule by attacking the Catholic minority from which the I.R.A. drew support. The resulting strife drew in the British Army and security services, as well as the police.
At least 3,500 people were killed in the conflict between 1969 and 1998, when the Good Friday agreement effectively ended the bloodshed. At least 485 of those are believed to have been killed by the Ulster Volunteer Force or its offshoots.
In the later years of the Troubles, when Mr. Haggarty came to prominence, many loyalist groups had descended into drug dealing, organized crime and vicious internal feuds.
The Special Branch, which was responsible for counterterrorism intelligence, has long been accused of allowing some loyalist informants to continue committing terrorist crimes, including the murder of innocent civilians, that the police could have prevented.
After the 1998 peace agreement, the Royal Ulster Constabulary, which was mainly Protestant, was disbanded, and a new, more diverse Police Service of Northern Ireland was organized to take its place. But attempts to investigate the old Special Branch have been rebuffed by its former members.
In 2007, the province’s police ombudsman, Nuala O’Loan, reported that many retired Special Branch officers had refused to assist her inquiry into allegations of collusion, or had provided false or misleading information. Important evidence, including logs and witness statements, was missing from official police files, she said. And she identified cases in which police informants who were arrested in connection with terrorist crimes were interrogated in ways that ensured they would not be prosecuted.
“These interviews were a sham,” Ms. O’Loan’s report concluded.
In the absence of truthful testimony from former insiders, she said, it was impossible to bring charges against any former Royal Ulster Constabulary officers. But Mr. Haggarty’s cooperation could change that.