The Stars and Stripes. Fireworks. Apple pie. Podcasts?
O.K., so we don’t necessarily think of the programs that distract from our tedious commutes, that accompany us as we run errands and prepare meals, as a staple of American life. But maybe we should. After all, podcasts are a homegrown medium, one of the newest ways for Americans to share stories that define us.
Below, we’ve gathered episodes that feel thematically appropriate for the Fourth of July. Some of them cover iconically American subjects, like ballgames, fried food, guns and cars. Others are historical or political, or just tell us a little bit about where we’ve been and where we may be going. Hopefully, you’ll find something on this list you can enjoy while trapped in traffic over the holiday, whether you’re feeling stirringly patriotic or just a little bit bored.
If you accept the premise that “This American Life” succeeds in offering meaningful snapshots of, well, our American life, then you’ll understand why it was difficult to stick to one Fourth of July episode. We settled on two.
The first, “Guns,” contains several vignettes, most of which try to bridge the gap between the feelings of love or fear that guns arouse in so many people. The historian Sarah Vowell’s story of bonding with her father over building a gun is not to be missed.
The other episode, “Cars,” is nearly 75 minutes long, focused on one compelling story: a Jeep dealership that will receive a huge cash bonus if its salesmen manage to persuade their customers to buy 129 cars.
American history is filled with embellishments, exaggerations and outright fabrications. On “Stuff You Missed in History Class,” Tracy V. Wilson and Holly Frey take a second look at an event that they say should have been called “the minor Boston kerfuffle with a few unfortunate casualties.” Just one of the many tidbits that emerge: accusations that a British soldier’s failing to pay for his wig stoked the flames that led to the fighting. The whole episode makes for a brisk history lesson that never feels dry or repetitive.
Baseball, hot dogs and yelling — three quintessentially American things — merge beautifully in this “Planet Money” episode about baseball vendors, those restless souls who spend their summers hawking snacks and beer. The show introduces us to Fenway Park’s own Jose Magrass, a veteran salesman who considers himself the best of the Boston ballpark’s vendors.
His competitive strategies, and the efforts of a younger rival to catch up, make this one of many “Planet Money” episodes that go beyond the raw economics of the story to gesture at something more joyous.
The food writer Besha Rodell, who was born in Australia but fell in love with the American South, takes a tour of the Cracker Barrel chain, which she calls “perhaps the country’s leading definer of Southern food culture.” As she points out, selling nostalgia is tricky in the region, given its long history of racial injustice, and Cracker Barrel has at times proven itself to be an emblem of the South in less-than-flattering ways. Still, she finds reasons to admire the restaurant and what it stands for, even as she takes a hard look at its flaws.
The inaugural episode of John Dickerson’s podcast contains one of the show’s better stories: the famed “Nashua Moment” in which Ronald Reagan showed his mettle to voters by lashing out at a moderator at a New Hampshire debate in 1980.
Mr. Dickerson, the host of “Face the Nation” on CBS, relies on firsthand accounts from the scene to grant insight into one of the more storied moments in presidential campaign history, and his enthusiasm imbues the tale of the future president’s outburst with fresh excitement.
“More Perfect” is a podcast about the law, which to many people might seem like a good reason to avoid it. But the show’s selling point is its ability to trace some of the country’s most impactful Supreme Court decisions back to the human stories that informed them.
“The Imperfect Plaintiffs” tells the stories of two cases that had the potential to change civil rights in the United States. Throughout, the episode avoids any hint of partisan rhetoric, letting the parties tell their own stories and, in turn, providing a window into the process through which law is shaped.
Reporting from Afghanistan in the early 2000s, the journalist Scott Carrier was assisted by a young translator named Najibullah Niazi, who had learned English by watching American movies over and over. Years later, when Mr. Niazi’s life was endangered by some of his work, Mr. Carrier helped him apply to Utah Valley University. In this episode, Mr. Carrier explores Mr. Niazi’s transition to the United States, and in his subdued, almost casual storytelling, manages to stumble upon some profound insights about the nature of freedom.
On “Song Exploder,” musicians take apart their songs to show fans how they were built. But in this episode, the indie-rock artist Mitski pays special attention to the lyrics of her 2016 anthem, “Your Best American Girl.” The track is an ode of unbelonging, a heartbreakingly emotional testament to feeling like an outsider. For many, that feeling is essential to the American experience, and Mitski’s description of the events that inspired her song make this episode feel profound, far weightier than a simple discussion about musical mechanics.
This episode of “State of the Re:Union” — a series that usually tells stories of specific locations in the United States — trains its attention on Bayard Rustin, a gay, black Quaker who helped guide the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. toward nonviolent resistance tactics. The show’s host, Al Letson, explains that he was mystified, upon learning about Mr. Rustin, that he had never before heard of such an important figure. The show is dedicated not only to Mr. Rustin’s life but to discovering why someone so significant has remained so anonymous.
