How long can you play the seven different D notes on the piano — without it being boring?
If anyone is suited to take on that question, it’s the pianist R. Andrew Lee, who has developed a reputation as an interpreter of extremely — O.K., almost unbelievably — long, sparse contemporary music. By 2014, when he first approached “The Four Pillars Appearing From the Equal D Under Resonating Apparitions of the Eternal Process in the Midwinter Starfield,” the composer Randy Gibson’s 210-minute, D-saturated work, Mr. Lee had already recorded Dennis Johnson’s five-hour “November,” from 1959. He then released a well-received program of radically quiet works by Eva-Maria Houben, a central figure of the Wandelweiser composers’ collective.
As is sometimes the case with outwardly unvaried Minimalist music, the texture emerges from the overtones, the frequencies that sound above fundamental notes (in this case, those seven Ds on the piano). Mr. Gibson’s electronic design for the piece highlights these naturally occurring acoustic phenomena, making their ghostly quality more easily perceived. By recording his pianist’s playing in real time, and feeding the resonating notes into a laptop hooked up to speakers, Mr. Gibson is able to amplify a series of overtone relationships, pushing them back into the concert hall as the piece very, very gradually progresses.
Mr. Lee said in an interview that in an early part of the work, “Establishing,” the piano’s middle D gave him “these two particular overtones that just dance back and forth,” creating “a wonderful little melody above the single strike of a note.” During the section’s higher D notes, Mr. Gibson’s electronic filters respond with a chirping realization of the overtones, evoking a maniacally picked string instrument.
Nearly midway through the work’s penultimate section — the hourlong “Roaring” — Mr. Lee’s journey to a low D results in one of the piano’s most dramatic interactions with the electronic setup. With Mr. Gibson’s laptop producing sampled callbacks to frequencies highlighted earlier in the performance, Mr. Lee’s move to this particular D reveals one of the work’s most arresting — and, yes, roaring — overtone clouds.
Raised in Boulder, Colo. (he writes on his website of “traveling into the high mountains to look at the stars and the Milky Way and meditate on the expanses of life”), Mr. Gibson spent two weeks in an undergraduate music program there before realizing he wanted to pursue a less traditional educational path. He moved to New York in 2001 and since 2003 has studied with the composer La Monte Young, one of the founders of Minimalism, and the visual artist and musician Marian Zazeela. Whether acoustic or electronic in nature, Mr. Young’s compositions often employ unconventional “just intonation” tunings and extended durations. Like Mr. Young and Ms. Zazeela’s collaborative installations, Mr. Gibson’s live performances tend to involve dreamy, meditative visual accompaniment.
Mr. Gibson and “The Four Pillars” don’t require a piano; his use of electronic filters has allowed him to produce his preferred tonal relationships using other instruments, too. At a recent concert at the Wild Project in Manhattan, the percussion trio Tigue used the “Four Pillars” tuning, playing tam-tam gongs that were hooked up to Mr. Gibson’s electronic design. Amy Garapic, a member of the ensemble, said in an interview that reading the work’s instructions on the page was one thing, and realizing its goals in a live setting was something else entirely.
