Tony DiCicco, who coached the United States women’s soccer team to pioneering victories in 1996, at the Summer Olympics in Atlanta, and in 1999, at the World Cup, died on Monday at his home in Wethersfield, Conn. He was 68.
DiCicco (pronounced de-CHEEK-oh) coached with a calm demeanor and was popular with his players because he welcomed their suggestions and maintained an ebullient approach. His mother — named Welcome because her parents had three sons before she was born — played an influential role in his appreciation of women’s sports.
In 1996, as the inaugural Olympic tournament for women’s soccer approached, DiCicco made a switch in the team’s defensive alignment. He also listened when his players told him they had felt overtrained and fatigued during the 1995 World Cup in Sweden, when they finished a disappointing third.
The United States defeated China, 2-1, to win the first Olympic gold medal in women’s soccer before a record crowd of 76,489. The American women also won gold in basketball and softball at the Atlanta Games. Those victories have been widely viewed as the accelerant in a greater appreciation of women’s team sports in the United States.
The Olympic tournament also convinced players and organizers that the 1999 Women’s World Cup should be played in large football stadiums across the United States. It would become the largest sporting event ever held for women, with the epic final against China drawing 90,185 fans to the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif.
There was enormous pressure on the United States to win, but DiCicco insisted on seeing the tournament as an opportunity, not a burden.
DiCicco’s coaching style was summarized in an aphorism attributed to Hamm: “Coach us like men, treat us like women.” As he explained it, the women on the national team wanted to be pushed and challenged like all elite athletes, but they did not want a coach yelling at them or singling anyone out for criticism in front of others.
The World Cup final against China ended 0-0 after regulation and overtime, extending to penalty kicks. DiCicco then made two important decisions that were as much psychological as tactical.
His instinct was correct. Chastain expertly took the kick with her left foot, won the game and ripped her jersey off in jubilant celebration.
Anthony D. DiCicco Jr. was born on Aug. 5, 1948, in Hartford and lived most of his life in nearby Wethersfield, Conn. His father owned a car radiator business. His mother worked as an engineering associate at a manufacturing company.
He is survived by his wife, Diane, and four sons, Anthony, Andrew, Alex and Nicholas.
Tony DiCicco became an all-American goalkeeper at Springfield College in Massachusetts, played professional soccer for five years and, in 1973, played briefly for the men’s national team.
He was the goalkeepers coach for the women’s national team when it won the inaugural women’s World Cup in 1991, and he became head coach in 1994. In 2001, he played a key role in the start of women’s professional soccer in the United States, becoming the chief operating officer, and later the commissioner, of the short-lived Women’s United Soccer Association.
