Instead of bringing the trees to town, The New York Times Company and the Kimberly-Clark Corporation brought a town to the trees.
In the 1920s, to ensure a steady supply of newsprint for The Times and business for Kimberly-Clark, makers of Kleenex, the companies dammed the Mattagami River at Smoky Falls, amid northern Ontario’s boundless ocean of black spruce, poplar, tamarack and birch; harnessed the river’s power through four gigantic turbines; forged a 50-mile railroad; constructed an enormous mill; and leased the cutting rights to 4,300 square miles of boreal forest — an area twice the size of Prince Edward Island.
Their $30 million investment, or about $400 million today, did not stop there.
They developed the tiny settlement of Kapuskasing (kapus-KAYS-ing) into a full-fledged company town along the radiant concentric lines of a garden city. It had a hospital and a community clubhouse; riverfront parkland; curling and skating rinks; a public school for 400 students; apartment buildings and hundreds of new houses; paved streets; power, water and sewer systems; and a hotel worthy of a princess and her prince. Elizabeth and Philip, to be exact.
“A city dropped into the midst of Canada’s north woods,” the Times correspondent Russell Owen marveled in 1931. Mr. Owen had traveled across Antarctica and wasn’t easily impressed.
Thousands of tons of newsprint left Kapuskasing each year, much of it bound for the clamorous loading docks of The Times’s headquarters off Times Square. Each roll was capped by a label with the silhouette of a spruce branch and the name of the joint venture, Spruce Falls Power and Paper Company.
The people of Kapuskasing had a different name for the company: Uncle Spruce.
“Everybody was very happy working for Spruce Falls,” Olivier Vermette recalled. Now 83, Mr. Vermette spent almost half his life with the company. He still lives in town with his wife, Suzanne.
But 1991 was not a happy year for Mr. Vermette, who lost his job, or for the town, which faced an existential crisis when The Times and Kimberly-Clark pulled out, unwilling to invest the money needed to bring an aging, stand-alone plant up to par. It looked as if the mill might close.
Then, against daunting odds, employees and townspeople took ownership of the plant. With an infusion of capital from the Tembec paper company of Montreal, they saved the mill. And many jobs.
Kapuskasing was not born of high-minded principle, though. Originally a speck of a stop called MacPherson on the National Transcontinental Railway, the settlement was remote enough to have served from 1914 to 1920 as an internment camp, first for immigrants from the Austro-Hungarian empire, who were presumed to be hostile in the midst of World War I, then for political radicals.
Nearly 1,000 miles away, The Times’s appetite for newsprint was growing ravenous. And as its consumption increased, so did its vulnerability to price increases imposed by papermakers.
When Kimberly-Clark raised the prospect of a partnership in its Ontario operation, Arthur Hays Sulzberger, a vice president of The Times, was receptive. In 1924, he and James C. Kimberly canoed together down the Kapuskasing and Mattagami Rivers, all the way to Moose Factory on James Bay.
They bonded. So did their companies.
Their plans fit splendidly with those of George Howard Ferguson, the premier of Ontario at the time, who envisioned the northern part of the province as a cradle of industry and employment.
Joint ventures were usually anathema to Adolph S. Ochs, who was then the publisher of The Times. Spruce Falls, however, offered a useful hedge. When newsprint was abundant and cheap, the newspaper would profit. When newsprint was scarce and expensive, Spruce Falls would profit.
The success of the venture helped cement Mr. Sulzberger’s claim as Mr. Ochs’s successor.
In the Kapuskasing history museum are many 25-year service watches, and 25-, 30- and 40-year service pins. They attest to the Ochs philosophy, Ms. Latimer said.
A hospital was the most critical amenity for a mill where a single misstep could be fatal. The four-story Sensenbrenner Hospital opened in 1929 with 40 beds, an operating room and an X-ray department. Its half-timbered facade lent a picturesque, if incongruous, Tudor touch to the utilitarian structure.
Other civic buildings developed by Spruce Falls were in the same style. The clubhouse, which opened in 1929, had a 500-seat auditorium (“with two modern projection machines for motion pictures”), a library, four bowling lanes, men’s and women’s lounges, a gym and a snack bar.
The 90-room Kapuskasing Inn, also in vaguely Tudor style, opened in 1928. It was the pride of town, never more so than on Oct. 15, 1951, when Princess Elizabeth and Prince Philip spent the night, four months before she became queen.
By 1951, the population of Kapuskasing had reached 5,000. Spruce Falls employed 1,500 workers and produced 750 tons of newsprint daily, half of which was consumed by The Times, the rest sold to other consumers. The company’s cutting rights had expanded to 6,360 square miles.
By the 1970s, as many as 12,500 people lived in Kapuskasing. Mr. Vermette had been promoted to foreman of road construction and then to a supervisor of cutters, but he found that scaling was his first love. Not that his work was easy. A journey from town to one of the remote cutting camps could sometimes take most of a day.
Kapuskasing’s frigid winters attracted General Motors, which opened a cold weather testing center in 1973. Other employers include the local government and schools, the Detour Lake gold mine, and Sensenbrenner Hospital, which moved out of its original Tudor-style home in the 1980s. Johanne Théberge, one of the Vermettes’ two daughters, works at the hospital. Their son, Don, has worked at the mill for nearly as long as his father.
The old hospital has been transformed into affordable housing, under the name Drury Place. The community clubhouse now serves as Kapuskasing’s civic center. The Kap Inn, as it was fondly known, burned down in 2007 and was demolished the next year.
One customer, however, will not be holding its breath.
The last shipment of newsprint bound for The Times left Kapuskasing 14 years ago.