Ingrid Latorre has spent half her life undocumented in America, including a recent stint in a Quaker meetinghouse that offered refuge. But she says she can run no more.
Ingrid Encalada Latorre, 33, spent the last six months living in a red brick Quaker meetinghouse in Denver, one of hundreds of religious communities in the United States offering refuge or other help to immigrants facing deportation. Supporters of these churches say they keep families together. Opponents say they harbor criminals at the expense of citizen parishioners who could use their aid.
She has two children, both citizens. In the meetinghouse, she lived in an upstairs bedroom, exercised on a stationary bicycle and cooked in a kitchen by the pews. Her son Anibal, 1, learned to walk there. Her son Bryant, 8, adapted to new rules: As visitors came and went, he reached for a key on a wall, unlocking and relocking the door.
During Ms. Latorre’s six months in the church, Bryant, front, split his time between the meetinghouse and his home, where he stayed with his father.
Ms. Latorre cooked meals for herself and for Anibal with food brought each week by volunteers.
Bryant played downstairs in the church.
For Anibal, the meetinghouse became more familiar than home, Ms. Latorre said.
Ms. Latorre had the run of the place on most days. On Sundays, when the pews filled with people, she mostly stayed upstairs.
On a recent day, federal officials granted Ms. Latorre a three-month reprieve from deportation, and supporters gathered to celebrate.
When she left the meetinghouse, Ms. Latorre walked to a nearby park, followed by a crowd. During the party that followed, people sang karaoke and Ingrid’s partner, Eliseo Jurado, cooked carne asada on the grill. As someone invited her to sing, he tried to coax her, unsuccessfully, to join.
Mr. Jurado’s truck, piled with Ms. Latorre’s belongings.
Ms. Latorre, joined by her family, left the meetinghouse. Upon entering her home, she lay on a bean bag chair in her sons’ bedroom. She rested for a few minutes, then sprang up to help her partner unpack.