The filmmaker Bill Morrison customarily constructs his movies with footage from other films that are very old and whose prints are very worn. No matter the ostensible subject of his individual pictures, the overarching theme is impermanence; his best-known work, “Decasia” (2002), is an artfully edited assemblage of found footage whose visual appeal is the crumbling of the film emulsion itself. So it’s a bit of a shock that “Dawson City: Frozen Time” begins with a brightly colored, completely intact clip from a television show about baseball in which Mr. Morrison appears, talking to an enthusiastic host about newly discovered footage related to the Black Sox baseball-betting scandal of 1919.
Mr. Morrison’s film tells the story of how that footage, and several hundred other reels of volatile nitrate film from the 1910s and ’20s, were discovered decades after they were presumed to be permanently lost. But part of the point of “Dawson City” is that the film prints had actually been forgotten — buried underground in an era when not much thought was given to their artistic or historical value. The discovery was made in 1978 in Dawson, also known as Dawson City, a Yukon River town in northwestern Canada. A local man who was clearing a lot with a backhoe suddenly found himself digging up film reels, and he paused. The story of the finding unfolds via television news clips from the late 1970s; then Mr. Morrison goes further back, using a wide variety of much older footage.
“Dawson City” tells a number of stories: about how the addition of certain chemicals to cotton created an explosive (nicknamed gun cotton) that was developed into celluloid motion picture film; about a settlement of Native Americans that was muscled out of existence by white settlers trekking north during the gold rushes of the mid- and late-19th centuries; about the boom and bust cycles of Dawson City itself, which burned to the ground once a year for the first nine years of its existence.
It tells the stories of famous fortunes made in this vicinity, including that of one Frederick Trump, the president’s grandfather. Future pioneers of Hollywood, such as the actor-director William Desmond Taylor and the theater entrepreneurs Alexander Pantages and Sid Grauman, somehow got their starts in this remote locale. As silent motion pictures became a worldwide attraction, Dawson City became the end of the line for film distribution routes. And after a given picture’s run, individual distributors balked at paying for return shipment. The town inadvertently came to house a huge film library, which was eventually sent floating down the Yukon. Except, that is, for a portion that was buried, for an unusual and arguably hilarious reason.
The variety of action and modes seen in the newly discovered films, dramas with titles like “The Unpardonable Sin” and “A Stolen Paradise,” suggest a vast unknown film history. They also remind any film scholar that no matter how seemingly voluminous your knowledge of movie history, it is likely to be only a fraction of a fraction of the entirety. In any event, “Dawson City” now enters that time line as an instantaneously recognizable masterpiece.