Nearly 60 teenagers accepted diplomas from Bronx Preparatory High School there on Monday, amid all the usual trappings of a graduation ceremony. But for three men in their 40s who joined the teenagers onstage, wearing the same blue academic robes, the day was no less meaningful.
They were Yusef Salaam, Kevin Richardson and Raymond Santana Jr., three members of the Central Park Five. Years ago, they missed the graduation ceremonies for their own high schools because they were in prison for a crime they did not commit.
On Monday, they received honorary diplomas and the capped, gowned feting they had been denied.
The Central Park Five was a group of teenagers convicted of the brutal rape in 1989 of a woman who was jogging in Central Park. They refused plea bargains, insisting that incriminating statements they had made to the authorities had been coerced, and spent from seven to 13 years in prison.
 DNA evidence confirmed that the crime had been committed by another man, Matias Reyes, who confessed to acting alone. The five have since reached settlements with New York City and the state totaling nearly $45 million, according to their lawyer.
The youngest was 14 at the time of their arrest. The oldest was 16.
A documentary about their ordeal called “The Central Park Five” was released in 2012, and a government teacher at Bronx Prep, Marielle Colucci, has used the movie as a tool to teach students about the justice system. This year, after her students asked if they could meet the men, Mr. Richardson spoke to their class.
In fact, the three men did already have diplomas — each received a G.E.D., and then an associate degree, while still in prison. But they never had a ceremony, and a piece of paper in the mail is not the same.
“It’s kind of emotional,” Mr. Santana said at the ceremony, which was at Lehman College in the Bronx.
The two men who were not present at Monday’s ceremony, Antron McCray and Kharey Wise, will still receive honorary diplomas, Mr. Gil said, but theirs will come by mail.
After the valedictorian had spoken and awards had been distributed for achievement in subjects like history, science and physical education, Mr. Gil stood at the lectern to introduce Mr. Richardson, Mr. Salaam and Mr. Santana.
Mr. Salaam accepted his diploma and spoke, with his “brothers through fire,” as he put it, standing at his side.
