A Dublin teenager and her only friend go on a road trip to save her father in “My Name Is Emily,” starring Evanna Lynch. And “The Tunnel,” the British-French version of “The Bridge,” prepares for a second season.
THE TUNNEL on PBS.org, Amazon and iTunes. Fans of “The Bridge” (Hulu.com), the Scandinavian noir set on the Oresund Bridge linking Sweden and Denmark, will know the setup if not the setting: A woman is found dead at the midpoint of (here’s the twist) the Channel Tunnel, and cops from both countries — the socially inept French detective Elise Wasserman (Clémence Poésy) and her jokey British counterpart, Karl Roebuck (Stephen Dillane) — are called in. But what begins as one murder becomes two: The killer has bisected two bodies at the waist and has positioned different halves to look like a single corpse. “Look, she comes apart like the eurozone!” the butcher taunts. Season 2 arrives on June 15, with the abduction of a French couple from the tunnel, leaving behind their traumatized daughter.
MERU (2015) 6:30 p.m. on TMC; also on Amazon and iTunes. Jimmy Chin, an elite professional climber (who directed this documentary with his wife, Elizabeth Chai Vasarhelyi); his mentor, Conrad Anker; and the young Renan Ozturk try to become the first to conquer the Shark’s Fin, a 1,500-foot blade of granite at the top of Mount Meru in the Garhwal Himalaya range in India. Blizzards and avalanches, frostbite and trench foot, and sleeping in a tiny tent dangling in thin air are part of the thrill. The film is so “blindingly beautiful” that it “easily makes you forget that what you are watching is completely bananas,” Jeannette Catsoulis wrote in The Times.
NASHVILLE 9 p.m. on CMT. Season 5 picks up 10 weeks after the death of Rayna and the celebration her life. Juliette faces dismal reviews on her new album — and offers Maddie some unsolicited advice about her own single. Deacon struggles to keep Highway 65 on course, and Daphne in school. And Scarlett awaits the results of her paternity test.