The showrunner for “The Leftovers,” Damon Lindelof, has never made any secret of his intention to baffle. Before the first season debuted, he said he’d follow the lead of the titular novel by Tom Perrotta and wouldn’t explain why or how 140 million people disappeared from Earth in what came to be known as the Sudden Departure. But the very fact of the event established a supernatural backdrop to this drama. And as the man who helped bring “Lost” into the world, Lindelof knows how to milk the fantastical for every spine-tingling, pulse-pounding moment ... even if his ultimate goal is to keep our feet firmly planted on the ground.
Just look at the opening ten minutes of the series finale, which is “The Leftovers” at its most emotional and most nerve-racking (two buttons this show has never shied away from pushing). To tug at the viewers’ heartstrings a little — or a lot — Lindelof, Perrotta and their credited co-screenwriter, Tom Spezialy, have Nora Durst sharing some sweet childhood memories with her brother, Matt Jamison.
What makes this conversation especially moving is that the siblings know they’re never going to see each other again. Matt is dying, and Nora’s about to subject herself to the process that’s supposed to transport her to the place where all the Departed went. Before he heads back to Texas, Matt writes one last “Matt Libs” for Nora, to serve as her obituary.
The scenes involving the Departure Ray are almost unbearably intense. Nora strips naked, climbs into a small glass sphere and takes deep breaths before a liquid flecked with metal pours in. Everything about this is disturbing and strange, from the laser she’s not supposed to touch on the way to “the event chamber” to the fossilized remains of a previous participant that are hauled out before she steps in. Almost as disturbing is what happens next. As the fluid reaches Nora’s head, the episode cuts suddenly to a replay of the odd epilogue from this season’s premiere, in which Nora was inexplicably older, going by the name Sarah, working as a pigeon-wrangler in rural Australia and denying she’d ever heard of Kevin.
That jump from sphere to “Sarah” seems to imply that Nora really did make her way to an alternate universe, where she took on a new identity — not unlike what has happened to Kevin Garvey every time he’s drowned himself and become “Kevin Harvey, international assassin.” Lindelof and company keep that reading alive for as long as they can, including in a scene in which Nora calls Laurie and the two women talk about their agreement not to say anything about each other to the people “here” and “there.” Laurie, who appeared to commit suicide (by drowning!) the last time we saw her, has a baby on her lap throughout the call, raising the possibility that she, too, passed over to another plane of existence.
It gets weirder. After Nora hears that Kevin is looking for her, she packs a bag and is all set to flee when he knocks on her door. Kevin, too, looks about 20 years older. He says that she probably doesn’t remember him, but that he used to admire her from afar back in Mapleton, and that the last time they spoke was at the Christmas dance a year after the Sudden Departure. His story is that he saw her by chance during a vacation in Australia, and thought it was finally time to ask her out.
One of the more out-there possibilities for what’s happening is that Nora is in a universe with an alternate Kevin. Or maybe “our” Kevin found a way to travel to her world. But there is also a much simpler explanation: Laurie didn’t kill herself, Kevin’s story is a fake, and Nora is still herself, only older.
“The Book of Nora” is an unusual series finale. Only four of the show’s main characters appear, and most of the hour is concerned with resolving a story line that wasn’t introduced until the middle of Season 1. “The Leftovers” never really seemed as though it were “about” Kevin and Nora’s turbulent romance — until Kevin’s big revelatory trip into his own subconscious last week.
Yet Lindelof and company cleverly use that relationship to round out “The Leftovers” without delivering anything too on-the-nose or overly explanatory. Kevin’s “secret admirer” act gives Nora the license to ask about the friends and relations she left behind when she chose to get zapped — which, by extension, catches the rest of us up with what happened to Matt, Mary, John, Jill and the rest. Nora reluctantly accepts Kevin’s invitation to attend a local dance (which turns out to be a wedding), where she tries to trip him up, asking him about things he’d only remember if he were the “real” Kevin.
The big tease that Nora and Kevin are each somewhere (or someone) else is a prolonged act of misdirection — the kind Lindelof does so well. But the episode does have moments of genuine mystery, beyond that astonishing opening trip into the Departure machine.
If nothing else, it’s curious that Nora keeps suffering odd mishaps and annoyances. Toward the end of the finale, after she leaves the wedding because she can’t play along with Kevin’s schtick anymore — “Because it’s not true,” she tells him tearfully — she has a bicycle accident. Near the wreck, she finds a goat, snagged on barbed wire. She brings it back to her house, where in the morning it starts eating the “messages of love” that the wedding party attached to Nora’s homing pigeons. While picking through the pike, she finds what may have been Kevin’s message to her. (“I know you’re out there.”) When he comes by her house a second time to fess up about how he really got there, she’s already been softened up by the universe.
That just leaves two last bits of business for this episode to dispatch: his real “What have you been up to?” story, and hers. Kevin admits that for decades he’s been spending every vacation in Australia, looking for her. Nora, meanwhile, somewhat surprisingly, says that she actually did make the trip to the land of the Departed.
What follows — as a sort of grand closing number — is another magnificent Carrie Coon monologue, in a series that’s seen its fill. Nora describes the place she landed as a kind of shadow earth, where on the day of the Sudden Departure, everyone except the 140 million disappeared. She says this Earth is like a ghost planet, suffering from unexpected inconveniences because so many of the skilled laborers (like most of the pilots) are gone. Nevertheless, when she found her husband and kids they looked happy, because they were among the lucky few who stayed mostly together.  So she decided to leave them be, and instead spent years tracking down the physicist who invented the Departure machine, to get him to send her back.
That’s a stunning story. But is it true? For that matter, is Kevin’s? There are no images to back up what either is saying — just whatever they’ve conjured in our heads.
The magician Raymond Joseph Teller — the quieter half of the popular duo Penn and Teller — likes to say that the best tricks demand a devious imagination and a willingness to “make the secret a lot more trouble than the trick seems worth.” Obsessive preparation matters as much a divine spark of creative imagination. “The Leftovers” never shied away from the uncanny, but ultimately its take on “magic” is more like Teller’s. Consider Kevin and Nora. He found her through decades of hunting; and she got herself into a position to be found by slogging her way toward the one man in another dimension who had the technology to return her to ours.
