Jay-Z is back, and he is vulnerable. But for now, his secrets are exclusive to Tidal.
This veteran Brooklyn rapper, 47, ended weeks of speculation near midnight on Thursday, releasing “4:44,” his 13th studio album, as a digital exclusive on that streaming service, which he bought in 2015. The album — Jay-Z’s first since “Magna Carta ... Holy Grail” in 2013 — features 10 intensely personal and provocative tracks that, yes, include a few references to the marriage-baring “Lemonade” album by his wife, Beyoncé, and the recent birth of their twins.
As part of a deal with Sprint, the cellphone carrier, which bought a one-third stake in Tidal this year, “4:44” was made available only to those who had subscribed to Tidal before the album’s release, along with existing Sprint customers. Tidal, which trails in the streaming race dominated by Spotify and Apple Music, has relied largely on splashy exclusives from its artist partners to encourage sign-ups, making itself the first — and, in some cases, only — place to hear new music from Kanye West, Rihanna and Beyoncé, whose “Lemonade” has remained a Tidal exclusive since its release in April 2016.
For “4:44,” there was a populist twist to the exclusive release: The album also debuted in its entirety at midnight across 160 pop-, rhythm- and urban-formatted radio stations owned by the broadcast conglomerate iHeartMedia, and it will continue to be played all day Friday on select stations.
Whether the album leads to more Tidal subscribers or just more online piracy, it is sure to be a talker. Already, the lyrics are being dissected and pored over across social media and beyond, as listeners try to decode which details come from the real lives of one of the most famous (and famously private) duos in entertainment. Twitter said before noon on Friday that there had been more than 810,000 posts about Jay-Z and his album since it was released, plus another 230,000 about Beyoncé.
Coming in the wake of “Lemonade,” an ambitious multimedia project that was simultaneously Beyoncé’s most personal and most political work to date, “4:44” finds Jay-Z in a similar mode, weaving confessional and autobiographical songwriting with big-picture perspectives on black life in the United States.
The album was produced entirely by No I.D., a longtime Jay-Z collaborator who is also known for his work with Mr. West and Vince Staples. Guest performers include Frank Ocean and Damian Marley, along with subtle flourishes from Beyoncé (“Family Feud”); The-Dream (“Marcy Me”); Jay-Z’s mother, Gloria Carter (“Smile”); and his and Beyoncé’s daughter Blue Ivy (who asks, “Daddy, what’s a will?” on “Legacy”).
