Staring at the wall might seem like the worst thing that could happen to a writer. But for the playwright Lynn Nottage, the walls of the Brooklyn house where she lives with her husband, Tony Gerber, their two children and her father are her muse.
They are also a who’s who of 20th-century African-American art, with a floor-to-ceiling display that includes Norman Lewis and Romare Bearden. The collection continues into the 21st century with Helen Evans Ramsaran and others.
Her walls are her windows on the world.
This year, Ms. Nottage won the Pulitzer Prize for drama (her second) and was nominated for a Tony Award for best play for “Sweat,” which closes on Sunday. She sits in a leather armchair in a corner to write, looking across the tall parlor of her Boerum Hill brownstone.
Here are edited excerpts from a conversation last week.
The piece on the steps behind your chair is “A Man Was Lynched Yesterday,” a redrafting of the flag the N.A.A.C.P. flew over Fifth Avenue in the 1920s and ’30s when a lynching took place. What about it spoke to you?
You grew up in this house?
I moved back in when my mother got very ill. She had Lou Gehrig’s disease. I was pregnant, and so, literally, I had my baby, my mother died, and we stayed. [Her father, Wally, lives on the ground floor.] I remember standing on these steps — my brother and I used to put on plays when we were little, for guests.
Your parents were collectors of, and friends of, artists who form the historical core of midcentury African-American art. Your father sat on the board of Cinque Gallery in Harlem; your mother, Ruby, bought art in Africa in the ’60s. Was that unusual?
As a writer, why plays?
It’s a communal, collective art form. Theater’s the most effective tool in building empathy.
You might be describing the potential of a collection: It can foster a conversation among sometimes aggressively disparate points of view. Can its dialogues be a mirror of the “national conversation”?
Just about every single piece that’s in this space is about an African-American artist in conversation with the culture. I think that if I lived a hundred years ago in a village in Africa, I would be the griot who’s collecting all the tales of the village — that I have this real need, at least as an African-American woman, to go on record, to collect our stories, to ensure our stories are heard.