MADRID — The term homosexuality was first coined at the end of the 19th century, by which time the Prado Museum here had almost finished assembling Spain’s largest art collection.
Yet homosexuality has always been present within the Prado, Madrid’s flagship museum, in ways that it has now chosen to highlight for the first time, in a new show called “The Other’s Gaze. Spaces of Difference.” The exhibition allows visitors to look at the ways homosexuality features not only within some specific paintings and sculptures, but also within the lives of the works’ artists and patrons.
The show opened on June 14, just ahead of World Pride, a 10-day festival that ends on Sunday and is expected to draw more than two million visitors to Madrid.
“The Prado is much more than a national museum, because we get visitors here who come from countries that don’t always recognize what is normal, countries that really belong to the third world in terms of human rights,” said Jaime de los Santos, who is responsible for culture and tourism within Madrid’s regional government.
Miguel Falomir, the Prado’s director, said his museum wanted to demonstrate that it was “open to all sensitivities” and sexual orientations. This exhibition, he said, “should probably have been done 10 years ago, but it’s never too late.” And while he had braced himself for criticism from the more conservative elements of Spanish society, no dissent had been voiced so far, he said. “This country has luckily changed,” he added.
During a tour of the Prado’s show, Carlos G. Navarro, one of its curators, explained how artists drew on mythology and biblical episodes to incorporate homosexuality into their works while trying to circumvent censorship. Initially, such art was then often kept out of bounds in private royal chambers, like the Parada Tower, a hunting pavilion built by King Philip IV on the outskirts of Madrid. One of the pavilion’s masterworks, which now hangs in the Prado’s main gallery, is “The Rape of Ganymede,” by Peter Paul Rubens, in which the artist shows Ganymede and a quiver of arrows in a juxtaposition that suggests anal penetration, Mr. Navarro explained.
“Such themes weren’t discussed by art historians until recently,” he added.
Some of the show’s works focus on the persecution suffered by artists, often fomented by rival painters. In 1603 Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio was put on trial for sodomy, then a capital crime. Caravaggio’s painting “David With the Head of Goliath,” which now hangs in the Prado, is believed to have been acquired first by Juan de Tassis, a nobleman who was accused of sodomy. “You have some really special triangular relationships, between a work, its artist and its collector,” Mr. Navarro said.
There are works that explore cross-dressing and transgender issues, which were also themes developed in the literature of Spain’s Golden Age. In 1590 Juan Sánchez Cotán painted his “Bearded Lady of Peñaranda,” probably not as a medical curiosity, but more likely to warn men about effeminate behavior, Mr. Navarro said.
Female artists are barely represented in the Prado, which only last year held its first exhibition devoted to a woman, Clara Peeters, a Flemish still life painter. But for this show’s advertising poster, the curators selected a lion’s portrait painted by Rosa Bonheur in 1879. Fascinated by animals, Bonheur obtained a cross-dressing permit from the French police, allowing her to wear trousers and other men’s clothing to gain access to cattle ranches and fairs where women were not welcomed, but whose cows and horses she wanted to paint.
“You normally think of female artists in the 19th century as painting kittens, but she was very different,” Mr. Navarro said. The lion is strikingly realistic and unmissable, once it is found, buried in one of the lower-floor rooms of the museum.
Mr. Navarro said the curators had initially considered putting this exhibition in a separate section of the Prado, but decided to leave the paintings in their normal settings because “we also wanted to make clear that visitors can find here far more than what forms part of the normal and classical tour of the Prado,” Mr. Navarro said.
