Are you cleanshaven and tattoo-free? What’s your credit score? What about marijuana — ever inhaled?
Becoming a police officer has long depended on having the right answers to questions like these.
But with killings by officers forcing a public reckoning over whether the police deserve to be seen automatically as the good guys, departments in major cities are struggling to fill thousands of openings: 1,000 in Chicago, nearly 300 in Phoenix and 200 in Detroit. And with the additional mandate to become as diverse as the communities they serve, police departments are rethinking recruitment standards once considered sacrosanct.
New Orleans, with more than 400 openings, no longer automatically disqualifies those who have injected heroin or smoked crack. Aurora, Colo., has stopped using military-style running tests, but now checks how quickly candidates can get out of a squad car.
Pittsburgh, accused of discriminating against black applicants, recently updated its hiring criteria to include integrity, dependability and “cultural competence,” or the ability to incorporate diverse perspectives.
John Lozoya, a senior commander with the St. Paul Police Department, said law enforcement now had little choice but to modernize.
The process of becoming a police officer is still onerous — it might be easier to get top-secret clearance than to be hired as a rookie cop. Evaluation can take more than a year, and generally includes interviews, written and oral exams, physical and psychological examinations, a fitness test, a polygraph exam, drug testing, credit checks and an extensive background investigation.
Police candidates in Nashville are asked to list their neighbors and a decade’s worth of boyfriends or girlfriends, who may be questioned about the applicant’s personality and past behavior.
The process is meticulous for a reason: Officers are empowered to arrest and use force against civilians, and substance abuse and financial problems can make new hires vulnerable to corruption. Still, the questions can get intimate.
Nashville candidates are told to catalog every parking ticket and confess whether they ever ran away from home or faked being sick to get out of work. “Are you now or have you ever been a member of any Communist organization anywhere?” the application asks.
But elsewhere, police departments are asking whether such standards are relevant to policing today.
What Did It Take to Be a Cop in ... 1861?
Was it more important to own a gun, or know how to shoot it?
In April, after years of debate, a Maryland state commission on police standards reversed its 1970s-era policy of rejecting candidates who had used marijuana more than five times since turning 21, or more than 20 times in all.
Last year, Louisville did away with its requirement that officers have two years of college credit.
The New Orleans police, looking to broaden its pool of candidates, dropped a rule that automatically disqualified anyone who admitted prior use of recreational drugs. It now prohibits pot use during the previous two years and use of harder drugs, like heroin and cocaine, within the past decade.
Mayor Rahm Emanuel of Chicago, where the police are seeking 970 officers, said in January that he had been rethinking a prohibition on those with juvenile records.
In Chicago, where police data shows African-Americans are stopped by the police far more often than whites, disqualifying applicants for minor or youthful offenses can exclude minority candidates at a time when the department is desperate to attract them.
“I want to take a look at the general idea that if somebody did something when they were 16 or 17, that doesn’t become an entire impossibility — as long as it’s not serious — to joining a police department,” Mr. Emanuel said.
Rookie police officers in New York in 1939. In the past, police recruitment was based on military standards that valued uniformity.Credit...Keystone View Co.
Chuck Canterbury, president of the national Fraternal Order of Police, said there was concern about whether the changes would result in a generation of ill-prepared officers.
Standards have evolved over time, particularly when they promoted uniformity at the expense of fairness. In the 1960s, for example, height requirements began to vanish because they excluded far more women than men. The Los Angeles Police Department’s requirement was one of the last, ruled unconstitutional in 1979.
In its drive to diversify, the New York Police Department claims to be one of the nation’s more forward-looking departments. Fifteen years after firing a Sikh officer who refused to remove his turban, the department last year began to allow Sikhs to wear turbans and have short beards.
Last year, Detroit’s police chief, James Craig, began to allow beards for men and stud earrings for women, saying they had no bearing on job performance.
Some changes deal not with appearance, but with qualities that are harder to measure and that are intended to fight crime by fixing deteriorated relationships.
In St. Paul, the department has experimented with a number of ways to find the best officers, including taking some “situational judgment” questions — meant to test common sense, adherence to police hierarchy and police priorities — off the written exam.
Chief Todd Axtell said the tests might have been unintentionally biased against minorities, proving particularly difficult for those who are not native English speakers.
“We’ve got a lot of diversity in St. Paul, and we’ve struggled with recruiting in the past, so we need to be more thoughtful about these communities,” he said, referring to growing immigrant populations from Southeast Asia, East and West Africa, and Latin America.
The changes seem to be having an effect. Last year, almost half the police academy graduates were minorities.
Ler Htoo, a Burmese refugee who grew up in a camp in Thailand and had trouble mastering English, said he decided he wanted to become a St. Paul officer when he heard from a recruitment officer at his high school.
Recent high-profile police shootings have exacerbated negative feelings toward the police, making recruitment more difficult, particularly among minorities. But Officer Htoo said tensions with officers in his own neighborhood had a different origin.
The department’s new written tests now focus more on personal histories and community engagement, and interviews have been refocused to allow applicants to personally explain incidents that may have previously disqualified them.
As police departments grapple with complaints of excessive use of force and retrain officers to “de-escalate,” or defuse, tense encounters, Chief Axtell said he had used the interviews to identify one personality flaw that in the past might have gone overlooked.
