INFANT AND INDIA HOURS Traditionally, I’ve never been an early riser. I often write late into the night, but as a new mother, that has changed. Sky wakes up between 5:30 and 5:45, hence I do as well. Mikey works India hours, and since it’s early afternoon there when it’s morning here, he is also up, and the whole apartment is buzzing.
WINDOW ONTO WILLIAMSBURG Sky is starved, so the first thing I do is nurse her while sitting in a rocking chair by the window in our bedroom, which overlooks McCarren Park. I see partyers come home from their night out and always think back to how my life was prebaby. When I’m done nursing, I cuddle and play with her and read to her. We always have some sort of music playing, whether it’s the latest pop songs, Bollywood hits, old French songs, jazz.
BREAKFAST CASUAL Around 7, we make it a point to head out and we wear sweats or sometimes even pajamas, but the great thing about living in our neighborhood is that there are lots of other parents with babies out who also have similar attire. We go to Lilia Caffé and always get their cappuccinos and olive oil cake to go and walk to McCarren Park. We’ll eventually find a bench where we sit down and enjoy our breakfast. When Sky starts to get a little fussy, we head back home.
THE BASIC THINGS Mikey is in India often for work, and for much of our relationship we’ve lived apart, so it’s really nice that we’re together, and we love being homebodies. Sometimes he’ll work and I’ll write, but other times, we’re hanging out in our living room and relishing being in the same space together. We might do emails, catch up on the latest issues of The Economist or The New Yorker or watching the news. All these might be routine for many couples, but for us, it’s so novel and so wonderful to do the basic things together.
FRIENDS AND FOOD Around 12:30, we meet up with someone or the other in our area for lunch. We’re the only people with kids so far, so we choose some place kid-friendly, which means practically anything in the neighborhood. Meadowsweet is a favorite — their duck confit is a killer. We also like the truffle burrata pizza at Kesté and the oat pancakes at Sauvage.
FERRY TO THE FAMILY My parents live in Midtown East, and we make it a point to see them every Sunday. My brother and his wife live in Manhattan, too, and they have a 3-year-old, Avaaz, and he’s there, and my parents coo over their two grandkids.
ANXIETY CREEPS IN By the time we’re back home, it’s 8, and Sky has usually fallen asleep. Around this time, I start getting anxious. It could be about my writing or larger issues such as mortality. Usually, I try to calm myself down by writing. While I write, Mikey makes dinner.
A PROPER MEAL Mikey loves to cook, and when he tells me the meal is ready, we sit down at our dining table and have a proper meal. It could be a fish like a salmon, a steak salad or pulled pork, but it’s always delicious. We may drink wine or a bit of whisky to go along with the food.
DECOMPRESS It’s Mikey’s turn to tend to his work while I clean. Sky wakes up at 10 for another feed and a diaper change, and when she’s done, we get into bed and may do a bit of reading and watch some TV just to decompress from the day. Then, we’re out. Sky will be up in the middle of the night for a feed and up early to start her day, and sleep is at a premium.