By Louis A. Pérez Jr.
608 pp. The University of North Carolina Press.
Though Cuba is now known as an island frozen in time, the early 1900s saw an era of prosperity there. World War I had caused a decline in European sugar production, creating a demand that Cuba rushed to fill, with the building of plantations and factories to satisfy the American market. Trade went both ways: By 1920, 80 percent of imports to Cuba were from the United States, and the island enjoyed the same technological advances and entertainment as Americans. Yet a few decades later, Cubans seemed to be worse off — salaries had stagnated, and sugar could no longer sustain the economy. Louis A. Pérez Jr.’s exploration of the cultural exchange between the United States and Cuba over almost 100 years, from the early 1850s to the revolution in 1959, paints a picture of the landscape leading up to the shift to socialism and the significance of the embargo the United States would impose.
245 pp. Alfred A. Knopf.
This family epic follows three generations of women — Celia del Pino, the matriarch; her daughter, Lourdes; and Lourdes’s daughter Pilar — and their vastly different views of Cuba and Fidel Castro’s revolution.  Her daughter, Lourdes, was raped by a revolutionary soldier, and the memory would continue to haunt her after she escaped to the United States, where she builds a successful chain of bakeries. Lourdes views the lavish desserts she creates as a subliminal message to her mother, a “reminder of the ongoing shortages in Cuba,” while Pilar longs to return to the island. Cristina García crafts a masterly novel that deals with political exile through the various viewpoints of one family.
728 pp. Belknap Press/Harvard University Press.
In 1962, in the midst of the Cold War, Soviet missiles were discovered in Cuba, making real the threat of nuclear war. What followed was a 13-day-long confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union, during which President John F. Kennedy and his advisers deliberated on how best to keep the United States safe. The volume, put together by Ernest R. May and Philip D. Zelikow, then professors at Harvard, is based on recordings of these sessions and provides insight into Kennedy’s decision to opt for a blockade as opposed to an airstrike. Eventually, Kennedy would agree to an arrangement with Nikita Khrushchev, premier of the Soviet Union at the time: The agreement included Soviet removal of the missiles and a pledge by the United States not to invade Cuba. The Cuban missile crisis was a significant turning point for American-Cuban relations and also an indication of the danger of continued enmity.