Robert S. Leiken, a maverick political scientist who stunned fellow liberals in the 1980s when he denounced the leftist Sandinista government in Nicaragua, died on June 7 in Boston. He was 78.
The cause was complications of neuro-Behcet’s disease, an inflammatory condition, his son Samuel said.
The title of Mr. Leiken’s unfinished memoir reflected the frustration of his fickle ideological soul mates, first liberals and later conservatives, who had assumed that once he embraced their orthodoxy he would never challenge it.
The book was to be called “How I Lost All My Friends.” That was an overstatement, of course, because as his positions evolved, Mr. Leiken (pronounced LAY-kin) also gained new supporters.
“He was a rare original thinker who based his conclusions on a wealth of research that forced others — even others with very different perspectives — to take his views seriously,” said Dimitri K. Simes, president of the Center for the National Interest, which was established in Washington in 1994 by former President Richard M. Nixon as a nonpartisan foreign policy research and advocacy group.
Pigeonholed as a leftist after teaching English at a labor union center in Mexico and promoting racial integration during Boston’s school busing crisis in the 1970s, Mr. Leiken drew the scorn of fellow liberals in 1984 when, in an article in The New Republic, he accused the Sandinista government of corruption and repression. Officials with the administration of President Ronald Reagan had claimed that the government was verging toward pro-Soviet totalitarian socialism.
Mr. Leiken’s conversion was cited in a speech by Mr. Reagan and provided an intellectual foundation for Washington’s support for the Contras, the rightist guerrillas who were seeking to overthrow the Sandinistas.
Mr. Leiken “was undoubtedly the single most important person outside of the administration to make Americans aware of the Sandinista government’s agenda to institute a Cuban-type repressive Communist state in Nicaragua,” Ron Radosh, an author and historian, wrote this week on pjmedia.com, a news and opinion collaborative blog.
Mr. Leiken argued in The New Republic that “there is no monolithic pro-Soviet left in Central America,” and he warned that Washington should embrace only governments that demonstrated “consistent support for human rights.” In 1990, in an Op-Ed article in The New York Times, he also correctly predicted that the Sandinistas would lose a forthcoming election.
If conservatives figured that Mr. Leiken, like Mr. Radosh, had permanently abandoned his liberal roots, Mr. Leiken surprised them, too, a decade later.
In 2007, he and Steven Brooke wrote in Foreign Affairs that Washington policy makers should recognize that the feared transnational Muslim Brotherhood was, in fact, a relatively moderate group and a sworn enemy of Al Qaeda that could be engaged in negotiations.
Mr. Leiken also sounded an early alarm against homegrown jihadist terrorism in Europe, a warning he repeated in his book “Europe’s Angry Muslims: The Revolt of the Second Generation” (2012).
Robert Solin Leiken was born on March 19, 1939, in Manhattan to Robert Solomon Leiken, a sportswear manufacturer, and the former Gertrude Solin.
He attended Great Neck High School on Long Island and graduated from Deerfield Academy in Massachusetts. He earned a bachelor’s degree in English and a master’s in history from Harvard and a doctorate in politics from St. Antony’s College of the University of Oxford.
His marriage to Katherine Robbins ended in divorce. In addition to their son Samuel, he is survived by another son, Benjamin; and a brother, Samuel.
Mr. Leiken was a senior fellow at the Georgetown Center for Strategic and International Studies, the Brookings Institution and the Center for the National Interest; a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace; a research associate at the Harvard University Center for International Affairs; and a visiting fellow at the International Forum for Democratic Studies.
Recalling that in recent decades Mr. Leiken had “moved back to earlier left-wing positions, such as advocacy of universal national health care,” Mr. Radosh was nonetheless forgiving.
