“What the country needs now is a period of calm while we get on with the job at hand,” said Britain’s chancellor of the Exchequer, Philip Hammond, no doubt reflecting what was on the mind of the prime minister, Theresa May, and many a fellow Conservative politician.
Alas, politicians usually long for a respite at times when they are least likely to deserve one.
Mrs. May and her party have had two terrible weeks, largely through their own doing. After losing her parliamentary majority in an entirely unnecessary election she called for in April, she was left trying to form a governing coalition with a hard-line Protestant Northern Ireland party, the Democratic Unionist Party, that could spell more trouble. John Major, the former Conservative prime minister, went so far as to publicly warn that such an alliance could undermine the delicate sectarian peace in Northern Ireland, while other Tories voiced concern about the D.U.P.’s opposition to abortion and same-sex marriage.
Mrs. May’s standing was further eroded when a horrific blaze in a public housing tower that took at least 79 lives unleashed furious criticism at the government over what survivors and others perceived as the government’s longstanding indifference to obvious safety hazards — including, lamentably, the absence of sprinkler systems in older public housing — as well as its failure to invest in better living conditions generally. The prime minister’s slow and seemingly uncaring response did nothing to improve her standing.
Mrs. May is severely handicapped as she opens formal talks on Brexit with the European Union this week and presents an extensive legislative program — much of it required to withdraw from the union — when the newly elected Parliament holds its first session on Wednesday.
The one benefit to be found in this mess is that Mrs. May must now take into account a broader range of ideas on what sort of divorce to seek with the European Union.
Mrs. May has indicated in the past that she wants a “hard” exit that will take Britain out of the bloc’s single market and customs union. That way, she argued, she can control British immigration policy — a major objective of many who wanted to leave the union — and make trade deals free of the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice.
But proponents of a softer exit — like Mr. Hammond, who would prefer that Britain remain at least in the customs union in order to protect British jobs and trade — are likely to ask for a stronger voice as well as concessions in exchange for continued fealty to the prime minister.
The Grenfell Tower tragedy should also impress on Mrs. May that she cannot hope to gain the political credibility she needs for a successful Brexit negotiation without simultaneously pursuing a domestic agenda that addresses Britain’s domestic inequalities.