LOS ANGELES — With a new vehicular heroine, Cruz Ramirez, taking center stage in “Cars 3,” and Tupac Shakur’s life dramatized in “All Eyez on Me,” Latino and African-American moviegoers turned out in force over the weekend, demonstrating once again the power of multiculturalism on screen.
“Cars 3” (Disney-Pixar) took in roughly $53.5 million in the United States and Canada, enough to push “Wonder Woman” into second place after a two-week run at No. 1. Analysts said the “Cars 3” production budget was in line with other Pixar films — $150 million to $200 million.
The domestic opening total for “Cars 3,” which received mostly favorable reviews, was 19 percent lower than initial results for “Cars 2” in 2011. Generally speaking, it’s hard to regain momentum after a bad sequel: “Cars 2” was Pixar’s first flop with critics.
Latinos, who make up 17.6 percent of the population, accounted for about 25 percent of the “Cars 3” audience, according to exit polling services. Marketing efforts included a 27-city tour of life-size Cruz Ramirez and Lightning McQueen look-alike cars, with an emphasis on cities with large Hispanic populations. Cristela Alonzo, who provided Cruz’s voice, was a fixture on Spanish-language media leading up to the film’s release.
While Latinos are underrepresented in movies over all — by a huge margin — animated films are suddenly leaning into Hispanic characters and stories in a big way. Pixar’s “Coco,” set to arrive on Nov. 22, features an all-Latino voice cast and was inspired by Day of the Dead traditions in Mexico. “Ferdinand,” set in the world of Spanish bull fighting, is scheduled for December release from 20th Century Fox.
It could be a coincidence, although the animation field does have a history of moving as a pack. More likely, studios are paying attention to the data: Latinos have become the most reliable animation audience, according to the research firm Screen Engine/ASI. Over the last two years, Latinos have made up about 20 percent of opening-weekend ticket buyers for all films, and 25 percent for animated films.
“In the Hispanic community, family is key, and animation is the perfect family activity,” said Santiago Pozo, the founder of Arenas Entertainment, a marketing agency.
In second place for the weekend, “Wonder Woman” (Warner Bros.) collected an estimated $40.8 million, for a three-week domestic total of $274.6 million, according to comScore, which compiles box office data.
“All Eyez on Me” (Lionsgate) collected a strong $27.1 million. African-American and Latino ticket buyers represented 71 percent of the audience. The biopic, independently financed for roughly $40 million, on Friday drew rebukes from Jada Pinkett Smith, who said on Twitter that the film’s depiction of her friendship with the slain rap star was “deeply hurtful,” and from 50 Cent, who called the film “trash” on Instagram.
Also notable: “Rough Night” (Sony), an R-rated comedy led by a female ensemble, flopped with $8.1 million in ticket sales. “Rough Night,” which cost Sony and LStar Capital $20 million to make, may have been hurt by the low-budget shark thriller “47 Meters Down” (Entertainment Studios), which took in a better-than-expected $11.5 million.