Soccer|U.S. Soccer Fans Can Relax. The Team Should Make the World Cup.
U.S. Soccer Fans Can Relax. The Team Should Make the World Cup.
Last November, the United States was seemingly in danger of missing out on the World Cup. The team had lost its first two games in the final round of qualifying, capped by an ugly 4-0 loss in Costa Rica that led to the firing of Coach Jurgen Klinsmann. The United States stood last in the six-team qualifying group, with only the top three finishers guaranteed a World Cup spot.
Now, only four games later, the United States looks virtually certain to make the finals.
The Americans stand third, only a point ahead of Panama. But the rest of their schedule looks favorable, and there is an escape route even if they falter.
The United States resumed its qualifying campaign in March by pounding Honduras at home and, more important, getting a point in a potentially tricky game in Panama. This month, the United States beat an overmatched Trinidad team, then on Sunday grabbed a point in Mexico City, a place notoriously difficult to win.
Just as important, Panama on Tuesday night could manage only a draw in a home game it could have been expected to win against Honduras.
That leaves the United States in third in the group behind Mexico and Costa Rica and a point ahead of Panama. Though that sounds precarious, the United States has the advantage of a comparatively easy schedule ahead in the fall. Its home games are against Costa Rica and Panama, neither a gimme, but both very winnable. Away games are exceedingly difficult in this region, but the United States must play only Honduras and Trinidad, the teams that are in fifth and sixth in the six-team group.
The United States is also the only team that has no more games to play against first-place Mexico. And Panama, the team closest behind, must play Mexico on the road in its next game.
Even with a poor run of games, the United States has an out. If it finishes fourth, it still has a backdoor path to the World Cup, a qualifying playoff with the fifth-place team in Asia.
While it is possible that the opponent could be a team like Australia, it seems more likely to be Saudi Arabia or Uzbekistan, teams that while far from terrible, would be clear underdogs even to a struggling American team.
Four years ago, Mexico used a playoff victory over New Zealand to sneak into the World Cup after a horrible qualifying campaign.
But it is unlikely to come to that. Fans often panic after an early bad result or two, but the American team has shown again and again that it always has the firepower to make the World Cup. In 2018 in Russia, the United States should be lined up for its eighth straight appearance.