Six hours of television would be enough to cover the histories of most countries satisfactorily, but China is not most countries.
“The Story of China,” which begins on Tuesday with two hourlong episodes on PBS, is all highlights. Three dynasties, not to mention Confucius, fly past in the first episode.
The host, the British historian and TV personality Michael Wood (“In Search of the Dark Ages,” “Michael Wood’s Story of England”), does linger here and there. He has a crush on the Song dynasty — wonderful, peaceful, prosperous — which gets most of an hour, equal to the more recent and better documented Ming and Qing. The mid-19th-century Taiping Rebellion, with its Christian roots, gets ample time.
But mostly, it’s a mad rush. This really sinks in when the first mention is made of Mao and Chinese Communism with fewer than 30 minutes to go in the final episode. The Great Leap Forward and the resulting famine are covered in one sentence. The Cultural Revolution gets a few minutes, almost entirely devoted to an anecdote about a family hiding a treasured heirloom from the Red Guards.
And therein lies a key to the approach of Mr. Wood and his producer and director, Rebecca Dobbs. “The Story of China” is framed by the idea that respect for family is the constant thread through 4,000 years of tumultuous and violent history. It’s a simplistic notion, but it’s a natural fit for Mr. Wood’s folksy, intimate storytelling method.
Mr. Wood’s awkward enthusiasm seems genuine, though it can start to wear on you. There’s a lot of “Fantastic” and “Isn’t that wonderful.” In what starts to feel like an unintentional running joke, he credits a series of cities, from Xian to Kaifeng to Nanjing to Shanghai, with having been the greatest in the world in their time.
On a less amusing note, he invokes the Uighur minority in western China several times to make the case for various dynasties’ inclusiveness, without mentioning the violent conflict between Uighurs and the central government today. “The Story of China” is good entertainment, if you don’t mind a little whitewashing of recent history.