“The Leftovers” is not only the best thing to watch on TV right now, but it’s also the best thing to listen to.
The HBO series — a semi-apocalyptic drama about the aftermath of the Sudden Departure, in which 2 percent of the world’s population disappears — defies easy classification. It’s mournful and mordantly funny, absurdist but dedicated to the search for meaning. And it captures this ambitious mix of tones and contradictions with the most imaginative soundtrack on the air.
This is the sort of show that imagines the afterlife, in the second season finale, as a grotty karaoke bar in which Kevin Garvey (Justin Theroux) performs a shaky rendition of “Homeward Bound” while hovering between life and death.
“The Leftovers,” whose third and final season concludes Sunday, June 4, is less about plot than about the ineffable. And like the many religious traditions it makes reference to, the show finds its way to the spiritual through music.
Let’s start with the theme song. There is none. Or rather, there are many. The first season used a somber strings-and-choir piece over the opening titles. The second switched to “Let the Mystery Be,” Iris DeMent’s country ballad of eschatological doubt (“Some say once you’re gone you’re gone forever/And some say you’re gonna come back”).
In Season 3, the floodgates opened, weirdly and wonderfully. The first episode ditched the title sequence for a prologue, about a 19th-century doomsday cult, set to the Christian-rock “I Wish We’d All Been Ready” by Good News Circle. The second borrowed the theme song from the 1980s sitcom “Perfect Strangers,” paying off a comic-dramatic story line about the survivor’s guilt of Mark Linn-Baker, the only “Strangers” cast member not to have been raptured.
The theme has changed every week since, waxing sacred or tongue-in-cheek or both. One week, it was Richard Cheese’s lounge-lizard cover of Depeche Mode’s “Personal Jesus”; another, a Hebrew prayer; another, “1-800 Suicide” by Gravediggaz.
The device is attention-getting, but it’s more than a stunt. A good television soundtrack captures the voice of a series, and the voice of “The Leftovers” is brainy, irreverent but sincerely spiritually questing. The showrunner, Damon Lindelof, and the music supervisor, Liza Richardson, give the sense of trying to answer unsolvable cosmic riddles by coming at them from every possible angle.
The show uses gospel and praise music, both straight (“Sign of the Judgment,” by the McIntosh County Shouters) and skewed (“Song of the Pious Itinerant [Hallelujah, I’m a Bum])” by the New Christy Minstrels). It uses pop music ironically — “I Love a Rainy Night” by Eddie Rabbit as a character struggles across the parched Australian Outback — and with odd poignancy. In the fourth episode, “Take On Me” by A-ha appears three times, in its original version, as a piano melody and in a brass arrangement by the horn quartet Genghis Barbie, turning a disposable 1980s New Wave song into a triptych of longing and dislocation.
“Miami Vice” was an early example of the prime-time series as jukebox — its soundtrack topped the Billboard chart in late 1985 and early 1986, and it helped build the show’s cachet and mood of sexy menace.
But a good soundtrack creates a world, with its own aesthetic and rules, as much as plot and cinematography do. “Mad Men,” for instance, was notable for its astute period song choices. When the aging adman Don Draper puzzled over the Beatles’ “Tomorrow Never Knows” — as if the sound of the new youth culture was like an alien transmission to him — it wasn’t just scene-setting, it was character-defining.
On the other hand, when the Season 2 episode “Maidenform” began with a montage of Betty, Joan and Peggy dressing to the Decemberists’ 2005 song “The Infanta,” the music was fitting — its thundering drums and intimations of regal, powerful femininity — the anachronism (not the series’s only one, but rare) was jarring.
In the original “Twin Peaks,” dreamy pop music captured the show’s hallucinatory-sweet sensibility: absinthe bubble gum. David Lynch, with his composer, Angelo Badalamenti, wrote songs for the singer Julee Cruise. Mr. Lynch has been closing installments of the revival with ethereal performances from the likes of the Chromatics and Au Revoir Simone, as if to usher us from the show’s underworld to our surface reality.
This year’s Emmys will be the first with an award for best music supervision. You could easily fill a mixtape of worthy nominees. “Atlanta,” the FX hip-hop comedy, has an appropriately sharp ear, but so does “Scandal,” whose classic-soul playlist announces its love-roller-coaster sensibility, and “The Americans,” the Cold War spy drama, which uses deep cuts from the ’80s to give a different shading to a familiar era.
“Big Little Lies” characterized its upper-class families partly through their children’s precocious musical tastes; “Legion” created an unstuck-in-time mod soundscape; “The Handmaid’s Tale” drops incongruous pop anthems into its dystopia like pirate broadcasts from free territory.
It’s the opposite sort of choice you would expect to score this scene, and that dissonance makes it ideal. The scene turns grieving into Shaolin shadowboxing, a struggle in which you drop down to rise higher. In its fierce beauty, you can hear the voice of “The Leftovers”: This series may not know if there’s a lord above, but it is determined to make a joyful noise.