HOUSTON — Sluggers strike out. In baseball, it is all but fact. The 1927 Yankees led the majors in slugging percentage and strikeouts. The five players with the most career strikeouts averaged nearly 600 home runs. This season, major league hitters are on a record pace for home runs and strikeouts.
Slugging and strikeouts — like love and marriage, as the song goes, you can’t have one without the other. Unless you are the Houston Astros.
When the Yankees visit Minute Maid Park this weekend, they will meet an Astros team coming in with a 54-26 record — the best in the majors through 80 games in more than a decade. The Astros’ hitters have the fewest strikeouts in the majors (540) while also leading in slugging percentage (.485).
According to the Elias Sports Bureau, only two teams since 1910 have led the majors in slugging percentage while recording the fewest strikeouts: the 1948 Yankees and the 1995 Cleveland Indians. The Astros have contact hitters who punch, not slap.
“I don’t want guys swinging at a pitch unless they can hit a homer,” said Dave Hudgens, the Astros’ hitting coach.
Hudgens, who has also coached for Oakland and the Mets, said he had always approached hitting this way. To make it work, though, Houston built a talented lineup with no holes.
From 2011 through 2013, the Astros lost 324 games. A new general manager, Jeff Luhnow, came aboard in December 2011 and overhauled the organization with an emphasis on analytics. While he did, the players felt hopeless.
Outfielder Josh Reddick, then with the Athletics, remembers the opposite feeling when facing the Astros. Hitters, he said, seemed to race one another to the bat rack. It was going to be a good day.
But the Astros’ pitchers have evolved, too. They lead the majors in strikeouts, and their six most-used relievers each average at least 10 strikeouts per nine innings. Just one team has ever led the majors in strikeouts by its pitchers and fewest strikeouts by its hitters, according to Elias — the 1911 New York Giants.
The Astros, who were 10 games better than the next closest American League team entering Thursday night’s games, may soon become even stronger. The injured starters Dallas Keuchel, Charlie Morton and Collin McHugh should all be back within a month, and the Astros could push hard to add another starter before the July 31 nonwaiver trading deadline.
The Astros did not quite have it in 2015, when they squeezed into the playoffs after a hot start and beat the Yankees in the wild-card game. That season, Houston ranked second in the majors in slugging, but also second in strikeouts.
“Power’s exciting, power sells tickets and power wins games, at times,” Luhnow said. “But power usually comes at the expense of rally-killing strikeouts in other instances. It’s not a satisfying brand of baseball, and I don’t think it’s a winning brand of baseball, necessarily, to have 30-home run hitters with 200 strikeouts a year.
Luhnow has trimmed several free swingers from the 2015 roster, including Chris Carter, Jason Castro, Carlos Gomez, Colby Rasmus and Luis Valbuena. Meanwhile, the young core of Jose Altuve, Carlos Correa and George Springer has continued to improve, as have role players like Gonzalez and Jake Marisnick.
Surrounding them now are veterans who more reliably make contact: Reddick, Nori Aoki, Carlos Beltran, Brian McCann and Yuli Gurriel, a rookie with a long track record in Cuba. All but Aoki have power. The Astros lead the majors in on-base plus slugging percentage from the 8 and 9 spots in the order, essentially using 12 everyday players to shuffle seamlessly in and out of the lineup.
Reddick said he was not aware that the Astros’ hitters had the fewest strikeouts in the majors, but said it made sense because they work counts well and rarely chase pitches out of the strike zone. The Kansas City Royals took a similar approach in 2015, when they had the fewest strikeouts in the majors en route to a championship.
The Astros came close to winning their division series here in Game 4 that year, but the Royals strung together five singles and an error to erase a four-run deficit in the eighth inning. The Royals did not have the Astros’ power — not even close — but made an impression with their relentless attack.
Hinch has experience with those. He managed Arizona for most of the 2010 season, when the Diamondbacks’ hitters set a major league record for strikeouts, a mark now held by the 2016 Milwaukee Brewers. He hated strikeouts then, and still does.
Hinch uses Springer at the top of the order, giving his best power hitter the most chances to produce. Springer has responded with 24 home runs, including a club-record nine to lead off games. He is on track to start the All-Star Game in the outfield, with Altuve at second base and Correa at shortstop.
Altuve, who will soon be a five-time All-Star at 27, said it was fine to strike out sometimes; it is better than grounding into a double play, for example. But when talented hitters like Correa and Springer aggressively hunt strikes — and only strikes — their hits can go far.
The Astros did that again Thursday, chasing a young Oakland starter, Daniel Gossett, in the sixth inning when Altuve doubled off the right-field wall and Correa launched his second homer of the game, a missile high over center field. Oakland’s hitters had 14 strikeouts, Houston’s just four. The Astros rolled to a 6-1 victory.
Contact, indeed, is their friend. The Astros hoard it for themselves, and the relationship is serious.