LONDON — Senior people in the Church of England “colluded” over two decades with a bishop to help cover up his serial abuse of young men and boys, an independent review found on Thursday.
The unsparing report, titled “An Abuse of Faith,” centers on Peter Ball, the former bishop of Lewes and Gloucester, who was convicted in 2015 of misconduct in public office and of indecent assaults against 18 victims over a 15-year period from the late 1970s to the early 1990s. Now 85, Mr. Ball was released from prison in February after serving half his 32-month sentence.
Among the report’s most damning criticisms is its rebuke of the former archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Carey, now the honorary assistant bishop in the Diocese of Oxford. It accuses him of setting “the tone for the church’s response to Mr. Ball’s crimes” and enabling Mr. Ball’s declarations of innocence to be accepted, even as victims and members of the public came forward to expose abuse by the former bishop.
Mr. Ball refused to meet officials conducting the review or to submit a written statement.
The report said that despite the efforts of victims and witnesses to report the abuse, the church allowed its desire to preserve its reputation to supersede the imperative to help victims.
After the report’s publication, Archbishop Welby asked Lord Carey to resign from his position with the Diocese of Oxford.
According to the report, Mr. Ball, a graduate of Cambridge University, was a charismatic speaker and a frequent visitor to public schools who mentored young men and boys. During his trial, prosecutors said he cajoled and forced young men in his orbit to pray naked, using the cloak of religion to gain their trust.
Mr. Ball resigned as bishop in 1993 after Neil Todd, a 17-year-old aspiring monk, reported abuse to police and church officials that occurred when Mr. Todd was living with Mr. Ball at Bishopscourt, the official residence of the Bishop of Gloucester.
According to the report, Mr. Ball encouraged Mr. Todd to engage in spiritual exercises involving nudity and cold showers and he suggested Mr. Todd agree to be beaten while naked. That was averted in one instance after an intervention by a member of the domestic staff. Eventually, explicit “sexual activity” between Mr. Ball and Mr. Todd ensued, the report says.
Even after his resignation, Mr. Ball was permitted to officiate at churches and to speak at schools. Mr. Todd took his own life in 2012 at the age of 38.

During Mr. Ball’s trial, it emerged that members of the British establishment, among them cabinet ministers, an unnamed member of the royal family and Lord Carey, had intervened to vouch for Mr. Ball with the authorities. The church has been accused of seeking to cover up what it knew about the abuse.
