The movement being led by the Rev. William J. Barber II, featured in your article, is important, not least because he understands that Christianity is more than a series of ethical demands. Religion is primarily a lens for meaning, and in our chaotic, increasingly globalized world, we on the left need this more than ever.
Jesus preached a sophisticated message that disrupts false binaries and upends conventional notions of how power works. If we on the Christian left better understood and were more fluent in discussing this aspect of our faith, we would not struggle as we do with the challenges inherent in having a diverse membership.
The writer is an Episcopal priest.
The media in this country have long portrayed the struggle in the public square as one between the religious right and the secular left. This perspective has been fostered by the religious left’s misguided belief that upholding the separation of church and state meant keeping religious beliefs personal and private.
Doing so has long enabled progressives to dun the religious right by claiming that it tries to force its religious beliefs on others.
Actually, the struggle has always been over whose theology would take precedence. Christian believers on the left, like those on the right, take positions on a host of issues based upon their interpretation of the Bible. Being unable to openly acknowledge that has indeed left the media and the general public with the view that Christian belief is synonymous with conservative positions.
Sadly, the price for such reticence has been the loss of millennials from the churches and from partnership with progressive believers in the fight for justice, equality and human rights.
Many of us religious liberals never left the game. We have been there through civil rights, Vietnam, abortion, school integration, voting rights, same-sex marriage, the death penalty, wealth equality, immigration and much more.
You describe my denomination as “agnostic Unitarians.” We have been Unitarian Universalists for over 55 years. We welcome a diversity of theological beliefs. “Agnostic” describes only a few of us.
The writer is minister emeritus of the First Parish in Waltham.
Your article says anti-Vietnam War protesters who were religious leaders were mostly white men. I remember marching with many Catholic nuns as well as with black clergy and black women affiliated with churches. Residents of Rogers Park in Chicago, then a predominantly Jewish neighborhood, lined the streets to cheer us on.
The religious right’s moral agenda ended when its adherents overwhelmingly voted for a serial adulterer who has violated every code of decency. The talk of “family values” is belied by its actions. Claiming to be pro-life, it turns its back on the born. It punishes the poor and serves the rich. 
It is willing to cut food stamps for the hungry, cut health care for the sick and put our elderly at risk in the name of a savior who would be appalled by its actions.
HUNTINGTON WOODS, MICH.
As a former agnostic turned evangelical Christian, I read your article with avid interest.  The Rev. William J. Barber II and Jim Wallis, the Christian writer and political activist, are two of my heroes.
God led me to a Christ-centered Presbyterian church, and I have been fighting for social justice ever since. You report that the Rev. Franklin Graham said that “progressive” is “just another word for ‘I’m an atheist.’ ” This last year was tough on my faith, and it was people like Mr. Graham and President Trump who tested my faith.
It is no coincidence that with the rise of the religious right we also had a rise in anti-Christian secularism. Mr. Graham justifies the left’s atheism. Thank God for the social justice movement.
MAX BLASKA, MADISON, WIS.
Two thousand years ago, a young Jew led a progressive religious movement in opposition to the Pharisees and the Sadducees, two religiously conservative sects who were recognized as the foremost arbiters of Scripture when Jesus appeared on the scene.
In today’s political climate, it can be argued, by those who identify themselves as both liberal and followers of Christ, that Jesus would adamantly challenge the demographically restrictive moral authority of the religious right.
The evolution of conservative religious communities as a political force in white suburban and small-town America has little to do with nonsecular issues of morality and values, and much more to do with secular issues of race, power and wealth.
Religious issues have become inextricably commingled with social agendas. Important elements include social status, privilege, rewards (both in the here-and-now and in the hereafter), and justification of an inequitable distribution of power.
How else could the gerrymandering, Citizens United, voter ID laws and other forms of disenfranchisement be justified? In this perverted value system, poverty is regarded as de facto evidence of a lack of worthiness. Similarly, wealth (and whiteness) provide de facto evidence of God’s favor.
History shows that religions evolve through time in a manner that belies their social fitness. Membership in conservative churches has surged because they provide a sense of community in an environment that woefully fails to fulfill this basic human need in other ways.
Along with community comes tribalism, and with tribalism comes party affiliation and political power. The situation is no different from the Middle Ages. All of this evolved quite organically in the context of the expanding exurbs, air-conditioning, the automobile and cable/satellite television — secular issues all.
Other moral and ethical issues are only a footnote. They receive most of the attention, however, because they carry the aura of sanctity (or else sanctimony, one or the other).
The left-of-center faith community, of which I am a member and leader, has stood proudly on a foundation of speaking out against moral and civic injustices for as long as our institutions have existed.
Certainly, this is a political moment like no other, galvanizing wide resistance often from unlikely places. But religious resistance, based on fundamental moral truths, has existed for decades, arguably centuries.
These faith voices have not been silent for the last 40 years. They have been speaking loudly, identifying issues like immigration, climate, war, abortion and poverty as moral rather than political issues.
The real question is why the media has been ignoring these faith voices for the last 40 years.
NORTH HAVEN, CONN.
The writer is executive director of the Franciscan Action Network and a co-founder of the Global Catholic Climate Movement.