The PGA Tour is beefing up its antidoping policy by adding blood testing and bringing its list of banned substances in line with the World Anti-Doping Agency.
The revised policy takes effect at the start of next season, in October.
Blood testing will allow the Tour to detect any use of human growth hormone, which is on the list of banned substances but cannot be detected through urine. But the Tour still plans to use urine samples for the majority of its drug testing next season.
Levinson said that blood testing also detected substances that were common in more high-endurance sports, like cycling, but that the Tour did not see those substances as applicable to golf.
“For that reason, urine will be the predominant method of testing,” he said.
Under the revised policy, the Tour is adding to its banned list three categories of substances that the antidoping agency already prohibits — asthma medications, allergy and anti-inflammatory medications, and pseudoephedrine over a certain threshold.
He said the process for therapeutic use exemptions involving some of those additional substances would be adjusted to make the response time quicker.
In a slight move toward more transparency, the Tour will start reporting suspensions for substance abuse. Under the current policy, the Tour is required to announce when a player has been suspended only for performance-enhancing drugs. Recreational drugs fell under the Tour’s private “conduct unbecoming a professional” disciplinary policy.
But if a player tests positive for those types of drugs, it will not be reported unless the player is suspended.
“We believe that these changes to our program are prudent in that they further our objectives of protecting the well-being of our members and better substantiate the integrity of golf as a clean sport,” Jay Monahan, the PGA Tour’s commissioner, said in a statement on Tuesday.
The Tour’s antidoping policy began in June 2008.
In nine years, only three players have been suspended for performance-enhancing drugs — Doug Barron, Bhavik Patel and Scott Stallings. Stallings never failed a drug test; rather, he became aware that the anabolic agent DHEA that a doctor advised him to take was on the banned list and turned himself in. He has said he was tested while taking DHEA and never failed a test.
Levinson said the Tour was encouraged to add blood testing after the Olympics last summer in Rio de Janeiro, where golf was added to the program for the first time in more than a century. He said Tour officials saw how the blood testing was administered and whether the actual testing affected performance. “We saw no impact,” he said.
He also cited advancements in blood testing that expanded the window for detecting H.G.H.
The Tour said it would spend the next three months explaining to the players the changes to the system.
Levinson said the additional substances added to the Tour’s banned list were not included in 2008 because the Tour felt the antidoping agency’s code was “one size fits all” and those substances would be considered more performance-enhancing in endurance sports than in golf.
But he said players were facing different lists around the world, particularly in the Olympics.
“So we felt for consistency’s sake, it was time to move our list to the current WADA list,” he said.