Mycroft Holmes, Sherlock’s older, fatter, smarter brother, was renowned for solving mysteries without leaving his armchair at the Diogenes Club. In Josephine Tey’s “The Daughter of Time,” Inspector Alan Grant of Scotland Yard was confined to a hospital bed when he tackled the historical crime of the murdered princes in the Tower. And Rex Stout’s corpulent genius, Nero Wolfe, investigated criminal cases without budging from his elegant Manhattan townhouse.
The Swedish author Leif GW Persson takes up the challenge of the sitting sleuth in THE DYING DETECTIVE (Pantheon, $27.95), which features Lars Martin Johansson, once head of the National Criminal Police, but now retired and vegetating in the country. Johansson is about to bite into a spicy sausage from “the best hot-dog kiosk in Sweden” when he has a stroke that puts him in the hospital under the care of a doctor who’s seriously worried about his heart. That in itself might be enough to give Johansson a heart attack, so he grasps at the chance to work on an old case, the unsolved rape and murder of a 9-year-old girl named Yasmine.
“Do you think it’s possible to solve a 25-year-old murder case if you’re forced to lie on a sofa the whole time?” Johansson asks his former colleague and best friend, Bo Jarnebring. Well, sure it’s possible, so long as the supine sleuth has friends like Bo, who digs up the police files for his old boss and drives him around to possible crime scenes. Nero Wolfe may have had Archie Goodwin to do the legwork and take his guff, but Johansson has his own minions. Besides his doting wife, Pia, there’s his punked-out caregiver, Matilda, to drive him to the face-to-face interviews that are crucial to the investigation, and beefy Max to handle certain illicit errands that shall not be named.
Persson wrote a hefty trilogy of deeply researched, if ponderously argued, crime novels based on the unsolved assassination of the Swedish prime minister Olof Palme. On a lesser scale, this exhaustively detailed police procedural, painstakingly translated by Neil Smith, speaks to that same inclination to dig for the truth, regardless of the personal cost, which in this case is quite high. Maybe too high.
Sons are expected to carry on their fathers’ professions in 1816 Dublin, but when 18-year-old Abigail Lawless tries to follow her father into the medical field, she has to sneak into the anatomical theater where he’s dissecting a cadaver for the edification of his male students. In THE CORONER’S DAUGHTER (Pegasus Crime, $25.95), Andrew Hughes takes great relish in describing the occupational hazards of being a smart woman in restrictive times. Luckily for Abigail, her father is happy to tutor his clever girl privately. But Abigail is on her own when she applies her knowledge of human anatomy to question the supposed suicide of a housemaid who was said to have killed her illegitimate newborn child.
This slender thread of a plot is sturdy enough to send Abigail all over the city in pursuit of a killer, from the wretched Lying-In Hospital, where poor women are herded into overcrowded wards, to the grand ballroom at Charlemont House, where society swells parade in all their finery. Although social class, religious fanaticism and early forensic medical procedures are all duly explored, I confess to being more thrilled by the spectacle of a life-size animatronic doll — with rotating glass eyes! — entertaining the guests at that society ball.
If Frank Marr didn’t have a drug habit, he’d probably still be with the narcotics squad of the Washington, D.C., police. But Marr is a willing slave to cocaine, so here he is, a lackadaisical private eye in David Swinson’s CRIME SONG (Mulholland/Little, Brown, $26), trying to keep his coke edge while investigating the murder of his cousin, a nice kid who happened to be dealing drugs. “I certainly wouldn’t want to put my lifestyle on someone else,” Marr says. “It ain’t for everyone.” Drugs and all, Marr is easy to take, a decent guy with a sense of honor. And since Swinson is one of the best dialogue hounds in the business, Marr is also blessed with some terrific street talk. While searching for his stolen vinyl record collection, he has an extended conversation with a cabdriver that just about melts in your mouth. “How many times I gotta keep tellin’ you I ain’t stupid?” the driver demands. Keep talking. We hear you.
There are stunning descriptions of rampaging forest fires, majestic mountain ranges and violent storms in THE WEIGHT OF NIGHT (Atria, paper, $16), Christine Carbo’s rugged wilderness mystery set in Glacier National Park. If only people didn’t stand in front of the landscape. Carbo’s characters, a manly park police officer with a burdensome secret and a crime scene investigator with nightmares of her own, aren’t the liveliest creatures in the forest, but they perform important tasks like finding the skeleton that kicks off the mystery. It’s in depicting nature’s drama that Carbo’s writing thrives. “This was no campfire with steady, lulling pops and crackles,” she observes. “We were talking about the kind of roaring giant that presses in on you, fills your head with its freight train of noise, and makes your gut vibrate.” More of that, please.