Senator Kamala Harris and Attorney General Jeff Sessions had a contentious back and forth at a Senate Intelligence hearing, at which Senator Richard Burr, the committee chairman, had to weigh in.
Last week, after an Uber board member’s wisecrack and the interruption of Senator Kamala Harris during a Senate Intelligence Committee hearing, The New York Times asked women to share their own experiences. More than 1,000 responded, offering up vivid anecdotes of times they had been interrupted, penalized for speaking up, belittled or discriminated against in terms of salary, promotions or pregnancy.
Some women asked to have their names withheld, fearing career repercussions. Several comments have been condensed for space.
Some women recalled moments when they relayed an idea during a meeting, only to have a male colleague chime in later and claim it as his own.
“I work in the oil and gas and power generation industry, and I am surrounded by mostly males.
“I offer suggestions and comments during meetings, and often my suggestions do not even get acknowledged. Then, moments later, a male in the room offers up my suggestion and claims it as his own, and everyone acts real supportive and cheers it on, so to speak.
“I have been on email threads with a team of colleagues, and if I state a fact that is not in agreement with what one of my male co-workers has said, he sends me a message later telling me that I need to ‘soften my responses’ to him.
“I am a [male to female] transgender engineer working for a large aerospace company. I transitioned midcareer. I have found that prior to my transition, my input and opinions in meetings were regarded and considered. Post-transition, I could render an opinion or assertion, and it seems that only when a male colleague affirms the same assertion, only then is it taken seriously. He will then get credit for the idea. This is apart to constantly being interrupted while speaking.
A male colleague said, ‘I’m sure you know a lot about cleaning.’ People chuckled.
Some women shared stories about having sexist remarks hurled at them during meetings or having their contributions ignored.
“I am an associate professor in informatics with a Ph.D. in Computer Science. Most recently, while at a meeting discussing faculty hires, I was explaining how a job candidate (who was a man) should not be hired for our faculty slot because he had never worked with medical data, which is sparse, messy and needs a lot of cleaning.
“I worked in investment banking and was the only female in the team for awhile.
“I’ve been told, ‘The only reason you would be in the boardroom is if you were bringing us tea.’ When I said that was out of line, I was told that I couldn’t take a joke. I raised this with the head of the division, and he refused to believe me.
“I pushed my direct boss to do something about it and to his credit he did try. But sure enough I was ostracized for speaking up and complaining.
Some women spoke broadly of the gender pay gap, but many shared specific stories of being paid less than a male counterpart.
While most women recalled numerous instances of sexism and gender bias in the workplace, others praised a culture of inclusivity.
“I have had very positive experiences in my workplace. That may surprise people because I am an assistant professor of theology at an evangelical Christian university in the Midwest. Christians, especially conservative evangelicals, have a reputation for regressive gender roles.
“I have never felt undervalued or had my voice stifled, even when I am the only female on a committee. My male colleagues understand (or are at least trying to understand) the importance of being advocates for full inclusion of women.
