On a recent Saturday morning in a desanctified church in Upper Manhattan, 24 people were piled together in a naked fetal hug.
On a balcony one story above them was the New York artist Angelo Musco, taking photos of the group for his latest project. Every few minutes, Mr. Musco would stop shooting and shout directions to his three clothed assistants to help move an arm or a leg or to break up the crowd into smaller formations.
The naked mass was made up of actors, dancers, artists, off-duty photographers, a lawyer, a chef, a masseuse, a real estate agent and a professional fire dancer — mostly New Yorkers, many of them naturists (nudists’ preferred term). They got up every 10 minutes or so, milled around, chatted as if at a cocktail party, and then lay back down, eyes closed, silently spooning one another while relaxing lounge music played in the background.
There were black bodies, white bodies, one Asian body, tattooed bodies, hairy and smooth bodies and one trans body, skewed three to one toward men. And they were all Mr. Musco’s clay for the day.
Some of the volunteer models said they came for the feeling of closeness and camaraderie. Once in a while, there was a playful slap as the crowd got into position. Others said they came to spend time with good friends or to be part of a bigger purpose.
Gary Wayne, who was on his fifth shoot for Mr. Musco, said that being a part of the artist’s projects made him “feel like you’re becoming the art — it feels awesome.” Mr. Wayne, a retired broadcast engineer, works as a nude model for drawing classes.
Gary Francis, an actor, said the best part of the process was finding himself in the finished product, months later. He remembered the first time he saw himself in Mr. Musco’s “Sanctuary” project last year.
Shoots generally last around three hours, with occasional breaks to stretch. “It’s like doing yoga: You have to hold the pose,” Mr. Musco said from above.
When it was all over, the crowd applauded. As payment, each model was given a 12-by-18-inch print of a naked formation from the last shoot, six months ago, at Judson Memorial Church in Greenwich Village.
After the shoot, Mr. Musco’s assistant Win Naing would spend several days transferring the photographs to a computer, removing any tattoos or jewelry from the images and archiving them. Mr. Musco would then build his new work, “Aaru,” a black-and-white garden with butterflies, calla lilies, roses and other plants, all made up of human bodies, using 500 to 1,000 photos. He hopes to be finished by the end of the year.
 We’re done,’” said Alex Matskevich, a Russian computer programmer who has posed eight times for Mr. Musco. His wife, Hana, a nurse and a Japanese native, had come for her third shoot and was the smallest of the models. At one point, she was placed on top of the pile of bodies, for some variation.
