PARIS — With the four remaining Grand Slam winners all falling in their fourth-round matches Sunday at the French Open, there will be a new women’s major champion crowned Saturday at Roland Garros.
It is the first time that no past major winners have reached the quarterfinal stage at a women’s Grand Slam event since the 1979 Australian Open, and the first time in Paris since 1977.
Venus Williams, Svetlana Kuznetsova, Samantha Stosur and Garbiñe Muguruza, the defending champion, lost Sunday, leaving a dozen women in contention who have never won a major — four in the quarterfinals and eight awaiting Monday’s fourth-round matches.
Heading into this French Open, the women’s draw appeared to be wide open, because of the absence of Maria Sharapova and Williams’s sister, Serena. The draw just became even more open, but a new crowd favorite appears to have emerged quite clearly.
Kristina Mladenovic, the 13th seed and the highest-ranked Frenchwoman, rode a sonic wave of crowd support through her 6-1, 3-6, 6-3 win over the fourth-seeded Muguruza. Mladenovic’s nickname, Kiki, rang out from the stands between points, especially as she began to cement her lead in the third set.
Mladenovic shouted “forza,” Italian for power, but she may as well have yelled “fortissimo” to lead the fans’ chorus at Court Suzanne Lenglen. Her supporters reacted with maximum volume to nearly any point she won — whether on a Mladenovic winner or an unforced error by Muguruza.
Muguruza, in her first defense of a major title, was visibly agitated by the hostile reception, and she wagged a disapproving finger at the crowd as she walked off the court.
Muguruza, who defeated Serena Williams in last year’s final, arrived red-eyed to her news conference and said the crowd “sometimes should be a little more respectful,” citing the many times the chair umpire, Mariana Alves, had to calm them down.
When a reporter began to ask about Mladenovic’s Italian exhortations, Muguruza began to cry anew. The moderator, Eleanor Preston, asked Muguruza, 23, if she wanted to “pop outside for a minute,” and she accepted the offer.
“Bear with us, please, for a few moments,” Preston said.
When Muguruza returned, the reporter who had asked the question apologized and offered to retract it, but Muguruza said she was ready this time.
When he asked again, Muguruza said she was not bothered by her opponent’s shouts, and mockingly alluded to the fact that Mladenovic is multilingual.
“I think she speaks, like, 25 languages — I heard, so,” she said with a shrug.
Mladenovic, 24, appeared surprised when told of the criticism by Muguruza and Sumyk, and she disagreed that the crowd’s behavior was in any way “bad at all.” She noted that in April she had played against Germans in Stuttgart, where the crowd had also supported the local players, as she said should be expected.
Venus Williams, who will turn 37 this month, was the most established champion to fall, with her collection of seven major titles. The 10th-seeded Williams lost, 5-7, 6-2, 6-1, to Timea Bacsinszky, the 30th seed and the same player who defeated her in the fourth round last year.
Bacsinszky, who lives in the French-speaking part of Switzerland, enjoyed crowd support throughout the match on Court Philippe Chatrier — albeit not as raucous as it was for Mladenovic, her quarterfinal opponent.
Williams, who has never won a French Open in her 20 appearances, fought back from 5-1 down to rattle off six straight games and win the first set, but it was not enough.
The eighth-seeded Kuznetsova, who won the 2009 French Open and the 2004 United States Open, fell, 6-1, 4-6, 6-2, to Caroline Wozniacki, the No. 11 seed. The 12 women remaining in the tournament have reached a combined 11 Grand Slam semifinals, and six of those appearances belong to Wozniacki. But Wozniacki’s best result here was one quarterfinal, in 2010, with clay being her least comfortable surface.
In her bid for a first French Open semifinal, Wozniacki, 26, will face 47th-ranked Jelena Ostapenko, a first-time major quarterfinalist who beat the 23rd-seeded Stosur, the 2011 United States Open champion, 2-6, 6-2, 6-4. The loss will end Stosur’s 453-week run as the top-ranked Australian woman, a mantle she cedes to Daria Gavrilova.