Patent infringement cases may seem like arcane disputes between faceless businesses. But they can have huge effects on the economy and on individual consumers. Just wait until the next time you have to buy a cartridge for your printer.
The Supreme Court ruled on Tuesday that companies can’t use patent law to prevent customers and other businesses from reselling products — in this case used printer cartridges, which are cheaper than new ones. And last week, the court decided that companies bringing patent infringement cases must do so in a jurisdiction where the defendant is incorporated rather than cherry-pick courts.
The rulings, which overturned decisions by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, should benefit consumers and deter frivolous or abusive patent infringement lawsuits. In its ruling on Tuesday, in Impression Products v. Lexmark International, the court decided that Lexmark, a printer company, could not use patent law to prevent Impression from buying used cartridges, then refilling and selling them to consumers. Lexmark said Impression violated its patents because Lexmark had sold some of the cartridges under the condition that customers return them.
Chief Justice John Roberts Jr., writing for the majority, likened Impression to a shop that buys, restores and sells used cars. “That smooth flow of commerce would sputter if companies that make the thousands of parts that go into a vehicle could keep their patent rights after the first sale,” he wrote in an opinion joined by six justices. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissented from part of the decision, and Justice Neil Gorsuch did not participate in the cases because arguments took place before he was seated.
In the decision last week, in TC Heartland v. Kraft Foods Group Brands, the court struck a blow against forum shopping. TC Heartland was seeking to have a lawsuit Kraft filed against it in Delaware moved to a federal court in Heartland’s home state, Indiana. Federal patent law says those cases should be brought in “the judicial district where the defendant resides, or where the defendant has committed acts of infringement and has a regular and established place of business.” The case hinged on what the word “resides” means. A unanimous decision written by Justice Clarence Thomas said it meant the place where the defendant is incorporated.
The effects could be significant. Patent cases will be more evenly dispersed, and consumers will benefit from patent law that encourages innovation, not needless litigation.