If beating the surging Boston Red Sox were not difficult enough these days, the Yankees tried to do it Tuesday night with one arm seemingly tied behind their back — the one belonging to their putative ace, Masahiro Tanaka.
Tanaka’s funk only deepened as the visiting Red Sox, who entered the game with the fewest home runs in the American League, hit three off him in a 5-4 victory that narrowed the Yankees’ lead in the American League East to a single game.
When Red Sox closer Craig Kimbrel struck out the side in the ninth inning — blowing away Brett Gardner, Gary Sanchez and Aaron Judge — it sealed the Yankees’ 14th loss in 25 games since May 8, when they owned the best record in the major leagues.
It was a rough night from the start for Tanaka, who put the Yankees in a hole three batters into the game and then watched as Mitch Moreland, Hanley Ramirez and Andrew Benintendi hit no-doubt home runs off him.
The Yankees avoided further disaster when Judge crashed into the right-field wall to rob Jackie Bradley Jr. of a hit. Judge shook his right arm but remained in the game and did not seem affected.
How is the wall?
“I think it’s good, too,” Judge said.
The same could not be said for Tanaka. When he last faced the Red Sox, he delivered the type of performance befitting the ace of a team with playoff aspirations: besting the Red Sox’ ace, Chris Sale, with a three-hit, complete-game shutout at Fenway Park.
He has not looked the same since.
In seven starts since that night in Boston, Tanaka has recorded an 8.50 E.R.A. and has given up 54 hits in just 36 innings. He has also allowed 14 home runs in that span.
If there was a glimmer of hope, it was a 13-strikeout domination of Oakland — the only game in which he did not allow a home run — but that increasingly appears to be an outlier.
The Yankees have turned over numerous rocks to try to solve Tanaka’s woes. In his previous start, they used the backup catcher Austin Romine, with whom Tanaka has a far better E.R.A. than he does with the usual starter, Gary Sanchez. The pitching coach Larry Rothschild has pored over video, and Tanaka has made mechanical tweaks and gone back to the basics.
Nothing has returned the bite to his split-fingered fastball, the dip to his slider or the command to his fastball.
Luis Severino, who experienced similar struggles last season, going 0-8 as a starter before being demoted to the minor leagues and then the bullpen, empathized with Tanaka.
Tanaka had some good pitches — and he retired eight in a row at one point — but too many pitches leaked over the middle of the plate. Tanaka acknowledged that he was pressing.
Through five innings, Tanaka had thrown only 62 pitches, but Girardi removed him from the game, even with the Yankees still within striking distance, trailing by 5-2.
Chad Green pitched superbly in relief — working three and a third perfect innings to give the Yankees a chance — and the team had a handful of opportunities against the Red Sox left-hander Drew Pomeranz and four relievers. The Red Sox allowed two runs to score on an error and a wild pitch, the latter coming when Didi Gregorius swung through a slider from Kimbrel for what would have been the final out of the eighth. Instead, the ball bounced away from catcher Christian Vazquez, allowing Gregorius to reach first base and Matt Holliday to race home and close the Yankees’ deficit to 5-4.
But the Yankees could not help themselves enough. Holliday took a 3-2 curveball from Pomeranz to end the fifth with Judge on second, Gregorius hit into a double play to short-circuit a rally in the sixth, and Chris Carter chased a 3-2 fastball from Kimbrel to end the eighth with two runners on.
The Yankees had an especially tantalizing opportunity in the seventh, with Judge up and a runner on second with two outs. Judge fouled off a letter-high fastball and then struck out on a pinpoint slider from Joe Kelly.
If there was an encouraging sign for the Yankees — other than Judge’s remaining in one piece after his run-in with the wall — it was Carter’s at-bats. He hit a solo homer off Pomeranz in the fifth, and he was unfortunate to have two hits taken away by third baseman Pablo Sandoval. He also saved Yankees third baseman Chase Headley from a throwing error with a deft backhanded scoop.
Carter, who is hitting .184, may need to show more signs of life to remain with the Yankees.
With two first basemen, Greg Bird and Tyler Austin, getting closer to finding their swings in the minor leagues after injury layoffs, Carter may be playing for a spot on the roster.
Including one that, at some point, the Yankees may be forced to consider with Tanaka.