• On the second day of the criminal trial of Bill Cosby, the complainant, Andrea Constand, a former Temple University employee, testifed tearfully about the night in 2004 when she says he drugged and sexually assaulted her at his home outside Philadelphia.
• Ms. Constand told prosecutors in Norristown, Pa., that she had trusted Mr. Cosby and kept in contact with him even after the incident because he was a powerful trustee at the university where she worked.
• Mr. Cosby has said the sex was consensual and his lawyers aggressively challenged her credibility during cross examination.
• Earlier Tuesday, the prosecution called two witnesses to testify in support of Kelly Johnson, a woman who on Monday said that Mr. Cosby had also drugged and sexually assaulted her in 1996.
• One witness was Ms. Johnson’s mother and the other was a lawyer who both said Ms. Johnson had described an attack to them.
Ms. Constand spent a grueling four hours on the stand.
Facing Mr. Cosby for the first time in 12 years, she cried as she testified that after she rebuffed his sexual advances, this man she had admired and looked to for guidance drugged and sexually assaulted her.
Ms. Constand, the crucial witness at the criminal trial of Mr. Cosby, told a jury that in early 2004, when she was 30 years old and he was 66, he invited her to his home near Philadelphia, where he handed her three blue pills and wine to wash them down.
Her voice catching and her eyes tearing, Ms. Constand said she took the pills and then felt disoriented, telling Mr. Cosby, “I see two of you,” before losing consciousness.
But on cross-examination, a lawyer for Mr. Cosby hammered at inconsistencies in Ms. Constand’s statements over the years — about how she met him, how long they had known each other, how much time they spent together, and whether she stayed in touch with him after the incident.
And the lawyer, Angela C. Agrusa, suggested that it was Ms. Constand, with an ulterior motive, who cultivated the relationship. “You were befriending him because he was going to be able to give you some resources to get into broadcasting,” she said.
The second day of testimony concluded with Ms. Constand being cross-examined.
Ms. Constand took the witness stand on the second day of the trial at the Montgomery County Courthouse, carrying the expectations of dozens of women who have accused Mr. Cosby of sexual assault, many of whom tell stories similar to her own. While there have been multiple civil lawsuits, none of the other allegations has led to prosecution, in many cases because too many years had passed, leaving Ms. Constand’s case as the only one that could render a criminal verdict on Mr. Cosby.
Mr. Cosby, who frowned as Ms. Constand testified and held his hand against his head, has said that what he gave her that night was Benadryl and that their sexual contact was consensual. He has admitted in a lawsuit deposition to giving women quaaludes in order to have sex with them, but his lawyers have said it was not to incapacitate and take advantage of them.
He stands accused of three counts of aggravated indecent assault against Ms. Constand, each punishable by up to 10 years in prison.
Ms. Constand, who had never spoken publicly about her account before, spent nearly four grueling hours on the witness stand Tuesday, with more cross-examination to come on Wednesday.
The defense team, insisting that no assault took place, focused on attacking Ms. Constand’s credibility, in part by noting how willing she was to have repeated contact with the man she says violated her. In opening arguments, they revealed that phone records would show that she called Mr. Cosby at least 53 times after that night at his home.
The prosecution earlier on Tuesday had called one of the officers who first interviewed Ms. Constand in 2005, Detective David Mason of the Durham Regional Police, and he recounted what Ms. Constand told him, a story largely consistent with the accounts she has given. But under cross-examination by the defense, the detective confirmed that Ms. Constand had told him she had never been alone with Mr. Cosby before the incident, and that she had little contact with him afterward — points that conflict with her later accounts.
Ms. Agrusa later produced the police statement that had resulted from that interview with Ms. Constand and asked Ms. Constand about the discrepancies.
The prosecution began its case on Monday with Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson, the first witness, testified that in 1996, Mr. Cosby had drugged and abused her under circumstances similar to that described by Ms. Constand. Prosecutors had wanted to present other accusers but Judge Steven T. O’Neill allowed just one. On Tuesday, they called two more witnesses to support Ms. Johnson’s account, her mother and a lawyer who said she told him about the alleged assault in 1996.
Ms. Constand cut a striking figure — a former basketball star, she stands six feet tall, and has a mass of dark curly hair. She testified about befriending Mr. Cosby when she worked for the university’s athletic department, and told of being invited to his home for dinner parties.
The first time she was alone there with him, she said, he put a hand on her thigh. The second time, she said, he tried to unbutton her pants but she stopped him. She had no interest in him sexually, she said, yet there was no question of cutting off contact with Mr. Cosby, then a prominent member of the university’s board of trustees.
Her third time alone with him at his home, she said, he assaulted her. She remained in touch with him because “I thought it would look negative on me” to do otherwise, she said. “I didn’t want to stir up any trouble.” She has also said that some of her contacts with him were attempts to confront him.
Shortly after the incident, she moved back to Ontario, Canada. At first she said nothing to her family. Months later, she took them to see Mr. Cosby perform near Toronto — an act that his lawyers have suggested was not the behavior of a victim toward her abuser.
Finally, in January 2005, she told family members about the incident and called the police in Canada. She testified that her mother confronted Mr. Cosby over the phone, and he apologized, said he was not sure what pills he had given her, and added that he thought Ms. Constand had had an orgasm from their encounter.
In court, prosecutors played voicemail messages from representatives of Mr. Cosby.
They had called the Constands’ home soon after, including one from a lawyer saying he wanted to discuss creating an education fund for Ms. Constand.
After her testimony, one of the lawyers who represent Ms. Constand said that she thought her client had fared well in her time on the stand.
