Things are pretty hectic backstage at “Groundhog Day,” the Tony Award-nominated musical based on the 1993 hit movie. After all, the show depends on its characters reliving the same day over and over, and that means getting in and out of the same costumes.
More than once. In some cases, much more.
And of course it’s not just any day. “Groundhog Day” features a marching band from Punxsutawney, Penn., celebrating the festivities; townspeople gathering in a diner to trade gossip; and coverage by a smarmy TV weatherman (and his crew), who’d rather be anywhere but there. And: It’s winter, which means snowsuits, scarves and 58 hats.
The 21 actors have just over 300 costume changes, handled by eight dressers and a wardrobe supervisor. Kyle Stewart (above) demonstrates how he assists Travis Waldschmidt make several of his 29 quick changes.
Each day begins with the weatherman Phil Connors (Andy Karl) nagged awake by his alarm and grudgingly getting dressed onstage. But most of the cast, and sometimes Mr. Karl, depend on the dressers — manning “quick change booths” and often working in the wings in darkness — to make sure every cue is hit right.
“As much as the show is choreographed onstage, it’s choreographed backstage,” said Carrie Kamerer, the wardrobe supervisor.
For the quickest of changes, actors have between eight and 16 seconds. During one particularly busy 25 seconds, five actors do complete costume changes in the wings, helped by three dressers. Among the tricks: costumes rigged with Velcro, as well as snaps, zippers and magnets.  Rose Keough, below, helps Joseph Medeiros get out of his deputy-sheriff duds and into the character known as Mr. Cleveland.
Mr. Waldschmidt, below, has more changes than any actor in the cast. Here he’s getting into costume as the football-loving waiter Jeff; he also plays a townsperson and is part of that very busy marching band.
Raymond J. Lee has 25 changes, including outfits for a mulleted drunk named Ralph, a storm chaser, and — his face hidden — the groundhog mascot, in a 6-foot-6-inch-tall fake fur costume.
The six members of the marching band, including Vishal Vaidya (below), always wear other costumes underneath. Gerard Canonico, who at times has to move most rapidly into his next role, has magnets on his jacket instead of buttons, making it especially easy to open and close.
