Most one-act plays have, by default, a tight focus: between two and four characters, unity of time and place. “The Good Muslim,” on the other hand, ambitiously moves seven characters through a fast-food prep area, a porch, the subway and even virtual reality. Zakiyyah Alexander’s piece — part of the final installment of Ensemble Studio Theater’s annual one-act play series — also tackles assimilation, racism and sexism.
This would be a lot even for two acts, and at just under 30 minutes the play feels like the précis for a full-length work rather than a self-contained effort. Certainly it would be great to see more of the intriguing Aliah (Lily Balsen), whose evolution from the title character to — well, what, remains tantalizingly open — is rushed in this context.
Ms. Alexander (“10 Things to Do Before I Die”) does ponder what it is that makes a good Muslim. By all accounts Aliah is a well-adjusted college student — a good person. But she also defines herself as nonobservant and wants to date any boy she chooses rather than let her parents (Rajesh Bose and Pooya Mohseni) decide for her. Until reality catches up, Aliah lets off steam by playing a game that appears to involve the mating rituals of white preppies.
Then one day she has a terrifying encounter on the subway, a brief moment that evokes the racist harassment that’s been flourishing during the past few months. Maybe one day Ms. Alexander will tell us what happened to Aliah.
None of the four other plays in the series match “The Good Muslim” in ambition, though Donald Marcus’s compact two-hander “Intensive Care” succeeds by making the most out of economy.
Those who know Zach Grenier only from his role as the unctuously ruthless lawyer David Lee on “The Good Wife” may do a double take when he turns up as a bearish former Mafia foot soldier who strikes up a conversation with a silver fox of a gentleman (Eric Conger) in a hospital waiting room. The chitchat between the men is enough to suggest entire lives.
Edith Freni’s “Female Beginner” and Elyzabeth Gregory Wilder’s “Santa Doesn’t Come to the Holiday Inn,” on the other hand, plop hastily sketched characters in the middle of drama — contrived in the first case, wan in the second. The playlets are reminiscent of those empty-calorie short stories from The New Yorker.
Wrapping things up is “Good Results Are Difficult When Indifference Predominates,” by Amy Fox (screenwriter of the 2016 movie “Equity”). Two girlfriends in their 30s discuss feminist ngagement — one is knitting a pink hat for the other — when an old Singer sewing machine connects them to the reality of women past. Alas, the seams are showing in this didactic effort.