“When Opioid Addicts Find an Ally in Blue” (news article, June 13) celebrates that the police have begun to protect drug users rather than reflexively prosecute them. In historical context, this development is indeed salubrious — but unfortunately the transformation reflects more a new face of addiction than a reconfiguration of law enforcement attitudes.
As an assistant federal public defender, I regularly appear in court on behalf of young men, sometimes still teenagers, accused of selling opiates implicated in a fatal overdose. The families of the deceased, like their loved ones, have in my experience always been white and articulate. My clients, typically, are neither.
To move past the follies of the drug wars, it is not enough for law enforcement to feel sympathy for a new generation of more demographically relatable addicts. The police must learn instead to realize that it is not sufficient to “tell a midlevel dealer from a user needing help.” Between these easy categories lies the reality of the poor, petty seller who distributes drugs in many cases because doing so is the only way to support his own addiction — the low-level dealer needing help.
Your reporting highlights how the stigmatization of methadone and buprenorphine has led to poor outcomes when it comes to treating substance use disorders. Our research has shown that the aggressive marketing of Vivitrol — among other factors — has led to the denial of other forms of treatment, even when those treatments might be more effective.
The preference for Vivitrol in criminal justice settings is often based on factors unrelated to best treatment outcomes. Instead, marketers play off government officials’ obsession with sobriety, claiming that other treatment options are somehow less acceptable. Until policy makers, law enforcement and drug court staffs start focusing on evidence-based medicine rather than marketing hype, alternative criminal justice approaches like drug courts will fail to deliver medically sound treatment.
The writers are, respectively, director of programs and director of research and investigations for Physicians for Human Rights.
“U.S. Drug Deaths Climbing Faster Than Ever” (The Upshot, front page, June 6) is indeed disturbing. However, we can do more than simply wring our hands over this deadly epidemic.
Decades of scientific evidence show that opiate addiction is a treatable disease. Two Food and Drug Administration-approved medications, methadone and buprenorphine, can effectively and safely treat the underlying addiction that leads to drug overdoses. Studies show that cities and countries that have expanded access to these medications have seen dramatic decreases in overdose deaths.
Many of my patients have stories similar to the young man in the article who has tried to “get clean” six times. Unfortunately, most of them were never offered one of these medications by either doctors or rehabilitation programs. Instead, too many health care professionals, including Dr. Tom Price, the health and human services secretary, promote moralistic abstinence-based approaches. Now is the time to rapidly expand access to medically proven treatments.
The writer is a doctor who treats patients addicted to opioids.
Your article brings attention to America’s worsening death toll from opioid abuse in compelling detail. Emergency medical care providers are the front line of health care for the opioid epidemic, hourly rescuing overdose victims on the verge of death. Highly concentrated synthetics such as fentanyl compound the situation, resulting in inadvertent and potentially lethal exposures to family members and our brave first responders.
The challenge is stopping the carnage. The Food and Drug Administration commissioner, Dr. Scott Gottlieb, has created an Opioid Policy Steering Committee to explore “more forceful” actions the agency can take to stem new addictions and reduce overdoses. But battling this epidemic will require a multipronged approach in addition to the F.D.A. efforts.
Regulatory agencies, law enforcement and the medical community need to be mutually committed to finding a solution to this deadly crisis. Our lives and the lives our of loved ones depend on it.
J. BRENT MYERS, RALEIGH, N.C.
The writer is president of the National Association of E.M.S. Physicians.
The scale of the opioid crisis is staggering and deserves an all-hands-on-deck response.
We know why cartels traffic these drugs. They do it for the money. There is a simple bipartisan solution we can enact right now that would help go after that money. We should get rid of anonymous shell companies — companies formed with no way of knowing who owns or controls them. These companies help drug traffickers launder profits and hide dirty money.
As we fight to save lives from opioids, we should leave no stone unturned — which should include the rocks under which drug cartels hide their money.
The writer is national campaigns director of Fair Share and co-author of “Anonymity Overdose,” which links the opioid crisis to shell companies.