An official in Flint, Mich., who was recorded using a racial slur and insulting residents of the city during a private conversation, resigned on Monday.
Philip Stair, 63, was a sales manager at the Genesee County Land Bank, a government organization that develops abandoned properties in Flint, a majority-black city that suffered through a contaminated water crisis beginning in 2014.
In May, Mr. Stair, who is white, used a racial epithet to describe black people who “don’t pay their bills,” as part of an attempt to explain what he thought led to the city’s water crisis. He was speaking to Chelsea Lyons, a journalist and activist who was secretly recording him.
In audio clips first published on Sunday by the online media outlet Truth Against the Machine, Mr. Stair can be heard backtracking slightly, saying that he did not want to use the slur and had recently gone to the beach with a group of men who were not white.
Elsewhere in the recording, Mr. Stair referred to some Flint residents as “derelict” and “deadbeats.” He could not be reached for comment on Tuesday.
Truth Against the Machine is an independent media organization that covers “stories the corporate media is ignoring on a local, national and international scale,” according to its website. It did not respond to an email requesting comment from Ms. Lyons, but she told MLive, an online news outlet based in Michigan, that the Genesee County Land Bank was “a disaster,” in part because of the tax foreclosures that made so much land available to the bank in the first place.
Michele Wildman, the Land Bank’s executive director, said she heard the recording on Sunday evening and resolved to fire Mr. Stair. When she arrived at work on Monday morning, protesters were outside the office doors, and Mr. Stair’s resignation was already on her desk.
Ms. Wildman said she had “no indication” until this week that Mr. Stair would make racist remarks.
The Genesee County Land Bank was established in 2004, and to Ms. Wildman’s understanding, it is currently the largest landowner in Flint. The bank acquires abandoned land from foreclosed properties. Its objective is to “restore the integrity of the community by removing dilapidated strictures and redeveloping abandoned properties,” the website says.
The organization was created, in part, to address a cycle of foreclosures and blight in Flint, which has been under emergency management since 2011 because of budgetary issues.
Michigan’s governor, Rick Snyder, has been criticized for appointing emergency managers to take over financially struggling cities with largely black jurisdictions. The emergency managers he appointed to run Flint made the decision in 2014 to save money by sourcing water from the Flint River, rather than from Detroit.
A failure to treat the water with an anti-corrosive agent led to sky-high levels of lead contamination across the city. Tap water was often visibly cloudy, and there was a surge in the number of children with lead poisoning. The oversight has also been linked to the deaths of 12 people from Legionnaires’ disease.
Flint switched back to Detroit water in 2015, but many homes still do not have access to safe tap water because of pipes that are tainted with lead and are in need of replacement.
After Mr. Stair’s resignation, Ms. Wildman said the bank was looking into cultural competency training for its staff.
