A young asylum seeker who was tortured in his native Venezuela no longer faces deportation after an immigration judge in Miami ended removal proceedings against him this week.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents arrested the man, Marco Coello, 22, in April when he appeared for his asylum interview and initiated deportation proceedings. The arrest, while legal, was unusual because Mr. Coello seemed to have a strong argument for winning asylum.
Now Mr. Coello can proceed with his asylum case after he asked an immigration judge to terminate the deportation proceedings and the Department of Homeland Security, the parent of ICE, did not object, according to a one-page order issued on Monday.
A spokesman for ICE in Miami had no immediate comment on the case on Wednesday.
Mr. Coello was 18 when he participated in a protest in Caracas, the Venezuelan capital, in 2014. The demonstration turned violent and Mr. Coello was detained.  He was imprisoned but was later released pending trial and fled to the United States.
Mr. Coello’s mistreatment was documented by a Human Rights Watch report that year and the next year in a report by the State Department on human rights in Venezuela. With such extensive documentation, and almost certain imprisonment if he was deported back to Venezuela, Mr. Coello expected a relatively easy path to asylum.
But since President Trump’s inauguration in January, ICE agents have taken a more active approach to immigration enforcement, arresting more people and in particular, more people without serious criminal convictions.
Mr. Coello was working as a driver for the ride-hailing service Lyft last year when he became drowsy and pulled over to sleep in a parking lot. He received a ticket for trespassing by a police officer and later paid a $100 fine and $92 in court costs.
A spokesman for ICE said the trespassing violated the terms of Mr. Coello’s stay in the United States, leading to his arrest when he showed up for an asylum interview.
Mr. Coello’s case drew extensive news coverage in Florida and back home in Venezuela. To many in South Florida, which has a large community of residents who fled socialist governments in Cuba and Venezuela, ICE appeared to be acting overzealously. A day after Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, intervened in the case, Mr. Coello was released from a Miami-area detention center.
With the situation deteriorating at home, more Venezuelans have filed asylum petitions in the United States than any other nationality during the fiscal year, according to United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, which handles asylum cases.