Is the Trump administration a drama or a sitcom?
Eventually, this will be for history to judge. But first, let’s give television its shot.
“House of Cards,” Netflix’s presidential soap, is theoretically well positioned to break the fourth wall of today’s political conversation. But the series — at best, a thick slice of ham onto which Kevin Spacey ladles villainous oratory like red-eye gravy — has never really stood up to deep reading. And with Season 5, which commenced at the end of May, the series is a lamer duck than ever.
Superficially, the season is loaded with plot points that echo current headlines: an immigration ban proposed by President Frank Underwood (Mr. Spacey); congressional hearings and leaks; a Russian attempt to take advantage of American divisions; a Syrian chemical-weapons attack that draws a presidential response, driven by a dramatic photo of a dead child.
But the show’s big picture feels like something from an alternative universe, and not just because the power partnership of Frank and his wife, Claire (Robin Wright), is like a conspiracy-fever version of the Clintons’.
“House of Cards,” based on a British series, is at heart a fantasy of competence and omnipotence.  He plays four-dimensional chess while his current analogue often seems to play Whac-a-Mole. He’s cold and deliberative, not hotheaded and impetuous. He confides his plans in Shakespearean asides while President Trump spills to 31 million Twitter followers.
Its greater disconnect — shared with legacy political shows like “Scandal,” “Designated Survivor” and “Madam Secretary” — is that it assumes there are still norms governing politics, which it generates drama by pushing against. Characters behave badly in secret, the quaint notion being that discovery would bring shame and consequences.
Frank works hard to hide his acts of violence. In our world, a Montana politician body-slammed a reporter and was elected to Congress the next day. When a congressman from Frank’s own party (Democratic, in this case) plans to go against him and place “country over party,” it may be the season’s biggest laugh line.
Beyond this, the idea that adults are still in charge, that the presidency is still beholden to a pretense of decorum, has been disrupted by the election of a TV star whose following depends partly on his going off script. “House of Cards” isn’t less crazy than reality. But it assumes a greater baseline of normalcy in its larger world.
Even HBO’s comedy “Veep” has this problem — it’s poetically foul-mouthed, but has the charming conceit that the characters need to keep their obscenities from the public. Other, nonpolitical current shows get at bits and pieces of today’s climate. “Mr. Robot” and “Legion” have themes of conspiracy and gaslighting; “The Good Fight” captures the world-turned-upside-down disorientation of liberals.
But for now, you need to go back to earlier TV eras — and away from Washington story lines — to find the shows that most recall today’s White House.
This is not to say that the Trump White House is like the mob, so much as that “The Sopranos” feels timely for how it portrays leadership in a dysfunctional, privately held family business.
It has that in common with “Arrested Development,” whose Trump parallels have made for one of the richest social-media memes of 2017. In The Daily Beast, Erin Gloria Ryan likened the Trumps to the Bluths, the grifting real-estate-development family whose patriarch, George Sr. (Jeffrey Tambor), ran into legal trouble over his taxes and some “light treason.” After the failure to pass the American Health Care Act in March, the Politico writer Dan Diamond compared it to the Bluths’ attempt to pass off the empty shell of a house as a real one.
Plot details aside (the Bluths also once schemed to build a border wall with Mexico), the show has a familiar personal dynamic. Mr. Trump has always believed in pitting people against one another — in personal life, in business, on “The Apprentice” and in the White House.
“Arrested Development” began in 2003 as TV’s best satire of an earlier presidency — it was, in part, a sly commentary on the Iraq War. In the fake-house episode, Gob Bluth (Will Arnett) unveils a “Mission Accomplished” banner, à la George W. Bush, on the facade, just before it falls apart.
All of which suggests that the definitive television show of the Trump years, whenever it arrives, might not be about politics. And it might be a comedy, even if we experience the real-life version very much as a drama.
History repeats, they say. In this case, both times as farce.