Paul McGinley remembers meeting Pascal Grizot at a European Tour pro-am 10 years ago. The two had never met before, but that didn’t stop Grizot, a former French national team golfer and successful businessman, from bragging that he was going to bring the Ryder Cup to Paris.
In May 2011, France was selected ahead of the favorite, Spain — which hosted the only previous cup held in Continental Europe in 1997 — and Portugal, Germany and the Netherlands.
George O’Grady, a former European Tour chief executive, said the existence of a tried-and-true facility like the Albatros Course at Le Golf National, in the Paris suburb of Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines and host site of the Open de France, worked in France’s favor, while Spain’s presumptive course was still on a drawing board.
“You could say we have gone for certainty,” O’Grady said.
The 2017 Open de France, which starts on Thursday, is mainland Europe’s oldest pro tournament, dating from 1906. This year marks the 25th time it will be played at Le Golf National, the site of the 2018 Ryder Cup. Grizot, president of France’s Ryder Cup committee, and leaders of the French Golf Federation are trying to use the Ryder Cup as a catalyst for golf in their country.
Golf has always been something of an afterthought in France. It ranks around the fifth or sixth most popular sport in the country, and the country’s golf enthusiasts have long yearned for a native-born star.
No French golfer has won a major since 1907, when Arnaud Massy claimed the British Open. Jean van de Velde (1999) and Thomas Levet (2002) have come the closest since, losing in playoffs.
France has approximately 800,000 golfers, but the sport suffers from a reputation of being primarily for the wealthy. More than 425,000 golfers pay an annual membership dues of 52 euros, which is required to participate in club and amateur events.
France’s Ryder Cup initiative was put to a vote of federation members, with 83 percent voting in favor of paying a €3 surcharge to help underwrite the competition. As part of its Ryder Cup bid, the federation agreed to pay an annual fee of €1.5 million for the next 12 years. It marks the first time a nation’s golf community has funded as much as half of the Ryder Cup.
The French are trying to encourage interest in the sport. Research conducted by the federation found that six million citizens — roughly 10 percent of the population — follow professional golf, and 12 million say they would be interested in learning the game.
“How do we convert that and bring those new golfers into the fold?” said van de Velde, the first French golfer to win on the European Tour, in 1993.
Van de Velde is optimistic that the federation’s “Small Structures” concept is a step in the right direction. France’s Ryder Cup bid contained a pledge to build 100 urban courses. Grizot said 91 of those are now up and running, and 110 more are in development.
In the past, community leaders considered only swimming pools and soccer fields for recreation facilities. A nine-hole compact course is around €1 million (not including the cost of land), Grizot said. These courses — some with driving ranges, some without — can be played quickly, occupy less property and require smaller maintenance budgets.
The creation of compact golf courses in and around cities should attract new participants to the game. Golf du Fort, close to Strasbourg, signed up 1,000 members in its first year.
To attract young people, the French Golf Federation has rolled out a school initiative to promote the Ryder Cup. Students receive golf lessons as well as a golf leaflet that links their math, English and French lessons with the Ryder Cup. Youngsters learn to count with the basics of par, birdie and bogey.
Yet despite these efforts, the number of registered French golfers actually decreased for a few years and is flat over the last six years since the Ryder Cup announcement.
For the French Golf Federation to reach its goal of 600,000 members in the next 10 years, it will likely need a homegrown star. The country’s youth development system, which identifies talented players and grooms them with an eye for the professional ranks, is praised for producing 21 golfers competing on the European Tour.
But currently, no French golfer is in the top 50 of the Official World Golf Ranking. Alexander Lévy is the top Frenchman at No. 76, and there are only five in the top 200.
Lévy, 26, is a shining example of how the federation’s development system is working. At 14, he joined the French Golf Federation’s academy for secondary school. He won the French Amateur Championship in 2009, and anchored France’s victory at the 2010 Eisenhower Trophy, a biennial world amateur team golf championship. It was the first time France won the three-man team event.
He has won four times on the European Tour, including the Volvo China Open in April. “He can be the next rock star of golf in France,” said Martin Coulomb, associate editor of the Journal du Golf.
Victor Dubuisson, 27, was the highest-ranked Frenchman in history, reaching No. 15 in 2015, and is the last Frenchman to make the European Ryder Cup team, in 2014. McGinley said he was the most valuable player on his victorious team.
Dubuisson qualified for his first Open de France in 2005 at age 15, won the 2009 European Amateur and was the No. 1-ranked amateur in the world later that year. But he is painfully shy and something of an enigma; he hasn’t won since 2015 and he dropped to No. 129 in the world.
Others hold out hope that the European Tour rookie Romain Langasque, 22, who in 2015 became just the third Frenchman to win the British Amateur, will be able to make an impression on Thomas Bjorn, the 2018 European Ryder Cup captain.
How much will it dampen the federation’s effort to grow the game in France if a Frenchman fails to make the European team?
What organizers can control is preparing Le Golf National for upward of 65,000 spectators each day. A €10 million renovation was completed in May 2016 on a course that is rated as one of the favorites among the players on the European Tour.
“If ever a golf course was made for the drama of Ryder Cup, this is it,” McGinley said.
And organizers of the competition, to be held Sept. 28 to 30 next year, are trying hard to create Ryder Cup fever that is distinctly French. In the bidding document, Grizot promised a gala dinner at Versailles and to arrange for the two captains to hit golf shots from the Eiffel Tower. Arnold Palmer is the only golfer previously to do so.
