The man accused of firing the bullet that struck a 5-year-old boy in the head on his birthday was ordered held without bail on Wednesday as the child struggled to survive.
Prosecutors in the Bronx, where the boy was shot on Monday, said the bullet had entered his brain, damaging three lobes.
Doctors at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Medical Center have operated on the boy, Jaheen Hunter, and removed bullet fragments, but some remain, Felicity Lung, an assistant Bronx district attorney, told Judge Julio Rodriguez III of Bronx Criminal Court.
“The doctors are not able to give us whether the child will live,” Ms. Lung said.
She asked that the suspect, Michael Quiles, 27, be denied bail because of the recklessness of his actions.
Jaheen Hunter, who on his fifth birthday was hit in the head by a stray bullet, which entered his brain.
Mr. Quiles had been paroled in October after serving prison time for attempted kidnapping, Ms. Lung said.
In that case, according to court documents released on Wednesday, Mr. Quiles was charged with abducting someone just after midnight in Albany in 2009 to try to force that person’s brother to give Mr. Quiles the contents of a safe as ransom. During the kidnapping, someone working with Mr. Quiles repeatedly stabbed a woman and broke her orbital bone and nose, the documents say.
“He chose to shoot that gun when people are there,” she said.
On Monday, Jaheen had been celebrating his birthday with his father, Charles Hunter, and was being walked to a waiting car in front of Mr. Hunter’s home on Washington Avenue near 167th Street in the Morrisania neighborhood.
The police said Jaheen was between Mr. Quiles and another man, identified in the criminal complaint as Christian Foster. The police said the men were squabbling when Mr. Quiles fired four shots, one of which struck Jaheen.
The police arrested Mr. Quiles on Tuesday, about 300 feet from where Jaheen was shot.
Investigators are looking into the possibility that Mr. Quiles had been selling marijuana there. He had been arrested at least twice before on marijuana charges outside the same building.
They are also investigating whether the dispute that led to the shooting was a continuation of a June 1 fight involving Mr. Quiles, during which someone hit him with a bat and broke his hand.
Mr. Quiles faces charges of attempted murder, assault, criminal possession of a weapon and criminal possession of a firearm, according to the criminal complaint.
Besides ordering Mr. Quiles held without bail, Judge Rodriguez granted the prosecutor’s request for an order of protection for Jaheen.
Mr. Quiles also had an open warrant for a failure to perform community service. The judge offered to settle the charge with time served, but Mr. Quiles’s lawyer, Sidney Thaxter of the Bronx Defenders, declined.
“Judge, I don’t think we want to deal with that matter today,” Mr. Thaxter said.
Mr. Quiles is due back in court on Friday.