Dance|L.A. Dance Project Has Vivid Performers and Fine Repertory. There’s Just One Problem.
L.A. Dance Project Has Vivid Performers and Fine Repertory. There’s Just One Problem.
When given the chance, the 11 performers of the L.A. Dance Project, all accomplished, are unusually vivid and individual. In Ohad Naharin’s “Yag,” the Merce Cunningham MinEvent (a half-hour anthology from that choreographer’s repertory) and Justin Peck’s “Murder Ballades,” every dancer is grown-up, singular, free.
The men are especially assertive — none more than David Adrian Freeland Jr., an arresting newcomer. Morgan Lugo and Robbie Moore are marvelous, too. And the women are so immediately different from one another that you applaud the generously eclectic taste of Benjamin Millepied, the founder and artistic director of the company, which is in town presenting two programs at the Joyce Theater, through June 25.
There’s much else to admire about Mr. Millepied, who was a star dancer at New York City Ballet; he’s also made many ballets for that and other companies, as unalike as his Los Angeles dancers. His choice of Cunningham, Mr. Peck and Mr. Naharin shows his brilliantly hybrid taste.
Perhaps there’s only one important thing wrong with Mr. Millepied. Alas, it’s a central thing: he choreographs, a lot, and never memorably.
Mr. Millepied made half the repertory brought by his company to the Joyce. And his creations are both bewilderingly versatile and incurably second-rate. He also has the regrettable touch of making his female performers look insincere.
Mr. Freeland, marvelously authoritative, is the Orpheus whose Eurydice dies in his arms; when he leads her back to the world, he kills her again by looking at her. The dancers are also shown on the film projected at the back of the stage, often in similar or identical movements, suggesting the story has happened again and again.
But Mr. Reich’s music has a rigor and a metric complexity that the choreography lacks. The dancers do brisk footwork (in tennis shoes) now and then, as if toying with it.
And the worst Millepied piece at the Joyce? The season’s most eagerly anticipated one: “In Silence We Speak” (its world premiere was on Tuesday), a duet for the former ballerinas Janie Taylor and Carla Körbes, set to three compositions by David Lang. Mr. Millepied has set himself a tough assignment here: a study in sustained mutuality, proximity and supportive sensitivity for two women without conflict or contrast. Music gives us many examples, from Bach to Puccini, of the two-voiced female idyll; but Mr. Millepied’s dance is bland in the extreme.
Surrounded by a calf-height frame of dim neon light, Ms. Taylor and Ms. Körbes dance in loose trousers, with flowing hair and (why?) tennis shoes. The choreography keeps suggesting lines, but the sneakers keep the lines from extending through the foot. The women’s kind, mutual supportiveness is soon tiresome — and eventually unconvincing.
Mr. Millepied’s “Hearts and Arrows,” to Philip Glass’s String Quartet No. 3, is a nicely made series of ensembles, each ending in a good tableau. Too bad it resembles dozens of other such group dances. I’m sorry to harp on Mr. Millepied’s work, but here there’s no escaping it.
New to me was Mr. Naharin’s “Yag,” a tragicomic theater game in which each dancer speaks, like a character in a play giving testimony, of family and the family members’ love of dance. It’s an entirely eccentric piece. And eccentricity is wonderfully the point: These dances (especially the solos) disclose vital human essences in fabulously odd ways, as the body hungrily travels in opposing directions, the leg advancing while the torso arches back or vice versa. Though a couple of sections lose impetus, the six dancers stay astoundingly fine.
The company’s Cunningham MinEvent began life last spring at the Hammer Museum’s edition of the “Leap Before You Look” exhibition about Black Mountain College. The dances, all from Cunningham’s 1950s choreography, include the amazing male solo “Changeling” (1957) and the long male-female duet from “Springweather and People” (1955), both long-lost pieces rediscovered only when a film was found after Cunningham’s death.
Mr. Freeland takes complete possession of the many moods of “Changeling” (who will forget his crablike crossing of the stage with hands behind his back?). Stephanie Amurao and Robbie Moore make the “Springweather” duet suspenseful (I love the jumps he does for her while she looks up and away). At the heart of Cunningham choreography is change; we never know where these dances are heading.
I’m not wild about the way Mr. Millepied places largely black costumes for the Cunningham MinEvent against a black backdrop with dim lighting. The all-black effect ought to be true to the spirit of Cunningham’s long-term visual collaborator Robert Rauschenberg. But Rauschenberg’s lighting was more radical, while his and Cunningham’s usual preference was for light and clarity. Still, this look is a valid experiment. And the colored, thin geometric lines along the costumes stay in memory.
Mr. Peck’s “Murder Ballades,” for six dancers, is neat, cute, fast. I like it less than I like the superb visual installation in front of which it occurs, a vertically striped collage of colors and fabrics by Sterling Ruby. The harmlessly appealing music is by Bryce Dessner. Though this is minor Peck, its speed and contrasts nicely challenge the dancers. Another tennis-shoe piece, it has a duet in which a couple remove footwear.
If it wasn’t for his own creations, I’d call Mr. Millepied — enterprising, chic, unpredictable, modern — a very considerable force for good in the dance world. But he’s been making consistently unimportant dances for many years now. They’re what stop the L.A. Dance Project from becoming an important company.