Movies|The Tupac Biopic: What Took So Long?
The Tupac Biopic: What Took So Long?
Though he had been releasing music for only five years when he was killed in 1996 at age 25, Tupac Amaru Shakur’s surplus star power has fueled dozens of posthumous albums, books, documentaries, online conspiracy theories and even a short-lived Broadway musical. In recent years, he has popped up as a hologram in concert and as a guiding spirit on Kendrick Lamar’s “To Pimp a Butterfly”; in April, Shakur became the sixth rap act to be inducted into the Rock and Rock Hall of Fame. His relevance has rarely waned.
“The climate is perfect for it,” said the “All Eyez on Me” director Benny Boom, who is best known for his music video work with 50 Cent, Nelly and Nas. While there is no shortage of flash in his film’s performance sequences, he tries to ground Shakur — who, like Elvis Presley or Bob Marley, has often been sold as little more than a stylized visage — in the rapper’s activist upbringing, his relationships with women and experiences with the criminal justice system and police brutality.
Still, “All Eyez on Me,” which is named for the rapper’s fourth album and stars the newcomer and Shakur doppelgänger Demetrius Shipp Jr., is far from a sure thing — and those behind it are plain about the stakes.
Even with an immediate precedent — “Straight Outta Compton,” the 2015 drama about the rap group N.W.A, grossed more than $200 million worldwide — “All Eyez on Me” has faced an array of obstacles, said L. T. Hutton, a veteran record executive and one of the film’s producers.
The struggle wasn’t only with outside forces. The film, originally conceived in 2008 by Mr. Hutton, along with the production company Morgan Creek, was delayed for years amid a court battle with the rapper’s mother, Afeni Shakur, over life rights and creative control.
Ms. Shakur, a former Black Panther and long a careful steward of her son’s legacy, died in May 2016; she is ultimately not credited as a producer of “All Eyez on Me.” The Shakur Estate — now under the leadership of a trustee, Tom Whalley, and Shakur’s aunt Gloria Cox — has not publicly supported the film and declined to comment on its release or Ms. Shakur’s role, though the estate has touted in the press its authorization of a coming Tupac documentary by the Oscar-winning director Steve McQueen (“12 Years a Slave”).
“All Eyez on Me” hoped to avoid re-litigating the most controversial moments in Shakur’s life and career, including his 1994 conviction for sexual abuse and the robbery that year at a recording studio during which he was shot five times, leaving him hardened and paranoid. That is why the film relied chiefly on his point of view and stated version of events.
Jeremy Haft, a writer on the film, recalled the guidance he received from Mr. Hutton: “Tupac has already told his story, you just have to listen.” Mr. Hutton had compiled hundreds of pages of interview transcripts and other research into what he referred to as the “Tupac Bible,” a text to be consulted at any moment of narrative uncertainty.
In “All Eyez on Me,” Shakur is shown receiving oral sex from the woman at a club, a version of events corroborated by her real-life testimony in court. The next time they meet in the film, in his hotel room, she gives him a massage before he turns down her sexual advances in favor of sleep; when he wakes, she is accusing the rapper and his entourage of rape, a sequence that could bring scrutiny, especially after “Straight Outta Compton” was criticized for glossing over its subjects’ treatment of women.
The film is most affecting in its depiction of Shakur as a son, brother and friend — for instance, being quizzed as a child by his mother on Nelson Mandela or learning Shakespeare alongside his confidante Jada Pinkett (played by Kat Graham), at the Baltimore School of the Arts, where he wrote poetry and performed in plays.
That sensitive and cerebral essence remains even as Shakur grows more calloused from repeated arrests and experiences on both sides of a gun barrel. Though the barking renegade with the front-tied bandanna and “thug life” belly tattoo remains the most enduring image of Shakur, the film is adamant about spotlighting his softer side even in the moments leading up to the shooting on the Las Vegas Strip that would ultimately kill him.
Mr. Boom, the director, said those behind “All Eyez on Me” have tried to channel that grass-roots spirit in promoting the film, which he said would live or die on its perceived authenticity. “This wasn’t a money grab,” he said. “We’ve been on the ground really stomping for this movie, campaigning the way that politicians campaign.
