Progress on gun control has been glacially slow, and on the federal level nonexistent. Even so, it’s worth noting and celebrating laws enacted in four states this year to deal with one of the grimmest aspects of the nation’s firearms carnage — the murders of about 50 women each month, shot to death by current or former intimate partners. Many had been the victims of repeated domestic abuse. Some had obtained court protection orders that proved no defense against the fury of an abuser who came armed.
The urgency for preventive action is obvious. Research shows the presence of a gun in a situation of domestic abuse makes it five times more likely that a woman will be killed.
While Congress ducks this life-and-death issue, laws that could disarm domestic abusers before they can kill have been enacted in New Jersey, North Dakota, Tennessee and Utah. Those states join 19 others that have shown a bipartisan resolve to keep guns from domestic abusers.
California’s law is particularly important because it gives standing to concerned family members, not just the police, to seek a court ruling against possession of a gun by a violent abuser. This is a key initiative; no one knows better than the family of a disturbed person the danger presented by a firearm in the home. A 1999 Connecticut law, allowing the police to pre-emptively take the guns of potentially violent or suicidal people, shows a considerable benefit, having prevented up to 100 suicides, university researchers found.
The home-and-hearth slayings rooted in domestic abuse go largely unnoticed in the nation at large. Yet new research reveals how often these deadly encounters mushroom into the slayings of four or more people as a gunman runs amok. Of the 156 mass shootings from 2009 to 2016, more than half — 54 percent — were traceable to domestic or family violence, according to Everytown for Gun Safety, a gun control research and advocacy group. Among 422 victims in these shooting sprees, 181 were children.
For all these casualties, few such mass shootings trigger the national alarm prompted by headlines about global terrorism. But they should. Entire families and other innocent bystanders are being ravaged by known domestic abusers still able to keep their weapons.
Ideally, a concerned Congress would enact programs to help families and other intimates more easily petition courts for the surrender of a known abuser’s guns. Such a proposal exists, but it almost certainly won’t pass muster in the current Republican-controlled Congress or with President Trump, the ever grateful candidate of the gun lobby. This makes the issue an even more urgent priority for the states.