WASHINGTON — A once-quiet effort by governors to block the full repeal of the Affordable Care Act reached its climax in Washington on Tuesday, as state executives from both parties — who have conspired privately for months — mounted an all-out attack on the Senate’s embattled health care legislation hours before Republicans postponed a vote.
At the center of the effort has been a pair of low-key moderates: Gov. John R. Kasich, Republican of Ohio, and Gov. John W. Hickenlooper, Democrat of Colorado, who on Tuesday morning called on the Senate to reject the Republican bill and to negotiate a bipartisan alternative.
The mounting criticism from governors, including sharp denunciations from within President Trump’s party, helped stymie Republican efforts to marshal support in the Senate, and may have led, in a roundabout way, to the stalling of the measure this week.
More than half a dozen Republican governors, including several from states with Republican senators, expressed either grave reservations or outright opposition to the bill, while Democrats have been unanimous in their disapproval. Though their preferences on health policy diverge in many ways, state leaders from both parties were alarmed at the potential for harm to their constituents, state budgets and insurance markets.
Gov. Brian Sandoval, Republican of Nevada, rejected the Senate proposal so forcefully that he helped sway his state’s Republican senator, Dean Heller, to oppose the measure. Mr. Heller’s unrestrained attack on the bill on Friday helped set off a chain of events that forced Senate Republicans to delay the vote.
On Monday, a second bipartisan pair of governors, Terry McAuliffe of Virginia, a Democrat, and Charlie Baker of Massachusetts, a Republican, issued a joint letter asking the Senate to halt its dash toward a vote.
In an indication of the stakes involved for the states, Mr. McAuliffe and Mr. Baker wrote explicitly in their capacity as chairman of the National Governors Association and vice chairman of its health and human services committee — a striking gesture given the nonpartisan organization’s reputation for caution in politically sensitive matters.
The doggedness of the governor-led efforts reflects the expansive implications of a federal health care overhaul for state governments. In states that accepted expanded Medicaid funding under the Affordable Care Act, including Ohio and Nevada, the sharp restrictions on the program imposed under the Senate bill would batter state budgets and threaten the health coverage of millions of people.
The current Senate bill, which could be revised extensively, would wind down support for expanded Medicaid coverage and recalculate federal funding for longstanding Medicaid programs on a more restrictive basis. The Congressional Budget Office projected on Monday that the Senate’s plan would lead to 15 million fewer people receiving Medicaid coverage by 2026.
There has been no visible effort among governors to lobby in support of the legislation, and most Republican governors have either remained silent or given equivocal statements on the bill.
But if the legislation does unravel further, governors will have played a hand: Mr. Hickenlooper said in an interview that he and Mr. Kasich had agreed to team up after a February meeting of the governors’ association in Washington, where state leaders heard an alarming presentation about the potential consequences of a federal pullback in health care.
A tentative game plan emerged: They would assemble a nimble, informal group of governors, from the right and left of center, who would publicly express concern about health care legislation drafted in the House and Senate. The governors would press for a slower, less disruptive and more public legislative process, and insist on protections for states that had greatly expanded their Medicaid rolls.
Joining Mr. Kasich and Mr. Sandoval on the Republican side was Mr. Baker. On the Democratic side, Mr. Hickenlooper recruited Steve Bullock of Montana, John Bel Edwards of Louisiana and Tom Wolf of Pennsylvania.
The core group of seven has spoken out against a precipitous repeal of the Affordable Care Act — publicly urging caution, lobbying members of Congress and issuing dire assessments of how their states could suffer. They have also gently reached out to colleagues who might be wary of signing a joint letter criticizing Republican legislation, but would be willing separately to express their own reservations about a rollback of existing health care law.
Mr. Weaver said the group hoped its appeals would put political pressure on the Senate and serve as a model of bipartisan action that Congress could copy in a more protracted negotiation.
Now that Senate Republicans have balked, aides to several of the governors said they hoped lawmakers in both parties would craft a different measure focused principally on stabilizing insurance markets. It is unclear whether the Senate might consider that approach.
In addition to the disruptive impact the health bill would have on states, there are clear political implications for governors if the legislation passes, an increasingly tenuous possibility.
On Wednesday, the Democratic Governors Association is to begin a campaign of digital advertising and automated phone calls in several states, attacking Republican state leaders on the issue of health care, said a spokesman for the group, Jared Leopold.
To the extent that governors openly opposed the bill, it helped create an untenable situation for undecided senators, and critics of the legislation embraced Mr. Sandoval’s role in wooing Mr. Heller as a template to follow. Mr. Heller offered his denunciation of the Republican plan at a news conference with Mr. Sandoval on Friday.
Mr. Sandoval told other governors, at a conference in Montana last weekend, that he had urged Mr. Heller to ignore potential backlash from the right and come out against the bill because “the people of Nevada will respect you and you will rise above that commotion,” according to Mr. Hickenlooper, who said he met with Mr. Sandoval on Sunday night.
Mr. Kasich and Mr. Hickenlooper indicated Tuesday that they were hopeful, but far from certain, that Republican senators from their states would help defeat the legislation. After Tuesday’s decision, it is unclear when a vote will ultimately take place.
Besides Mr. Heller, there are a number of Republican senators from states whose governors have been critical of the legislation, including Senator Rob Portman of Ohio and Senators John McCain and Jeff Flake of Arizona.
Mr. Kasich, who said he had spoken with Mr. Portman, said that Democratic senators should volunteer to cooperate on a negotiated solution, and that Republicans who campaigned on a root-and-branch repeal of the Affordable Care Act should be “big enough” to say they changed their minds.
Mr. Hickenlooper said he was seeking a meeting with Senator Cory Gardner of Colorado, a first-term Republican. “I will go camp out on his doorstep if I have to,” Mr. Hickenlooper announced, alongside Mr. Kasich.
Mr. Hickenlooper said he made his case to Mr. Gardner for preserving Colorado’s coverage level, adding somewhat sheepishly that he had not meant to imply Mr. Gardner was evading him. “He clearly responded the moment he heard such a comment,” the governor said.