The popular English dessert (a.k.a. “pudding” in British-speak) Eton Mess, attributed to a yearly celebration at Eton College, is a delectable combination of strawberries, smashed meringues and softly whipped cream. As desserts go, it’s not daunting to make — just a matter of marinating strawberries with lemon juice, sugar and an optional slosh of liquor. “Mess” in this context means “mixture” rather than “messy.” Even so, you would not exactly call it elegant, though it has universal appeal.
If you use store-bought meringues, it is ultra-easy. Most bakeries sell meringues, sometimes giant ones, or smaller versions called meringue shells. If neither is available, you could substitute a package of meringue cookies.
You may, however, enjoy the sticky process of making meringues. Just three or four egg whites, whipped for 10 minutes or so with sugar until stiff and glossy, are enough. Electric beaters make the job painless, or use a wire whisk and give your arm a workout.
It is a bit of a project, but mostly a waiting game. Meringues must be baked for at least two hours in a very low oven. If time permits, letting them dry overnight in a turned-off oven gives the best, crispiest results (though some prefer their meringues with a somewhat gooey center). If they are not to be used right away, the meringues should be stored in an airtight container. Do not try to make meringues in damp or humid weather because they will not set, remaining weepy and soft, which is not at all what you want.
Cooks have long taken liberties with the original Eton Mess, adding other kinds of summer berries or stone fruit as they come into season. Indeed, blackberries, blueberries, nectarines and raspberries, alone or combined, make for a fine mess.
With local rhubarb and strawberries in plentiful supply at the market, my mess contains those. I stew the rhubarb quickly with sugar until it is just cooked and syrupy, and then toss the cooled compote with the strawberries. The rhubarb juices supply plenty of sweetness. The cream is barely sugared, since the meringues are sweet, too. For the most luscious experience, be sure to keep the cream very softly whipped. Toss everything together and spoon into individual bowls or pile the mess onto a platter.
If you prefer a more refined version, spread meringues with whipped cream, spoon the fruit on top and call it Pavlova, the dessert named for the early-20th-century ballerina.
