Thad Matta is out as Ohio State’s basketball coach after the Buckeyes missed the last two N.C.A.A. tournaments amid an exodus of players. Matta, who coached the team for 13 seasons, also cited his health at a news conference Monday. He has been troubled for years by chronic back problems that sometimes prevented him from taking off his shoes after a game.
Matta said he and Athletic Director Gene Smith agreed he would leave. “I think it’s the right thing for our program at the right time,” Smith said.
Matta coached the Buckeyes from 2005 to 2017 and took them to two Final Fours.  In the Big Ten Tournament, Ohio State lost in the first round to Rutgers, the lowest-seeded team.
Matta’s teams won at least 20 games in 12 consecutive seasons, making him the university’s career leader in wins and games. He won five regular-season Big Ten titles and four conference tournaments.
A federal judge dismissed a wrongful-death lawsuit filed by the former N.H.L. player Derek Boogaard’s parents, who blamed the league for their son’s brain damage and addiction to prescription painkillers.
Boogaard, a feared enforcer during six seasons with the Minnesota Wild and the Rangers, died of an accidental overdose of pain medications and alcohol in 2011. His parents later sued, arguing that the N.H.L. knew or should have known that Boogaard — who they said received more than 1,000 prescriptions from team physicians, dentists, trainers and staff — was not complying with treatment.
In a 20-page opinion dismissing the case, United States District Judge Gary Feinerman wrote that Boogaard’s parents did not prove that the N.H.L. was negligent. But the judge was careful not to comment on the allegations against the N.H.L., which is involved in a class-action lawsuit involving more than 100 former players.
An oversight by the women’s world golf ranking means Lydia Ko is still No. 1. The L.P.G.A. Tour said last week that projections showed Ariya Jutanugarn going to No. 1 after the ShopRite L.P.G.A. Classic because Ko did not play and So Yeon Ryu missed the cut.
But the tour said the projections were based on the day they were calculated, instead of the day when the ranking is released. A tournament from two years ago was inadvertently included, which gave Ko an additional event. In the two-year formula, Ko has played 50 tournaments. The projection showed her at 51 tournaments.
The difference meant Ko stays at No. 1 by an average ranking of .01 of a point. Jutanugarn is playing the Manulife L.P.G.A. Classic in Canada this week and can become No. 1.
Yuli Gurriel blew open a tight game with a three-run homer in the ninth inning as the Houston Astros, who have the best record in the majors, defeated the host Kansas City Royals, 7-3, for their 11th straight victory. Brian McCann added a two-run homer for the Astros.
CUBS CLIMB INTO FIRST Eddie Butler pitched three-hit ball into the sixth inning, Kris Bryant hit a two-run homer and host Chicago beat Miami for its fourth straight win. The Cubs are tied with the Milwaukee Brewers for first place in the National League Central.
GIANTS PERSEVERE Jeff Samardzija pitched deep into the game after a shaky beginning, Aaron Hill had a tiebreaking, pinch-hit double in the eighth inning and San Francisco beat host Milwaukee.
Darrell Wallace Jr. will become the first black driver to race at Nascar’s top level since 2006 when he replaces an injured Aric Almirola this weekend at Pocono Raceway. Richard Petty Motorsports said Wallace, more commonly referred to by his nickname Bubba, will drive the No. 43 car until Almirola returns.
The British star Ben Ainslie’s troubles in the America’s Cup trials grew when the wing sail on his 50-foot foiling catamaran was seriously damaged in the opening race of the challenger semifinals, forcing him back to shore with two quick losses.
Ainslie’s Land Rover BAR crew pulled up on the third of seven legs on Bermuda’s Great Sound after the camber arm in the high-tech wing sail broke during the opening race against Emirates Team New Zealand.
Ainslie said the wing would have to be replaced, which was impossible to do quickly enough to get back out for the second scheduled race against the Kiwis, who took a 2-0 lead in the best-of-nine series. Two more races between Ainslie and the Kiwis are scheduled for Tuesday.
In the other semifinal, SoftBank Team Japan and Sweden’s Artemis Racing each took a comeback victory. Team Japan won the first race by 23 seconds and Artemis the second by 29 seconds.
Quarterback Cam Newton is almost ready to get back to work. Panthers Coach Ron Rivera said Newton is ahead of schedule in his rehab from shoulder surgery and is expected to begin throwing next week at minicamp.
GIANTS RECEIVER LEWIS ARRESTED The Giants backup receiver Roger Lewis Jr. was arrested on charges of operating a vehicle under the influence over the weekend in Reynoldsburg, Ohio.
49ERS SIGN PASS RUSHER DUMERVIL The San Francisco 49ers bolstered their pass rush by signing Elvis Dumervil. Dumervil, 33, has 99 career sacks in 10 seasons with the Denver Broncos and the Baltimore Ravens.