Jimmie Johnson sped off on the final restart during the AAA 400 Drive for Autism on Sunday and achieved a Nascar milestone, winning at Dover International Speedway in Delaware for the 11th time and moving into a tie for sixth place on the career victories list.
Johnson was forced to start from the rear of the field because of a gear change, but he roared past Kyle Larson in overtime on the final restart.
Johnson tied the Hall of Fame driver Cale Yarborough for sixth on the wins list with 83. Johnson also joined Richard Petty and Darrell Waltrip as the only drivers to win at one track 11 times.
RAHAL SWEEPS Graham Rahal completed a doubleheader sweep at the Detroit Grand Prix to become IndyCar’s first two-time winner this season. Rahal’s Honda-powered racecar finished 1.17 seconds ahead of Josef Newgarden’s Chevrolet, a day after Rahal took the checkered flag more than six seconds ahead of the competition.
George Springer hit two of Houston’s four home runs, and the visiting Astros matched Texas for the longest winning streak in the majors this season at 10 games, beating the Rangers, 7-2.
The Astros scored in all four innings pitched by Martin Perez (2-6) and tied a team record from 1989 with their 10th straight road win. Houston’s first sweep of Texas since July 2014 dropped the Rangers to 3-11 since their 10-game streak.
RED SOX GAIN SPLIT WITH ORIOLES Andrew Benintendi hit two home runs, Chris Sale pitched six innings to earn his sixth straight win, and Boston defeated the Baltimore Orioles, 7-3, to split a four-game road series with their American League East rivals.
TWINS HOLD ON FOR FINAL OUT A video review overturned Ben Revere’s stolen base and changed the call to a caught stealing for the final out in the Minnesota Twins’ 3-2 win over the Angels in Los Angeles. A 1-minute-45-second review confirmed that Revere slid past second base and that Twins shortstop Ehire Adrianza held the tag.
AROUND THE MAJORS Ryan Zimmerman hit a tiebreaking three-run homer in the eighth, and the visiting Washington Nationals held off the Oakland Athletics, 11-10, after nearly blowing a seven-run lead in the ninth. Ian Happ hit two home runs and pinch-hitter Jon Jay drove in the go-ahead run as the Cubs beat the St. Louis Cardinals, 7-6, to complete a three-game home sweep. A. J. Ellis hit a tiebreaking single on the 14th pitch of an at-bat against Archie Bradley in the seventh, and host Miami edged the Arizona Diamondbacks, 6-5, for its seventh win in eight games. Ender Inciarte tied his career high with five hits and drove in five runs as Atlanta thumped the Reds, 13-8, in Cincinnati.
In-Kyung Kim of South Korea held off the two-time defending champion Anna Nordqvist of Sweden to win the L.P.G.A. Classic in Galloway, N.J., for her fifth tour title.
Tied with Paula Creamer for the second-round lead, Kim closed with a two-under-par 69 for a two-stroke victory over Nordqvist at Stockton Seaview. Nordqvist also shot a 69. Kim finished at 11-under 202.
ITALIAN EARNS FIRST EUROPEAN TOUR VICTORY The Italian Renato Paratore won the Nordea Masters in Malmo, Sweden, for his first European Tour title. Paratore finished one stroke ahead of Chris Wood and last year’s winner, Matthew Fitzpatrick, both of England.
Kiah Stokes scored a career-high 23 points and added 14 rebounds, and the Liberty beat the Phoenix Mercury, 88-72, at Madison Square Garden.
It was the second straight game that Stokes finished with a career high in points and had a double-double. Shavonte Zellous added 21 points and Tina Charles 16 for the Liberty (4-3). Brittney Griner scored 26 points and Diana Taurasi 17 for the Mercury (4-3).
More than 1,500 people were injured when panic swept through a crowd of Juventus fans watching Saturday’s Champions League final in a piazza in the northern Italian city of Turin, authorities said on Sunday.
The Turin prefect said in a statement that the crowd “was taken by panic and by the psychosis of a terror attack,” fearing that a loud noise had been caused by terrorists. The source of the loud noise that triggered a stampede remained unclear, officials said.
The noise caused panic among thousands of fans gathered in Piazza San Carlo to watch the match pitting Juventus against Real Madrid on giant television screens. Fans were trampled as they tried to flee.
Most of the injured were treated for cuts and bruises. Three, including a young boy who suffered cranial and thoracic trauma, were in serious condition, officials said.
Juventus lost, 4-1.
UNITED STATES ELIMINATED IN U-20 TOURNAMENT Venezuela scored twice in extra time to defeat the United States, 2-1, in an Under-20 World Cup quarterfinal in Jeonju, South Korea. The Americans were eliminated in the quarterfinals for a second straight time. They also lost to Serbia in 2015.
Delaney Gourley was nearly perfect, giving Florida a chance to win its third national championship in four years.
Gourley struck out 10 while throwing a two-hitter, helping the top-seeded Gators beat Washington, 5-2, in a semifinal at the Women’s College World Series in Oklahoma City.
Florida will face Oklahoma in the best-of-three championship series that will begin on Monday. In the other semifinal, Shay Knighten singled in two runs in the fifth inning to help the Sooners, the defending champions, beat Oregon, 4-2.
The Olympic road-race champion Greg Van Avermaet continued his powerful run by winning the Tour of Luxembourg.
