WASHINGTON — William P. Barr was a lawyer in private practice in June when he wrote an unsolicited memo to the Justice Department that was sharply skeptical of the special counsel’s inquiry into whether President Trump illegally obstructed justice.
Nine months later, Mr. Trump is cleared of that offense, and he has Mr. Barr, his new attorney general, to thank.
Mr. Barr’s decision to declare that evidence fell short of proving Mr. Trump illegally obstructed the Russia inquiry was an extraordinary outcome to a narrative that has unspooled over nearly two years. Robert S. Mueller III was appointed as special counsel to remove the threat of political interference from an investigation involving the president, but he reached no conclusion on the key question of whether Mr. Trump committed an obstruction-of-justice offense.
Mr. Barr stepped in to make the determination, bringing the specter of politics back into the case. Senior Justice Department officials defended his decision as prudent and within his purview, but it reignited a debate about the role of American law enforcement in politically charged federal investigations that has roiled since James B. Comey, as F.B.I. director in 2016, excoriated Hillary Clinton even in announcing that he was recommending she not be charged over her handling of classified emails.
Listen to ‘The Daily’: Why Didn’t Mueller Decide on Obstruction?
The special counsel came to no conclusion on whether President Trump illegally obstructed justice. The attorney general, a recent political appointee, stepped in.
Today: The special counsel was supposed to make the decision about whether President Trump committed a crime. Why did the attorney general do it instead?
It’s Tuesday, March 26.
Mike Schmidt, it has been 48 hours since the attorney general, Bill Barr, sent his summary of the special counsel’s report to congressional leaders. Where are you at in your thinking about all this?
In a certain way, I’m starting to think that the special counsel regulations, the way that this investigation was set up, has failed.
What do you mean failed? Do you mean, because this investigation didn’t produce criminal charges against the president?
No, no, no. It’s not about that. It’s about the perception of politics in criminal decisions. Bob Mueller, the special counsel, operated under certain regulations that were designed to protect him and his investigation but also give the public assurances that investigators who were free of politics pursued the facts. In this case, there’s a perception problem.
What do you mean by perception problem?
The special counsel is supposed to go out, look into the issues that are in question — in this case, collusion and obstruction of justice — and no matter how hard the questions they are looking at are, make a determination about whether someone broke the law or not.
Because obviously, Mueller did not feel comfortable making a decision in either direction on obstruction.
Mueller said, you know what, I can’t decide. It’s up to you.
In the case of the president, Mueller made no conclusion with respect to obstruction.
I would love to learn more about what was happening behind the scenes and why Mueller decided to punt.
Prosecutors get paid to make determinations. That’s what we do.
So that meant that the special counsel, the person who had been put there to protect themselves from politics, had no determination.
That’s not the job of the prosecutor. The job of the prosecutor is to decide yes or no.
And that left it up to the political appointees, the attorney general and deputy attorney general, people who had been placed there by Donald Trump.
Barr says he and the deputy attorney general, Rod Rosenstein, concluded that that conduct did not reach the threshold of a crime.
So you’re saying that because Mueller punted the decision on obstruction of justice to Barr, and it was Barr who then cleared the president of that charge, the special counsel failed because there was no apolitical figure reaching a conclusion on one of the central questions of the investigation.
Correct. Part of the reason the special counsel is there is to give the public the assurance that a investigator who’s not politically tied to the person under investigation is doing the work and following the facts. And in this case, that person, Mueller, said, I can’t come to a determination on this, and kicked it up to the folks above him who are the political appointees. By not reaching a conclusion, Mueller left the door open for Barr to come in and make a determination that he didn’t think there was enough to say the president broke the law. But Barr has another perception problem.
Back in 2018, Bill Barr, who had been the attorney general under George H. W. Bush and was now semi-retired, he, unprompted, wrote a memo that ended up in the hands of the Trump legal team that essentially said there is a very, very high bar for a president to be charged with obstruction of justice. And in that argument, he says that in order to prove obstruction, you also have to prove the underlying crime. In this case, collusion. So to make a case, you have to be able to establish both.
And Barr writes this long before his attorney general. What is meaningful about that memo and that legal logic about obstruction of justice now?
In the letter he sends to Congress this weekend in which he explains the decision on what they did with the president on obstruction, he says that one of the reasons that it’s so difficult to make this case is that they can’t show that the president was part of collusion.
An underlying crime that would justify a charge of obstruction of justice.
Correct. I actually want to — can I read from it?
So just to translate that for us, what exactly is he saying?
He’s saying that unless you can show that the president was trying to obstruct to cover up another crime, then the obstruction is sort of hollow. It doesn’t really resonate because there’s nothing really to cover up.
So that is a clear echo to the original Barr memo from 2018 written to the Trump administration. And it sounds like what you’re saying is that because Barr wrote this memo before he was nominated as attorney general, the White House knew he held this position when it came to obstruction of justice. And the fact that it ended up being that legal interpretation that is used to help clear the president of wrongdoing when it comes to obstruction of justice — that starts to feel quite political.
Here’s the problem. Barr may be right. He may have come to the correct conclusion based on the law and the fact. But because Mueller took a pass in this highly weird thing where he didn’t want to make a call about whether the president broke the law on obstruction, it ended up in Barr’s hands. And he looks like the ultimate and only decision maker. And he, because of politics, has perception issues on this decision.
Well, let’s talk about the actual conclusion that Barr reached. What do you make, Mike, of his rationale? Is there a broad legal consensus around Barr’s argument here that obstruction of justice depends on an underlying crime?
I think prosecutors would say that they don’t want to bring cases against folks who did not obstruct an actual criminal act. Legally, you could make the case, but most prosecutors wouldn’t want to because it’s not worth their time and energy to go after someone who is trying to cover up something that’s not criminal.
But in this case, I would say that there were crimes that the president may have wanted to cover up.
Hmm. Which ones?
The president has been named essentially as an unindicted co-conspirator in Michael Cohen’s payments to women before the election for violating campaign finance.
Prosecutors say the hush money payments Cohen made violate campaign finance laws. President Trump calls them a simple private transaction.
Donald Trump knew about those payments in May, June, July of 2017. So if you’re the president and Bob Mueller comes along and you know that you made these payments, you think, well, if this thing really gets out of hand, I could have some problems. So in the summer of 2017 the president’s talking about trying to fire Mueller.
Now, according to The New York Times and The Washington Post, the White House is laying the groundwork to try to discredit or undermine Mueller’s investigation.
Why was he really talking about that? Was it because of Russia? Was it because it was simply a distraction? Or did he want to ensure that Mueller didn’t go too far into his personal finances?
Multiple U.S. officials tell NBC News Mueller is gathering documents involving the financial records and businesses of dealings close to the Trump campaign, something the president says is a red line — a red line, except following the money is what Mueller does.
Putting all information related to inaugural donors, vendors, contractors, bank accounts.
— and his businesses. And Mueller’s investigation has led to great embarrassment for the president.
President Trump’s former national security adviser Michael Flynn just hours away from finding out if he’ll go to prison for lying to the F.B.I. about his Russia contacts.
Also, breaking tonight, the president’s former campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, found guilty on eight counts.
Roger Stone, longtime Trump associate and adviser, was taken into custody by the F.B.I.
Even though he was cleared on collusion, more than a handful of his advisors and associates have pled guilty to different charges. So was there really nothing to obstruct?
So you’re saying that Barr’s rationale that there is no obstruction, because there were no crimes to obstruct, doesn’t really hold up, because there were crimes, they just weren’t the crimes of coordinating with Russia to influence the election?
I’m saying that a day after Barr sent the letter, as we look at it, that’s another part of it that doesn’t make complete sense yet.
Mike, is that one more way in which, by kicking the decision to Bill Barr, the special counsel put this in the political realm of interpretation by political actors in a political system that might have been better left to an independent figure as the special counsel rules envisioned?
It means that instead of Mueller explaining the determination, Barr is doing it. And that just exposes the decision to the politics that Mueller was there to protect it from. And the head-scratching part of it is, so you went through this whole exercise of creating a special counsel.
To be apolitical.
To be apolitical. And in the end, the special counsel takes a pass, and it ends up right back in the hands of the political appointees. Well, why did you need a special counsel?
Right. And to that point, I guess the question is, why did Robert Mueller kick this question of obstruction of justice to the attorney general knowing full well everything you just explained, that that would make whatever decision Barr made feel political and in violation of the spirit of having a special counsel? He arguably handed off his central job to a political appointee.
Well, we don’t know, and we’re trying to find out. But here are two possibilities. Maybe, one, he didn’t want to box in Barr. He didn’t want to put him in a situation where he may appear to be disagreeing with the investigators. The second is that the legal issues around this are very difficult to unravel because it’s caught up in the unique position the president has as the head of the executive branch. And it may just be so hard to untangle them that Mueller kind of threw up his hands and said, this is a highly unusual situation. I’m going to let the Justice Department make the call.
It’s interesting. You said that maybe Mueller doesn’t want to box in Bill Barr, but it feels like it also puts Barr in a very weird position, because Barr’s options are all about degrees of political once Mueller kicks the decision to him. If Barr makes a decision about obstruction, yes, that seems political. But if he sends Mueller’s findings along to Congress with an open-ended question of whether or not the president obstructed justice, he leaves it to a Democratically controlled House to answer the question. And honestly, that feels as political, maybe even more political, than the attorney general making the call himself.
In a sense, maybe Barr was damned if he did and damned if he didn’t. I don’t know.
Do you think that Mueller would have anticipated all of this, that this would put Barr in a political position and would essentially violate the spirit of what the special counsel was all about?
It’s one of the mysteries right now. It’s one of the questions we’re trying to answer. Why is it that Mueller couldn’t come to a conclusion? Came to a conclusion on collusion, said it didn’t happen. But obstruction — wouldn’t exonerate the president.
Mike, it seems like before this report came out over the weekend, the main concern from Congress about Attorney General Bill Barr was whether he would ever release the full Mueller report to Congress, not that he would actually weigh in on whether the president committed crimes, because the idea that Mueller would not reach a conclusion wasn’t really conceivable. In retrospect, was that a mistake, that we weren’t focused enough on the possibility that Barr might weigh in on something like this and that he had already kind of told us how he would act in this situation?
Like the folks who put the special counsel regulations together 20 years ago, we, just a few weeks ago, couldn’t predict the future, and we couldn’t come up with the idea that Mueller, who’s been there for two years, would, at the end of the day, throw up his hands and say, I can’t make a determination on this. I spoke to a former senior Justice Department official today who said he had never seen an example in his entire career of prosecutors saying, we just can’t make a call here.
I wonder if the way that this has played out, in such a political manner — Mueller sends a decision to Barr, Barr decides not to pursue obstruction — how much does that influence what comes next, how Congress now conducts its side of this investigation, and how it treats the Mueller report?
Well, if Mueller had said there was no obstruction, and Barr put that out, then the Democrats would really have nothing to work with. But because Mueller didn’t make a decision, it now opens the door for the Democrats to say, we really need to take a look at everything that was here. Why was it that Mueller couldn’t make a decision? How did Bill Barr assess this? And they actually have something to work with. It gives them an issue to continue to prod on the obstruction of justice. Because if Mueller had cleared the president, the bar, no pun intended, for them to overcome to even investigate it would’ve been pretty high.
So counterintuitively, because of the way this played out, because of what Mueller did or didn’t do, and what Barr did as a political figure in all this, he has given someone like Jerry Nadler, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, a reasonably good reason to keep pushing forward for as much evidence as possible.
Correct. And I think that’s what we’ll see.
Democrats seized on Mr. Barr’s move, portraying it as a hasty and dubious intervention by a man who had taken over the Justice Department pledging to defend its independence, but ended up clearing a president who installed him in the post just last month. Mr. Mueller submitted his report about 48 hours before Mr. Barr wrote to lawmakers informing them that he and his deputy, Rod J. Rosenstein, had concluded that investigators lacked evidence that the president had illegally obstructed justice, though Mr. Mueller stopped short of exonerating the president.
“His hostility to the prospect of obstruction charges against the president has been now met with what seems to be a fairly rapid decision by him to squelch a case that obviously Bob Mueller found at least plausible,” said Senator Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island, a senior Democrat on the Judiciary Committee and a former federal prosecutor.
The chairmen of six House committees sent Mr. Barr a letter Monday evening demanding access to Mr. Mueller’s full report by April 2 and the underlying evidence shortly thereafter. “Your four-page summary of the special counsel’s review is not sufficient for Congress, as a coequal branch of government, to perform critical work,” they wrote.
The senior Justice Department officials pushed back. Mr. Mueller and two of his deputies told the attorney general on March 5 that he had no intention of deciding on the obstruction issue, according to an official familiar with the discussion. That gave Mr. Barr time to digest the facts along with Mr. Rosenstein, whom the special counsel’s office regularly briefed.
The officials also said the Justice Department applied no pressure on Mr. Mueller as he drew conclusions in the Russia investigation.
Mr. Barr made the “right call,” said Robert W. Ray, the former independent counsel for the Whitewater investigation who took over after Ken Starr stepped down. Since the statute that created independent counsels no longer exists, he said, it is the proper role of the attorney general to render a judgment on such a momentous and novel question.
“We depend on Bob Mueller to gather the information to make that judgment, but in a close call where there are significant both factual and legal hurdles to tackling the president, I think it is important for the department to speak with one voice, and that one voice is the voice of the attorney general,” he said.
Mr. Barr took over at a Justice Department that was still reeling from extraordinary moves by its leaders in recent years, including Mr. Comey’s defiance of longstanding policy to publicly criticize Mrs. Clinton while also declaring that “no reasonable prosecutor” would charge her with a crime as he closed an investigation into the matter.
Mr. Comey’s break with department policy was the subject of a blistering inspector general report, and Mrs. Clinton’s supporters believed that his public statements — and later move to reopen the email investigation days before the election — contributed to her loss to Mr. Trump.
Current and former Justice Department lawyers, including Mr. Barr and Mr. Rosenstein, had sharply criticized Mr. Comey’s handling of the case.
Mr. Mueller’s report arrived at the Justice Department on Friday, when a member of Mr. Mueller’s security team delivered a few hard copies of the team’s confidential findings to Mr. Rosenstein’s office. Those reports were immediately given to Mr. Barr, who began to read.
The letter, by Attorney General William P. Barr, details the main findings of the special counsel’s two-year investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election.
Over the next two days, he and Mr. Rosenstein met with a small group of aides, including Edward O’Callaghan, Mr. Rosenstein’s top deputy, and Steven A. Engel, the head of the department’s Office of Legal Counsel.
In his letter, Mr. Barr said Mr. Mueller had concluded that the evidence did not show that Mr. Trump or anyone involved with his campaign could be prosecuted for conspiring with the Russian government in its election interference operation — a determination that Mr. Mueller and his deputies had relayed during their March 5 briefing.
But the special counsel had been far more equivocal about whether Mr. Trump had illegally sought to obstruct that investigation, Mr. Barr wrote.
The special counsel’s team examined a pattern of behavior by Mr. Trump that raised questions about whether he obstructed justice, including urging Mr. Comey in February 2017 to drop an investigation into Michael T. Flynn, the former national security adviser; the president’s firing of Mr. Comey; and his appearing to dangle pardons at potential witnesses in the Russia investigation.
Mr. Barr said Mr. Mueller had laid out evidence and arguments both for and against the proposition that Mr. Trump committed obstruction but gave no details of the special counsel’s analysis.
It is not clear from Mr. Barr’s letter whether Mr. Mueller had wanted the attorney general to make the final decision on the obstruction issue, or whether he intended for Congress to absorb the evidence without a prejudgment by law enforcement.
While Mr. Barr did not detail his reasoning for deciding on the case, he appeared to be focusing on the question of whether investigators could prove Mr. Trump had “corrupt intent” in instances where the available evidence about his motivations was ambiguous. Obstruction cases often turn on whether prosecutors can prove that someone acted with an illegitimate motive.
But in narrowly focusing on a lack of evidence that the Trump campaign reached any agreement with the Russian government on sabotaging the election, legal experts said, Mr. Barr left out other reasons the president may have had for wanting to stymie a wide-ranging investigation: It could uncover other crimes and embarrassing facts.
Indeed, it did. The special counsel investigation uncovered a scheme between the president and his former lawyer Michael D. Cohen to violate campaign finance laws by paying hush money to an adult-film actress who alleged an affair with Mr. Trump, which he denies. Other matters related to the president that spun off from the special counsel’s work remain under scrutiny, including financial dealings by his inaugural committee and family business.
The special counsel’s inquiry also led to several of the president’s associates or campaign aides facing criminal charges and brought to light other potentially embarrassing information, including a detailed account of how Russia carried out two covert operations to aid his campaign.
Moreover, Mr. Barr’s suggestion that it could be hard to prove the president acted with a bad motive was at odds with his own previous writings. He has suggested that a president’s use of executive powers are beyond the reach of criminal law — regardless of motive.
In the 19-page memo Mr. Barr wrote unsolicited for the Trump administration last year, he argued that Mr. Mueller ought not be permitted to question Mr. Trump about several actions that he had taken as president that prompted accusations of obstruction.
Mr. Barr contended that a federal law against obstruction of justice should not be interpreted as applying to a president’s exercise of his constitutional authorities — such as to direct the Justice Department to close a case, to fire a subordinate or to pardon someone — as opposed to more familiar ways of impeding an investigation like destroying evidence or suborning perjury.
His argument in part rested on his broad theory of presidential power. But he also worried about the prospect of a world in which every time the Justice Department exercised prosecutorial discretion or changed a prosecutorial team in a controversial case, critics could raise accusations of improper motive and call for a criminal inquiry.
Citing Mr. Barr’s memo as a reason to question his motive in pronouncing Mr. Trump cleared of obstruction, Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, said he will call the attorney general to testify.
