A “kink collective“ in a residential area of Brooklyn has upset longtime residents and resulted in a culture clash and gentrification struggle all wrapped up into one fight.
On one side, longtime residents of a block in the Bedford-Stuyvesant area of Brooklyn, led by Laurie Miller, who lives in the same narrow house on Quincy Street that she moved into as a child in 1974.
On the other, a queer feminist, Charlotte Taillor, who moved her business next door to Ms. Miller, from a more expensive space in Crown Heights.
And in the middle: Ms. Taillor’s business.
Now about that business. It’s what’s known as a kink collective, where Ms. Taillor runs bondage workshops and other fetish events for the B.D.S.M. (bondage, dominance, sadism and masochism) community.
It’s perfectly legal, she said, but that does not necessarily make it welcome.
The dispute began in January when Ms. Miller began noticing men, some of whom she called “weird-looking,” coming and going from the house next door.
“It was like a heavy, continuous pattern of these guys that aren’t in the neighborhood,” she said. Because she lived alone, the foot traffic made her uneasy.
When she asked around, neighbors told her that Ms. Taillor was up to no good.
Perturbed, she quickly put up fliers calling for a meeting with the block association and urging local residents to call the community board and the police about “a gentlemen’s sex club” that had “no business” being on the block.
Now after weeks of outcry and several community meetings, Ms. Taillor is planning to move her custom-built kinky clubhouse, where folks play with the boundaries of trust and consent, under pressure from Ms. Miller, who says the dominatrices did not have her consent to be there.
The clash, which was first reported online by Patch, was splashed across the front of The Daily News with the headline “Kinky Booted” and an image of fishnets and red, thigh-high boots.
But the battle on Quincy Street is about more than just sex. For Ms. Miller, it’s about trust and safety; for Ms. Taillor, it’s about respect and kink-shaming. As both women fought to protect their communities, what resulted was a culture clash and gentrification struggle all wrapped up into one fight.
Like many blocks in Bedford-Stuyvesant, that part of Quincy Street is a collection of well-kept rowhouses where residents nurse plants next to their stoops. The locals are a mix typical of many changing Brooklyn neighborhoods: young single people lured by affordable rent, families looking for a nurturing environment and older residents who helped turn their block into a tight-knit community.
During a recent block association meeting in a church basement, Ms. Taillor, 30, and Ms. Miller, 58, sat across from one another, in front of about 20 people who appeared evenly split.
With her lawyer beside her, Ms. Taillor announced to the neighbors that she planned to move her business, the Taillor Group. Despite that, she and Ms. Miller clashed repeatedly, forcing a local police officer to intervene several times to call for order and keep tempers in check.
One of Ms. Taillor’s supporters said critics just objected to the nature of her work and wouldn’t care if she were teaching knitting.
“These brownstones are old and hollow,” she said.
The other day, Ms. Taillor, who does not live in the neighborhood but rents an apartment in the Ditmas Park section of Brooklyn, said she was most upset about what she says is a misrepresentation of her business.
She said she began The Taillor Group in 2016 to serve as a kind of kink community center that could help educate women in particular about B.D.S.M. practices. That included classes for aspiring dominatrices on the finer points of spanking, flogging and rope bondage, as well as events catering to those more experienced with fetish play.
The business relied on a group of submissive men for the women to practice with. But Ms. Taillor disputed Ms. Miller’s description of them. Because of the nature of The Taillor Group, she said, the clients tended to be respectful and docile.
Ms. Taillor said she also tried to foster a body-positive, sex-positive, queer-friendly and inclusive environment.
She wasn’t the only one with concerns. At the community meeting, neighbors asked why Ms. Taillor wasn’t running her business out of a storefront on a commercial block. And Ms. Patrick, 35, shared her concerns that children on the residential street might be exposed to adult sexual behavior.
The Department of Buildings has received several complaints about Ms. Taillor’s business, and Ms. Taillor has said she has spoken with them but that her lawyer told her she was not violating any zoning codes.
Still, after hearing Ms. Miller’s objections in person, Ms. Taillor said, she decided not to stay on the block.
She also wanted to make sure her group of femme-identifying dommes felt safe and valued.
Ms. Taillor is raising money for a new space and moving costs — none of The Taillor Group’s submissives are professional movers — but she said she wouldn’t be able to move until April. In the meantime, she said, Ms. Miller has been harassing The Taillor Group’s clients and employees, shouting insults at them on the street.
Ms. Miller denied any harassment and said the only time she confronted Ms. Taillor’s clients was after they started “cursing me out.” But she said she tells neighbors exactly what she thinks happens in the house next to hers.
Ms. Miller said she would feel unsafe as long as The Taillor Group was next door.
