Watching is the TV and film recommendation website of The New York Times. Sign up for our twice-weekly newsletter here.
Ricky Gervais’s new series, which he also wrote and directed, isn’t quite a comedy. Over the course of six half-hour episodes his character Tony, a widower who has recently lost his wife to breast cancer, abuses everyone he encounters in his small fictional English town. Tony no longer sees a need to pretend to be friendly to anyone or feign interest in anything, and while his insults and put-downs are amusing, his regular threats of suicide are less so. He’s a man who has given up on life, but life keeps drawing him back in. (A local widow played by Penelope Wilton sees behind his veneer of misery.) The show is a tough watch at times but Gervais holds our attention throughout.
Oscar Isaac is so convincing in the role of an intensely charismatic leader that it makes perfect sense that a group of ex-Special Forces veterans (Ben Affleck, Pedro Pascal, Charlie Hunnam, Garrett Hedlund) would happily team up with him for a mission that is not government sanctioned, and, more important, could be suicidal. The plan? To rip off and murder a South American drug lord in his own home. It’s a heist film with stunning locations and ingenious caper techniques. Plus it affords an excellent opportunity to scream at Ben Affleck when his character makes idiotic mistakes.
Surprised to learn that the actor Idris Elba is playing this year’s Coachella lineup? Don’t be: Elba moonlights as a DJ, and has played festivals and clubs around the world. And now he’s playing one on TV, in this new half-hour series about a washed-up DJ named Charlie who is striving for a comeback. Charlie gets a career boost when his more successful best friend requests help with looking after his precocious tweenage daughter Gabby (an adorable Frankie Hervey). The gig has some major perks, chief among them access to his friend’s in-home recording studio. Elba and Hervey have great freewheeling chemistry, and their affectionate bond is the show’s sweet, gooey heart. Bonus attraction: watching Elba show off his skills behind the DJ decks.
Amy Schumer recently had to cancel the remaining dates of her latest comedy tour because of pregnancy complications, and anyone wanting to know more about that can now hear in considerable detail. In her latest stand-up special, Schumer explains all about hyperemesis gravidarum, a knockout punch of extreme nausea and vomiting that’s had her against the ropes for months. (“I throw up an ‘Exorcist’-amount every day,” she says.) The silver uterine lining of it all is her maternal trials have given her some great new material to work with: stories about how her husband, who is on the autism spectrum, has dealt with her multiple hospitalizations and why she was arrested while protesting Brett Kavanaugh’s confirmation to the Supreme Court. And you should really hear her solution to the problem of unsolicited sexting — it’s pretty certain to shut that nonsense down.
Also arriving: “Apollo 13” (March 1), “The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind” (March 1), “A Clockwork Orange” (March 1), “Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon” (March 1), “Emma” (March 1), “The Hurt Locker” (March 1), “Junebug” (March 1), “Music and Lyrics” (March 1), “Nick and Norah’s Infinite Playlist” (March 1), “The Notebook” (March 1), “Stuart Little” (March 1), “Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street” (March 1), “Wet Hot American Summer” (March 1), “Winter’s Bone” (March 1), “Doubt” (March 7), “Blue Jasmine” (March 8), “Juanita” (March 8), “A Separation” (March 15), “Arrested Development” Season 5B (March 15), “Girl” (March 15), “Love, Death & Robots” Season 1 (March 15), “Queer Eye” Season 3 (March 15), “The Lives of Others” (March 15), “The Dirt” (March 22), “The OA” Part 2 (March 22), “Santa Clarita Diet” Season 3 (March 29) and “How to Get Away with Murder” Season 5 (March 30).
“Catastrophe” began with Sharon and Rob (played by the show’s creators Sharon Horgan and Rob Delaney) in a panicked state over an accidental pregnancy following a brief fling. As the show has progressed, the couple has grown into their relationship (more or less) and they are now the parents of two kids. They still experience moments of insecurity about the state of their union, and occasionally find themselves on the verge of ending it. (At one point Sharon asks Rob, “Were you unhappy the whole time?”) But in the show’s final season, this unlikely alliance enters a new, bittersweet phase, one in which we see that love and resentment can coexist, and hope and despair, too. The closing moment is as perfect (and perfectly ambiguous) as a series finale can get.
The Polish director Pawel Pawlikowski’s Oscar-nominated film is an enchanting black-and-white drama about a tempestuous love affair set against the backdrop of the Cold War. Wiktor (Tomasz Kot), a pianist and composer, and Zula (Joanna Kulig), a singer, begin a romance as they tour Poland performing folk songs in service of communist propaganda; they are eventually separated, but over the course of a decade they continue to find a way back to one another, only to lose touch again. This is a haunting story in which silence does much of the speaking.
“If anyone asks, that girl does not exist,” says the federal agent Marissa (Mireille Enos), trying to preclude public awareness of this show’s titular teenage assassin. Based on Joe Wright’s 2011 film of the same name, this “Hanna” shares the same writer (David Farr, here the showrunner) and features the newcomer Esme Creed-Miles in the role originated by Saoirse Ronan and Joel Kinnaman as Hanna’s guardian/trainer. It’s nice to see Kinnaman and Enos together again (they co-starred in the AMC series “The Killing”) and to find that the show wisely swaps out some of the movie’s curious aesthetic choices (like the ethereal fairy tale motifs) in order to spend more time on character development, world-building and breathtaking action sequences.
Also arriving: “The American” (March 1), “Boston Legal” Seasons 1-5 (March 1), “The Widow” Season 1 (March 1), “American Beauty” (March 1), “Big Night” (March 1), “The Chumscrubber” (March 1), “Deep Red” (“Profondo rosso”) (March 1), “Little House on the Prairie” Seasons 1-9 (March 1), “Nacho Libre” (March 1), “The Practice” Seasons 1-9 (March 1), “The Unit” Seasons 1-4 (March 1), “Tin Star” Season 2 (March 8) and “Colette” (March 12).
It’s hard to say what is the most devastating thing about this four-hour documentary. It might be the graphic, horrifying allegations of child sexual abuse made by two men, Wade Robson and James Safechuck, against Michael Jackson. Or it could be the fact that Robson and Safechuck were still unable to emotionally process what they say occurred and speak out as young adults during the singer’s 2004-2005 criminal trial, when justice might have been meted out and other children protected. Just as with the “Surviving R. Kelly” series on Lifetime, the accusations themselves — furiously contested by Jackson’s estate — are not new. But the impact of survivors on camera sharing their painful recollections is. The difference now, perhaps, is that the public seems ready to listen.
“I don’t have many secrets,” Elizabeth Holmes claims near the start of Alex Gibney’s latest documentary. But that’s a lie, as was the entire basis for her now-defunct health care start-up Theranos, which claimed to offer a revolutionary approach to medical blood tests with an all-in-one testing device that supposedly required only a single drop of blood. Theranos was the Fyre Festival of Silicon Valley — an exercise in branding that promised the impossible and duped a lot of famous and influential people. But Gibney has no interest in laughing at the people who fell for the fraud; instead, the filmmaker seeks to dissect the conditions that made the scandal possible. Where was the due diligence? Why wasn’t patient safety the foremost concern? This is a cautionary tale with implications beyond the health care industry, and it’s necessary viewing.
Also arriving: “Angela’s Ashes” (March 1), “The Client” (March 1), “Courage Under Fire” (March 1), “Date Night” (March 1), “The Devil Wears Prada” (March 1), “Despicable Me” (March 1), “Drugstore Cowboy” (March 1), “Green Zone” (March 1), “The Grudge” (March 1), “Love & Other Drugs” (March 1), “Paper Heart” (March 1), “Taps” (March 1), “Weekend at Bernie’s” (March 1), “Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom” (March 9), “The Case Against Adnan Syed” (March 10), “One Nation Under Stress” (March 25), “Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again” (March 30), “Barry” Season 2 Premiere (March 31) and “Veep” Season 7 Premiere (March 31).
“Hello, I’m Fat,” writes the plus-size protagonist Annie in the headline of her online essay for a fictional Portland newspaper. Played with one-of-a-kind warmth by Aidy Bryant, Annie is a woman who has always felt compelled to apologize for her overweight existence, responding to casual body shaming with timid smiles and promises to do better. It’s a delight to watch as she comes to realize that life doesn’t have to be that way — anyone who wishes “Dietland” were still around should try this.
Also arriving: “American Beauty” (March 1), “Batman Begins” (March 1), “Bruce Almighty” (March 1), “The Chumscrubber” (March 1), “The Cider House Rules” (March 1), “The Crying Game” (March 1), “The Dark Knight” (March 1), “Easy Rider” (March 1), “Edward Scissorhands” (March 1), “The French Lieutenant’s Woman” (March 1), “He Named Me Malala” (March 1), “The Ice Storm” (March 1), “Ironweed” (March 1), “JFK” (March 1), “Nacho Libre” (March 1), “Office Space” (March 1), “The Piano” (March 1), “The Pope of Greenwich Village” (March 1), “River’s Edge” (March 1), “Saved!” (March 1), “Toys” (March 1), “Witness” (March 1), “Suburbia” (March 7), “Shoplifters” (March 14), “Like Water for Chocolate” (March 15), “Wings of the Dove” (March 15), “Assassination Nation” (March 18) and “Girl Most Likely” (March 20).