Nearly two weeks after basketball players at the University of Mississippi knelt during the national anthem in protest of a pro-Confederate rally that ended on campus, the student government voted unanimously to move a prominent statue of a Confederate soldier.
The resolution passed, 47-0, to thunderous applause in the Associated Student Body senate on Tuesday night. The faculty senate unanimously passed a similar measure on Thursday evening.
The student resolution “allows us to remember history, and remember the role the university played during the Civil War, without giving the statue the same power,” said John Chappell, the president of the university’s College Democrats.
Mr. Chappell was one of six students who spent months researching legal opinions involving the movement of Confederate monuments and consulting with legal and academic experts to write the resolution, which received bipartisan support.
The Confederate monument, which was erected in 1906, “undermines our mission to maintain an inclusive and safe environment,” the resolution said.
The statue, at the pointy end of a teardrop-shaped traffic circle that leads to the university’s main administrative building, is among the first things drivers see when approaching the campus. The proposal suggests relocating the statue to a cemetery for Confederate soldiers near the campus’s former basketball arena, less than a 10-minute walk away.
Parallel proposals have been taken up by other governing bodies on campus. The Graduate Student Council Senate adopted a similar measure on Monday, as did the Staff Council on Thursday.
The interim chancellor, Larry D. Sparks, issued a statement to faculty and students on Thursday.
The final decision rests with the board of trustees for the Mississippi Institutions of Higher Learning, an agency that oversees the state’s four-year public universities. The members of the board are appointed by the governor.
A spokeswoman for the agency said the situation was “still hypothetical” and declined to comment.
In order for the agency to consider the proposal to move the statue, the university must consult with the Mississippi Department of Archives and History to determine “whether the cemetery is a suitable location” for the landmark, according to Mr. Sparks’s statement.
Brice Noonan, who teaches biology at the university and chairs the faculty senate, said he has seen “little to no pushback” about the proposals on campus.
“It’s generally from people on the outside,” he said, referring to Mississippi residents.
William Hall, a junior who writes for the school newspaper, disagreed with the students’ approach. The matter should be settled with a campuswide referendum, he said.
For decades, the University of Mississippi has struggled with discrimination and lingering Civil War-era symbolism. When it integrated in 1962, thousands of white students and outsiders rioted on the campus. Two people died and at least 300 were wounded.
The statue has long been a source of discomfort for students on campus, said Jarvis Benson, a senior who is one of the authors of the resolution and the president of the Black Student Union. He was a freshman when the state flag, which includes a Confederate symbol, was taken down from a pole behind the statue.
When Ed Meek, a wealthy donor whose name once was on the journalism school, wrote an offensive Facebook post in October, it “opened the window” for the difficult conversations about the statue, Mr. Benson said.
Being in the room when the student government voted on Tuesday night was moving, he said.
