Willie McCoy appeared to be asleep in his car at a Taco Bell drive-through in Vallejo, Calif., when police officers, responding to a 911 call, arrived to check on him.
Minutes later, Mr. McCoy, 20, was shot and killed. The police said he had woken up and was reaching for a gun on his lap, but Mr. McCoy’s friends and family members demanded more transparency.
On Friday, the Vallejo Police Department released footage from the body-worn cameras of six officers who fired their weapons during the shooting, which occurred Feb. 9.
The footage showed that Mr. McCoy appeared to be asleep for at least several minutes, and that he was shot about 10 seconds after he began to move. It was unclear whether he was reaching for a gun.
The officers involved had been placed on administrative leave, but Ms. Nold said that they were back on duty within weeks of the shooting. Neither the police department nor the district attorney’s office immediately responded to requests for comment on Sunday.
The half-hour video released by the police included footage from six body cameras, as well as an audio recording of the 911 call that ultimately brought officers to the Taco Bell drive-through.
Mr. McCoy, in a photo provided by his family. He was killed by the police in February while in his car at a Taco Bell drive-through.
About four minutes passed while the officers tried to open the car door and moved their patrol cars to box in Mr. McCoy’s vehicle. In the videos, which were partly obscured by the officers’ drawn weapons and outstretched arms, there was no indication that the police tried to awaken Mr. McCoy, although they were shining their flashlights into his car.
At one point in the video footage, officers could be heard making a plan to open the car door, seize the gun and pull Mr. McCoy out of the car. “If he reaches for it,” said one of the officers, nodding.
“Yup,” said another. But they found the door locked, and Mr. McCoy appeared to remain asleep.
Then the officers began yelling at Mr. McCoy to raise his hands. Less than 10 seconds after Mr. McCoy scratched his left shoulder, he could be seen moving his left arm, and six officers opened fire.
“To respect the privacy of the decedent and his family, we are withholding the portions of the videos showing officers rendering medical aid,” the police said in their statement Friday.
The police first showed body camera footage to a few relatives of Mr. McCoy on March 13. Last Monday, Open Vallejo, a local news outlet, made a public records request for the footage. It was released to the public four days later.
