Carey Price stopped 27 shots for his fourth shutout of the season, and the host Montreal Canadiens beat the Islanders, 4-0, on Thursday night to move into an Eastern Conference playoff spot.
Joel Armia, Shea Weber, Jonathan Drouin and Jordan Weal scored for the Canadiens, who won their second straight after dropping two in a row. They moved past Columbus into the second wild-card spot. The Blue Jackets lost to Edmonton, 4-1.
Thomas Greiss gave up four goals on 22 shots for the Islanders before being pulled in the second period. Robin Lehner made 12 saves in relief. The Islanders remained three points behind idle Washington in the Metropolitan Division. The Pittsburgh Penguins pulled into a tie with the Islanders for second, beating Nashville, 2-1, in a shootout.
The Islanders have the league’s best defense, but they’ve given up nine goals in their last two games after dropping a 5-0 decision to the Boston Bruins on Tuesday.
Armia gave Montreal the lead with seven seconds left in the first period on a power play, beating Greiss between the pads from the slot after Weber stopped Cal Clutterbuck from clearing the puck.
Weber scored his 13th goal of the season with a blistering slap shot 1 minutes 3 seconds into the second period.
Drouin completed a tick-tack-toe pass play from Armia and Jesperi Kotkaniemi at the six-minute mark, snapping his 17-game streak without a goal. Drouin had not scored since Feb. 7, against Winnipeg.
Weal added a fourth for Montreal at 8:19, tipping a shot by Jordie Benn past Greiss, who was then replaced by Lehner.
“I think we needed that for our confidence,” Drouin said of the back-to-back victories. “We kind of lost it over the past two weeks. Now we got our confidence back and we’re not scared to make mistakes.
BRUINS 5, DEVILS 1 Patrice Bergeron scored twice and reached the 30-goal mark for the fifth time to lead Boston past the host Devils. The Bruins opened a six-point lead over Toronto in the race for second place in the Atlantic Division.
David Pastrnak, Danton Heinen and David Backes also scored for the Bruins, who are 16-3-1 in their last 20 games. Tuukka Rask made 22 saves to improve to 18-2-3 in his last 23 games.
Drew Stafford scored for the Devils, ending a 34-game goal-scoring drought. Cory Schneider made 22 saves as the Devils lost for the ninth time in 12 games (2-9-1).