This week, just days before the anniversary of her killing, prosecutors provided a partial answer, charging two former police officers with carrying out the killing. The case’s main questions — including who ordered the killing and why — remain unanswered.
A year after her execution-style killing, the call for justice for Ms. Franco — a black, gay, feminist Rio de Janeiro city councilmember who was raised poor — has morphed into a rallying cry in a deeply-polarized nation for those who felt represented by her.
Her name and image have become an antithesis to the dominant political forces in Brazil as the right-wing president, Jair Bolsonaro, settles into office.
Mr. Bolsonaro, a former paratrooper known for making offensive comments about women, black people and gays, campaigned on a promise to improve security with measures that include making it easier to get guns, and making it easier for the police to kill suspects.
But critics are afraid his policies could worsen aspects of Brazil’s violence, which includes a staggering number of people killed by the police, a rate of killings of women that experts call alarming, and a systematic targeting of gay and transgender people.
The killing of Ms. Franco — who stood for many of those groups who now feel endangered — shocked and divided Brazil. But it also injected a life-or-death sense of urgency into the rights movements she espoused.
It also helped propel the political careers of black women, including three who were elected last year to the Rio de Janeiro state legislative assembly.
“Marielle still represents, if only in memory, a threat to the status quo,” said Renata da Silva Souza, her former chief of staff, who was one of the black women elected to the assembly.
Within days, Ms. Franco, 38, a rising political star from a socialist party who had little name recognition outside political circles in her hometown, became a global symbol of resistance to the rising conservative tide. What made the killing particularly jarring for many Brazilians was how rare a phenomenon she was.
The council chamber was awash in gay pride flags and crackling with cheers when Ms. Franco made her inaugural address at a city hall hearing in February 2017, looking at once radiant and a bit taken aback by the attention.
Being black, maintaining strong ties to the favela where she was raised and being open about being in a same-sex relationship made Ms. Franco unique in Brazilian politics — and a role model for people who do not see themselves represented in a system dominated by white men.
But colleagues and fellow activists say they saw no sign that her political work put her at imminent risk.
Mr. Bolsonaro and his sons, who are also politicians, were strikingly silent about the crime, the most shocking political assassination in Brazil in years. Mônica Benício, Ms. Franco’s surviving partner, said this was troubling — but not surprising.
One of the president’s sons, Flávio Bolsonaro, employed until last year both the wife and the mother of a former police officer suspected of being a senior militia member.
And this week, once the two suspects were arrested in connection with Ms. Franco’s death, the Bolsonaros found their links to the men under the spotlight, which increased the unease many critics felt with his administration.
Mr. Bolsonaro has said he did not know the men, and police have said that their ties to the Bolsonaro family were not relevant to the investigation.
The black women who ran for office in Rio de Janeiro after her killing were mindful of the risks they were taking, said Mônica Francisco, another of the black women elected as state representative. But it would have been more dangerous to retreat, she said.
