Everyone loves the new: new things, new sensations, new talents. Our industry, and many others, are in fact built on the pursuit of discovery, the thrill of anointment, the excitement of prediction.
But what is new is not necessarily what is true. Or rather: What is new is sometimes mostly interesting because of its promise, because we can project onto it our own frustrated ambitions. If you are a young, new artist, such attention can be gratifying, of course — and is increasingly important in order to launch a career — but it can also be damaging; once the spotlight pivots from you to someone even younger and newer, what remains?
The answer, as always, is work: decades of it, if you’re lucky. It’s in these decades that a talent matures into an artist … or not. Those 20 or 30 or 40 or 50 years are, more than a debut show, book or exhibition, the only thing that separates an artist from, say, a gifted painter, or a playwright from a good writer. These are the decades in which you prove yourself to yourself. No longer are you the great new hope. The world may care (sometimes deeply) about what you produce; it may not care at all. But what the world thinks matters less (or it should), because the work itself has come to mean more.
This is why this magazine tends to focus on midcareer and late career artists of all disciplines, people who have been plying their lonely crafts for years, sometimes when it seemed that no one was paying attention. Sometimes the artist’s acquaintance with obscurity is long behind him, as in the case of Jasper Johns, who has, as M.H. Miller writes in his profile, managed to consistently define and speak to America for the past 60 years. But even Johns, now 88, still gets up every day and goes to his studio. In this, one of the greatest artists in modern history shares something elemental with the most unknown or the youngest — the work must be done, and it only gets done if you do it.
In my life outside T Magazine, I am a writer, and when I leave the office at night, I return to my desk at home to (try to) write. It doesn’t always happen. Part of my fascination with the midcareer artist is that, as a midcareer, middle-aged artist myself, I’m always looking to other people’s lives for clues about how to be. Occasionally, people ask me for advice, and the only, and best, encouragement I can give them is that you will never be an artist if you don’t finish your work. It sounds so simple, and so obvious, and it is. But it’s also true: You will never become an artist if you don’t spend every day being an artist.
Talent is sexy. Work is not. Only one, however, is actually essential. Your career begins if you have the former. But it’s finished if you don’t do the latter.
Read more from T’s March 3 Men’s Fashion Issue.