In an unusual reproach, Fox News on Monday criticized one of its star personalities, Jeanine Pirro, after the host questioned if a Muslim lawmaker’s religious beliefs undermined her loyalty to the United States.
The network has not yet commented on remarks by another of its prime-time stars, Tucker Carlson, who faced a second day of scrutiny after the left-wing advocacy group Media Matters for America exhumed offensive comments he made on a shock-jock radio program about a decade ago.
On the Monday episode of his 8 p.m. program on Fox News, “Tucker Carlson Tonight,” the host cast himself as a target of a liberal “mob” and suggested that the political left wanted to shut down his network.
Still, the network has faced unusually sharp scrutiny over the past week, starting with an article in The New Yorker that chronicled the close-knit relationship between Mr. Trump’s inner circle and Fox News personnel. One network alumnus in the White House, the deputy chief of staff Bill Shine, resigned from his position on Friday after a brief, bumpy tenure.
Ms. Omar caused an uproar in Washington recently after making remarks in Congress that were attacked as anti-Semitic, leading the House to pass a resolution last week condemning intolerance.
Mr. Carlson, a provocateur who enjoys flouting notions of political correctness, has been called out for misogynist comments before. In 2015, he defended his brother after an email exchange showed his brother making deeply sexist remarks about a female aide to Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York.
In a statement before his Monday show, Mr. Carlson did not apologize for his “Bubba” comments.
Fox News is not the only cable news network that has had to grapple with a star anchor’s troubling past remarks.
Joy-Ann Reid, the MSNBC host, apologized last year after revelations that she had published numerous homophobic posts and jokes on a blog that is now defunct. She also claimed without evidence that the homophobic remarks had been inserted by hackers intent on harming her reputation. MSNBC did not discipline Ms. Reid.