SAN FRANCISCO — Alphabet’s board of directors agreed to pay a former top Google executive as much as $45 million when he resigned from the company in 2016 after being accused of groping a subordinate.
The suit was part of the fallout over how Google has handled sexual harassment cases. The New York Times reported in October that Google had handsomely paid several high-ranking executives in separation agreements after they were credibly accused of sexual harassment, even though the men could have been fired for cause. In one case, Google handed a $90 million exit package to Andy Rubin, who used to head its Android division, after he was accused of sexual misconduct.
According to the amended suit, Google agreed to pay Mr. Singhal $15 million a year for two years and between $5 million and $15 million in the third year as long as he was not employed by a competitor. He agreed to take a job at Uber about a year after his departure, then resigned from the ride-hailing company a few weeks later when the sexual harassment claim at Google became public.
The suit also cited board meeting minutes confirming The Times’s report of the $90 million exit package for Mr. Rubin. A Google employee with whom he was having an extramarital relationship accused him of coercing her into oral sex. She filed a complaint, and the company’s investigation found her account to be credible. The separation agreement for Mr. Rubin was also contingent on his agreeing to refrain from working with rivals.
According to the suit, the board’s compensation committee proposed paying Mr. Rubin a salary of $650,000 in April 2014 with the opportunity for him to get a bonus of more than double his salary. At the time, Mr. Rubin was an adviser to Google and no longer running the Android business.
The lawsuit said Mr. Rubin had declined to accept that pay package until he had spoken to Mr. Page. In August 2014, Mr. Page awarded a $150 million stock grant to Mr. Rubin.
Eight days after the $150 million grant was awarded, a Google official emailed the board committee asking for approval of Mr. Rubin’s compensation. Without any additional documents, the committee members — Paul S. Otellini, Intel’s former chief executive, who died in 2017; John Doerr of the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins; and Ram Shriram of the venture firm Sherpalo Ventures — said they had approved it, according to the suit.
Google awarded Mr. Rubin the grant even though there was an active investigation into his misconduct. When Mr. Page ultimately decided to part ways with Mr. Rubin, the $150 million stock grant was a sizable bargaining chip that Mr. Rubin used to negotiate his exit package since an executive’s stock compensation is often taken into consideration during settlement talks.
