Sarai Pridgen had just gotten home from debate practice on Monday evening when she opened her laptop to find her Facebook feed flooded with stories about a staggering statistic: only seven black students had been admitted into Stuyvesant High School, out of 895 spots. The number was causing a wrenching citywide discussion about race and inequality in America’s largest school system.
Sarai said she felt sickened by the statistic — yet unsurprised. A 16-year-old sophomore, she is one of just 29 black students out of about 3,300 teenagers at Stuyvesant.
New York is being roiled by a fight over the future of its selective schools, but at Stuyvesant, the admission statistics were especially piercing. For students, it is hard enough being a teenager, balancing grades and homework with social pressures and a barrage of Instagram Stories.
But imagine being one of the few black and Hispanic students at one of the country’s most selective public schools.
The nine black and Hispanic students who gathered for an interview after school on Wednesday said the sobering statistics had energized them to be even more vocal in the discussion regarding the city’s elite schools, and to make Stuyvesant a more welcoming place for future students like them.
The students — current and former members of the school’s Black Students League and Aspira, the Hispanic student organization — recalled painful memories of having heard racist comments behind their backs at school. They reflected on their shared sense of alienation. They said they worried that adults would allow inequities in the system to persist.
Listen to ‘The Daily’: Why Did New York’s Most Selective Public High School Admit Only 7 Black Students?
The latest admissions numbers at Stuyvesant High School offer a stark picture of the persistent racial divide in America’s largest school system.
Today: Nearly 900 students have been offered admission to New York City’s most elite public high school. Just seven of those students are black.
It’s Tuesday, April 2.
Hi, I’m Bill de Blasio. I’m an outer-borough working dad and proud public school parent.
I’m currently serving as New York City public advocate, and I’m running to be your mayor.
Right now, we’re living a tale of two cities — one where the rich keep growing richer, while middle-class New Yorkers struggle, and nearly half our city lives at or near the poverty line.
— on this promise that he’s going to vanquish inequality in every part of city life.
Without a dramatic change of direction, generations to come will see New York as little more than a playground for the rich.
Each and every child deserves a future that isn’t limited by their zip code.
— is to tackle decades of inequities that have been built into America’s largest public school system.
The answer is to fix the entire system.
He wants to end a system in which there’s this understanding that there’s good schools and bad schools.
And really what he’s talking about here is the fact that middle-class white students have often gone to the quote, unquote, “good schools” — the most funding, the best resources, the highest-quality teachers — and low-income black and Hispanic students have gone to schools with the poorest performance and the least resources for decades.
Eliza Shapiro covers education in New York City.
[APPLAUSE] Now, to all the educators in the room, I hope you’re going to be proud of this next one.
— he’s trying to get the rest of the city, and, really, the rest of the country to pay attention to inequality in this massive public school system.
That number was less than 50 percent not long ago in this town, before we had mayoral control of education, which created real accountability.
Well, now, to those disturbing admissions numbers in New York City’s elite public high schools — a new report is intensifying the debate of racial disparity.
Only a handful of black and Latino students are getting into some of New York City’s elite high schools compared with other ethnic groups.
— these numbers come out.
Only seven black students were offered admission to Stuyvesant High School’s freshman class of 895 students. And the numbers are similar for other elite schools that use entrance exams to determine who gets in.
At New York City’s most elite public high school, out of 900 seats, only seven were offered to black students.
So that’s less than 1 percent admissions.
That’s right. And it’s actually getting worse.
The numbers at Stuyvesant are not a surprise. Last year, 10, and 13 the year before.
The percentage of black and Hispanic students at these schools has gone down year after year. And now, we’ve basically reached rock bottom.
It’s abysmal. You know, I would dare say an atrocity was happening in terms of education.
It’s absolutely abhorrent and unacceptable.
So many people were asking, how could we have allowed this to happen?
And now to the latest scandal rocking the halls of academia.
50 people have been charged in a nationwide admissions scam, many of them well-to-do parents trying to get their kids into some of the highest profile schools in the country.
Whether or not you support affirmative action, I think it’s an important time to be critical of Harvard and to look at how affirmative action policies have impacted or discriminated against Asian-American communities.
— and this number went into the center of that storm.
And so what are these elite public schools you’re referring to in New York that have admitted so few black students?
So they were created at the beginning of the 1900s. And the idea was that these schools would offer students who could have never afforded a fancy private school the same rigorous academics and extracurriculars and resources that their wealthier, more privileged counterparts get. The idea was that you didn’t have to be anyone’s son. Your parents didn’t have to give a donation. This was a meritocracy. And the meritocracy was based on the idea that you passed one test and you got in.
So a single test is all you need to get in.
A single test.
And who’s getting into these schools at this point?
So in the ‘20s and ‘30s and ‘40s, the schools were mostly attended by immigrants from all over Europe, Jewish immigrants in particular. And these students are going on to win Nobel prizes in physics and chemistry, become famous authors and writers and academics. And the schools are really seen as the way out of poverty — really, this golden ticket. So over the years, these schools really become household names in New York City. You have Stuyvesant High School. You have Bronx High School of Science. You have Brooklyn Technical High School. And they seem to be working the way they were designed to work.
All we want is equal education. That’s all — equal education.
Our hope is that the Board of Education will decide to come up with a really comprehensive plan for citywide school desegregation.
— some black and Hispanic educators and parents were beginning to wonder why their kids weren’t getting into these mythologized schools.
And they were wondering, can we change something about this admissions process to help our kids get into these schools and have their own path into the middle class? And that’s where things started to get really contentious.
So there was this seed of a plan to say, can we think about a different way to offer kids admission beyond this one standardized test? And there was this immediate backlash from the alumni of the schools, from the leaders of the schools, to say, our schools are under threat, and we need to do something to protect them.
Our capital. And they lobby politicians to make the test a law. And just a few months after this debate begins, in the spring of 1971 in Albany, a law is passed. The only way to get in is by taking the test. And that’s been our system ever since.
And what becomes of these schools once this single-test admission system is codified in the law?
So their stature only grows. They continue to churn out generally extremely accomplished alumni.
But now that this test is part of the state law, there’s this growing obsession with this exam. How do you ace this exam to get your way out of poverty? So as the years go on, we see this enormous rise in an industry to prepare for this test. And then in the 1970s, as we see this new wave of immigration from Asia, where there is a very strong culture that tests can determine your future, a lot of Asian immigrants say, we want these schools to propel our kids out of the poverty we found ourselves in after we came to America.
And did they succeed?
They did. So the schools, in the decades since, have become, instead of mostly white and Jewish, mostly Asian-American. But the percentage of black and Hispanic students has only shrunk. And that’s where we are today.
Help me understand those statistics. What exactly are they? And how do they reflect the city’s actual population?
So these elite schools are about 60 percent Asian-American. The city school system as a whole is about 16 percent Asian American.
These elite schools are about 10 percent black and Hispanic, but the system is 70 percent black and Hispanic.
Eliza, how do we explain these numbers? Why aren’t black and Hispanic public school kids getting into these elite schools?
So this is really complicated. But it all starts with the fact that a lot of these black and Hispanic students don’t know these schools exist in the first place. And they definitely don’t know this test exists that they have to prepare for.
And how can that be, that they don’t know? You, just a few minutes ago, said that the city is kind of obsessed with the tests.
So in some schools that are really underperforming, I’ve just heard from students that this is not a top priority.
So in fifth grade, my teacher, she pulled me to the side, and she was, like, hey, have you heard about the school? It’s called Stuyvesant. You have to take a test called the SHSAT.
For some of them, it was this one teacher who tapped them on the shoulder and said, you’re doing really well in school. You should think about these elite public schools.
She recommended that I buy the Barron’s book and start studying for it. And then that’s how I knew about it.
And I had students say to me, all of the kids at my mostly black or mostly Hispanic middle school were smart. But I’m the only one who got tapped on the shoulder.
But the rest of my peers did not know about the specialized high schools or Stuyvesant or any of the schools or the SHSAT until eighth grade, one month before the test.
And that shows just how uneven just the knowledge of this system really is throughout the city.
So I took the test. I think a handful of other students in my grade took the test. But since I had been the only one preparing for it, I was only one who got in.
So it’s just like, you can’t aim for something if you don’t know it exists.
How have Asian students that you’ve spoken to explained their awareness of the test?
So I’ve spoken to many Asian-American graduates of these elite schools who said, from the earliest age they can remember, their parents and their teachers were encouraging them to study and prepare for this test.
I think that most of the pressure I feel is just from myself. My parents are just there to support me.
And the week the admissions letters would come out, everybody in their community in Chinatown, in Flushing, in Asian-American neighborhoods all across New York City, this is all anybody was talking about. So there’s this awareness piece. And then we get to preparation for the test. This test is really hard. It really helps kids to prep for it. And some kids, particularly white and Asian-American students, will prep for months, if not years.
How do you prep for years for a test like this?
There are summer academies all the way through middle school where students are taking practice tests every single day, five days a week, hours a day.
And I assume that that costs a decent amount of money.
So does all that suggest that this has a lot to do with income?
So it’s really much more complicated than that. New York City schools are overwhelmingly attended by poor students. But poverty doesn’t mean the same thing for every student and in every neighborhood. There are low-income Asian-American students whose parents have said they scraped together every last dollar for test prep. But there are also poor students in black and Latino neighborhoods for whom the test is not this be-all, end-all. And so within this basically impoverished school district, we have some really different realities on the ground.
It sounds like you’re saying in certain, for example, Asian communities in New York City, that this test is just known. And people are talking about it, and they are preparing for it. You almost can’t avoid the subject of the test. Whereas in other communities — black, Latino communities — that may not be the case, for whatever reason.
Absolutely. And remember, these schools were created to find the diamonds in the rough, the kids who needed a push into a better life. And one big concern here is that black and Hispanic students who are brilliant and would do wonderfully at these schools don’t even know that they’re an option for them.
That actually feels like a pretty solvable problem. Why not just tell everybody in New York City public middle schools, make it mandatory — they have to know about the test, and they have to take the test? How much has that been seen as part of a solution to the problem?
So the city has been trying for decades — first, under Mayor Michael Bloomberg, now under Bill de Blasio — to raise awareness and to provide, actually, free test prep for kids who would have problems affording it. But I’ve found that even when all of those things technically go right, they’ll show up to test prep day one, take a practice test, and realize that the test is quizzing them on concepts they’ve never learned.
Why would that be the case for some students more than others, that they’re arriving at a test, and it’s all new concepts?
So this gets back to this huge question of quality. There’s this huge discrepancy in quality among these hundreds of middle schools in New York City. So in some schools, you might be taking an advanced geometry course. And in some schools, you might be really still on the basics. So when you show up and take this practice test, it can be a really harsh dose of reality for some of these kids.
I do not understand why we give eight graders ninth and 10th grade math, 11th grade math, et cetera.
And I spoke to some students who had an experience like that.
So in a sense, this test to get into these elite high schools, they may actually be assessing how good your middle school was.
We have to make a major change. We have to make sure the very best high schools are open to every New Yorker.
— the mayor, Bill de Blasio, the guy who ran on this platform of tackling inequality, is basically saying, time’s up.
It’s time for a much more radical solution.
The test has to go.
Scrap it altogether, and replace it with a system that would automatically give seats to the top students at every city middle school. And the impact of that change would be that the schools’ racial and ethnic makeup would be transformed overnight.
The schools that are now about 10 percent black and Hispanic would become about 45 percent black and Hispanic. That’s because most middle schools in New York City are mostly black and Hispanic. So if you take the best students in every single middle school, that’s what these elite schools are going to look like.
— because so much talent is being locked out right now. So much talent is being missed because of a broken system.
— not only is it clear that this test is missing some of the brightest black and Hispanic kids in the system, but that diversity is in and of itself a value and something that will make these beloved schools even better and stronger.
— Because beauty and intelligence and strength comes in all shapes and sizes, all colors, all genders.
You told us earlier that when this test was challenged several decades ago, there was an incredible amount of pushback. So what is the reaction this time to de Blasio’s plan to get rid of it?
So I have never seen such a vitriolic reaction to a proposal out of City Hall.
[CHANTING] A group of protesters gather in front of New York’s City Hall.
Keep the test!
And they marched, hundreds of them, across the Brooklyn Bridge to City Hall.
There are parents and alumni of these schools who are saying this proposal would all but destroy these schools.
There’s absolutely no doubt that once this door is open, who your father is is going to make a difference as to which school you get into.
Everyone has an opportunity to sign up to take the test. If you step forward and you sign up, then you’re up for the challenge. If you didn’t, then you didn’t want to be challenged.
They would water down their academics. And they would let in kids who simply can’t cut it at the expense of kids who are acing this test that they revere.
It is not a crime. We should not be punished for sending our kids for better education.
And then you have Asian-American families who feel that the mayor is discriminating against them.
This solution is going to be borne solely on the backs of essentially poor Asian families. The Asian Exclusion Act of 2018 — I don’t know. It sounds sort of like it, because what people are basically saying is, hey, this school is too Asian.
They would lose half of their seats in this system under the mayor’s plan.
De Blasio is a little biased. It showed implicit bias when he said, all Asians are economically sound. Well, we can afford tutoring. That sounds like a racist statement to me.
And they know the history of these schools. They know these schools were built to propel immigrant and poor kids out of poverty.
Their parents decided to put their money towards that best. It’s not rich people that are taking these courses. These are poor, working-class immigrants that are directing their resources towards enrichment.
And they’re saying, what about us? We are immigrants. We need these schools.
The plan to eliminate the specialized high school admissions test will not move forward as of this year. But it could be put to a vote in the future.
And losing our seats would be a profound loss, and something that really, really, really feels painful for these parents.
I mean, given those numbers, this argument from Asian-American families would seem to be quite compelling, right? Why should some kids who are clearly bright, who have aced these tests, lose their seats in the name of diversifying the entire schools?
— the best. And I think, for 50 years in this city, we’ve said segregation is simply a fact of life. And there’s not much we can do about that. And I think right now in New York City, we are in this really intense moment of reckoning with whether that’s really true, and whether that’s going to change. And it’s these elite schools that are in the middle of that shift.
All this is making me wonder what these elite public schools are actually like for the students who attend them. What is it that makes them so special?
So what I hear over and over again from alumni and from students is that it’s all about the other kids. There’s this magical quality in these schools of — you’re around all the kids who want to study as hard as you do, who love math and English and environmental science as much as you do. And it’s this really safe place for smart kids. It’s cool to be smart there. And that can feel really, really special.
Right. And I guess the question is, if you change the admissions process in the name of that diversity, does that magic you just described of being in these schools surrounded by only the best who have aced this test, does that go away somehow?
I think that’s the fear. But I think the argument against that is, could these schools change, but actually become something better? Could these schools become more vibrant, more special if they were more diverse, and if they looked more like the city in which all these kids live?
I’m curious about this very small number of black and Hispanic students at these schools. How do they feel about being deemed the best and the brightest, but also about being such a tiny minority there that’s now at the center of this big debate?
I wanted to start the conversation by just asking how you reacted to the news this week?
So the day after this number came out, I went down to Stuyvesant. And I spent a late afternoon in the park next to the school with a group of nine black and Hispanic students. And we spent a long time talking about what it’s like for them.
So to be honest, when I saw the number, I was angry. And I think my first reaction was anger, because I’ve seen a lot of people putting in effort and putting in time to try and remedy the discrepancies in our school system.
I heard a lot of pain and anguish about that number.
I’ve been told that the only reason I got into Stuyvesant was because I’m black, even though the test doesn’t even factor that in. The test doesn’t even factor that in. People get so aggressive. They personalize these issues, because these are your children. So people get angry. They find a way to demonize you, to vilify you in a way that makes you alien. And of course, not only is that discouraging and alienating, but it makes you feel like maybe you don’t deserve your spot, even though I know that I worked just as hard as every other sophomore in my class to get into this high school.
And I was talking to one of these students who remembered that his mom said to him, you’re going to be one of the only black students at this school. You’re going to have to put on your armor every day.
Obviously, it’s not us versus them. I think it’s important to say, it’s not us versus them. It’s very true that in this circumstance, black and Latinx communities and Asian communities have been pitted against each other. And I think what it’s so important for people to realize is that when we have a more representative school system, when we have a school system in which everyone has an equal opportunity, that benefits all of us. That benefits us collectively as a society.
And I also just saw, in this time we spent together, this really profound sense of camaraderie — that they’d gotten themselves through Stuyvesant together as a group.
Eliza, thank you very much.
Sorry, one more quick thing. I have so much trouble believing that, of all of the top students in New York City who are able to change the world and who are able to perform the best in this really rigorous environment, that only seven of them are black. Right? That, to me, it’s just wrong.
And that’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.
Katherine and some of the others noted how strange it was to leave their mostly black and Hispanic neighborhoods to make lengthy commutes to Tribeca, where the school takes up most of a city block. Katherine, the oldest of four siblings, said she was the first person in two decades to go to Stuyvesant from her middle school in Morris Park, in the Bronx.

“I have so much trouble believing that of all of the top students in New York City who are able to change the world, and are able to perform the best in this really rigorous environment, that only seven of them are black,” said William, who spoke quietly and seriously throughout the meeting while wearing a Black Students League T-shirt. Last year, William was the city’s youth poet laureate.
After that comment, the teenagers let out a collective sigh. Then they smiled and nodded in agreement.
Still, Sarai acknowledged that other students’ comments had occasionally made her question her place at the school.
The students said they hoped that the state’s politicians would listen to their opinions and experiences and then make a determination about how to diversify the school: by expanding gifted and talented classes, which many of them had benefited from, to low-income neighborhoods and by tackling the entrenched segregation they had endured throughout their younger years. They had already collaborated with the Stuyvesant administration to bring in more racial sensitivity training for teachers and seminars for incoming freshmen.
And the teenagers hoped they could expand the conversation beyond Stuyvesant, which is just one of the city’s roughly 600 high schools.
Last year, Mayor Bill de Blasio unveiled a controversial proposal to eliminate the admissions exam — the sole means of entry into the city’s eight so-called specialized high schools — and replace it with a system that offers seats to the top performers at every city middle school. The plan has little if any chance of passing in Albany because it has faced opposition from the schools’ alumni and Asian-American groups.
Asians make up roughly 73 percent of Stuyvesant’s 3,300 students, while white students are about 20 percent of the school. Hispanic students make up another 3 percent, with black students just under 1 percent. The city school system is nearly 70 percent black and Hispanic with white and Asian students making up roughly another 15 percent each.
Some who defend the entrance exam say Asian-American students at the specialized schools simply worked harder than the black and Hispanic students who did not get in. They say they believed that the numbers, while bleak, reflected a fair system.
But the black and Hispanic teenagers interviewed said they considered themselves proof that there is no disparity of effort or talent — just an imbalance of opportunity.
Venus Nnadi, 18, a Stuyvesant graduate who is a freshman at Harvard, said she remembered when a fifth-grade teacher pulled her aside at her Catholic middle school in Queens Village and encouraged her to consider an elite public school.
Ms. Nnadi, the daughter of Nigerian immigrants, had never heard of Stuyvesant, but she bought a test preparation book and started taking practice exams. She thinks often of her classmates who didn’t have the same guidance.
“I had a lot of friends in my middle school who were just as smart as me, and who I know could be thriving at Stuyvesant if they had known it existed,” said Ms. Nnadi, who was a standout on Stuyvesant’s track team.
She crammed practice exams into her schedule and took a test preparation course at the last minute.
“It ended up working out, but a lot of the time it doesn’t, and I can see why,” said Hanna, a 17-year-old senior who grew up in Harlem and on the Upper West Side.
Eugene Thomas, who is now a 19-year-old freshman at Yale, said that when he found out about specialized high schools from his seventh grade classmates, he saved up money from his job as a pharmacy delivery boy to pay for test preparation.
Mr. Thomas, who is black and Puerto Rican and grew up in a housing project in Chelsea, remembered that his tutor gave him a steep discount, in part because he lived with a single mother who is disabled.
Yet even after acing the exam, the students’ moments of triumph were tempered by fears about being one of the few black or Hispanic students at Stuyvesant.
“I remember my mom telling me, ‘You’re going to have to put on your armor every day,’” William said.
Once they got to Stuyvesant, the students said they sometimes felt misunderstood by their white and Asian-American classmates.
When Ms. Nnadi found out last April that she had been accepted into all eight of the Ivy League colleges, her first reaction was to keep the news quiet. She said she feared that her peers would make snide comments.
Ms. Nnadi’s classmates had previously told her that she did not have to worry about her grades because, as a black girl, she was basically guaranteed entry into the college of her choice.
“To have all my hard work, and all the work I’ve done throughout the years invalidated simply because I’m black, that hurt a lot,” she said.
Ultimately, all the students agreed that they had made the right choice in going to Stuyvesant.
Yajaira Rodriguez, a 17-year-old Mexican-American senior who lives in Corona, Queens, got to take a camping trip that bolstered her passion for environmental science.
Bryan Monge Serrano, a 16-year-old Salvadoran-American junior who lives in Flushing, Queens, said he never would have fallen in love with computer science if it wasn’t for the high-level classes at Stuyvesant.
As the sun began to set, the teenagers zipped up their coats and got ready to trek to their respective corners of the city to start their homework. They said they were grateful to have spent another afternoon together.
