WASHINGTON — Nearly a year after imposing stiff tariffs on foreign metals, the United States is pressing Canada and Mexico to agree to permanent limits on the amount of steel and aluminum they export to America each year.
The demand, reiterated in meetings with Canadian officials this week, has been rejected by Canada and Mexico and is eliciting opposition from American companies that use foreign steel and aluminum in their products.
The dispute is further complicating efforts to finalize a new North American Free Trade Agreement, which faces a long battle in Congress and must be ratified by legislators in all three nations. Canada and Mexico had hoped that President Trump would remove the tariffs last year, when the three countries agreed on a new trade deal known as the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement. That did not happen, and Mexico and Canada are now demanding that the United States drop the levies as a condition of ratifying the deal.
But Mr. Trump’s advisers appear hesitant to do away with what they see as a source of leverage with Canada and Mexico. Democrats, who now control the House, have made clear they will not approve the new agreement without changes that could require all three countries to sign off, and the White House may use the tariffs as a cudgel to force Canada and Mexico to agree to any alterations.
On Monday, Chrystia Freeland, the Canadian foreign minister, called the tariffs “illegal and unjust” and “completely unacceptable.” Ms. Freeland’s comments came after she left a meeting with Robert Lighthizer, the United States trade representative, that focused mainly on the tariffs.
Ms. Freeland said Canadians would be “really troubled” with the prospect of moving forward to ratify the new trade pact while the tariffs were still in place. “To a lot of Canadians, it just doesn’t make sense,” she said.
To try to resolve the impasse, the Trump administration has proposed switching Canada’s current 25 percent tariff on steel and 10 percent tariff on aluminum to a quota system, in which a specific amount of Canadian metal would be allowed into the United States each year, people familiar with the discussions say.
But Canada has rejected that idea, as have American companies that use foreign steel and aluminum in their products — from beer brewers to jet makers. They argue that capping metal imports at a specific level would be more disruptive than tariffs and could result in steep price increases or a scarcity of metals.
The United States and Mexico are locked in similar negotiations over American tariffs on Mexican metal. Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and a senior White House adviser, traveled to Mexico last week to discuss the tariffs, the new trade deal and investment.
On Tuesday, associations representing the aluminum industry in all three countries sent a letter to Mr. Trump asking for their industry to be exempted from any tariff or quota. “Replacing a tariff with a quota on aluminum imports in North America would be highly detrimental,” the letter said.
Mr. Trump has credited his tariffs with reviving the United States steel and aluminum industries, saying last week that American steel mills were “roaring back to life.” And American giants like United States Steel and Nucor say the tariffs have helped them build new facilities and hire workers.
Still, economists suggest those gains have come at a high price. Calculations published by the Peterson Institute for International Economics in December showed that Mr. Trump’s tariffs would create 8,700 jobs in the United States steel industry, but that steel users would pay an extra $650,000 for each job created.
Some American steel makers have promoted the idea of quotas as a way to prevent surges of cheap metal, particularly Chinese steel and aluminum, from being routed into the United States through countries like Canada and Mexico. Mr. Lighthizer, who negotiated similar quotas to help the United States steel industry during the Reagan administration, has supported the approach.
But businesses say that approach could be even more detrimental to American companies and the economy.
“What we hear from our member companies is tariffs are bad and quotas are worse,” said John Murphy, the senior vice president for international policy at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Economists say that quotas, if mismanaged, can quickly lead to shortages, rationing and other logistical problems. If companies are not able to get crucial parts back and forth across the border, it can delay investments in factories or oil and gas pipelines, potentially at the expense of American workers.
Aaron Padilla, the senior adviser for international policy at the American Petroleum Institute, said quotas would further hinder the oil and gas industry, which needs steel to build pipelines and other infrastructure and has already been affected by tariffs.
Depending on how the Trump administration managed the quota, companies shipping a product might not necessarily know if the cap would be filled by the time that product reached the border. That could result in companies having to either store the metal or have it sent back to the factory at great expense.
Traders can also game a quota system, stockpiling metal and then flooding the market when the quota period opens, which can lead to shortages for users and big profits for sellers. In a report on Monday, Harbor Aluminum Intelligence, a consultancy, said that one trader had bought over 200,000 metric tons of Canadian aluminum in March, a potentially profitable trade if Canada accepts the United States’ offer of a quota.
By placing a numeric limit on the products that can move across a border, quotas can also encourage importers to ship only the highest-value goods, in order to maximize their profit. Economists argue that the quotas Mr. Lighthizer helped place on Japanese cars during the Reagan administration encouraged Japanese automakers to shift their focus from small, fuel-efficient economy cars to the luxury segment, propelling the success of the Toyota Lexus, the Nissan Infiniti and other models.
Mr. Trump’s strategy has strained American alliances and given allies little room to maneuver. Although Canada and Mexico repeatedly insisted that they would not negotiate a revised Nafta with the threat of levies hanging over their heads, the three countries signed their pact in November without the levies being lifted.
On Tuesday, Mr. Trump met with Republican members of Congress responsible for gathering votes for his North American trade deal, while members of the House Ways and Means Committee held a hearing with labor leaders, who were generally critical of the deal’s labor provisions.
“Nafta’s one of the worst deals ever made,” he added.