Rarely is there a single conversation that dominates the college campuses of America, a back-and-forth that extends from Palo Alto, Calif., to Winston-Salem, N.C., and from New Haven, Conn., to Los Angeles.
There was one this week.
In classrooms and dining halls, on quads and in bars, there was a similar sense of astonishment. How could they? Can you believe it? United by an admissions scandal that touched so many of their campuses, students seethed in unison. They railed against privilege and greed. They worried that their diplomas might have been tarnished even before they were handed to them on stage.
Two Stanford University students channeled their fury into a class-action lawsuit that claims they wasted their money when they applied to schools that were ultimately linked to what the Justice Department called its largest ever college admissions prosecution.
At Yale, a 20-year-old junior said she felt vindicated because her stellar grades had earned her acceptance — not cheating or kickbacks.
At Georgetown, arguments erupted between students in classes and others offered their loan applications to each other as satirical proof that their parents had not wielded their wallets to gain them a spot.
At the University of California, Los Angeles — among the campuses ensnared in the shocking scheme — students like Ayesha Haleem said she and her classmates were both heartbroken and fuming.
The issue of race-based admissions dominated conversations at the University of Texas at Austin, which was party to a landmark affirmative action case several years ago and has a student body that is now 41 percent white, down from 62.7 percent in 2000.
The university’s men’s tennis coach, Michael Center, was fired Wednesday after he was accused of taking a $100,000 bribe in exchange for recruiting a well-off student who was not a competitive tennis player.
The scandal’s legal fallout is most likely only beginning, and it has already spread beyond the criminal indictments that federal prosecutors made public this week.
On Wednesday, just one day after prosecutors announced the charges in the so-called Operation Varsity Blues, two Stanford University students brought a class-action complaint in a federal court in California, and accused college after college of negligence. Although the suit was amended on Thursday — dropping one of the students but adding other plaintiffs without ties to Stanford — the case was an example of the exasperation on campuses.
The plaintiffs in the case alleged that they had wasted money when they applied to schools that were ultimately ensnared in the scheme and that every “qualified, rejected” student had also been hurt by the coast-to-coast fraud.
Many of the universities, though, have moved swiftly to fire coaches implicated in the scheme. Parents have made first appearances in court. And companies have distanced themselves from executives accused of paying William Singer, a college admissions consultant, to use bribes and deceit to raise their children’s test scores or get them admitted to their chosen schools through athletic recruiting spots, despite the fact that they were not competitive athletes.
In a brief court appearance on Friday, a Vancouver businessman who is accused of paying Mr. Singer at least $200,000 between 2011 and 2013 to have a hired test administrator take the SAT in place of each of his two sons, and a Canadian high school graduation exam for his older son, pleaded not guilty to conspiracy to commit mail and wire fraud.
The businessman, David Sidoo, was released on $1.5 million bail, under conditions including that he was not to travel beyond the United States or Canada. He was the first parent to enter a plea.
U.C.L.A. warned this week that it might punish students who were connected to the scheme, including those already admitted or enrolled, “up to and including cancellation of admission,” the university said in a statement.
Wake Forest said that a student who had been admitted after $100,000 in payments were routed through the volleyball coach was still enrolled on the campus in Winston-Salem, N.C., adding that it had no reason to believe that the student had been aware of the scheme.
And Stanford said the two prospective students caught up in the case were never admitted; one did not even apply. Still, students at the Palo Alto, Calif., campus said they were deeply disappointed that their university was enmeshed in the scandal.
About a year ago, federal prosecutors working on a securities fraud case were tipped off to the elaborate scheme by a suspect who hoped to be granted leniency for his cooperation. The suspect, identified by The Wall Street Journal as Morrie Tobin, who attended Yale University and is now a Los Angeles financial executive, reportedly told investigators that the college’s soccer coach had sought a bribe in exchange for getting his daughter into the school.
Olivia Jade Giannulli, a 19-year-old social media influencer whose celebrity parents were accused of paying $500,000 in bribes for her and her sister to be falsely recruited to U.S.C.’s rowing team, has remained silent. But she was dropped from a sponsorship with a makeup company and her Instagram account has been the target of vitriol.
This week, as the scandal unfolded and her parents were arrested, Ms. Giannulli was celebrating Spring Break on a yacht owned by a U.S.C. Board of Trustees member. On Thursday, TMZ reported that she and her sister, also a U.S.C. student, decided to drop out over fears of being bullied and would not return to campus next week.
Still, there was also a measure of sympathy for those unwittingly caught in their parents’ alleged deception.
