As American diplomats push for a peace deal with the Taliban to end the 17-year war, a strong voice of protest, largely coming from urban centers, has been cautioning against a rushed deal that could endanger some of the gains of past years. Those include women’s right to work and education, as well as an independent news media.
The peace efforts are unfolding during a humanitarian crisis, where displacement by war is being made worse by a harsh drought. About 13.5 million people are surviving on one meal or less a day, and 54 percent of the population lives below the poverty line of a $1 a day, according to Toby Lanzer, a United Nations humanitarian coordinator.
Aid groups want to use the Taliban’s engagement in peace discussions to open access to large swaths of the population in dire need of assistance. Humanitarian-aid access is needed to build trust among aggrieved Afghans, they say.
“People rightly feel so marginalized that they become angry — that fuels conflict,” Jan Egeland, the secretary-general of the Norwegian Refugee Council, said in an interview during a visit to Uruzgan Province, where Tirin Kot is the capital. His group is the only international aid organization with a presence in Uruzgan.
Mr. Egeland lamented the fact that aid distribution has fallen in recent years, as the need has gone up. The Norwegian group’s surveys showed that in 2012, about 50 percent of displaced Afghans received aid — and that five years later, that number had dropped to 25 percent.
He said that he feared the end of the conflict could send “European countries rushing for the exits” just as the true devastation of the long war comes into clear view. Of the $612 million required by aid agencies in Afghanistan in 2019, only $14.2 million has been donated so far, the United Nations said at the end of February.
Matiullah Wesa, an education activist who has traveled across Afghanistan for a study of children deprived of school, said that nearly 150 of the country’s 400 districts had not produced a single female graduate in the past 18 years. About 50 of those districts did not produce male graduates, either.
The Assad Suri school in the Zhari district of Kandahar Province, built in the early years after the United States invaded, has been occupied by every side of the conflict since. Schools in some areas are often taken over by armed men because there is little other usable infrastructure.
The United Nations says that about 1.5 million Afghans are internally displaced, largely by conflict but also by the recent drought. In large parts of the country, families have been forced to move over and over again. Even when there has been a lull in the fighting, returning home is impossible because of land mines.
Mohammed Salem, who arrived in Zhari district from neighboring Helmand Province five months ago, said that in addition to Taliban land mines, regular government raids and bombings against the insurgents also put civilian lives at risk.
Mr. Mohammed, the farmer now living with his family in Tirin Kot, is still about $20,000 in debt from the chicken farm they had to leave behind.
One cruelty particularly pains him: If he climbs to the roof of their room and squints, Mr. Mohammed can see his own demolished farmhouse — just a short distance away, but entirely out of reach.