1. The gig economy arrived on Wall Street.
Lyft’s initial public offering values the company at $24.3 billion, pricing its shares at $72 each to become the first publicly traded ride-sharing app. It will begin trading on the Nasdaq on Friday.
This opens a new chapter for Silicon Valley on the public markets. Uber’s initial public offering, coming in the next few months, is expected to be even bigger, and other disruptive tech darlings are also going public. Here’s who’ll get rich.
In other tech news: The U.S. government sued Facebook, saying it engaged in discrimination by targeting housing ads based on race and religion. Twitter and Google may also be under scrutiny.
2. President Trump addressed a rally in Grand Rapids, Mich., infused with his sense of vindication after the completion of the Mueller report.
Three Times journalists are there.
We examined the state of the economy under Mr. Trump. It’s his biggest bragging right, but it is shadowed by the Commerce Department’s downward revision of estimates for economic growth in the fourth quarter.
3. The Mueller report may be in, but the chasm between Democrats and Republicans is only growing wider.
The House Intelligence Committee’s first hearing since the special counsel delivered his report fell into tumult as the committee tried to resume its own work on Russia’s intervention in the 2016 presidential election.
Republicans called on the panel’s chairman, Adam Schiff, above right, to resign, and he accused them of turning a blind eye to President Trump’s wrongdoing.
The Justice Department revealed that Mr. Mueller’s report came in at more than 300 pages, raising more questions about what information was left out of the four-page summary released by William Barr, the attorney general.
4. The U.S. wants to take a gay dating app out of Chinese hands.
The Trump administration is pushing a Chinese firm, Beijing Kunlun, to relinquish its ownership of Grindr, over concerns that Beijing could use personal information on the U.S.-based app — like sexual orientation or dating habits — to blackmail or influence American officials.
It appears to be the first case in which the U.S. has asserted that foreign control of a social media app has national security implications.
5. New York State filed a sweeping lawsuit against the Sackler family, which owns Purdue Pharma, the maker of OxyContin.
The lawsuit accuses members of the family of methodically erasing a paper trail of profits and shifting hundreds of millions of dollars to themselves through offshore entities as investigators closed in.
It also lays out how OxyContin distributors helped pharmacies manipulate the timing and volume of orders to circumvent the monthly opioid limits as the epidemic of abuse exploded. Above, New York’s attorney general, Letitia James, announced the lawsuit.
Spokesmen for Purdue Pharma and the Sackler family denied the allegations.
6. The Supreme Court rejected an appeal from gun owners to temporarily block a federal ban on bump stocks.
Bump stocks, attachments that enable semiautomatic rifles to fire in sustained, rapid bursts, were banned by the Trump administration as of Tuesday. The court’s action means the ban remains in force while court challenges move forward.
For many, the traumatic memories of gun violence have an enduring impact. We talked to survivors of mass shootings who continue to struggle, even years later. Above, a father picking up his daughter after the Newtown, Conn., shooting in 2012.
5. It’s pronounced boot-edge-edge.
Pete Buttigieg, the mayor of South Bend, Ind., has a challenging last name (thanks to his father, who immigrated from Malta). And he has an unconventional résumé. But he’s drawing big crowds and has jumped to third place in a poll of Iowa voters for the 2020 Democratic caucus.
We also took a look at Senator Cory Booker’s road from enforcer to criminal justice reformer, beginning with rocky oversight of the Newark Police Department, and Senator Kamala Harris’s small-dollar, yet formidable, online fund-raising operation.
An iceberg twice the size of New York City is about to split from Antarctica. Two rifts on the Brunt Ice Shelf, in West Antarctica, are nearing one another. They will create an iceberg over 560 square miles in size. We’ve mapped the timeline of the split.
The first global analysis of a fungus that has been wiping out frogs for decades demonstrates that it is, in the words of one researcher, “the most deadly pathogen known to science.” It has caused major declines in more than 500 species of frogs around the world, and at least 90 are presumed to have gone extinct.
Last, a British woman has never experienced pain or anxiety, even during childbirth and surgery. Scientists have finally figured out why.
9. A harbinger of spring has finally arrived: baseball’s official opening day.
We have a look ahead at the Yankees’ season (they won today, pictured above), where the larger-than-life outfielder Aaron Judge has a murky financial future. Our baseball columnist also looks at how the Los Angeles Dodgers are shaping up and has an American league preview, too. With baseball season also comes baseball betting season — here are the odds.
There’s a different kind of March Madness also underway: It’s vasectomy season. That’s right, every year, men schedule their procedures in conjunction with the men’s basketball tournament so they can recuperate watching the games.
10. Finally, a look at the most diverse generation in American history.
More than 68 million Americans belong to Generation Z, the demographic of those born between the mid-1990s and a few years ago. We asked them to describe their identities and what sets them apart.
Thousands replied, using the language of their times — cisgender, queer, bi or just their preferred pronouns — terms in wide circulation to signal the pride, fluidity or suspicion of categories of sexual orientation, race and ethnicity.
See for yourself what they had to say.
And we wish you the kind of night of your choosing.
