The growing prominence of the B.D.S. movement — and the backlash to it — is widening fault lines from college campuses to Capitol Hill.
The group met in the hotel’s Palladian Ballroom, whose walls are covered in murals depicting Thomas Jefferson’s slave plantation, Monticello. The representatives chosen by Sanders who spoke during the Israel-Palestine hearing were all minorities, including James Zogby, the head of the Arab American Institute and a former senior official on Jesse Jackson’s 1984 and 1988 presidential campaigns; the Native American activist Deborah Parker; and Cornel West, the African-American professor and author then teaching at Union Theological Seminary. The representatives selected by Clinton and the D.N.C. who spoke on the issue were all Jewish and included the retired congressman Howard Berman, who is now a lobbyist; Wendy Sherman, a former under secretary of state for political affairs; and Bonnie Schaefer, a Florida philanthropist and Democratic donor, who had made contributions to Clinton.
In 2018, the Pew Research Center conducted a poll of more than 1,500 Americans. Among Democrats who self-identified as liberal, nearly twice as many said they sympathized more with the Palestinians than with Israel. In 2016, a University of Maryland poll found that 60 percent of Democrats supported economic sanctions or taking more serious action in response to new Israeli settlements. Yet year after year, Congress, citing “shared values” and Israel’s strategic importance, among other things, votes to give military aid to Israel, which is currently $3.8 billion per year: $500 million in missile defense and $3.3 billion in foreign military financing, more military financing than the United States provides to the rest of the world combined. And Aipac, whose positions many on the left regard as rarely distinguishable from those of the Israeli prime minister or the Republican Jewish Coalition, remains the dominant force among Israel-Palestine advocacy groups within the Democratic Caucus. Aipac’s closest Democratic allies occupy top leadership posts and lead the committees and subcommittees of greatest importance to Israel. The pro-Israel orientation of the Democrats extends to the Congressional Progressive Caucus, whose members co-sponsored two bills in 2017 and 2018 — the Anti-Semitism Awareness Act (Jerrold Nadler and Donald Norcross, among others) and the Israel Anti-Boycott Act (Hakeem Jeffries and Ted Lieu, among others) — that counter B.D.S. and were supported by Aipac.
The Michigan affiliate of Hillel International — the world’s largest Jewish campus organization — has its own multistory building, a budget of more than $2 million and a staff of 15, among them an emissary of the Jewish Agency for Israel, an Israeli quasi-governmental body that includes among its core activities the strengthening of Jewish identification with Israel. Hillel chapters around the world must adhere to guidelines that forbid partnering with or hosting organizations, groups or speakers who “delegitimize” or “apply a double standard to Israel,” deny “the right of Israel to exist as a Jewish and democratic state” or support “boycott of, divestment from or sanctions against the state of Israel.” In 2016, Michigan’s Hillel affiliate received the top award for pro-Israel campus advocacy from Aipac; it has served as a headquarters for opposition to divestment.
The Louis D. Brandeis Center for Human Rights Under Law is a nonprofit founded by Kenneth Marcus in 2011 that has fought anti-Semitism and “anti-Israelism” on university campuses. It has since worked to promote the notion that certain courses and pro-Palestinian events on campus violate Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, which prohibits discrimination based on race, color or national origin by any entity receiving federal funds or other federal financial assistance, and has argued that anti-Semitism, often “under the guise of anti-Israel sentiment,” creates a “hostile environment” for some Jewish students. In 2013, Marcus wrote an op-ed for The Jerusalem Post describing his strategy: “These cases — even when rejected — expose administrators to bad publicity.” He continued: “If a university shows a failure to treat initial complaints seriously, it hurts them with donors, faculty, political leaders and prospective students.” Under the Obama administration, no such complaints were sustained or found to have legal merit by the civil rights office of the Department of Education. But that was before Marcus, a Trump nominee, was confirmed by the Senate as head of the office in June 2018.
Over the past two years, the Brandeis Center, the Anti-Defamation League, the Jewish Federations of North America, the A.J.C., the Simon Wiesenthal Center, Aipac and others have promoted a federal bill, the Anti-Semitism Awareness Act, that would require the Department of Education to use the new State Department definition of anti-Semitism. What constitutes the denial of a Jewish right to self-determination is not outlined in the bill. But pro-Israel advocates have defined it as including calls for a one-state solution, for the return of Palestinian refugees or for Israel, within its pre-1967 boundaries, to grant equal rights to its Jewish and Arab citizens, thus rendering the country “a state of all its citizens” rather than a Jewish state.
Since 2014, anti-B.D.S. legislation in more than two dozen states has been applied to a variety of individuals or groups. In Texas, residents of the city of Dickinson who applied for relief after Hurricane Harvey were required to certify that they do not and will not boycott Israel. A trainer of math teachers in Kansas was told she had to sign a pledge not to boycott Israel in order to be paid by the state. An Arkansas newspaper was told it could not receive advertising dollars from the state university unless it signed a similar anti-boycott pledge. The A.C.L.U. has challenged laws similar to the one in Texas, which required people to certify that they were not boycotting Israel, in Kansas, Arkansas and Arizona. In two cases, federal courts held that the laws violated the First Amendment.
This charge is frequently leveled at people of color. There is a long list of black politicians, from Keith Ellison to Hank Johnson, who have suffered political setbacks or worse after confrontations with pro-Israel groups. Some of them were objects of legitimate criticism, like Jesse Jackson, who used the slur “hymies” during his campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1984. But others were attacked simply for supporting, or even having contact with, Palestinians. The most famous case is that of Andrew Young, a civil rights leader and close adviser to the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. who was appointed by President Jimmy Carter as the first black United States ambassador to the United Nations. In August 1979, shortly after Carter gave an interview to The New York Times in which he likened the Palestinian issue to the “civil rights movement here in the United States,” Israel leaked news that Young had recently met with the P.L.O. United Nations observer, in violation of the official United States policy of nonengagement with the organization. Though Young hoped to persuade the P.L.O. to postpone advancing a resolution calling for Palestinian statehood, which both Israel and the United States opposed, Israel’s ambassador to the United Nations, Yehuda Blum, declared Young’s behavior “highly disturbing.” Israel’s foreign minister, Moshe Dayan, lodged a formal protest with the United States government.
Ben-Youssef said most of the members of Congress and staff members she spoke to were aware of Israeli human rights violations against Palestinians under blockade and occupation but were largely uninformed about Israeli discrimination against Palestinian citizens. It was news to many that tens of thousands of Palestinian citizens live in villages that predate the creation of Israel and are unrecognized by the state, receiving little or no water and electricity. Or that in Israel, as in the West Bank, Palestinian citizens face demolitions and forced evictions to make way for Jewish communities, military zones and national parks.
Ben-Youssef’s work in the United States began during what became known among activists as the Ferguson-Gaza moment in the summer of 2014. As militarized police units confronted the crowds in Ferguson, Mo., using tanks and Pentagon-supplied weapons, The Telegraph reported that some protesters chanted, “Gaza Strip!” Activists noted that the same U.S.-produced tear-gas canisters launched at protesters in Ferguson were fired by the Israeli Army on Palestinians in refugee camps. The St. Louis County Police chief, who retired shortly before Ferguson, was one of hundreds of American law-enforcement officials who traveled to Israel for counterterrorism training with the Israeli military, police and intelligence services.
After Ferguson, the pro-B.D.S. group Jewish Voice for Peace began a campaign called Deadly Exchange, targeting law-enforcement training partnerships between the United States and Israel. The effort contributed to the Northampton, Mass., Police Department and the head of the Vermont State Police pulling out of a planned counterterrorism training in Israel. The civil rights group Dream Defenders has organized several delegations of people of color to Israel and the West Bank. Among the attendees were Patrisse Cullors, a founder of the Black Lives Matter movement, and some of the future drafters of the policy platform for the Movement for Black Lives, which calls for ending military aid to Israel.
In December, after Tlaib won the Detroit congressional seat long held by John Conyers, she announced that she would not go on the free Aipac-led trip customarily taken by freshman members and would instead lead her own delegation to the West Bank, where her grandmother lives. She also declared her support for the B.D.S. movement, making her the second member of Congress to do so. The other is her fellow Muslim congresswoman, Ilhan Omar. In February, the bill sponsored by Senator Marco Rubio that would give federal backing to state anti-B.D.S. laws came up for a vote in the Senate. Though it passed, almost half of the 47 members of the Democratic Caucus in the Senate voted against it. The list included all the senators who had filed a statement of candidacy for president in 2020: Warren, Gillibrand, Kamala Harris and even Cory Booker, who has a largely pro-Israel voting record and is a sponsor of the Israel Anti-Boycott Act.
