It was the liquor talking, apparently.
Two officials from an anti-immigrant political party in Australia said on Tuesday that an undercover recording of them explaining the political influence that money from the American gun lobby could potentially buy was not what it seemed.
Their comments, they said, were just small talk made over rounds of scotch.
In the recording, James Ashby, the chief of staff for Pauline Hanson, leader of the One Nation party, is heard to say that his right-wing party could “own” the Australian Senate and House of Representatives with a $20 million donation from the American gun lobby.
The recording — by a reporter for Al Jazeera — was made in the United States during a trip last year, just weeks before an Australian law banning foreign political donations took effect.
The recording was revealed on Monday in the first part of a two-part Al Jazeera documentary, “How to Sell a Massacre,” for which the Australian reporter Rodger Muller posed for years as a gun-rights advocate.
Through the guise of a fake organization called Gun Rights Australia, Mr. Muller introduced Mr. Ashby and Steve Dickson, the One Nation party’s Queensland leader, to representatives from the National Rifle Association and Koch Industries during a trip to the United States in September.
Mr. Morrison, the leader of Australia’s Liberal Party, also accused One Nation of trying to “sell Australia’s gun laws to the highest bidders,” and said the revelations were another reason Australians should not vote for the One Nation party in general elections expected in May.
“The idea of One Nation political party operatives going to the United States, seeking millions of dollars, promising to water down gun law protection in Australia — that was absolutely horrifying,” Mr. Shorten said.
But Mr. Ashby told reporters on Tuesday that the meetings with the N.R.A. had been about sourcing technology and gaining “an understanding of how they operate.” He said they were never about requesting $20 million, and that he and Mr. Dickson had traveled to the United States on a fact-finding mission.
“The conversations that have been recorded where there is talk of $10 and $20 million dollars — I’ll be the first to admit, we’d arrived in America, we’d got on the sauce, we’d had a few drinks,” Mr. Ashby said.
Many Americans can buy a gun in less than an hour. In some countries, the process can take weeks or months.
“I never, ever, suspected in my wildest dreams that that guy was employed by a Middle Eastern country, by Al Jazeera, as an Australian spy to interfere in Australian politics,” Mr. Dickson said.
The Australian government introduced some of the world’s toughest gun laws in 1996, after a gunman with a semiautomatic rifle killed 35 people in the town of Port Arthur.
The rate of intentional gun deaths in Australia had fallen about 33 percent from 1986 to 1996, the year of the Port Arthur massacre. But the decline accelerated after the new gun control measures were enacted, with the rate dropping about 60 percent from 1996 to 2006. President Barack Obama later cited the laws as a potential model for the United States.
One Nation’s website says that the focus of its firearms policy is to “move away from trying to criminalize firearms ownership to punishing criminals for the use of firearms to commit crimes.” Among other measures, the party’s platform calls for reducing waiting periods for handgun purchases.
In 2017, Ms. Hanson, the party’s leader, sparked controversy by walking into the Australian Senate wearing a burqa as a way of drawing attention to her party’s push to ban full-face coverings in public. The move drew strong criticism from other senators.