OSLO — One evening in December, Marie Ulven was riding a tram through Oslo, remarking on just how unremarkable she hoped her music might someday be.
For the last couple of years, Ulven, 20, has made spiky, emotionally tactile indie-pop songs about the panting urgency of new love, and the sharp pain of when it’s unachievable, under the name girl in red. In short order, she’s emerged as one of the most astute and exciting singer-songwriters working in the world of guitar music, with a laserlike melodic instinct that verges on the primal and lyrics that capture the sweat of real life.
In the last year, girl in red’s music has bubbled up from sporadic uploads on SoundCloud and Bandcamp into a growing phenomenon; Ulven has more than a million monthly listeners on Spotify despite having only 10 songs posted there. She’s opened for the bedroom electro-pop singer Clairo in Europe and is currently on her first American tour, warming up crowds for Conan Gray, a 20-year-old esoteric pop singer who has over a million subscribers on YouTube and is signed to Republic, a division of Universal. (They play this week in New York, at Bowery Ballroom on Wednesday and Music Hall of Williamsburg on Thursday.) On May 14, she’ll return as a headliner for a sold-out show at Baby’s All Right.
Last summer, she relocated from Horten to Oslo, moving in with her sister in a fourth-floor walk-up in the artsy Grunerlokka district and attending Westerdals, a college where she studied music production and songwriting.
Indeed, the project is evolving in real time. Her earliest songs were punchy and urgent, but some more recent ones, like “Watch You Sleep,” have an elegiac, dreamlike quality. She produces her own songs, and films and edits her own videos, and recently bought herself both a cello and an OP-1 synthesizer/sampler, which she’s planning on teaching herself to play.
At times, her songs change midway — she arrived at the melody for “Girls” while working on a different song, about an accident her father suffered a few years ago: “Someone I love died today/When he came back home he was not the same.” But a bright melody kept forcing its way to the front, and Ulven grabbed it and remade it as a proud anthem for loudly claiming who you love.
It’s that directness that has earned her particularly fervent fans, many of whom are looking to Ulven for guidance and understanding. The night before the interview, she’d spent an hour or so on Instagram Live, eating guacamole and talking with several fans: “I appreciate you appreciating me appreciating you guys!” Their reactions ranged from ecstatic cool to speechless awe. Ulven is in several group chats with her fans, with names like “Girls in Red” and “Your Children” — she pops in frequently, encouraging them but also answering silly questions.
