One of horse racing’s most celebrated tracks, Santa Anita Park in Southern California, said on Thursday that it would ban the use of drugs and whips on racing days after the death of another horse there, the 22nd since Dec. 26, an unusual spate that has puzzled investigators.
Santa Anita, a few miles east of Pasadena, Calif., would be the first racetrack in the nation to carry out such restrictions, an effort to restore public confidence in a sport that for decades has wrestled with drug and safety issues.
Track officials did not say they had pinpointed the cause of the deaths, but drugs and whips are among the factors under examination. Track conditions and colder and rainier weather than usual have also been under inspection.
It is unclear whether the new rules will apply to other racetracks owned by the Stronach Group, including Gulfstream Park in South Florida and Pimlico Race Course in Baltimore, the home of the Preakness Stakes.
Santa Anita, known as the Great Race Place, has held multiple Breeders’ Cup World Championships and is scheduled to host the event again this year on Nov. 1 and 2. Breeders’ Cup officials were not available for comment to say whether that was still the case.
The restrictions came after the death on Thursday of the filly Princess Lili B. It was the second day horses were back on the track after racing was suspended last week so authorities could re-examine it.
Princess Lili B broke both front legs while training. As is common after such injuries to horses, she was euthanized. The 22 deaths since Dec. 26 are more than the total number of deaths, 20 over 122 racing days, in 2017, according to Jockey Club data.
The track has been shut down twice this year and remains suspended for racing.
The track’s policy changes came after a bill, the Horseracing Integrity Act of 2019, was introduced in Congress on Thursday by Representatives Paul Tonko, Democrat of New York, and Andy Barr, Republican of Kentucky. The bill would create a private, independent authority, the Horseracing Anti-Doping and Medication Control Authority, responsible for developing and administering a nationwide antidoping and medication control program for horse racing.
The industry has resisted such changes for decades, and Santa Anita’s spike in fatalities once again put the sport’s lack of meaningful oversight in the spotlight. The Stronach Group, under pressure from animal rights groups as well as horse trainers, apparently had little choice but to take drastic measures to deflect blame.
With the Kentucky Derby less than eight weeks away, neither animal rights activists nor casual sports fans have the stomach to see a horse be put down after a catastrophic injury. Ever since the Kentucky Derby in 2008, when the filly Eight Belles had to be euthanized after finishing second, racing officials have worried that another high-profile breakdown could put the sport out of business.
In a 2012 series, The New York Times showed that 24 horses died each week at racetracks across America, many of them because of over-medication or a lack of regulatory protection. It prompted meaningful regulations across the United States that led to a decline in the death rate.
The Stronach Group has had experts survey and test the Santa Anita racetrack, but no conclusive explanation for the spike in fatalities has been offered. There are theories. Nearly 12 inches of rain have fallen since the meeting began, which has made maintaining a dirt track difficult, especially when “sealing” a track, or packing the dirt tight enough so that no water penetrates its surface. It can mean concrete footing for fragile 1,100-pound horses with ankles as slim as a Coke bottle.
The new restrictions, however, take aim at horse trainers and owners who have been among the most vocal about resisting tougher drug policies and harsher punishments. The revisions include banning the use of Lasix, a diuretic that is used to stop pulmonary bleeding but that has also been found to enhance performance, and increasing the limits on legal therapeutic anti-inflammatories, joint injections, shock wave therapy and anabolic steroids.
By banning the use of whips by jockeys, the company hopes to stanch public perception that horses are beaten to run faster.
“While we firmly believe our jockeys have not purposely been mistreating their mounts, it is time to make this change,” the statement said.
Statistically at least, California trainers appear to be more demanding of their horses. Horses at Santa Anita currently average 3.02 workouts per start compared with 0.88 workouts per start for horses running at Gulfstream Park in Florida and 0.42 at Aqueduct in New York, according to data compiled by Equibase.
The track’s new measures also call for complete transparency of all veterinary records; significantly increasing out-of-competition testing; increasing the time required for horses to be on-site before a race; and investing in diagnostic equipment for the early detection of pre-existing conditions. Also, horses in training cannot be treated with any medication in the absence of a veterinary diagnosis.