For months, Juan Sanchez was at the center of the national uproar over family separations at the Mexican border because the nonprofit he founded, Southwest Key Programs, was housing migrant children taken from their parents. On Monday, facing intense scrutiny from his own organization and federal investigations over alleged financial improprieties, he stepped down after 32 years at the helm.
The charity’s chief financial officer, Melody Chung, left last month after a New York Times article outlined allegations of mismanagement and possible malfeasance at the charity.
The Southwest Key shelter in a former Walmart superstore in Brownsville, Tex., known as Casa Padre, became a symbol of the Trump administration’s family separation policy, with immigration advocates likening it to a warehouse for children. But it was also a generator of millions of dollars in federal grants at a nonprofit unusually concerned with its bottom line.
From its humble beginnings in Brownsville, the charity became the largest player in the shelter system for unaccompanied minors nationwide. In the last decade, Southwest Key was awarded almost $1.8 billion in federal money to care for those children. The nonprofit can house up to 5,000 children in its 24 shelters in Texas, Arizona and California, including the former Walmart.
But the modern-day Horatio Alger tale of a shoeshine boy and Golden Gloves boxer turned Harvard doctorate and nonprofit chief executive came to an end with Southwest Key’s announcement of Mr. Sanchez’s departure.
The Southwest Key board, in consultation with Mr. Sanchez, decided it was time to begin a new chapter at the charity, Orlando Martinez, the board chairman, said in a statement. “Our mission has never been more critical than it is today, and we must look carefully at what is required to evolve and grow as an organization,” he said.
As of February, there were more than 11,000 minors in the shelter system, housed in about 100 sites. As the number of unaccompanied migrant children continued to pose a crisis, Mr. Sanchez had been central to the administration’s plans.
Southwest Key, which was sitting on $61 million in cash in the fall of 2017, also lent millions of dollars to real estate developers, acting more like a bank than a traditional charity. It has rented shelters rather than buying them, an unusual practice that has proved lucrative for shelter owners, including Mr. Sanchez and Ms. Chung, The Times reported in December.
Mr. Sanchez, Ms. Chung and a friend owned a shelter in Conroe, Tex., through a shell company. Asked by The Times last year about that potential self-dealing — whereby the executives collected rent paid by the federal government — they announced that they would seek to sell their ownership stakes. There is no record that the property has yet been sold.
Joella L. Brooks, a longtime Southwest Key employee and the current chief operating officer, was named interim chief executive. Mr. Sanchez said that a “nationwide search” would begin for a permanent replacement.
In 1987, Mr. Sanchez, who had grown up poor near the Mexican border, used his mother’s address in Brownsville on founding documents for the nonprofit. The charity took out loans of $6,700 to buy a photocopier and a computer. Mr. Sanchez’s salary at the time was a modest $35,000.
