WASHINGTON — President Trump said the United States would keep tariffs on $50 billion worth of Chinese goods in place even if the two sides reached a trade deal, channeling a tougher approach as his negotiators head to Beijing this weekend for a crucial round of talks.
Mr. Trump’s remarks, made in a television interview that aired Friday, are likely to unsettle Chinese negotiators, whose main goal in the talks is to convince the United States to remove as many of the $250 billion worth of tariffs that have been imposed.
While Mr. Trump had agreed late last month not to raise tariffs on Chinese goods, the administration is now coalescing around the need to retain at least some of the tariffs as it looks for a way to ensure that China keeps whatever promises it makes in a trade agreement.
Robert Lighthizer, Mr. Trump’s top trade adviser, prefers to phase out many of the tariffs over time as China proves its willingness to follow through with economic reforms sought by the Trump administration, people familiar with his thinking say. But it is unclear whether China will make enough concessions to satisfy the United States if the tariffs remain in effect.
The two sides are now pushing for a summit in late April to sign a trade deal.
The deal is not public, and its contents are not exactly clear. But people familiar with the negotiations say the outcomes would include hundreds of billions of dollars of purchases of American products, an agreement by China to end its longstanding practice of pressuring companies to hand over technology and trade secrets and reducing certain barriers to American companies who operate in China, including financial firms.
Still, politicians on both sides of the aisle have been suspicious that China is making promises that may be too vague to be enforceable and recycling old commitments it has made to past administrations. They have cautioned the Trump administration against being too eager to strike a deal.
The talks appear to have bogged down over how the deal will be enforced. The United States is insisting that it be able to reimpose tariffs without any input or retaliation from China if there is any infringement of the agreement. But China has rejected such a mechanism as potentially compromising its sovereignty.
Administration officials have appeared less publicly optimistic about the prospects for a deal in recent days, perhaps in an effort to portray a tougher stance as talks enter the final stages.
Mr. Kudlow said the administration has asked China not to retaliate if the United States reimposes tariffs, but did not specify on Thursday whether China had agreed to that request.
The president also criticized the World Trade Organization and the European Union in the interview and praised his own efforts to rewrite the rules of trade through updating the North American Free Trade Agreement.
He also said that the European Union had offered to reduce tariffs on automobiles to zero on both sides of the Atlantic, but that he would not accept such a deal.
Administration officials had previously said that the goal of talks with Europe was getting to zero subsidies and zero tariffs across the Atlantic.