WASHINGTON — Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, extended a bipartisan invitation on Monday to the head of NATO to address a joint session of Congress, in an unsubtle jab at President Trump’s foreign policy that is meant to underscore broad congressional support for the alliance.
The president’s antagonistic stance on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization — publicly railing against its members while privately discussing withdrawing from the military alliance entirely — has set off a bipartisan concern on Capitol Hill, where support for the alliance has remained largely unwavering.
“During this critical time for the United States, NATO and the European Union, the U.S. Congress and the American people look forward to your message of friendship and partnership, as we work together to strengthen our critical alliance and advance a future of peace around the world,” Ms. Pelosi said Monday in a letter to Jens Stoltenberg, the NATO secretary general.
The invitation, endorsed by the minority leaders of both chambers — Representative Kevin McCarthy of California and Senator Chuck Schumer of New York — is intended to provide Mr. Stoltenberg the opportunity to respond to criticism that alliance members are not living up to their commitments on military spending, according to a Republican aide.
The alliance’s foreign ministers will converge on Washington during the first week of April for a celebration of the organization’s 70th anniversary, led by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. Ms. Pelosi invited Mr. Stoltenberg to speak to Congress on April 3.
The announcement comes days after reports that the administration is considering a plan that would require allied countries to pay the full cost of stationing American troops on their territories, plus 50 percent more, in an attempt to address the president’s long-held grievance that allied countries are not paying enough.
Her father, former Vice President Dick Cheney, warned Vice President Mike Pence over the weekend that “we’re getting into a situation when our friends and allies around the world that we depend upon are going to lack confidence in us,” The Washington Post reported.
Republicans in both chambers have become increasingly vocal in their displeasure with the president’s foreign policy, including rebuking Mr. Trump’s withdrawal of American military forces from Syria and Afghanistan, joining Democrats in calling for a harsher response to the murder of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi and pressing for an end to the American military role in Saudi Arabia’s war in Yemen.
The Atlantic alliance is facing a long list of security challenges, including the nearly 18-year-old war in Afghanistan, the dissolution of a Cold War treaty controlling intermediate-range nuclear forces, Russian aggression online and on the ground in Ukraine, and an increasingly assertive and powerful China. If the United States were to withdraw, it would all but end the military alliance.
Alliance allies were further shaken in December by the departure of Jim Mattis, the defense secretary, who had steadfastly defended it. Patrick Shanahan, the acting secretary, told reporters last month that “we’re going to be with NATO 100 percent,” but allies have yet to receive from him the kind of reassurance that Mr. Mattis provided for two years.
The House passed legislation in January affirming its support for the alliance. The Senate, led by Mr. McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, who has called the alliance “the most significant” in history, passed a similar bill in July. And more than 50 members of Congress, led by Ms. Pelosi, traveled to Brussels last month for two days of meetings with NATO leadership and allied nation representatives.
“Time and again, the alliance has proved that the free peoples of the world are strongest when they stand together,” said Representative Michael McCaul of Texas, the ranking Republican on the Foreign Affairs Committee.