Readers discuss the continuing problem of low numbers of minority students admitted to the city’s elite high schools.
Early one Sunday morning in the spring of 1982, my father took me downtown to Stuyvesant High School to take the entrance exam. When we arrived, we realized two things. Most of the other kids on line were Asian and all the kids were holding copies of test prep books.
“They make test prep books for this test?” my father said to me. I encountered an analogy for the first time that morning and had to figure out, during the exam, what that meant. I missed the Stuyvesant cutoff by one point and was admitted to Bronx Science.
Imagine if the playing field were leveled and all kids could go into that testing room equally prepared, or unprepared, and just take the test based on their innate ability. The demographics wouldn’t totally balance out because these tests are still skewed toward certain populations, but we could begin to see them change.
In this race-obsessed, sports-mad, money-grubbing country of ours, I think it’s great that there are still schools that students can’t get into by pulling strings, highlighting their race, submitting grade-inflated transcripts or bragging about their extracurricular activities. The entrance exam replaces subjective criteria with objective ones and, for all its imperfections, is the fairest way to judge academic ability.
Sure, students can boost their chances by brushing up on the material, taking practice exams or enrolling in test-prep courses, but that’s what students do for the SAT, the GRE and many other exams; it’s called studying.
When I went to Stuyvesant in the late 1960s, the vast majority of students were Jewish, many the sons of European immigrants, like my parents, who escaped the Holocaust by the skin of their teeth. There were no girls (they weren’t admitted back then), and no more blacks and Hispanics than there are today. That the vast majority of students are now Asians is evidence not only of changing trends in immigration, but also of immigrants’ ferocious work ethic and respect for education.
Education begins at home. Instead of trying to change the rules of the game by eliminating the exam or finding ways around it, the losers would be best served by emulating the winners.
The solution for diversifying New York’s elite high schools is for the district to create several more such schools. If it’s true that a high-quality secondary school must have a critical mass of the most capable students, it’s also true that the city’s elite high schools enroll too many of these teenagers in too few schools.
New York should spread out these students, which would open up spaces for the next tier of scorers, who are now denied admission. Including these students would make for a more diverse school population, enhancing the education for all students there.
As the parent of a sophomore at Bronx High School of Science, I am reminded daily of the lack of diversity at New York City’s top high schools. However, it is a mistake to blame or discriminate against Asian-Americans for their success and the resulting lack of diversity. The Asian-American students I meet at Bronx Science don’t feel entitled to success — they earn it.
Many Asian families send their kids, starting at age 3, to weekend study programs, where they study a language in the morning and do test prep in the afternoon. New York City needs to learn from and replicate what makes these kids so successful by creating weekend enrichment centers in all boroughs. The Discovery program, designed to diversify the specialized schools, isn’t a bad idea, but it needs to be started much earlier.
The tests aren’t the problem; the fact that they can be gamed is the problem. Level the playing field. By helping all students realize their potential, New York City will achieve diversity in its top schools without discriminating against any ethnic groups.
The problem isn’t the test, and can’t be solved by free test prep: The problem is eight years of substandard education for the city’s black and Hispanic students.
