Dr. Regina Maree Myers and Joshua Alexander Kulick were married March 30 at the Loews Hotel in Philadelphia. Rabbi Stacy Rigler officiated.
The bride, 32, is a fellow in pediatric hematology/oncology at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. In July, she is to receive a master’s degree in clinical epidemiology from the University of Pennsylvania. She graduated from Cornell with honors, and received a medical degree from Yale.
She is a daughter of Beatrice Myers and Alexander Myers of Bayside, Queens. The bride’s father is a manager for a Walgreens Pharmacy in Manhattan and is the former president and chief executive of Alexander Pharmacy, which was also in Manhattan. Her mother, a former senior producer of the NBC “Today” show in New York, is now a freelance television producer.
The groom, 35, is the director of software systems at Independence Realty Trust, a real estate investment trust in Philadelphia. He also serves as board president of Allens Lane Art Center, a Philadelphia-based nonprofit arts organization. He graduated magna cum laude from Lehigh.
He is the son of Anita Kellerman Kulick and Joel David Kulick of Dresher, Pa. The groom’s mother is the president and chief executive of Educating Communities for Parenting, a social service nonprofit organization in Philadelphia. His father is an independent commercial real estate appraiser and investment broker, also in Philadelphia.
Ms. Myers and Mr. Kulick met through a dating app Sept. 24, 2016 — shortly after each had moved to Philadelphia from New York — and went on a first date to a bar later that evening. He said he knew the first date would be different when she crossed the street and walked toward him.
“I remember the voice in my head telling me that I needed to do everything in my power to ensure that this first date led to a second,” he said.
Long before the bar and their conversation had shut down for the evening, Mr. Kulick had indeed secured his second date with Ms. Myers. He mentioned that Beyoncé would be performing in Philadelphia the following week, and slyly asked if she would go with him if he had tickets.
They began dating almost immediately. Their first few months were filled with a dizzying blitz of concerts, sports events and long walks exploring Philadelphia’s food scene.
And so did she, a fact she could no longer ignore.
