WASHINGTON — A day after President Trump reveled in the apparent fizzling of a two-year effort to prosecute him for possible illicit coordination with Russia during the 2016 campaign, Washington’s most prominent Moscow native arrived at the White House on Monday to celebrate.
The milestone? A hockey championship.
Some members of the Washington Capitals, who won their first Stanley Cup title in June, boycotted the White House event in their honor, which included a private tour and a meeting with the president in the Oval Office. But not Alex Ovechkin, the team’s Russian captain and the National Hockey League’s most valuable player, who is also a vocal admirer and personal friend of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.
Mr. Ovechkin was not the only Russian player in the Oval Office on Monday. He was joined there by two teammates: Evgeny Kuznetsov, a forward, and Dmitry Orlov, a defenseman, who were part of a 55-member Capitals delegation, the first from a Washington team to visit the White House since the Washington Redskins won the Super Bowl in 1992.
Braden Holtby, the Capitals goalie and an outspoken gay rights advocate, declined to visit the White House. “I’ve got to stay true to my values, and I’m going to respectfully decline,” Mr. Holtby told reporters last week. Two other members of the championship team, Brett Connolly and Devante Smith-Pelly, also said they would not attend.
The irony of the photo-op, in which Mr. Ovechkin stood smiling behind the Resolute Desk next to Mr. Trump, wearing a red tie that matched the president’s signature look, wasn’t lost on some former White House officials.
“Perhaps the only time Russians have visited the Trump White House with bipartisan support in D.C.,” said Andy Hemming, a former White House staff member.
Another former aide pointed out that the White House was a natural place for the Stanley Cup to visit, after Mr. Ovechkin took the trophy on a tour of Moscow’s Red Square last summer.
Mr. Ovechkin has said he is an apolitical sports star. But questions about his connections to Mr. Putin, and whether he is a participant, knowingly or unknowingly, in a Kremlin propaganda machine, have swirled around his career. They peaked when Mr. Ovechkin announced last year the creation of a “civic movement” that he branded online as #putinteam, ahead of Russia’s elections.
Mr. Ovechkin, who received a wedding gift from Mr. Putin and reportedly has his personal phone number, insisted that the hashtag and the campaign were simply his own project, involving no input or signoff from Mr. Putin’s government. There were questions, however, about whether a public relations firm with Kremlin connections was involved.
But the optics of Monday afternoon’s event recalled another Oval Office meeting Mr. Trump took with Russians, in May 2017. At that meeting Mr. Trump told Sergey V. Lavrov, the foreign minister, and Sergey I. Kislyak, then the Russian ambassador to the United States, that firing the F.B.I. director at the time, James B. Comey, took “great pressure” off him.
That conversation reinforced the belief that Mr. Trump had fired Mr. Comey because of the F.B.I.’s investigation into possible collusion between Russian operatives and the campaign — a move that would have potentially implicated him in another crime, obstruction of justice.
But as the Capitals players balanced the Stanley Cup on the Resolute Desk, another “great pressure” seemed to have been relieved. On Friday, the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, concluded his two-year investigation, and in a four-page letter to congressional leaders released on Sunday night, William P. Barr, the attorney general, said the investigation had ended without finding any collusion with the Russians.
Mr. Ovechkin thanked the president for hosting his team and promised to try to win the Stanley Cup again this season.