When Boeing’s Dreamliner was grounded in 2013, it took more than $20 million and three months to fix the problem. The crisis over its 737 Max jet could be even harder to manage, given the incalculable reputational risk after two fatal crashes.
The short-term costs such as a software fix to the plane are likely to be manageable for Boeing, but the bigger financial unknown is whether airlines lose confidence in the Max, the company’s best-selling jet. Some 4,600 planes are on order, accounting for around $550 billion in future revenue.
Since the second crash, in Ethiopia on Sunday, shares of Boeing have dropped nearly 11 percent.
“Reputationally and financially, this is painful,” said Richard Aboulafia, vice president of analysis at Teal Group Corp., a consulting firm.
With all of the Max planes now grounded around the world, Boeing’s first priority is developing a fix. Boeing has been working with American regulators to roll out a software update and new training guidelines in the months since the first crash, off Indonesia in October. The update is expected by April, but a final solution could take more time depending on what investigators determine happened in the Ethiopia disaster.
The longer it takes to find a solution, the higher the price tag. The battery fix for the Dreamliner jets amounted to $465,000 per plane, according to Carter Copeland, an analyst at Melius Research. Based on those costs, he estimates that Boeing could spend nearly $1 billion to resolve issues with the 737 Max fleet.
Airlines, which have 350 of the planes in their fleets, have also begun to demand compensation for their losses during the grounding. It costs an estimated $1 million to lease a replacement jet for three months.
Boeing introduced the 737 Max as a reliable fuel- and cost-efficient solution to air travel in the 21st century. After two fatal Max crashes, all of the Max aircraft in the world are believed to have been grounded.
It was sold as a next generation aircraft. But it has now been involved in two fatal crashes in just five months. The Boeing 737 Max 8 entered the market in 2017, a part of the 737 Max class, and became an instant hit. Within the first six months, more than 4,000 Boeing 737 Max 8 planes had been ordered. It quickly became the company’s best-selling plane ever. The new model was advertised as a rare win-win for both airlines and passengers. “It’s going to give them max efficiency, which leads to profitability; max reliability, and to the flying public: max passenger appeal.” ‘The demand for something new.” Boeing debuted the new planes in response to market pressures. In late 2010, Boeing’s archrival, Airbus, had just announced a new fuel-efficient version of its best selling A320. Boeing countered with the introduction of the 737 Max — “The Max uses 14 percent less fuel than current 737s —” its own version of fuel- and cost- efficient aircrafts. Their message to customers was: These are new planes that aren’t that new. “Boeing 737 —” “Newest arrival in the Boeing family of airliners, the 737 attracts a crowd.” Boeing’s first 737 model took off in 1967. “A new queen of the sky.” For the Max class, Boeing upgraded the engine and design. They added more cabin space, bigger windows and multicolored ceiling lights to help modernize the planes. But the company kept the 737 name because it evoked a legacy of reliability and built trust. “I’ll tell you what, it’s just a beautiful, beautiful airplane. Not only were they able to modernize the airplane with new engines, and new winglets, but they were able to keep that classic iconic 737 look.” But that isn’t the whole story. The new model was also designed to help carriers save money. “Which means CEOs like the Max. Really like the Max.” Major changes to the plane would have required pilots to be retrained. But Boeing’s position was that the new models handled enough like the old ones. Though the 737 Max 8 planes did actually have a number of changes, including the size and location of the engines. The higher and more forward position of the larger engines can cause the plane’s nose to pitch up, a potential danger. To compensate for this, Boeing added a computerized system called MCAS to prevent the plane’s nose from getting too high and causing a stall. But the F.A.A. initially said pilots did not need to be informed of this system update. Experts say that the lack of training for the new system may have helped cause a deadly crash with a Max 8 off the coast of Indonesia in October, killing 189 people. All of the Boeing 737 Max 8s in the world are believed to have been grounded, while a second crash in Ethiopia is investigated. Boeing said it supported the decision to ground the planes and is cooperating with investigators.
Boeing could also face lawsuits from the families of passengers who died in the disasters. The Dreamliner had battery problems but never crashed.
A company the size of Boeing will probably be able to absorb such costs. Boeing, an aerospace giant that builds commercial and military aircraft, makes more than $100 billion in revenue a year.
The bigger challenge for Boeing is how it will handle future orders. If deliveries are delayed because the plane needs to be redesigned, the manufacturer is likely to have to offer discounts to carriers with orders.
There is also a broader risk that, if the passenger backlash to the Max lasts, the manufacturer could lose some corporate customers in the long run. Such a shift would give an advantage to its European rival Airbus, which makes a similar fuel-efficient plane, the A320neo.
But it’s unlikely that airlines will cancel their Max purchases outright. Carriers typically put down a deposit of around 20 percent for their orders on the $120 million plane, which is paid out over time. It can be difficult to get out of those commitments without solid evidence that there’s a structural problem with the aircraft, airline executives and analysts said.
Even if customers could walk away from their Boeing orders without losing money, they probably wouldn’t. The aircraft manufacturing business is essentially a global duopoly. And Airbus has a yearslong backlog.
“I don’t think anyone will abandon them,” said Jonathan G. Ornstein, the chief executive of Mesa Airlines, who operated a fleet of 737s in his previous role at the helm of Virgin Express, a European airline. Mr. Ornstein called Boeing “customer-centric” and said he expected that the company would bend over backward to maintain its rapport with carriers.
Three American airlines — Southwest, United and American — fly the 737 Max aircraft, and one, Alaska, has ordered some. But Boeing has delivered hundreds more around the world and have thousands on order.
*Aircraft leasing company. (Planes associated with CIT Group were ordered by a unit the company has since sold.) Data through February.
The most significant fallout may be from the new scrutiny over the manufacturer’s relationship to its regulator, the Federal Aviation Administration.
On Wednesday, top House Democrats with oversight of the agency said that they would begin a thorough review of the process used to determine the airworthiness of the 737 Max.
“There must be a rigorous investigation into why the aircraft, which has critical safety systems that did not exist on prior models, was certified without requiring additional pilot training,” said Representatives Peter DeFazio of Oregon and Rick Larsen of Washington.
Through a program established in 2005, Boeing and other aircraft manufacturers have been able to choose employees to help certify their planes for regulatory compliance. The program is meant to help the F.A.A. stretch its limited resources. But critics say that system gives too much authority over the process to Boeing.
“It has become a largely self-certified system,” said Mary Schiavo, the former inspector general of the Transportation Department. Over the last several days, unions representing pilots and flight attendants have been raising the alarm over potential conflicts in the regulatory process that could put their members at risk.
“The F.A.A. has got to stop treating the airlines and manufacturers as their clients, and get back to doing their job with oversight for the American people,” said Sara Nelson, the president of the Association of Flight Attendants.
Dennis Tajer, a spokesman for the American Airlines pilot union and a 737 pilot, said his members had long been concerned about the minimal training required for pilots to become qualified to fly the Max models.
