“Milkman,” by Anna Burns, an intelligent and thoroughly engrossing novel about a girl who’s forced into a relationship with a powerful man. It’s told in a stream-of-consciousness style that’s both rich and darkly funny. Next to it is a pile of nonfiction that includes “Freedom in the Family: A Mother-Daughter Memoir of the Fight for Civil Rights,” by Tananarive Due and Patricia Stephens Due; “Birthright Citizens: A History of Race and Rights in Antebellum America,” by Martha S. Jones; “Gunfighter Nation: The Myth of the Frontier in Twentieth-Century America,” by Richard Slotkin; and “The Paranoid Style in American Politics,” by Richard Hofstadter. I became a United States citizen nearly 20 years ago, but I haven’t stopped learning more about the history of the country I claim as a new home. I think of history as a dialogue with the present, so whenever I’m puzzled by the turn of current events — which is all too often these days — I look to the past for context.
Manning Marable’s “Malcolm X: A Life of Reinvention,” a superbly written and carefully researched biography of the civil rights icon. It’s filled with rare details about Malcolm’s childhood in Nebraska, the collapse of his family after his father’s death and his mother’s nervous breakdown, his incarceration in Massachusetts, and the transformation of his personal identity and political philosophy over the next two decades. I can’t recommend it highly enough.
“Their Eyes Were Watching God,” which I read for the first time only five years ago, and which made me fall in love with Zora Neale Hurston. I was knocked out by her eye for detail, her rigorous use of formal and vernacular languages and the depth of her narrative perspectives. Since then, I’ve read her stories and essays and found her throughout to be an independent thinker. I loved Valerie Boyd’s excellent biography of her, “Wrapped in Rainbows.” And I just bought “Barracoon,” the book she wrote about a survivor of the last slaving ship to have made the Middle Passage.
I read anything that might be relevant, whether for content or outlook or style. When I was working on “The Moor’s Account,” which is based on the true story of the first African explorer of America, I read a lot of historical fiction, scholarly works on 16th-century Moroccan history, epics about Spanish exploration of the Americas and research on indigenous tribes of Florida and the Southwest.
For my new book, “The Other Americans,” which tells the story of how a Moroccan immigrant’s death affects his family and the Mojave town where he lives, I went back to old favorites — William Faulkner’s “As I Lay Dying” and Toni Morrison’s “Paradise.” I also read a mix of novels set in the West (Joan Didion’s “Run River,” for example), crime novels (Pete Dexter’s “Paris Trout” and Richard Price’s “Lush Life”), war novels (Ben Fountain’s “Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk”), and novels on identity and belonging (Sigrid Nunez’s “A Feather on the Breath of God” and Viet Thanh Nguyen’s “The Sympathizer”). How lucky am I that working means reading so many wonderful books? God, I love what I do.
From Aminatta Forna’s novel “Happiness,” I learned that foxes have largely adapted to urban habitats. In cities like London, they survive by foraging in trash cans or chasing prey in parks and backyards, which occasionally causes social panics. And from the short story “Everything the Mouth Eats,” which appears in Jamel Brinkley’s collection “A Lucky Man,” I learned that Brazilian capoeira is not something you do, like a martial art, but something you play — body and spirit and music are joined together.
I’m moved by voices that ring so true that they make me feel kinship with characters who are completely different from me. As I get older, I also find myself moved by depictions of friendship and kindness, which are so much harder to execute convincingly on the page than cruelty or betrayal.
What books would you recommend for somebody who wants to know more about Morocco?
Paper only. Books give me an intimacy that e-readers can’t deliver. I love the heft of a good novel in my hands, the smell of new pages, the fact that I can underline a beautiful sentence or mark an unusual detail. I interact with a paper book in many different ways; I’ve been known to throw a book across the room when it frustrates or angers me, for example. And books hold so many memories of the times and places in which I’ve read them. The other day, I opened a novel, and a bookmark that my daughter made me when she was 4 years old fell out. No e-reader can do that.
Alphabetically, like a maniac. I’m constantly shifting books on the living room shelves to make room for new novels. Nonfiction is roughly by category — memoir, criticism, history, current events and research for my work. Graphic novels are under my husband’s care. He doesn’t alphabetize, but knows where everything is. (Or so he claims; I have my doubts.) Poetry is in my office, where I can reach for it whenever I need inspiration.
Don Quixote, because life is too short to listen to reason; sometimes, you have to tilt at windmills.
Voracious. My parents didn’t go to college, but they were devoted readers and took us to the library and the bookstore regularly. I grew up in a house full of books. It also helped that we had few distractions: In those days, there was only one television channel in Morocco — and it was owned by the state. So I spent every weekend and every summer reading. Comic books were my first love (Tintin, Astérix, Boule et Bill). From there, I moved on to adventure stories, crime, romance and historical epics. It wasn’t until my teens that I turned to contemporary fiction, reading the work of Leila Abouzeid, Tahar Ben Jelloun, Naguib Mahfouz, Hanan al-Shaykh, Tayeb Salih and others.
“First Things First,” by L. G. Alexander. It’s the textbook that was assigned for my first English class, when I was in the 10th grade. It covers the basics of grammar, usage and respectful communication. It also has a lot of big, beautiful pictures.
Toni Cade Bambara, Edward Said and James Baldwin, writers with whom I could talk for hours about literature, criticism and social change.
Disappointing, overrated, just not good: What book did you feel as if you were supposed to like, and didn’t?
“A Sport and a Pastime,” by James Salter. I found the main character insufferable, the supposedly erotic bits a little boring, and I cringed at the portrayal of the woman who’s the object of his desire.
How do you decide what to read next? Is it reviews, word-of-mouth, books by friends, books for research? Does it depend on mood or do you plot in advance?
When I’m reading for pleasure, I pick out books on the spur of the moment, based on a recommendation by a friend, or an interesting book review, or a mention on social media. But when I’m reading for work, I tend to be much more deliberate. I trust the advice of my editor at Pantheon, Erroll McDonald, who’s phenomenally well read and always has great suggestions for me.
“No Turning Back: Life, Loss, and Hope in Wartime Syria,” by Rania Abouzeid, “Our Women on the Ground,” edited by Zahra Hankir, “Gingerbread,” by Helen Oyeyemi, “Free Food for Millionaires,” by Min Jin Lee, and “The Nickel Boys,” by Colson Whitehead.