Season 3 of Morgan Freeman’s travelogue series returns on National Geographic. And the rock climbing documentary “The Dawn Wall” arrives on Netflix.
THE STORY OF GOD WITH MORGAN FREEMAN 9 p.m. on National Geographic. Morgan Freeman continues his international exploration of faith in this documentary series. In the first of six episodes, he sets out to understand the meaning of the devil in different traditions by picking the brain of a priest in Rome who performs exorcisms and by meeting a Buddhist lama in Nepal who discusses a Tibetan ritual meant to cleanse temples of evil.
HOARDERS 8 p.m. on A&E. If you need a reason to start spring cleaning a little early this year, look no further than the 10th season of “Hoarders.” In each two-hour episode, experts help someone declutter a massive mess; in some cases, their assistance is sought to avoid crises — financial ruin, jail time — brought on by extreme hoarding. (The subjects in this season premiere risk losing their home if they don’t do something about the 250 tons of objects they’ve amassed.) The episode is followed by the series premiere of ‘THE TOE BRO,’ about a chiropodist who can handle the most unpleasant of foot problems.
THE BACHELOR: THE WOMEN TELL ALL 8 p.m. on ABC. Twenty memorable contestants from the 23rd season of “The Bachelor” reunite for this two-hour special. The former N.F.L. player Colton Underwood confronts the women he sent home; clashes resurface among a handful of the women, and the tension subsides with a look at the season’s best bloopers.
OFFICE SPACE (1999) Stream on Amazon or Hulu; rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu or YouTube. For those who yearn for more authority at work, consider this comedy by Mike Judge a cathartic watch. Fed up with his job at a tech company, Peter (Ron Livingston) tries to get fired, but his aloof behavior earns him a promotion. When his two friends (Ajay Naidu and David Herman) are laid off instead, the three decide to seek revenge by embezzling from the company.