Tyson Foods has recalled 69,093 pounds of frozen chicken strips after two people reported that they found pieces of metal in the product, the federal Department of Agriculture said this week.
It was the second time this year that the company had recalled some of its products.
“We continue to investigate this matter, but currently believe it’s an isolated matter,” Gary Mickelson, a spokesman for Tyson, said on Friday.
The Agriculture Department said that no one had reported getting sick from the products. “Anyone concerned about an injury or illness should contact a health care provider,” the department said in a statement.
The items that were recalled were all produced at the same plant in Rogers, Ark., on Nov. 30, 2018. They include 65,313 pounds of Tyson’s fully cooked Buffalo-style chicken strips and fully cooked crispy chicken strips, which are sold to retailers in 25-ounce bags. Tyson also recalled 3,780 pounds of “Spare Time” branded fully cooked Buffalo-style chicken breast strips, which are sold to retailers and correctional facilities in 20-pound boxes.
All of the packages in question have an establishment code of “P7221” and a “use by” date of Nov. 30, 2019. They were sent to distribution centers in 25 states, including Arkansas, Connecticut, New York and Texas. The full list of retail stores that received the products will be posted on the Food Safety and Inspection Service website when it is available.
Customers who may have the recalled products in their freezers should not consume them. “These products should be thrown away or returned to the place of purchase,” the department said. They can also call Tyson’s Consumer Relations Department at |||PHONE_NUMBER||| .
In January, the company recalled 36,000 pounds of chicken nuggets after pieces of “soft, blue rubber” were found in the food. In that instance, Tyson said the rubber came from part of the seal on a piece of equipment used to produce the nuggets.
Perdue, another large meat supplier, recalled 16,000 pounds of its chicken nuggets in January because of misbranding and undeclared allergens.
Food is the most common source of salmonella infection, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates is the cause of 1.2 million illnesses and 450 deaths every year.