WASHINGTON — Scott Gottlieb, the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, known for his aggressive efforts to regulate the tobacco and e-cigarette industries, said on Tuesday that he would resign at the end of the month.
The reason he gave was family and his weariness with commuting to see his wife and three children, who have remained in their Westport, Conn. home since he took office. But his announcement caught many in Washington and the industries he regulates by surprise and raised questions about whether his push to reduce teenage vaping and lower nicotine levels and ban menthol in cigarettes will continue in an administration that generally has a hands-off approach to business.
Dr. Gottlieb has been subject to increasing pressure from some Republicans in Congress and his former associates in the conservative movement for his tough stance against youth vaping and traditional cigarettes. A coalition of influential conservative groups recently asked the White House to block some key parts of the F.D.A.’s strategy to prevent youths from vaping. Republican Senator Richard Burr blasted the commissioner on the Senate floor for his proposal to ban menthol cigarettes.
Dr. Gottlieb said these protests had no role in his departure.
“There’s no intrigue here,” he said in an interview. A senior White House official said Dr. Gottlieb was not pressured to leave and that the President was “very fond” of him.
Dr. Gottlieb said he planned to advance the F.D.A.’s pending tobacco regulations before he leaves. And he was confident, he said, that the agency’s guidance on restricting flavored e-cigarettes would be issued before he left. He acknowledged, however, that he could not predict the fate of his proposals to ban menthol in cigarettes and reduce nicotine to nonaddictive levels in cigarettes.
Industry analysts expressed optimism that those initiatives would, in fact, now end.
When he was first nominated, Dr. Gottlieb seemed a figure right out of central casting for the Trump administration. As a venture capitalist who served as both a consultant and board member for drug companies, he had made a fortune from the industry he would regulate, written impassioned anti-regulatory columns in conservative journals, and held stock in industry players large and small, which he divested. But he was also a physician, and as he settled into the job, his libertarian views were often balanced by his zeal to protect public health.
Under Dr. Gottlieb’s leadership, the F.D.A. approved a record number of generic medicines, new drugs, and medical devices. He led the agency into unusual territory, calling for lower drug prices and speaking out about the opioid crisis.
But his record on opioids was mixed, some policy experts said. Although the agency worked to take one powerful addictive painkiller, Opana ER, off the market, it approved Dsuvia, a new form of an extremely potent opioid, for acute pain — which public health advocates feared would be just as dangerous.
Ryan Hampton, who advocates for people recovering from addictions and who has testified before Congress, recently helped launch a campaign, “Wake Up F.D.A.,” to protest the agency’s approval of Dsuvia, while being slow to approve new medications to treat addiction, though Dr. Gottlieb spoke often about the importance of doing so.
Likewise, the F.D.A.’s speedy approval of many medical devices was praised by the growing industry, but has drawn strong protests from many people who believe the rate of approval has been too rapid to ensure safety. He also worked to better track outbreaks of food-borne illness, and to boost new treatments like gene therapy and targeted medicine.
During his tenure at the F.D.A., Dr. Gottlieb, who was not shy about announcing his achievements, sometimes several times a day on social media, eventually moved from a hands-off approach to the nascent e-cigarette companies, to leading a clamorous fight against them, particularly as studies emerged about how teenagers swarmed the new product, unaware of the addictive properties of nicotine.
In shifting his position, from giving the companies years to show that e-cigarettes were both safe and effective for smoking cessation, to urging stringent monitoring of convenience stores, vaping flavors and age restrictions, Dr. Gottlieb earned both the umbrage of pro-business leaders and some aspersions from the antismoking movement, which felt he moved too slowly.
And the landmark tobacco regulation plan, announced in July 2017, has lagged in some important areas. After the tobacco industry sent thousands of letters against reducing nicotine in cigarettes to nonaddictive levels, that plan has stalled. The proposal to eliminate menthol in cigarettes has not yet been formalized. Dr. Gottlieb’s early decision to give e-cigarette companies more time to comply with new, tougher regulations is viewed by many as having opened the door to the youth vaping epidemic.