New York|Parents Wanted Their Unvaccinated Children in School, but a Judge Said No.
The decision added to a growing public pushback against people who do not vaccinate their children. Last week, an Ohio teenager who got vaccinated against his family’s wishes gave dramatic testimony before Congress of how he believed his mother had fallen prey to widely debunked conspiracy theories about the dangers of immunization.
Days later, New York lawmakers proposed a bill that would allow teenagers to get vaccinated without parental consent. On Monday, local chapters of the American Academy of Pediatrics expressed their support for the legislation.
So far, no confirmed cases of measles had been reported at Green Meadow, a private school offering early childhood and K-12 educational programs that, like other Waldorf schools, follows a teaching philosophy focused on nondenominational spiritual development.
But Rockland County has been the epicenter of the measles outbreak in New York, with 146 confirmed cases since October, the vast majority of them among those 18 and under. Many cases have involved members of Orthodox Jewish communities where vaccination rates tend to be lower than average, public health officials have said.
All of the children at the center of the lawsuit had received approved religion-based exemptions to vaccination, according to Michael Sussman, a lawyer for the parents who sued Rockland’s health department. But neither they nor their parents are Orthodox Jews, he said.
Rockland County’s so-called “exclusion orders” in December was the first time county officials had taken the step to ban unvaccinated children from schools, a county spokesman said. Under the orders, unvaccinated children were not allowed to attend targeted schools until the school’s vaccination rate reached 95 percent.
Even when schools did not have confirmed cases of measles, as with Green Meadow, officials were still worried that unvaccinated children could be exposed to measles in other public places, like shopping malls, and would then spread the disease at their schools, said Ed Day, the Rockland County executive.
At one point, 60 schools, many of them in ultra-Orthodox communities, and 6,000 students were affected by the orders, officials said.
That included 49 lower school (8th grade and younger) students at Green Meadow. The complaint does not list the names of the parents or their children.
Mr. Sussman said his clients believed the religious-based exemptions disqualified them from the ban.
“What Rockland County has done is remarkably irrational in every conceivable way,” he said.
The complaint filed in court said that Rockland County officials violated the children’s constitutional rights by forcing them to stay home. The order also “substantially disrupted” the children’s education, the complaint said.
Vicki Larson, a spokeswoman for Green Meadow, said the school had no official stance on vaccinations but was complying with New York State law, which allows religious exemptions to vaccination and immunization requirements.
But she said that the school was following the county’s exclusion order and working with the Rockland County Health Department. To return to school students would have to prove immunity to measles or receipt of the measles, mumps, and rubella vaccination, she said.
“We’re ready to welcome back our excluded students as soon as it’s legally possible,” Ms. Larson said.
The Rockland County Health Department said that as of last week, the immunization rate at Green Meadow’s elementary school was about 56 percent. Ms. Larson said that the school had paperwork to prove its rate at the elementary school was actually at 83 percent — still short of the threshold the county requires.
Green Meadow’s high school reached a 95 percent rate earlier this year and was cleared from excluding unvaccinated children in late January.