BEIRUT, Lebanon — In tense meetings on Friday, United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo pressed leaders of Lebanon to curb the growing power of Hezbollah, the political and military group supported by Iran that holds government posts and runs the health ministry.
Mr. Pompeo’s meetings in Lebanon, which included sessions with President Michel Aoun and Prime Minister Saad Hariri, were bound to be awkward, since he had been announcing for days that his express purpose for going to Lebanon was to denounce Hezbollah and its allies in the government. It is rare for a country’s top diplomat to publicly declare that a visit is aimed at berating a government or a party within it.
But Mr. Pompeo’s trip this week to the Middle East is mainly about Israel, where he spent two nights before flying to Beirut on Friday. His anti-Iran and anti-Hezbollah messages played well to many Israelis since Hezbollah has waged war on Israel before, and is seen as a major threat.
Mr. Pompeo’s aggressive words could give a boost to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, an ally of the Trump administration who is running for re-election on April 9. Mr. Netanyahu’s support fell when the country’s attorney general announced last month that he intended to indict Mr. Netanyahu on bribery and other corruption charges.
In another effort to boost Mr. Netanyahu, on Thursday, as Mr. Pompeo visited religious sites in Jerusalem, Mr. Trump said in a tweet that the United States should recognize Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights, a strategic strip of land that Israel seized from Syria in the Six Day War of 1967 and effectively annexed in 1981.
The Golan Heights is no longer the rallying cry in the Arab world that it once was, but there are Lebanese who are furious over Mr. Trump’s move, and Hezbollah supports the government of Bashar al-Assad of Syria. So Mr. Trump’s announcement added to the friction as Mr. Pompeo moved around Beirut.
Lebanon itself claims a sliver of the Golan Heights, and the Israeli army once occupied southern Lebanon, where Hezbollah has a strong presence.
On Thursday, Mr. Aoun, the president, told reporters for Russian-owned news organizations that “the siege on Hezbollah affects all Lebanese.” Mr. Aoun said he plans to travel to Moscow. Russia and Iran are the two main allies of the Syrian government, and, along with Hezbollah, are fighting anti-Assad rebels.
“Pompeo is here to incite Lebanese against each other,” it said.
On Friday, in what appeared to be another element in President Trump’s campaign to bolster Mr. Netanyahu, officials in Washington announced new sanctions against individuals and groups in Iran with links to its nuclear program. They acted even though American intelligence agencies say Iran is not trying to build a nuclear weapon.
“As a Christian, I certainly believe that’s possible,” Mr. Pompeo said.