A Republican proposal would condition the right to vote on the payment of all outstanding court fines and fees.
Florida voters approved a ballot measure in November to restore voting rights to up to 1.4 million people with felony convictions who have served their sentences and thus paid their debt to society. The passage of Amendment 4, which went into effect in January, righted 150 years of injustice.
But Republican lawmakers in the state immediately went to work to undermine that progress. On March 19, a state House panel on criminal justice approved, along party lines, a measure that would erect new roadblocks for the Floridians who just regained the right to vote.
The new proposal would require those who want their voting rights restored to first pay all outstanding court fees and costs arising from their prior convictions — a move that one Democratic lawmaker denounced as an unconstitutional poll tax.
But Florida Republicans want “completion” of a sentence to include “a financial obligation arising from a felony conviction” — such as the court costs and fines that Florida is notorious for imposing on top of criminal sentences. This would, in effect, suppress the votes of people who are too poor to pay.
Supporters of restoring voting rights to citizens with felony convictions agree that court-imposed restitution should be paid if that’s what a given sentence calls for. But they argue that the punitive administrative fees that Florida and other states impose on citizens should not deny anyone the right to vote.
For Desmond Meade and Neil Volz, the co-leaders of the grass-roots group that helped advance Amendment 4 — supported by nearly 65 percent of voters — the new bill is an affront to the electorate. “Because we know how disempowering it is to not have a voice in our community and how sacred getting that voice back is,” they wrote in The Tampa Bay Times this week.
There are signs that the Republican-controlled Florida Legislature will move ahead with the bill, and Gov. Ron DeSantis, who was narrowly elected in November, has said that Amendment 4 needs clarification. But voters already made their views clear on this matter in the fall, and their desire to re-enfranchise their fellow citizens should be honored.