ISTANBUL — President Recep Tayyip Erdogan confronted the prospect of a stunning political defeat on Monday, as local voting in Turkey showed his party had lost the capital, Ankara, and possibly Istanbul, its largest city and his key base of support for many years.
The results of the municipal balloting on Sunday from around the country was a telling barometer of Mr. Erdogan’s weakened standing with voters, as Turkey’s economy has fallen into a recession and he has assumed sweeping new executive powers.
Mr. Erdogan was not conceding defeat on the results in Istanbul, which were still unofficial. But the head of the High Election Council said the opposition mayoral candidate, Ekrem Imamoglu, was leading the Istanbul race by 27,806 votes, with only 24,000 remaining ballots to be counted.
“The mathematics of the issue is over,” Mr. Imamoglu told a news conference, asserting there was no way that the candidate of Mr. Erdogan’s Justice and Development Party, former Prime Minister Binali Yildirim, could catch up.
If the Istanbul results are confirmed, the Justice and Development Party is likely to appeal to the High Election Council.
Mr. Erdogan claimed victory over all in the elections, pointing to results that showed his party 15 points ahead of the opposition Republican People’s Party in districts nationwide.
But for the first time in his political career, Mr. Erdogan was tasting defeat not only in mayoral races in the center of Turkish political power, Ankara, but his hometown, Istanbul, the country’s business center.
Rusen Cakir, a veteran commentator, said on Twitter that the turnaround was as historic as Mr. Erdogan’s arrival on the political stage, when, as an Islamist and former political prisoner, he first won the mayorship of Istanbul.
If Mr. Erdogan’s candidate loses the Istanbul race, it would be a severe blow to his party, which after 17 years in power has been showing a decline in popularity.
The declining economy was at the forefront of voters’ concerns. After years of impressive growth, Turkey entered a recession in March. Unemployment is over 10 percent, and up to 30 percent among young people. The Turkish lira lost 28 percent of its value in 2018 and continues to fall, and inflation has reached 20 percent in recent months.
Investment analysts reported that Turkey was depleting its international reserves to bolster the lira in the run-up to the election. Finance Minister Berat Albayrak promised to announce a package of new financial measures after the election, but investment confidence remains weak.
While Mr. Erdogan remains by far the most popular politician in the country, his party failed to secure a majority in parliamentary elections in June and was forced into an alliance with the Nationalist Movement Party. A referendum in 2017 that gave him sweeping new authority over the legislature and the judiciary was approved by just a narrow majority of Turks.
Even pro-government newspaper columnists warned that corruption and cronyism in the municipalities were turning voters away from the ruling party. Opinion polls showed that a larger percentage of voters than usual remained undecided right up to the election, which officials of his party took as a sign of unhappiness among the electorate.
Opposition candidates offered change and promised to create jobs, improve education and bolster social services. And some were blistering in their criticism of Mr. Erdogan.
A former deputy prime minister to Mr. Erdogan, Abdullatif Sener, said that while the economy was tanking, Mr. Erdogan was building not only a second but also a third presidential palace, and spending millions to fly around on his presidential plane.
Municipal elections usually draw little notice outside Turkey. But the local votes for mayors, municipal councils and neighborhood administrators was seen as critical to Mr. Erdogan’s grip on power.
The municipalities represent the core of his working-class, conservative power base and a source of income for his party, said Aykan Erdemir, a former member of Parliament and a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a research institute in Washington.
Mr. Erdogan began his career as the mayor of Istanbul, and built his popularity on providing local services like garbage collection and mass transport.
The president intervened personally in the race for mayor of Istanbul, pushing his longtime ally Mr. Yildirim to run when the race promised to be close. He picked another former minister to run for mayor of Ankara, the capital.
Mr. Erdogan also adopted a more negative tone on the campaign trail than in previous elections. He threatened lawsuits, accused the opposition of criminality or terrorism, and whipped up nationalist anger at rallies. Conjuring up a clash of civilizations, he even played edited segments of a video of the mass shooting at mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand.
On the economy, Mr. Erdogan told supporters that the municipalities had nothing to do with the downturn, and that he as president would handle economic matters. In the weeks before the vote, the government set up municipal stalls to sell cheap vegetables to combat rising prices.
Most political analysts had predicted that however dissatisfied they were, supporters of his party, known as AKP, were unlikely to make the leap to vote for the opposition alliance. But some voters in the AKP-held district of Uskudar in Istanbul said they were switching.
Younger people across the political spectrum have also voiced dissatisfaction, chafing at the lack of media freedom and the dearth of job prospects, said Ms. Aydintasbas, the European Council fellow.
