It’s a line from Disney’s “The Lion King,” spoken by Mufasa to young Simba as they sit atop Pride Rock. And on Wednesday morning, just after midnight on the East Coast, it seemed to describe the Walt Disney Company itself, as the conglomerate closed its $71.3 billion acquisition of 21st Century Fox assets. It is now an entertainment colossus the size of which the world has never seen.
Disney had been a mere behemoth, dominating sports television through ESPN, controlling the global theme park business and running Hollywood’s No. 1 movie operation, with studios that include Marvel, Pixar and Lucasfilm. But the company decided that it needed to bulk up even more as the tech giants aggressively moved into Hollywood. The competition now includes Apple, which is scheduled to unveil its television and movie plans on Monday.
“This is an extraordinary and historic moment for us,” Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, said in a statement on Tuesday.
Mr. Iger has staked his legacy on this deal, and he had to fend off an aggressive play by Comcast on two continents to gain control of Mr. Murdoch’s trove. (Mr. Iger ultimately lost Sky, the British pay-television company.) The acquisition is the largest in Disney’s 96-year history, dwarfing even the 1995 purchase of Capital Cities / ABC. That cost $19 billion (about $32 billion in today’s money) and, because it included ESPN, served as a growth engine for Disney for two decades.
The Fox assets are meant to do the same for Disney in the years ahead. Disney is now trying to become less dependent on cable channels like ESPN, which are in slow, steady decline owing to cord-cutting. Instead, Disney has decided to move into the rapidly growing realm of online video, a direct-to-consumer business defined by Netflix. Mr. Iger believes that the Fox assets will enhance that plan, which includes a streaming service called Disney+ later this year.
The challenges are daunting. Mr. Iger and his lieutenants need to persuade investors to start viewing Disney more like a technology company, where near-term financial turbulence is often overlooked. Integrating the Fox assets will bring headaches that include substantial layoffs — analysts project more than 3,000 — and the melding of two starkly different corporate cultures. When the deal was announced in December 2017, James L. Brooks, a creator of “The Simpsons,” posted an image on Twitter that showed an angry Homer Simpson strangling Mickey Mouse.
The government doesn’t want you to pay too much to watch your shows. That’s why the Justice Department says it is challenging the proposed merger between AT&T and Time Warner.
The companies that beam, or stream, your favorite shows onto your screens, and how much they can get away with charging you, attract a lot of scrutiny when they start racking up acquisitions and cornering the marketplace. What keeps them in check are antitrust laws. “Unreasonable curbs on competition are, in theory, at least, criminal.” Too much control or market share can happen in two ways. The first is horizontal integration. If one studio gains monopoly power by buying up lots of other studios, and the resulting company squeezes out the competition across an industry, or jacks up prices for consumers, it could be violating antitrust laws. The second way is vertical integration of the supply chain. In the late 1940s, the government actually went in and busted up the Hollywood studio system because a few behemoths owned almost all the studios, and the theaters, and they controlled the distribution rights to almost all the films. “Hello, Mr. Aylesworth. How are you?” That made it extremely difficult for other companies in the business of making, or selling, or showing movies. If we look at today’s digital landscape, that would be like if an internet provider also owns the studios that make the shows and the channels, premium networks or streaming platforms. And in some cases, maybe even the device you watch on. Kind of like, say, Apple or Amazon. The government usually leaves these kinds of companies alone if the growth happens organically, through ingenuity. But when a company grows through mergers and acquisitions, that can raise a red flag. Historically there have been fewer challenges to vertical integration up and down the supply chain, than across industries. But when AT&amp;T decided it wanted to merge with Time Warner, the Department of Justice decided to challenge the move. “Your pricing is going to go up. I don’t think it’s a good deal for the country.” The companies say they need to make this deal to compete with the Amazons and Apples of the world. The question is whether one huge company plus another huge company would turn into one new enormous telecom and media company controlling so much content, and the way it’s delivered to you that it could charge consumers more and squeeze out other producers, suppliers or distributors who want to make you laugh, cry and binge-watch.
The final sticking points came from Brazil and Mexico. Regulators in those countries are forcing Disney to sell Fox Sports, a competitor to ESPN that holds extensive rights to televise soccer matches. Brazil’s antitrust regulator, Cade, said in a statement that operating both channels would give Disney too much control of the sports TV market in the country. Mexico’s telecommunications regulator, IFT, held a similar view and added stipulations about Disney’s ownership of the National Geographic and Nat Geo Wild channels.
At Disney’s annual meeting this month, Mr. Iger said the 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight labels — trumpet fanfares included — would continue to exist. That decision pleased Hollywood, but it could lead to consumer confusion since Mr. Murdoch retained ownership of the Fox broadcast network, a chain of local Fox television stations and his crown jewel, Fox News. Those businesses, along with the FS1 sports channel, were rolled into a new publicly traded company, Fox Corporation, on Tuesday.
Paul D. Ryan, the former Republican congressman from Wisconsin who served as speaker of the House from October 2015 to January 2019, joined the Fox board on Tuesday. Other board members include Mr. Murdoch and Roland A. Hernandez, a former chief executive of Telemundo. Mr. Murdoch’s oldest son, Lachlan, serves as the new company’s chief executive.
The Murdochs are expected to receive roughly $12 billion in proceeds from the Disney deal, according to Bloomberg. Shareholders in the assets that were sold to Disney had the option to accept Disney shares or cash out. Disney said on Friday that, based on initial results of that process, holders of about 52 percent of shares asked for cash and 37 percent asked for Disney shares. The balance did not make a request.