Europe|U.K. Knife Crime Rises. Are Budget Cuts to Blame?
U.K. Knife Crime Rises. Are Budget Cuts to Blame?
LONDON — Two recent, high-profile stabbing deaths have reignited a debate in Britain over whether a nationwide decline in the number of police officers is behind an alarming increase in knifings.
The clash has divided the Conservative cabinet, with the home secretary, Sajid Javid, demanding millions of pounds in emergency funding for the police, and Prime Minister Theresa May rejecting a linkage between knife crimes and cutbacks in the number of officers.
Lost in the back and forth about the smaller police forces is another element — the stringent overall reductions in public spending under the government’s austerity program, analysts say.
For example, the police now spend hours answering calls involving mentally ill people and sitting with them in hospitals, work that had been done by agencies that have suffered their own funding cuts or been eliminated entirely.
Some analysts say that the policy of austerity cuts — a centerpiece of the Conservative Party’s agenda for the last decade — is helping to drive people toward crime, including vulnerable young people who had been helped by social services.
“We do ensure police have the right resources,” Mrs. May said.
During a meeting with Mr. Javid on Wednesday, police leaders said they pressed the home secretary to add more officers and remove restrictions on the use of stop and search.
Mr. Javid’s office and Mrs. May’s office would not comment on reports that they clashed in a cabinet meeting on Tuesday over police funding.
Outrage waxes and wanes in the British press and among government ministers in accordance with the severity of the crime and, all too often, the race, class and ethnicity of victims. The latest public furor was prompted by the killings of two teenagers: Jodie Chesney, 17, who is white, and was stabbed by a stranger in an east London park on Friday night; and Yousef Ghaleb Makki, also 17, a private school student who was stabbed near Manchester the next day.
But there is no doubt that knife crime is a growing problem, with such offenses rising for the fourth straight year, to just under 43,000 offenses in the year ending Sept. 30, 2018, the most since the government started recording comparable data in 2011. Still, rates of violent crime in Britain remain low by American standards, and since the mid-1990s Britain has registered a marked decline in such crime.
Mrs. May’s government announced an additional $1.2 billion for the police in mid-December. But her refusal to accede to police leaders’ demands that she take responsibility for the uptick in knife crimes or to invest even more money in the police has become a political liability as she struggles to push her Brexit deal through Parliament.
Mrs. May’s defining characteristic in office has been a refusal to bend — on her unpopular Brexit deal, on hard-line immigration measures or on police cuts. But for a Conservative prime minister to keep up a fight with the police for so long is more remarkable.
“It could either prove her undoing, or that will be her great legacy: the leader who stood firm and got what she wanted,” said Rick Muir, the director of the Police Foundation, a think tank.
Still, analysts largely agree with Mrs. May that blaming violent crime on reductions in the number of police goes far beyond available evidence.
Research on how increased police patrols affect crime is mixed. Flooding an area with police, as occurred in certain parts of London in the weeks after terror attacks in 2005, seems to push down crime, suggesting that large, visible surges in police patrols have an effect.
But gradual reductions in police numbers may not have an effect, researchers have said. And the evidence suggests that while bigger police forces can sometimes help reduce offenses like property crime, violent crime is much more resistant, given that it is usually carried out in the heat of the moment and most perpetrators are not caught.
Analysts said austerity cuts to social services, like youth centers and interventions for children who are expelled from school, seem to be a big part of what is driving some young people into crime.
Take the illegal drug market. Local drug gangs in Britain used to deal most drugs outside major cities, but gangs based in the cities are now sending children into more rural areas to distribute them. That has created more competition and, analysts believe, more violence.
But a large part of the reason those children are vulnerable to recruitment is that the youth centers where they once spent time have been closed, and the number of children expelled from school has grown rapidly, analysts said.
Analysts worry that until the government tries to use what they call a public health model to address some of those root causes of violence, there will be no progress.
Mr. Javid’s hard-line approach may be rooted not only in his own beliefs — his brother is a senior police officer — but also in his leadership ambitions: With the Conservative Party split over Brexit, he has been positioning himself to become the next leader, and opposing Mrs. May on knife crime could help, analysts said.
But as long as responses to knife crime are predominantly about political posturing, rather than evidence, analysts said, little will change. Versions of this week’s political uproar have occurred since 2007, when the prime minister, the Labour Party’s Tony Blair, led a Downing Street summit and then blamed knife violence on black culture, rather than poverty.