For some time now, Ruth Bader Ginsburg has been having a moment. Books, documentaries, a major feature film, even a best-selling comic-book-cum-biography have celebrated the feminist litigator and second woman to serve on the United States Supreme Court. Still, all this attention to No. 2 implicitly raises the question of whatever happened to No. 1.
Evan Thomas answers that question in his fascinating and revelatory biography, “First: Sandra Day O’Connor.” There are many parallels between the lives of R.B.G. and S.D.O. — early confrontations with discrimination, fierce work ethics, supportive and enlightened husbands — but there is one major distinction: power. As a lawyer, Ginsburg won important cases, and as a liberal justice in a conservative time, she has written stirring dissents. But O’Connor was the swing justice on a closely divided Supreme Court, so she — and she alone — determined the outcome of case after case. It was her vote that saved abortion rights, her vote that preserved affirmative action and her vote that delivered the presidency to George W. Bush in 2000. She is the most consequential woman in American history. Now that’s notorious.
The book is billed as an “intimate portrait” of O’Connor, and it certainly is. The O’Connor family gave Thomas open access to the justice’s papers, including letters and diaries, and encouraged all who knew her, law clerks as well as colleagues, to speak with him. Thomas makes the most of this bounty, producing a richly detailed picture of her personal and professional life. To cite just one example, we learn that as Sandra tried to cope with her husband’s descent into Alzheimer’s disease, she turned down her doctor’s prescription for antidepressants. That’s how close we get.
In the 1980 campaign, Ronald Reagan had promised to appoint the first woman to the Supreme Court and, thanks in part to a good word from Burger, nominated O’Connor the following year. Those were more innocent, or at least less partisan, days when it came to the politics of the justices, and it was good enough for Reagan that O’Connor was a loyal Republican. There was no heavy-duty scrutiny of her views either from the White House or the Senate; indeed, at that early stage, she hadn’t really thought much about the issues that come before the Supreme Court.
Thomas pretty much lets O’Connor off the hook for her shabbiest moment on the court — her decisive role in the 5-to-4 travesty that was Bush v. Gore. He even provides a mini-scoop of sorts when he reports that it was O’Connor who wrote the most shameful line in the majority’s unsigned opinion. The court’s decision, she wrote, was “limited to the present circumstances, for the problem of equal protection in election processes generally presents many complexities.” In other words, in a system that is supposed to establish and rely on precedent, this case would benefit only one person — the Republican candidate for president.
O’Connor knew what she wanted her legacy to be. While still a justice and in robust health, she gave instructions to her sons about the public portion of her funeral, writing, “I hope I have helped pave the pathway for other women who have chosen to follow a career.” Notwithstanding her own extraordinary example, O’Connor recognized how difficult that still was.
It’s not just because Ginsburg has received so much attention lately that O’Connor seems almost like a forgotten figure. Ginsburg has always been an unapologetic representative of the liberal tradition in America, and today she is embraced by the resurgent left within the Democratic Party. But O’Connor was both literally and figuratively a country club Republican, and her kind is anathema to the Federalist Society solons to whom President Trump has outsourced his judge picking. In this way, Evan Thomas’s book is not just a biography of a remarkable woman, but an elegy for a worldview that, in law as well as politics, has disappeared from the nation’s main stages.