The king in a Super Bowl commercial for Bud Light may have “just wanted to return some corn syrup to its rightful owners” in the Coors Light and Miller Lite castles, but MillerCoors, which produces both beers, was not amused.
MillerCoors sued Anheuser-Busch on Thursday over the ad, claiming that it purposely misled consumers into believing there is corn syrup in Coors Light and Miller Lite, when there is not.
In the ad, the king of the Bud Light Castle mistakenly receives a barrel of corn syrup and travels far across the land to deliver it to the correct address. When he and his companions arrive at the Coors Light castle, its king says, “Looks like the corn syrup has come home to be brewed.” The lawsuit claims that this statement, in particular, makes it seem as if corn syrup may be the only ingredient in Coors Light.
“Anheuser-Busch is fearmongering over a common beer ingredient that’s used, by the way, in many of its own beers as a fermentation aid,” Adam Collins, MillerCoors’s vice president of communications, said on Thursday.
Corn syrup is listed as an ingredient in several Anheuser-Busch products, including Bon & Viv Spiked Seltzer and Stella Artois Cidre, but the Super Bowl campaign focuses on Bud Light, which is brewed using rice.
While MillerCoors uses corn syrup in the fermentation process, the yeast consumes and breaks it down, leaving no corn syrup in the final product, according to the lawsuit.
MillerCoors also claimed that Anheuser-Busch purposely conflated corn syrup and high-fructose corn syrup, which the lawsuit said was “triggering” to consumers because high-fructose corn syrup has been linked to obesity. Anheuser-Busch did this to “frighten consumers” into switching to Bud Light, the lawsuit said.
“We believe that the deliberate deception is bad for the entire industry, and we’re filing this lawsuit to show the world the truth,” Mr. Collins said.
Beer sales have been declining for several years in the United States, according to data from the Beer Institute, an industry trade group. There had been talks between MillerCoors, Anheuser-Busch, Heineken and Constellation Brands to launch a joint “Got Milk?”-like campaign to revive beer sales, Mr. Collins said, but those discussions have stopped for now.
“Our view is it made no sense to waste time or money on an industry health campaign when the industry leader was denigrating an ingredient that is widely used across the industry, including Anheuser-Busch,” he said.
Anheuser-Busch is standing behind its campaign.
