WASHINGTON — After years of effort, scientists at the Fish and Wildlife Service had a moment of celebration as they wrapped up a comprehensive analysis of the threat that three widely used pesticides present to hundreds of endangered species, like the kit fox and the seaside sparrow.
Agency records suggest Mr. Bernhardt, after having had only limited involvement in the issue, had nine meetings or calls on his schedule with Fish and Wildlife staff in October and November 2017, and helped write the letter saying the Interior Department was no longer prepared to release the draft.
Wendy Cleland-Hamnett, the E.P.A. official at the time who ran the office in charge of toxic chemicals and pesticides, said the sudden change in regulatory philosophy was part of a broader trend across the government after Mr. Trump’s election.
Gary Frazer, the top endangered species official at the Fish and Wildlife Service, whose schedule says he participated in all nine of the late 2017 discussions with Mr. Bernhardt, and who subsequently directed his staff to revise the study, said he did not believe the change in direction was politically driven.
The endangered species review is required as part of the re-registration of pesticides, a process that occurs every 15 years.
Experts at the Fish and Wildlife Service and the Commerce Department’s National Marine Fisheries Service were supposed to determine if any of the pesticides might “jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered species or threatened species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of habitat of such species,” a standard created under federal law.
Much of the work focuses on questions like whether a wildfire management program in the Florida Everglades hurt endangered species such as the American crocodile or the West Indian manatee. The Fish and Wildlife Service rarely makes so-called jeopardy findings; a 2015 study of nearly 7,000 cases found that only two concluded with a finding that a species was in jeopardy.
The pesticide industry, as well as groups representing farmers who rely on its products, began to mobilize as the endangered species review got underway during the Obama administration.
The industry’s central argument was that the federal scientists were not sufficiently taking into account the difference between how the pesticides could legally be used and how they were actually used.
Staff members at the Fish and Wildlife Service, emails show, did have access to actual pesticide usage, as well as other information, such as measurements of pesticide concentrations found in salmon-bearing streams in Washington State.
But the agency staff — working from dozens of field offices like Hawaii and Maine as well as the headquarters — generally built its predictions of a “jeopardy” threat to endangered species by assuming the pesticides were being used to the maximum extent possible as allowed by their labels.
That is because “unlike most other types of product labels, pesticide labels are legally enforceable,” according to E.P.A. policy. And historic usage data, the agency staff said in its documents, is not sufficient to predict how these pesticides might be used — and cause harm — in the coming 15 years.
The pesticides, particularly chlorpyrifos and malathion, are “high toxicity” for all animals, and their effect on endangered species would be both direct and indirect, via contamination of food sources, for example, the staff concluded. The E.P.A. has separately considered banning chlorpyrifos because of potential harm to humans.
The Fish and Wildlife staff cited the San Joaquin kit fox, a tiny animal that weighs about five pounds, with a slim body, large ears and a long, bushy tail. Decades ago, it inhabited large parts of California’s San Joaquin Valley, an area today of intensive farming and pesticide use. But most of those fox populations are now gone, in part because pesticides like diazinon contaminated birds and grasses the foxes fed on, the agency concluded.
The Cape Sable seaside sparrow, another endangered species located mostly now in Florida, was found to be in jeopardy as a result of drifting sprays of chlorpyrifos. “For many vulnerable species, a single exposure could be catastrophic,” an October 2017 summary of the staff’s findings said.
Agency records show repeated contacts in early 2017 by the pesticide industry with administration officials. Among those targeted, the emails show, was Daniel Jorjani, a top Interior Department lawyer who had spent six years working for groups connected to the billionaire brothers Charles G. and David H. Koch.
Aaron Hobbs, a onetime lobbyist for CropLife, the leading pesticide industry trade association, who now works for an affiliate of the industry-funded group, reached out to Mr. Jorjani and invited him to an April 2017 meeting with industry officials to discuss the endangered species effort — shortly after sending the letter asking the agency to kill the Fish and Wildlife Service’s work. He followed up again in July in an attempt to set up another meeting.
Ms. Adcock joined the discussions even though the ethics agreement she signed said she would not participate “personally and substantially in any particular matter” involving CropLife for one year. An Agriculture Department spokesman said this did not violate that ban because she had not specifically lobbied on endangered species matters for CropLife.
On Tuesday, after this article was published online, three House Democrats, including Representative Raul M. Grijalva of Arizona, the chairman of the House Committee on Natural Resources, sent a letter to Mr. Bernhardt asking him to release the draft reports immediately.