Talk about callbacks.
In the newest episode of “Star Trek: Discovery,” directed by T.J. Scott, we return to Talos IV, where the initial unaired pilot of the original series took place. You might remember, it was called “The Cage,” and featured Pike as the centerpiece of the crew, rather than Kirk, whom we all came to know and love. The episode, shot in the 1960s, was scrapped (although it is now available on Netflix), because it didn’t impress NBC executives at the time. It also was very sexist! At one point, Pike expresses his displeasure with having a woman on the bridge.
The original series did return to Talos IV, in a classic two-parter of the original series called “The Menagerie.” In that episode, Spock runs afoul of Starfleet and steals the Enterprise to send it to the forbidden planet. In “Discovery,” Starfleet is on the hunt for Spock again, although for different reasons.
“If Memory Serves,” which is a convoluted but absolutely delightful episode, has several bits of catnip for Trek aficionados. The one that I appreciated most was near the end of the episode, when Pike says to Spock, “Is that a smile I see on your face?” In “The Cage,” the original pilot, the episode’s tone was much different and Leonard Nimoy’s Spock is seen smiling, something we rarely, if ever, see again.
In “Discovery,” Ethan Peck’s Spock has guided Burnham to Talos IV because the Talosians, a race that can converse telepathically and project images over long distances, can help Spock make sense of what is happening in his mind. Namely, he is experiencing time in a “fluid, rather than a linear construct.” He must free himself from “conventional logic.” I’ll note: the Talosians are a bit more benevolent in this edition of “Star Trek” than the original series, and help the Discovery crew elude Section 31.
Vina, the woman who crash landed on Talos IV and developed a deep affection for Pike in “The Cage,” plays a crucial part in reconnecting Burnham and Spock to Pike. Anson Mount does excellent work here when he is startled by seeing Vina again. He has filled the Lorca-role of the charismatic captain quite well this season.
This is the first episode in which we really see what kind of Spock we are going to see in “Discovery.” Peck’s Spock is clearly bitter toward Burnham and not afraid to flash anger, certainly more so than the adult versions of Spock we have become used to. It’s revealed that Spock’s anger toward Burnham is a result of Burnham telling him, as a child, that he is a “half-breed” and mocking his ancestry, in a misguided attempt to escape home to keep the family safe from Vulcan extremists. It seems like an odd reason for them to have fallen out for all these years, especially given that they both end up in Starfleet.
Also, Spock didn’t murder anyone from Starfleet. He neck-pinched a doctor and knocked out a couple security guards. So Starfleet is engaged in a cover-up of a decorated officer, as Spock shows in a flashback. The most concrete knowledge we have of the Red Angel, at this point, also comes from Spock: He or she is a human intent on changing the timeline we are all living in, which ends with the destruction of all sentient beings. No biggie!
By the end of the episode, the Discovery, as Saru puts it, is “the most wanted ship in the galaxy.” So now, the rogue ship will go on the run, promising no shortage of unusual hijinx for the rest of this season.
Want exclusive “Thrones” interviews and news, as well as the internet’s best articles on that week’s episode? Sign up for our Season 8 newsletter here.
I had a bit of trouble following the episode, mostly because I don’t understand why Starfleet sees Spock as such a threat.
One unidentified member of the brass says at the beginning of the episode that “Spock’s foreknowledge of these signals appearing around the galaxy and his interactions with the Red Angel constitute vital intelligence.” O.K., so why treat him as a murder suspect? Why not work with him to learn more?
I won’t delve too much into the B-storyline of the episode: Namely, sulking Hugh Culber. The former ship’s doctor is angry at the world, and particularly angry at Stamets, although he doesn’t really know why. This plotline felt distracting. I was especially baffled when no one stepped in to break up the fight between Culber and Tyler, but I couldn’t get too angry about it — the “Discovery” writers don’t seem to know what to do with either character.
The members of the Discovery bridge crew grow unusually antagonistic to Tyler, eventually confining him to quarters, accusing him of sabotage. Tyler’s presence on the ship has been strange and toothless to me from the start, so again, this was a plotline I couldn’t get invested in.
But overall, now that we’re finally moving forward with the season’s central mystery, the episode worked for me. Peck is acquitting himself just fine as Spock. It’s clear that the Vulcan loses faith in the human side of himself as he gets older, and the underlying anger in Peck’s portrayal is subtle but clear.