Opinion|What Happens to a Magazine Deferred?
What Happens to a Magazine Deferred?
The American Bystander, published for just one issue in the 1980s, is back. It was worth the wait.
John Belushi threw me into the air.
In memory, I soar a good 20 feet over his head, as if I have been launched in some coked-out version of the blanket toss.
It’s spring of 1981. I’m 23 years old, a closeted trans woman and the managing editor of The American Bystander magazine.
I want to tell you about The Bystander, but this story isn’t only about that. You read a lot about people — Steve Jobs, say, or the Wright brothers — whose harebrained schemes transformed the world. It’s less common, though, to read about dreams deferred, ideas that were either ahead of their time or — who knows? — just plain crazy. Jimmy Dean’s Chocolate Chip Pancakes and Sausage on a Stick, for instance. Frito-Lay’s fat-free potato chips (that also acted as a laxative). Pepsi A.M. — the “breakfast cola.” Or The American Bystander magazine, which produced one issue and died.
But the value of a dream shouldn’t always be measured by whether or not it came true.
The Bystander was imagined as a “grown-up Lampoon” or an “American Punch.” Reported pieces, edgy commentary, so edgy that you were never quite sure what was serious and what was humor. Mr. McConnachie put together quite a crew as the project’s benefactors: Mr. Belushi and Dan Aykroyd, Gilda Radner and Lorne Michaels, Harold Ramis and Michael O’Donoghue, along with some New Yorker cartoonists and other Lampoon alumni. And then there was precocious young me, fresh out of Wesleyan University, where I’d edited the campus newspaper, The Argus.
In 1982, we produced our pilot issue, certain that this would change the world. But in this we were disappointed. The Reagan recession hit us hard, and our plans proved nugatory.
Before The Bystander folded, though, it gave me lots of adventures. I reported on a monkey orphanage on Long Island; I interviewed an aggrieved woman who ran the Skunk Club, a support group for people in Manhattan who kept skunks as pets; I visited Hart Island, the city’s sad, windswept potter’s field. I did not know, as I stood there, that the bones of my grandfather lay at my feet.
The Bystander came and went. And then 36 years went by, real fast.
As it turns out, the new Bystander has not sunk; it has thrived. Newsweek called it “the last great American humor magazine.” Subscription is per issue, via the Patreon crowdfunding app, and back issues are available through Amazon. Ten issues have been published; it’s a beautiful, hilarious magazine — very much what we always hoped the Bystander would become. This is in large measure because of Mr. Gerber’s hard work and genius, but it’s also because of the vision that Brian McConnachie had almost 40 years ago.
One afternoon last spring, I walked into a restaurant in Midtown Manhattan that was hosting a publication party for the most recent issue. All around me were the writers and cartoonists I had once worked with. There was Sam Gross, sitting at a table with George Booth — both of them legends in the world of comics art. There was Ms. Chast, who did not regret for one moment backing out of the weather-balloon stunt. And there was Mr. Gerber himself, who welcomed me like I was his long-lost sister.
Mr. McConnachie, now living in Florida, wasn’t there. But his vision was everywhere.
It occurred to me that sometimes a dream deferred does comes true. But you have to be patient, and not allow time and disappointment to break you.
Afterward, I walked back out into the New York afternoon with my head spinning, feeling, against all odds, like I was 23 again, with all of the mysteries and heartaches of life yet to be revealed.
I remembered the night that John Belushi had tossed me skyward. “Belushi just threw me in the air and caught me,” I said to Mr. McConnachie later.
