Jeffrey Wechsler beats around the bush.
WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — Those diagonal circles in the grid … what could they mean? Jeffrey Wechsler is back, but he’s not going to tell you directly. He’s going to make you work for it.
19-/20A: I liked these “flipped” clues: “Ithaca, to Odysseus” and “Odysseus, to Ithaca.” Thinking about them in turn really works the brain and lifts somewhat mundane entries like HOME and RULER.
48A: I somehow guessed that “Big name in mortgages?” was MAE, as in Fannie MAE. It could have been MAC (as in Freddie MAC) and the crossing entry at 35D, ONE-ALL TIE was not top of mind for me (more about that later).
10D: TIL about the Charioteer constellation, also known as AURIGA. Even though I’m a science nerd, this one wasn’t in my wheelhouse.
35D: A note from the Department of Redundancy Department: We love the entry ONE-ALL TIE.
42D: Loved this clue. “Made the rounds, say?” is not hinting at a doctor’s rounds, but a person who makes rounds of drinks for patrons. The answer is BARTENDED.
59D: Here’s something to commit to memory, if you haven’t already done so: The right-hand, or even-numbered, pages of a book are known as VERSO, and the left-hand, or odd-numbered, pages are called recto. They come up fairly often in crosswords, so they are worth knowing.
Mr. Wechsler takes the phrase OBLIQUE REFERENCE — our revealer at 60A — and reinterprets it as reference books that are lying on a slant. That’s pretty clever, and the revealer phrase is making its debut in the New York Times Crossword.
Those diagonal, circled letters spell out four reference books like DICTIONARY, which was the first one I got, after having ___TIONARY for a while. Once I got that, I realized that the other lines of circled squares had to be similar books, although I didn’t yet know why they were on the diagonal. The revealer provided a satisfying “Aha!” moment.
Puzzle maker Mike Selinker and the folks at Lone Shark Games, who brought us the incredible Maze of Games book, are launching a new Kickstarter campaign at 2 p.m. Pacific. While the original book and some of the items around it have been for sale before, this campaign gives puzzle lovers a chance to grab everything in one go.
Trevor Kidd, Lone Shark’s marketing director, says this campaign has “everything for the Maze of Games, including The Maze of Games puzzle book, The Theseus Guide Puzzle book, The Maze Map puzzle, as well as all the new audio products, including the new Gatekeeper’s Variety Hour audio puzzle suite.
Occasionally a phrase presents itself that immediately triggers the thought that it might be conducive to a crossword theme.
I’ve always been interested in themes that use diagonal sets of letters in a grid, so the “oblique” of OBLIQUE REFERENCE became a natural source for that format, and “reference” suggested the use of standard forms of reference books. I really liked the idea, but the construction, which needed to place the diagonals within the strictures of a symmetrical grid while including a large number of triple-checked letters, was very hard to manage.
When I submitted the puzzle, the response was that the theme was good, but one entry could not be accepted. Several revisions followed, all receiving a “close but no cigar” response. I am very thankful to Will for having enough interest in the theme to allow me to battle it out with the grid until it finally became acceptable.
I hope solvers get some enjoyment from the final product.
