Plus, Gap breaks up with Old Navy, and artwork that can think for itself.
Welcome to a quick catch-up on this week’s news in business and tech, so you can sound smart and well-read on Monday even if you spent most of your weekend scrolling through strangely cute pictures of vermin. Here’s your cheat sheet.
If you didn’t spend your Wednesday glued to the riveting testimony of Michael Cohen, President Trump’s former lawyer and fixer, you’ve no doubt heard the more salacious details by now (hush money to a porn star, etc.). But Mr. Cohen also made new accusations about his former client’s business practices. He said that Mr. Trump inflated his net worth to qualify for bigger bank loans, misrepresented the value of properties to avoid taxes and exaggerated the value of his assets when insuring them — in other words, committed fraud. Those revelations could pose problems not only for Mr. Trump, but also for his inner circle, including his daughter Ivanka Trump and son Donald Trump Jr.
Tesla’s chief executive, Elon Musk, went rogue on Twitter — again. The Securities and Exchange Commission wants to hold him in contempt of court for tweeting about production forecasts last week, which violated the terms of a settlement he made with the agency last year. (The S.E.C. sued him over misleading Twitter posts about taking his company private, and his legal team is now supposed to review any tweets with material information before he sends them — which didn’t happen, in this case.) In related news, Tesla is finally taking orders for the long-promised $35,000 version of its Model 3 sedan. But it had to cut significant costs in other areas — like in its work force — to do so.
Hopefully, they can still be friends. Gap Inc. said on Thursday that it would split into two companies, one that’s just Old Navy — the star moneymaker — and the other containing Gap, Banana Republic, and the newer labels Athleta and Hill City. Gap the brand has been dragging down Gap the company for quite some time (its sales fell 5 percent last year) while Old Navy has grown like gangbusters and can now proceed unfettered. So what’s Gap doing wrong? Analysts say it failed to hold onto the baby boomers who loved its turtlenecks and jeans in the ’90s, while millennials are turning to cheaper options — and Old Navy has the better deals.
American farmers are bearing the brunt of the China trade war, defaulting on their loans at the highest rate in nine years. But Mr. Trump has said he’s anticipating “some very big news over the next week or two” about a deal. Last Friday was supposed to be the hard deadline for an agreement between the two governments, or else Mr. Trump would raise tariffs on Beijing to more punitive levels. But the administration backed off its big-stick posturing last week, dropping the deadline in light of “significant progress” in negotiations. Mr. Trump’s advisers were more cautiously optimistic about striking a deal, while many members of Congress remain skeptical of its terms.
What better name for a new spacecraft than “Crew Dragon”? NASA and SpaceX are sending the capsule on its maiden voyage to the International Space Station this week. No humans are aboard this test flight, but ultimately the Crew Dragon is intended to carry astronauts — making it the first passenger-friendly ship that NASA has launched since the Atlantis space shuttle completed its final mission in 2011. Since then, NASA has had to buy rides to the International Space Station aboard Russian spacecraft, an arrangement that the Crew Dragon is expected to end.
It looks weird, and it should — it’s artwork “curated” by artificial intelligence, and it will be the first of its medium sold at auction this Wednesday at Sotheby’s. Created by the artist Mario Klingemann, the installation consists of two framed screens that use neural networks to “think” for themselves, shifting into an endless stream of (rather creepy) portraits that the machine “imagines” in real time. No two faces that it depicts are alike, so every viewer gets a unique show. The piece is expected to fetch up to $52,000 — and perhaps whet the art market’s appetite for more of its kind.
HBO’s chief executive, Richard Plepler, who ushered in a heyday for cable with shows like “The Sopranos” and “Sex and the City,” abruptly stepped down after 27 years at the network. Millions of people in Uganda have quit the internet after the government imposed taxes on the use of social media platforms like Facebook, WhatsApp and Twitter. Walmart is doing away with its greeters — those people in blue vests who stand at the store entrance and seem way too happy to see you — which may put many employees with disabilities out of a job. And a new report showed that economic growth in the United States is not as peppy as some people (including Mr. Trump) predicted, as the effects of tax cuts and other economic stimuli fade.