Mary Lou Guizzo and Erik Agard collaborate on a puzzle that will hopefully warm things up.
WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — If we are going to climb over the hump of the week and make it to the late-week puzzles, we have to be willing to sit down and get to work. No more the easy, straightforward cluing of Monday and Tuesday; few are the fill-in-the-blank clues that we can recall immediately.
That’s O.K., by the way. Wednesday is a warm-up for the tricks of Thursday and the mind games of Friday and Saturday. But you’ve got this. Start with what you know — there will always be something that you know — and use those crossings. Build on what you have.
Mary Lou Guizzo and Erik Agard (the reigning American Crossword Puzzle Tournament champion) have collaborated on a midweek puzzle that will definitely give you a workout and help you climb over that hump.
15A: Maybe Herman Melville’s “OMOO” wasn’t his best known novel, but it has been in the New York Times Crossword a total of 358 times and it has been clued as “‘Typee’ sequel” approximately 10 times, so it pays to familiarize yourself with it.
20A: I really like clues like “Bring up … or something brought up.” It’s a nice reminder of how complex the English language is. The former refers to REARing a child, and the latter hints at bringing up the REAR in a line.
45A: I filled in ZERO at first, because I thought the constructors and editors were just being clever with me. Also, I didn’t take the phrase “grandfather clock” into account as much as I should have. Since the numbers on a grandfather clock are Roman numerals, and since the hours stop at 12, the lowest number not on a grandfather clock would be 13, or XIII.
60A: The “South side?” could be a neighborhood in a town, but the answer is OKRA. How is that possible? Think of “side” as a side dish, in this case one that’s served in the South.
23D: At first I thought the answer to “Spit in the food?” might be ONE REASON NOT TO TICK OFF YOUR SERVER, but that obviously wouldn’t fit. So I adjusted my thinking, and realized that I needed to think of the kind of food that might be cooked on a spit over a fire. The answer is SKEWER, which fits perfectly.
56D: Most of us know that an APSE is part of the layout of a church, but a transept is another part in a cross-shaped layout, and the two areas abut each other.
An interesting historical aside: The entry WINTER WONDERLAND makes a return after nearly 60 years, and SPRING HAS SPRUNG returns after almost 40 years.
Mary Lou Guizzo: Erik got in touch with me last January about co-constructing a themeless crossword. We emailed a few times about it before I shared a grid I’d been playing around with. It had the LION to LIMN to LIMB to LAMB words in the corners and three other theme entries.
Together we came up with three theme entries that were stronger than the ones I had initially chosen. Erik then arranged them in a grid with a ladder structure. I filled the grid and Erik tweaked it slightly. We worked together on the cluing.
It was a privilege and a pleasure to work with Erik. So glad he reached out to me. Hopefully we’ll get back to that themeless soon.
In an earlier version of this column, I inadvertently described two words that are not in Ms. Guizzo’s and Mr. Agard’s puzzle. I sincerely regret the error, I’m still not sure how that happened and I am going to start planning a vacation today.
