The political news cycle is fast, and keeping up can be overwhelming. Trying to find differing perspectives worth your time is even harder. That’s why we have scoured the internet for political writing from the right and the left that you might not have seen.
Mr. Starr, the independent counsel who oversaw the investigation that led to the impeachment of President Bill Clinton, made clear that the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, was subject to different rules from the ones he was in 1998, when he delivered a book-length report directly to Congress. “The drafters of the new regime — the one under which Mueller operates — set themselves firmly against the revolutionary principle of factually rich prosecutorial reports,” he wrote. “It might seem strange for me to say, but they were right to do so.” Read more.
The president’s critics are demanding full disclosure of the special counsel’s report. Mr. McCarthy said he was not opposed to that, as long as full disclosure included information about how the investigation got started to begin with. Read more.
Ms. Gesiotto, a supporter of President Trump, criticized journalists and television hosts for being biased and described what she called their “stages of grief” over the news that no further indictments were coming. Read more.
Mr. Katyal, the former acting solicitor general under President Barack Obama who drafted the special counsel regulations in 1998 and 1999, said that Attorney General William P. Barr could and should release the report. The law, he wrote, gives “all the latitude in the world” to make the report public. Read more.
Despite all the anticipation of the Mueller report, Mr. Graham wrote, few will be happy that it is finished. His argument: Democrats will no longer be able to use the continuing investigation as a reason to wait to act against President Trump. Republicans will also be forced to reckon with the president. And Mr. Trump, who has succeeded when he has a nemesis to rally against, will find himself without a villain. Read more.
Mr. Remnick, the editor of The New Yorker, wrote that it was unlikely that Mr. Trump would change his behavior after the Mueller report. Of the Democratic candidates for president in 2020, he suggested that the right one not only has to be able to win the election but also be up to the challenge of undoing the legacy of Mr. Trump’s “moral and material corruption.” Read more.
Mr. Feldman offered a reminder that the culmination of the Mueller report was “far from a foregone conclusion throughout much of the past two years.” Whatever the report says, he argued, the fact that it exists is a win for democracy. Read more.
Mr. Wittes cautioned against jumping to conclusions about the end of the Mueller investigation without knowing why it ended. Was there a finding of innocence? Or was the evidence not sufficient for prosecution? And, Mr. Wittes said, even if the subject of a criminal investigation claims vindication, that does not mean the person cannot not be judged morally. Read more.
Though the Mueller investigation has taken up about 85 percent of Mr. Trump’s presidency, Mr. Cillizza argued, this milestone is just the end of the beginning, not the beginning of the end. Read more.