Stephen Colbert can finally claim complete bragging rights.
For the first time, Mr. Colbert’s “Late Show” on CBS has drawn a bigger Nielsen rating point among young adult viewers than any other late-night talk show. Until now, Jimmy Fallon’s “Tonight Show” on NBC has been the leader in that category, which is vital to advertisers.
Mr. Colbert had a tepid start after his much-ballyhooed debut in September 2015. His show pulled ahead of Mr. Fallon’s in total viewers in February 2017 — the month after President Trump was inaugurated. Between then and the latest Nielsen report, Mr. Fallon had clung to the lead among the 18-to-49-year-old crowd.
The latest season-to-date ratings from Nielsen show that Mr. Colbert has drawn an average of 692,000 adult viewers under 50 during the 2018-2019 season, which began in September. That gives him a slim lead over Mr. Fallon, who averaged 686,000 such viewers in that same period.
Those figures have helped push Mr. Colbert to his first lead as measured by Nielsen rating points, with a margin of 0.54 to 0.53. As New York magazine’s Vulture website reported, Mr. Colbert squeaked past Mr. Fallon in viewers as early as mid-November, but that victory wasn’t sizable enough to give him the lead in the Nielsen numbers.
In total viewers, Mr. Colbert is leaving his rival in the dust. “The Late Show” averages 3.8 million viewers per episode, while “The Tonight Show” brings in 2.5 million.
In October, NBC made a move to rebuild Mr. Fallon’s audience, installing the veteran network executive and former “Today” producer Jim Bell to take charge of the show. The addition of Mr. Bell echoed a strategy employed by CBS nearly three years ago, when it named Chris Licht, the lead producer of the network’s morning show, as an executive producer and showrunner of Mr. Colbert’s program.
Since Mr. Bell came aboard (with the title executive in charge), “The Tonight Show” has shown some improvement in the ratings, gaining 6 percent in total viewers, compared with a 10 percent increase for Mr. Colbert. Likewise, Mr. Fallon’s ratings among adults under 50 have risen 4 percent — but Mr. Colbert managed an 8 percent jump among those viewers.
The number of young adult viewers watching both shows has slipped, however, compared with a year ago. At the same time, the number of total viewers tuning in for “The Late Show” is flat versus 2018, while the size of the total audience for “The Tonight Show” has shrunk by 17 percent.
Under Mr. Bell’s guidance, Mr. Fallon has started rolling out specialty episodes. He took “Tonight” to San Juan, Puerto Rico, in January, following Lin-Manuel Miranda and a “Hamilton” touring company for an exclusive performance of a song from the musical.
Last week, for the fifth anniversary of Mr. Fallon’s tenure as NBC’s 11:30 p.m. host, “The Tonight Show” aired a tribute to “The Larry Sanders Show,” the influential HBO sitcom starring Garry Shandling as an insecure talk show host, complete with Mr. Fallon asking his colleagues if his face looked “puffy.” And he recently took a rare deep dive into the political realm — Mr. Colbert’s forte — with an extended interview immediately after his monologue with the NBC News correspondent and anchor Katy Tur.
There is no guarantee that Mr. Colbert’s narrow advantage among the younger adult viewers will hold. But with the 2020 presidential campaign entering its early stages, the trend lines could be troubling for Mr. Fallon. Liberal viewers have flocked to Mr. Colbert’s late-night show, and several potential Democratic candidates have sat in the guest chair.
Mr. Fallon continues to score digitally. “The Tonight Show” passed 20 million YouTube subscribers last month. But Mr. Colbert has outperformed Mr. Fallon among viewers who watch his program on DVR in the days after an episode airs.