No matter that a middle ground always existed. With a few timeless exceptions, those wines got little attention.
This clichéd view of Australian wines reminds me of how Europeans tend to view American tastes. Regardless of the fact that wine styles in the United States have reoriented over the last 10 years toward freshness and restraint, many Europeans are stuck imagining that all American wines are the California rocket juice of a decade ago, when, to the critics, at least, bigger always seemed to be better.
During a three-week trek through Australian wine regions, from the Yarra Valley outside Melbourne through the Grampians, heading west to the cluster of wine appellations surrounding Adelaide, and on to the extreme southwestern regions of Margaret River and Great Southern, I found wonderful wines all over, the kinds that I would joyously seek out in the United States.
The blockbusters are still there, wines like Torbreck and Mollydooker, as are the Australian classics from longtime producers like Penfolds, Tyrrell’s and Henschke. But today, Australia has a thriving natural wine culture (more on that soon), as well as a number of producers who are achieving finesse and grace.
Australia, it turns out, has experienced the same sort of evolution as the United States. Though it achieved international success among critics in the 1990s with powerful shirazes from regions like Barossa Valley and McLaren Vale, many Australians came to prefer more restrained European styles.
Taras Ochota, a onetime surfer and punk rocker, worked as a winemaker in the Barossa Valley at Two Hands, one of the most successful companies working in the bigger style. But, he said, he always preferred lighter, fresher wines with lively acidity, so he established his own winery, Ochota Barrels, in 2008 in the Adelaide Hills.
Mr. Ochota’s wines sing in the glass, full of energy and expressive of place and grapes. They are what the French call digestible.
The evolution in Australia has occurred largely over the last decade. Gary Mills, who hails from Western Australia, was a Japanese translator before making the transition to wine. In the early part of the century, he spent two years working at Ridge Vineyards in the Santa Cruz Mountains of California, where Paul Draper, the longtime chief executive and wine sage, became a mentor.
In 2002, Mr. Mills settled in the Yarra Valley and established Jamsheed Wines, which makes numerous small cuvées that both evoke the nuances of terroir and evolve over time. He has seen firsthand what he called “the seismic shift in Australian drinking habits” toward fresher, lower-alcohol wines.
Mr. Mills’s wines were never particularly high in alcohol, but they are not easygoing. His single-vineyard syrahs — he uses the term syrah rather than shiraz, like many who want to separate themselves from the Barossa Valley style — are firm and tannic in youth, though they become more elegant and complex with time. Younger wine drinkers in the big cities are not so patient.
“People want easy-drinking, low-tannin ‘juice,’ as they call it,” Mr. Mills said as we tasted in the workmanlike industrial winery, where he rents space to make his wines. These sorts of thirst-quenchers are often called “smashable” in Australia.
Ronnie Sanders, president of Vine Street Imports in Mount Laurel, N.J., the American importer of Jamsheed and Ochota Barrels, has specialized in Australian wines for more than 20 years.
He says he never sought out the most exaggerated wines. He worked with Two Hands, but also with producers like Michael Dhillon, of Bindi in the Macedon Ranges in western Victoria, who makes exceedingly graceful pinot noirs and chardonnays. Still, when the pushback against Australian wines began around 2003, Vine Street was affected, too.
“That’s when we started to have a really hard time selling Australian wines,” Mr. Sanders said. He never gave up on his Australian portfolio, he said, but he diversified by bringing in wines from other countries. Things did not begin to turn around, he said, until he began showing wines like Ochota Barrels to the few American sommeliers who were willing to taste Australian bottles.
Aside from the stylistic shift, many in Australia point to an increasing focus on the agricultural side of production.
It’s a sentiment that echoes all over Australia. “For a long time, farming and agriculture had been heavily dismissed,” said Mac Forbes, a thoughtful producer who makes a wide variety of intriguing wines in and around the Yarra Valley.
His view is entirely different. “We’re not trying to grow great wine,” he said. “We’re trying to farm to understand the place.” That’s a challenge.
“A bigger problem than climate change is attracting good, young people to agriculture,” Mr. Forbes said.
Shaw & Smith, a medium-size producer in the Adelaide Hills, has become more precise in both its winemaking and its farming since its inception in 1989. While not certified as organic, it has eliminated herbicides and is heading in that direction, with an emphasis on the health of the soils in the vineyard.
“We’ve accepted the argument that the vines will have more resilience,” said Michael Hill Smith, one of the proprietors.
In the Margaret River region, where the maritime breezes flow in from the Indian Ocean just a few miles away, a new focus on viticulture has helped with making elegant cabernet sauvignons.
At Cullen Wines, one of the region’s early producers, Vanya Cullen spearheaded a movement to organic farming in 2003 and biodynamic viticulture shortly after. She feels the wines are more complete than before. Indeed, today, they are well-calibrated, precise and focused.
Virginia Willcock, the chief winemaker at Vasse Felix (another Margaret River pioneer practically next door to Cullen), has been there since 2007.
Vasse Felix never produced the sort of syrupy, alcoholic style that was once popular, but an evolution in the wines is evident nonetheless, particularly in its top cabernet sauvignon cuvée, which was once called Heytesbury, but in 2013 was renamed after Tom Cullity, who founded Vasse Felix in 1967.
The Heytesbury cabernets, a selection of the best barrels, were dense, tannic and somewhat rustic. Even today, the 2008 Heytesbury is intensely tannic.
By contrast, the Tom Cullity cabernets, made from the oldest plots of cabernet and malbec, are perfumed and elegant, and show great finesse. Ms. Willcock says they remind her of the great cabernets from Margaret River in the 1970s and ’80s.
Australia has many fine producers now making fresh, balanced wines. Here are a dozen worth seeking out from among the wineries I visited earlier this year.
