Bentley Meeker had amassed 4,500 bottles of wine by 2009 when the recession began to affect his lighting and event business. So, as painful as it was to part with some of the finest wines in his collection, he began selling them.
“I had to liquidate all of my good stuff,” he said, estimating he sold some 1,500 bottles.
Collectible assets include wine, spirits, coins, trading cards as well as more unusual items, like lighters, belt buckles and even shrunken heads. These collections cost money and time to assemble and certainly have a value to their owners, but can they be considered legitimate investments? That depends on the market.
For many collectors, the only option to buy, sell or even value these assets is through online auction platforms like eBay or enthusiast sites, but for others, their possessions are treated as fine art.
But the market for collectibles, which are often valued in the millions of dollars, may not always be so easy to weather. It can experience sudden surges that put desired items out of the reach of true collectors or it can collapse, wiping out the gains speculators thought they had made.
In an economic slowdown, how these investments are treated depends on supply and demand as well as unpredictable forces like fashion and popularity.
This is the third column in a series on how owners of passion investments — those in which investors follow their heart as well as their wallet — should consider those assets when the economy softens. Previous columns looked at art and cars, and the next two will look at private equity and real estate.
Collectibles can be broken into categories determined by provenance, rarity and even a moment in time. Here are five issues to consider when weighing the investment potential of your collection.
Leading the pack are high-quality items that have broad name recognition.
In the past five years, for example, the value of Burgundy wine has increased by 105 percent, according to Liv-ex, a wine indexing company. That far outpaced a broader index of 1,000 wines, which rose by 42 percent over the same period.
Whisky has had a solid run since the 2008 recession, according to auction reports, but one of the top brands is Macallan, a single-malt whisky from the Speyside region of Scotland. A bottle of 60-year-old Macallan sold last year at auction for $1.1 million; it was priced at $27,000 after it was bottled in 1986.
Macallan is a known, high-end whisky for sure, but like the Ferraris I wrote about last week, it is well marketed and managed by the distillery.
But stars aren’t limited to spirits. This week, a trading card featuring the New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady from his 2000 rookie season sold for $401,000. The sale set a record for a football trading card and beat last year’s $250,000 price paid for a similar Brady card from the same set, said Brent Huigens, chief executive of PWCC, a marketplace that maintains an index of trading card values.
The Brady card is an outlier in the indexes that PWCC has created, which are typically led by baseball cards. Other exceptionally rare cards include a 1909 T206 Honus Wagner that has been in a private collection since 2007 when it sold for $2.8 million.
Still, Mr. Huigens pointed to a steady increase of the PWCC 500, a diversified portfolio of the 500 best cards that trade frequently. The index is up 165 percent since January 2008, while the S&P 500 is up 71 percent.
Nick Fiorella, who owns an insurance company in Stuart, Fla., won the Brady card at auction, but it wasn’t even his biggest card purchase that week. He also bought a 1952 Topps Mickey Mantle for $450,000.
Mr. Fiorella said he considered cards like that as long-term investments. He buys newer cards to turn a quick profit, using an approach similar to a portfolio strategy.
For example, he paid $50,000 for a set of cards depicting Ronald Acuña Jr., the Atlanta Braves outfielder named 2018 rookie of the year. “I could sell that for five times right now, but if he breaks his leg in spring training and never plays again, I’ve just lost $50,000,” he said.
The same is true for other collectibles, like whisky. Ms. Graham-Yooll said bottles from distilleries that had closed could jump in value. The lower supply creates greater demand. But there are risks: The whisky might not be that great in the first place or the distillery might not have been able to afford the best casks to age the whisky.
“You could say, ‘Yes, it’s worth buying,’ but what price is it worth buying at?” she said.
Colored gemstones have dominated the auction market for jewelry. A vivid pink diamond of nearly 19 carats sold for $50 million last year, topping all jewelry sold at auction. A pearl owned by Marie Antoinette came in second, at $36 million.
But jewelry is not an investment, said Susan Abeles, head of jewelry for the Americas at the auction house Phillips, because the market is driven too much by changing fashion.
She said that the auction prices were indicative of popularity, but that clients who needed to raise money often opted to sell their jewelry privately.
The world’s largest collection of shrunken heads is valued at $13 million for insurance purposes. It’s certainly rare, but what is it really worth?
Another of the company’s clients has an extensive collection of Barbie dolls dating back decades.
Mr. Fiamma said the insurer established the value of esoteric collections like these by using third-party appraisers. But insurance companies like A.I.G. value these collections by their replacement value, not by the price someone would pay for them.
Would an owner actually be able to sell a collection of shrunken heads for $13 million? That depends on finding a buyer, which could take time. It’s more likely that a collection of that kind is donated to a museum.
Whether it’s shrunken heads, 1,000 bottles of wine or sheets of trading cards, a ready buyer may not be available — or may want to pay much less.
Mr. Meeker said his collection of wine was probably worth close to $1 million at its peak but had fallen to $400,000 by the time he started selling it off. After that experience, he lost interest in collecting — and now just enjoys the wine he has left.
Mr. Fiorella said he would look at trading cards as if they were any other asset if a recession hit his business and he needed to sell. He said he would assess the collection over all, as he would any portfolio, with an eye on keeping the ones that were likely to rebound.
