Every year around this time, people grumble about their tax bills. This year, taxpayers who lost the deduction for state and local taxes in the 2017 tax overhaul bill — mainly those in California and states in the Northeast — are going to grumble even more. And for some, that grousing has turned to talk of fleeing to lower-tax states.
Those wealthy enough to own homes in multiple states will want to have their cake and eat it, too. Some will try to establish residency in one of the seven states that have no state income tax: Alaska, Florida, Nevada, South Dakota, Texas, Washington and Wyoming.
In doing so, they will reduce their tax bills substantially: up to 13 percentage points for California residents, for instance, or nearly nine points for those in New York and New Jersey.
The people trying to take advantage of this strategy have always been a target of state tax collectors, but financial advisers say states like California and New York have stepped up their collection efforts, and they urge caution for anyone considering this approach.
Wealthy taxpayers have long assumed that spending a minimum of 183 days, or six months plus one day, in a residence outside a high-tax state would be sufficient to avoid taxes in that state. But advisers note that this long-held belief is not a sophisticated approach.
New York tax collectors assume you are still living in their state — even if you are spending the majority of your time elsewhere — and expect to be paid accordingly.
So much for flying off to Nevada or Florida and leaving your state tax bill behind.
In the high-stakes game of tax collecting, states can seek unpaid tax bills that climb into the tens of millions of dollars. People who have legitimately moved to a different state have to be ready to prove their residency. But so do executives who travel around the country for work.
The first requirement is proving your state residency. For most people, a driver’s license will suffice. But for wealthier taxpayers who have homes in two or more states, it’s not so easy.
There are apps like Monaeo, TaxBird and TaxDay, which count days spent in each state, alerting people when they get too close to the 183-day limit.
Nishant Mittal, a co-founder of Monaeo, said one of his motivations for creating the app came from staying too long in India when he was a consultant for McKinsey & Company. United States citizens living abroad face their own 183-day limit for federal taxes. Mr. Mittal had been told to keep records of where he was, and he did. But that wasn’t enough.
Michael Kosnitzky, a partner at the law firm Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman, who divides his time among Colorado, Florida and New York, said that counting days was insufficient and misleading.
He pointed to New York’s five-part test for determining a person’s residence for tax purposes, where time spent in the state is just one part. The state also looks at the size and cost of the New York home compared with those in other states, a person’s business and family ties to the state, and a category that looks at where “near and dear” items are kept.
Traci Kratish Pumo, a managing director at the accounting firm BDO who helps people establish Florida residency, said the latter was often known as the teddy bear test.
“Where do you keep your teddy bear at night?” is one of 50 questions her firm asks clients who want to move their tax residency, she said.
Florida is a preferred destination for residents in the Northeast looking to cut their tax bills, and tax authorities in their former states are monitoring such moves.
One way to prove you are gone is to classify your former home as a rental. Mr. Kosnitzky said the Internal Revenue Service generally checked to see if there had been actual rental income, for taxes and expenses to be deducted, but a brokerage agreement and a good-faith attempt to rent the property is usually sufficient.
Edward Nicoll, who lives in Miami Beach and has been a Florida resident since 2015, said he had been taxed on the same income by different states on two occasions.
“I ended up paying them both and then tried to get a refund from them,” he said, adding that he had acted on his accountant’s advice. “In one instance, I got the refund. In the other, I ended up paying double taxes” because the cost of fighting the tax was not worth it.
Mr. Nicoll, 65, said that he used the Monaeo app to track his days, but that it was just one component of his effort to be as transparent as he could to build a defense for future audits.
What someone does when he or she moves somewhere can also make a difference. Mr. Campbell said California generally allowed people to buy a vacation home in the state without becoming residents for tax purposes.
“But that presumption goes away pretty quickly if you’re viewed as anything other than a seasonal tourist,” he said. And that can be a fine line, given how easy it is for many wealthy people to work wherever they are.
“If you had sufficient connections to two states and another state audited you, you now have a fight on your hands,” he said. Audit fees alone can range from $25,000 to well over $100,000, and that’s before taxes, penalties and interest are paid.
Generally, the type of income determines which state gets to tax it. Regular wages are taxed in the state where they are earned. Capital gains and dividends are taxed in the state where the person lives.
But forms of compensation like unvested options and other forms of deferred compensation are trickier. They are taxed by the states where work was performed over the vesting period, said Ryan L. Losi, a certified public accountant and executive vice president at Piascik, an accounting firm.
Mr. Losi said he expected to see a lot of these audits over the next few years, given the run-up in stock prices. Typically, he said, people pay the tax in the state where they are living when they exercise those options, but several years later, other states come looking for what is owed to them.
Taxpayers will have to settle with each state but then amend their return in the original state before the three-year statute of limitations has passed.
