What makes a watch a man’s watch? Or a woman’s?
“It came down to an iconic silhouette,” said Mr. Archibong, who consulted regularly during Le Galop’s development with Philippe Delhotal, the design and development director of the house’s watch division.
He said that Hermès hadn’t steered him toward its equine roots; he settled on the stirrup-shaped case himself after spending time at the house archives.
Mr. Archibong’s parents, academics from Nigeria, had expected that he would follow in their footsteps, and he did study business before deciding to pursue a career in design. He is a graduate of the prestigious L’École Cantonale d’Art de Lausanne in Switzerland and spent several years working in Singapore, and his portfolio includes lighting fixtures and furniture for brands such as Sé, Formentera and Lapicida.
Le Galop was made at 26 millimeters (an inch) in diameter and 40.8 millimeters tall — small for a man’s watch but large for a woman’s. The crown was tucked away at 6 o’clock, reducing the perception of size even further.
When it came to designing the two-layered dial, which Mr. Archibong described as the most challenging element, he said he was inspired by his obsession with cathedrals and their windows. The outer part of the dial was bead-blasted, a finish suggested by Mr. Delhotal that gives the watch’s appearance much of its depth, and that Mr. Archibong admitted he had not known was possible when the process began. Mr. Archibong said he enjoyed that mentoring.
Much of La Galop’s personality is communicated through its Arabic numerals, which taper in size with the case. They were designed by Vincent Sauvaire, a young typographer who also graduated from the Lausanne school and previously worked with Vacheron Constantin.
“The perspective of the numbers getting smaller is to keep that zoom feeling going and have everything flowing in a direction,” Mr. Archibong said.
At its introduction, La Galop was presented in either steel or rose gold, with a diamond-set option and a time-only battery-powered quartz movement. Prices start at $3,650.
Mr. Archibong, who was wearing a Slim d’Hermès watch during the interview, said he wore the Galop as one of a number of accessories on his wrist. “The size is perfect for being on the verge of large for a woman’s wrist so it’s a powerful statement, and then also large enough to be the size of a vintage watch on a man’s wrist,” he said.
