As more accounts of sexual violations on airplanes come to light, more women are sharing their experiences and taking action to make flights safer.
You’re reading In Her Words, where women rule the headlines. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox. Let me know what you think at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Earlier this week, on a late-night flight, Joanna Chiu witnessed a man requesting a “dirty” photo from a high school-age girl seated next to him. Chiu had overheard him repeatedly try to get the girl’s attention — asking her what she wanted to be when she grew up (a C.E.O.) and other questions — but it was this request that drove Chiu to tap him on the shoulder and tell him he was “acting like a pervert.” He ignored her and went to the restroom.
Chiu, a bureau chief at The Star Vancouver and The Toronto Star, shared her story on Twitter and then in an essay for The Toronto Star.
Later, as he disembarked, he was met by security personnel. “He was sweating bullets,” Chiu wrote.
Chiu’s tweets — the latest account of sexual misconduct on flights — went viral. In December, a Michigan man was sentenced to nine years in prison for sexually assaulting a sleeping passenger on an overnight trip, and two men were charged in separate cases last year.
Last week, two JetBlue flight attendants filed a lawsuit against the airline and two of its pilots, claiming that the pilots drugged them both and raped one of them and another co-worker during a layover. The airline took no action when it learned of the assault, the women said.
The increased attention on this problem has been attributed to a couple of factors.
One, that such violations have been on the rise because predators are exploiting increasingly cramped airplanes and dark cabins on night flights, Sara Nelson, who leads the Association of Flight Attendants-CWA union, has said. Another, that more women have been emboldened to share their stories amid #MeToo — and earlier, since 2016, when a woman came forward to say that Donald Trump had groped her against her will on a flight in the 1980s. A claim he’s denied.
Definitive figures about sexual assaults on flights are elusive because no clearinghouse for data exists, experts say. But what seems certain is that women like Chiu are increasingly determined to speak up.
In the incident this week, she said, it took the intervention of female bystanders to stop the behavior.
“Adult women passengers on the plane were paying attention and taking action while trying not to embarrass the teen,” she wrote.
On Tuesday, I asked you how gender has affected your comfort level when traveling solo. Now I’m wondering if you’ve ever been harassed or seen someone harassed on a flight. Tell me your story at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or join the conversation on our Instagram here.
Here are five articles from The Times you might have missed.
The T List newsletter, a weekly roundup of what T Magazine editors are coveting, is coming to an inbox near you later this spring! Sign up in advance here.
For Women’s History Month, we’re highlighting stories of trailblazing women you may not know, but should. Head over to our Instagram for daily posts.
She wanted to fly, but no aviation school in United States would admit her. So Bessie Coleman taught herself French, moved to France and became the first black woman to earn a pilot’s license, in 1921.
Sign up here to get future installments of In Her Words delivered to your inbox.
Read past articles here.