Tyler John Davies got his start at 19 with an apprenticeship restoring antique clocks.
CLAIM TO FAME Winner of the 2019 Young Talent Competition at the Salon de la Haute Horlogerie, held in January in Geneva. The program honors emerging watchmakers and is supported by F.P. Journe, the Fondation de la Haute Horlogerie and the Asia-based retailer The Hour Glass.
THE PIECE Mr. Davies attracted the competition’s attention with Equilibrium (pictured below), an eight-day weight-driven wall clock that he created in his final year of study at Birmingham City University. He made his own tools to create its visible deadbeat escapement, which transfers energy to the time-keeping element, and devised a chapter ringed dial large enough to encompass the movement. Other challenges included the clock’s large case of American black walnut, which Mr. Davies designed on a computer-assisted design system, and then joined and finished by hand.
BACKGROUND Clockmaking wasn’t a childhood dream. After leaving school when he was 16, Mr. Davies worked in several fields — construction, hospitality, carpentry — until, at 19, he began an apprenticeship restoring antique clocks. Four years later he entered the university, more mature and focused, he said. “I knew that this is what I wanted to do. I was interested in the subject and liked that I’d have access to the equipment, machinery, books, teachers and the industry as well.” In 2018 he earned a degree in horology from Birmingham and became accredited by the British Horological Institute.
Mr. Davies’s Equilibrium, an eight-day weight-driven wall clock he created while studying at Birmingham City University.
NEXT THING Although he made most of the Equilibrium clock himself, Mr. Davies said he is eager to work with others — and already has been collaborating with a furniture maker. Glassblowing also fascinates him, he said — Birmingham’s glassmaking quarter is close to his workshop — and is brainstorming a co-creation. “Think a mantel clock but on a glass stand, with the movement set within,” he said.
