TEHRAN, Iran — A top Iranian diplomat has rejected Britain’s decision to give diplomatic protection to a British-Iranian woman who has been detained in Iran for nearly three years, saying it contravenes international law.
British officials have said that Iran has failed to meet international obligations in its treatment of the woman, Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, and offered her diplomatic protection this past week.
The British foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, said this meant that the country no longer regarded her case as simply a consular matter and had raised it to the level of a legal dispute between Britain and Iran.
But the Iranian ambassador to Britain, Hamid Baeidinejad, said in a post on Twitter on Friday that Iran did not regard Ms. Zaghari-Ratcliffe as British.
Ms. Zaghari-Ratcliffe, who works for the Thomson Reuters Foundation, was arrested in April 2016 while traveling on vacation with her toddler daughter in Iran. She was given a five-year prison sentence for what the Iranians called plotting the “soft toppling” of its government.
The sentence has been widely criticized.
In 2018, she was granted a three-day furlough to see her young daughter and other relatives, but was returned to prison, where her family said sent her into an emotional tailspin. She later went on a hunger strike.
Her husband, Richard Ratcliffe, welcomed the offer of diplomatic protection on Friday, saying it could lead to a resolution of her case within months.
He said the top priority was to have a doctor see his wife to provide urgent medical care.
The Thomson Reuters Foundation, the charitable arm of the Reuters news agency, issued a statement on Friday welcoming Mr. Hunt’s action on providing diplomatic protection to Ms. Zaghari-Ratcliffe.
The British government has long been seeking her release without success.
Mr. Hunt said that legal proceedings against Ms. Zaghari-Ratcliffe in Iran were deficient and that she had been denied proper access to health professionals.
“It’s not a magic wand; it’s not going to solve things overnight; but it does create a different legal and political context,” he said of Britain’s decision to offer diplomatic protection.