LOS ANGELES — Joc Pederson and Enrique Hernandez each hit two of the Los Angeles Dodgers’ eight home runs, which set a major league record for opening day and tied the franchise mark for any game, in a 12-5 victory over the Arizona Diamondbacks on Thursday.
Adam Jones and Christian Walker went deep for the Diamondbacks, but the eight homers their pitchers gave up set a team record for the most allowed in a game.
The Dodgers broke baseball’s previous opening day record of six homers, set by the Mets in 1988 and matched by the White Sox in 2008.
Los Angeles also equaled the franchise mark set against Milwaukee on May 23, 2002, when Shawn Green hit four of the Dodgers’ eight.
The Dodgers finished second in the majors last season, behind the Yankees, with 235 homers, and they were even more potent in their first regular-season game under the new hitting coach Robert Van Scoyoc. All eight hoers were hit by players who returned from last season for the Dodgers, who had only two new position players on their opening day roster.
It was more than enough support for Hyun-Jin Ryu, who yielded four hits and struck out eight over six stellar innings as Los Angeles’ first opening day starter not named Clayton Kershaw since 2010. Kershaw’s franchise-record streak of eight consecutive opening day starts ended because of left shoulder inflammation.
Meanwhile, Greinke’s latest return to Dodger Stadium was a debacle.
The $206.5 million right-hander allowed four homers for the fifth time in his career, but only the second time this decade. The Dodgers also hit four against Greinke, their former star, on Sept. 5, 2016, in Chavez Ravine, where Greinke has allowed 14 homers in 34 innings since his big-money move to Arizona.
Arizona reliever Matt Koch allowed the Dodgers’ other four homers over a seven-batter stretch in the sixth and seventh, abruptly toppling the majors’ opening day power record.
Pederson delivered as the Dodgers’ leadoff hitter. After doubling and scoring in the first inning, he hit one of Greinke’s curveballs 420 feet to straightaway center in the second.
Hernandez drove a two-run shot to left in the fourth. Barnes followed with a solo shot to left — and two outs later, Seager chased Greinke with his first homer since April 28.
Seager was back in the Dodgers’ lineup for the first time since missing nearly all of last season because of Tommy John surgery.
