Sports|‘Hello, Kevin Knox.’ A Knicks Rookie Breaks Out.
Kevin Knox driving to the basket past the Lakers’ Reggie Bullock on Sunday. Knox scored 19 points to get out of what Coach David Fizdale called a rut.
In a rookie season that has resembled a seismograph, Knicks forward Kevin Knox needed a performance like Sunday’s against the Los Angeles Lakers. He scored 19 points with an array of shots, slashing to the basket, hitting a step-back 3-pointer while guarded by LeBron James and finishing with finesse on a driving, left-handed layup.
Knox shot 8 of 14 from the field and 3 of 5 from 3-point range in the Knicks’ 124-123 victory over the Lakers, their 14th win in a dismal season.
Last year the Knicks selected Knox, a freshman from Kentucky, in the first round of the draft, ninth over all. After an ankle sprain sidelined him at the start of the season, Knox’s play took off in December, when he averaged 17.1 points and was named the Eastern Conference rookie of the month.
Knox, 19, hit the rookie wall beginning in mid-January, with a 20-game stretch in which he shot 31.8 percent from the field and 27.7 from beyond the 3-point arc. The slump started soon after he scored 31 points, his highest total in the N.B.A., during a game against the Philadelphia 76ers.
Shortly before that, Knox had said that he was still learning how to adjust to the demands of the long N.B.A. schedule and its 48-minute games, compared with a 40 minutes in college and A.A.U. ball.
To improve his fitness, Knox did extra sprints after practice and spent more time on the treadmill, running spurts of 15 minutes with the last two as fast as he could.
King, who was with the Knicks for five seasons in the mid-1980s, and was known for his seemingly unstoppable baseline turnaround jump shot, has focused especially on mentoring Knox.
In between their meetings early in the season, Knox studied online video highlights from King’s career.
Perhaps the other way around, rook.
Knox said he had sought out his own tutors as well, connecting with Chris Bosh, Grant Hill, Jalen Rose, Carmelo Anthony and former Kentucky players for bits of advice during the trying moments.
After Monday night’s 128-92 loss in Toronto, the Knicks had 11 games left in the season, all of them meaningless, except for their effect on the draft. The three teams with the lowest win totals will each have a 14 percent of landing the No. 1 selection in June, which presumably will be the Duke freshman Zion Williamson.
The Knicks, who have the worst record in the league (14-57), are expected to lose their way into one of those slots, even after that uplifting win against the Lakers, which ended when the Knicks’ Mario Hezonja blocked a shot by James in the waning seconds.
At a critical stretch in the fourth quarter, the Knicks had its three rookies on the court — Knox, center Mitchell Robinson, guard Allonzo Trier — plus guard Kadeem Allen, who was just called up from the Westchester developmental team, and forward Lance Thomas, the longest-tenured Knick.
Knox is sixth in the league among rookies in minutes played per game, at 28, despite shooting a subpar 36.4 percent from the field and struggling with weakside defense. He is averaging 12.3 points with 4.3 rebounds.
Even so, Fizdale has never considered sending Knox to Westchester to work on his game in the anonymity of the G League “because our team was already like a glorified G League team,” Fizdale told reporters last week. Because his rookies played substantial minutes all season, he said, he thought it was better for them to take their knocks against the best.
Such as James on Sunday and Toronto’s Kawhi Leonard on Monday.
