It’s Friday. Today is International Women’s Day!
Weather: Brrrr! Temperatures start in the mid-20s and may reach into the upper 30s by this afternoon.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until March 21 (Purim).
More than half of the 8.6 million people living in New York City are women, yet only five of the 150 statues in the city’s outdoor public spaces honor women.
A famed jazz singer, Ms. Holiday moved to New York when she was about 13. In 1939, she notably recorded “Strange Fruit,” which protested racism, particularly lynching.
She won a lawsuit in 1855 against a Manhattan trolley company that wouldn’t let her ride in a whites-only car. It was a first step in desegregating New York’s streetcars.
In the 1980s, she developed programs for families affected by H.I.V. at the state’s AIDS Institute. She also became the first Latina director of the American Public Health Association.
She spent nearly three decades as the keeper of the Robbins Reef Lighthouse, lighting the way for ships between Staten Island and Bayonne, N.J., in the early 1900s. Historians credit her with helping to save at least 50 lives.
Whom else should New York City honor?
My colleague Ginia Bellafante, who has written extensively about gender and the city, told me that “the city shouldn’t get too self-congratulatory about all of this,” referring to the new statues.
The city, she said, should focus not just on women who are famous pioneers, but its fameless everyday heroes.
“New York worships too hard at the altar of exceptionalism,” she said, adding that people should be reminded of the millions of women who keep the city running.
So, which women should we be celebrating?
Michael Cohen sued the Trump Organization. He said he was denied $1.9 million in legal fees after cooperating with prosecutors.
A lush garden or senior citizen housing? The imminent sale of the Elizabeth Street Garden to build affordable housing has placed two of the city’s scarcest resources at odds.
Two 12-year-olds drew swastikas on a playground. For young people, the Holocaust has become dangerously far from view, the Times columnist Ginia Bellafante writes.
Seatbelts required in the back seat? This and other surprises are in Governor Cuomo’s budget.
And finally: What happened to the man accused of printing a 3-D gun on Broadway?
Last year, a puppet specialist with the Broadway musical “The Lion King” was arrested at the Minskoff Theater and charged with attempted criminal possession of a firearm after he was found to have been manufacturing a 3-D-printed gun, prosecutors said then.
In New York, it is illegal for an unlicensed person to 3-D print an assault weapon, pistol or revolver.
Now, six months later, the Manhattan district attorney’s office has dropped the charges against the man, Ilya Vett, 48, because the gun, once completed, would not have been operable — a requirement under the law to prove that a crime had been committed.
“There was no firing pin attached to the hammer of the prop, and no room for one to be inserted even if the prop were to be modified,” Matthew Sears, an assistant district attorney, said during a hearing Thursday at the Manhattan Criminal Courts Building.
He added that Mr. Vett had told investigators he was creating the prop for the firearms collection of his brother, who has a gun license.
Mr. Vett, a married father of two who had been part of the Broadway show for 17 years, said he lost his job after the charges. He said he had been unable to find steady employment since the charges were announced.
“I’m happy to try and move on now and get some work,” he said.
Mr. Vett’s lawyer, Mark Bederow, said the past six months have been “a nightmare” for his client.
Among the family members and friends who showed up to support Mr. Vett at the hearing was his mother, Aletta Vett, 77.
It’s Friday — set your clocks forward on Sunday for daylight saving time.
I went to see “The Band’s Visit” at the Ethel Barrymore Theater with my cousin, Carolyn.
We were ordering a cocktail before the show started when we noticed a man standing in front of a large framed portrait of Ethel Barrymore. He was posing so as to mirror her profile, and another man was taking his picture.
As Carolyn and I went to our seats, I noticed the two men sitting in the row behind ours. Making my way down the row, I smiled and leaned toward them.
“Ethel Barrymore was my great-grandmother,” he whispered.
I took my seat.
She looked over her shoulder, and then leaned toward me.
“And these are the best seats he could get?” she said.
