OXON HILL, Md. — A year ago, attendees at the Conservative Political Action Conference, the annual jamboree of the political right, were greeted by Big Tech with open arms and open bars.
Google sponsored a lavish hospitality suite, courting conservatives with an outdoor fireplace, hors d’oeuvres and flowing cocktails. Bright young representatives from Facebook hosted a “help desk,” handing out cookies frosted with emoji icons and offering free demonstrations of its virtual reality product, Oculus.
That was then. At last week’s gathering here in a suburb of Washington, Silicon Valley’s only obvious presence was on the lips of exercised right-wing critics who whipped up the crowd by denouncing the American tech industry as an authoritarian hegemony intent on censoring their cause.
Mr. Hawley, who investigated Google for antitrust violations while serving as attorney general of Missouri, earned cheers when he said that tech companies “should not be able to tell us to sit down and shut up.” Later, James O’Keefe, the provocateur behind Project Veritas, the guerrilla group that tries to undermine news outlets like CNN and The Washington Post, urged tech employees to secretly videotape their workplaces to reveal conservative bias.
If suspicion of Big Tech was once a minor concern of right-wing agitators — a subcategory of that saw, criticizing the media — this year’s gathering suggested that attacks on Silicon Valley are now squarely in the conservative mainstream.
President Trump last year accused Google and other companies of stifling right-wing news outlets. On Capitol Hill, Republicans grilled executives like Jack Dorsey of Twitter about ideological bias.
“Two, maybe,” replied Breitbart’s editor, Alex Marlow. “Silicon Valley.” Both men laughed.
Amid the mounting animus, Big Tech lay low.
Google, a leading conference sponsor in 2018 — when its logo was plastered on banners alongside groups like the National Rifle Association and the Heritage Foundation — did not participate this year. Facebook’s “help desk” was also nowhere to be found.
Representatives from both companies were not keen to explain their reasoning. “The list of events that Facebook sponsors or participates in evolves from year to year,” a Facebook spokesman, Andy Stone, wrote in an email. A spokeswoman for Google declined to comment.
That left conservative activists to fill in the blanks.
Days earlier, Mr. Kassam set off a furor in the right-wing media when his Facebook page, which has tens of thousands of followers, was deleted without warning. The move seemed to confirm conservative fears of “de-platforming,” the claim — denied by leaders of social media — that tech companies seek to suppress right-wing content.
Tech companies, including Google and Facebook, argue that they sponsor organizations of all political stripes, and their public relations teams say the policies and algorithms that patrol their platforms are intended to be ideologically unbiased.
Mr. Kassam said he believed tech firms had shifted to quieter strategies to woo the right wing.
Greeting well-wishers on his way into the conference, David Bossie, the right-wing activist and former campaign aide to President Trump, said conservatives remained “very skeptical” of tech companies’ motivations.
So would he rather the companies shy away from CPAC, or brave the critics and try to change a few minds?
