Maybe that’s why he believes in love.
Neil Lane is a fixture of the “Bachelor” franchise. Since 2009, the jeweler has appeared on each season of the reality show to furnish its romantic hopefuls with rocks of all cuts and carats, free of cost to them. Sometimes those rings lead to long-lasting engagements and marriages. More often, the couples split within months of the finale’s airing. That also means parting ways with their Neil Lane sparkler.
This season, it’s been often unclear whether there would be a proposal at all.
In the show’s penultimate week, the leading man of Season 23, an N.F.L. player turned philanthropist named Colton Underwood, was fleeing the show’s location in the Algarve region of Portugal after a painful breakup with the woman he hoped to someday marry. Though Mr. Underwood has asserted that he and Mr. Lane “met” during filming, thus teasing a potential “happy” ending to the season, some viewers have seized on a detail in promotional videos — an empty ring box in the Bachelor’s hand — as a sign of romantic doom.
He was referring, of course, to the “most dramatic finale ever” of “The Bachelor” to date, in which Arie Luyendyk Jr. called off his proposal to Becca Kufrin on camera and later proposed to Lauren Burnham, who is now his wife. Mr. Lane was invited to their wedding, as often happens with the couples he ushers toward the altar, but did not attend. He was in New York, working on his latest project: a book about wedding aesthetics, based on decades of consulting for couples, attending lavish ceremonies and traveling the world on ABC’s dime.
Getting into the bridal industry was largely accidental. Mr. Lane grew up in Marine Park, Brooklyn, and was long intent on becoming a painter. As a teenager, he bought up shiny souvenirs from shops in Chinatown and resold them at flea markets around the city, hoping to turn a profit that would pay for a ticket to Paris. The plan was to see the “Mona Lisa” and pass through Hector Guimard’s Art Nouveau Metro entryways. And he did. But what ended up impressing upon him was a tiny vintage jewelry shop on a side street off the Place Vendôme.
“I looked in, and my nose was to the glass,” he said.  The cost, he said, was $4,000. He had about $6,000 total. After circling the block several times, attempting to negotiate the cost and smoking many cigarettes, he paid the tag price. So began his collection.
In the ’80s, after years of collecting vintage jewels from antique dealers, Mr. Lane moved to Los Angeles to open up a business of his own. What he found when he arrived were few traces of the Golden Age glamour he’d imagined as an East Coast kid.
At the time, the red carpet was not the widely televised designer-name-dropping opportunity it is today. The first red carpet was only rolled out in 1961, and it took five years for its coverage to be broadcast in color. It wasn’t until E! hired Joan and Melissa Rivers, in 1996, to host its Oscars preshow that the red carpet became a real forum for designer branding and fashion critique, to the delight of viewers at home.
By then Mr. Lane had developed a reputation in the industry, designing engagement rings for young starlets and resetting stones from the ’70s in modern platinum bands. He says that a real turning point was when Renée Zellweger came to his counter in 2001 seeking jewels to wear on the Golden Globes red carpet.
In the intervening years, Mr. Lane took on high-profile custom projects, among them a diamond “M” necklace for Madonna; a marquise-cut engagement ring flanked by smaller pink diamonds for Portia de Rossi from Ellen DeGeneres; and the cushion-cut ring Liam Hemsworth gave to Miley Cyrus when he first proposed. Media and word of mouth have made him one of Hollywood’s favorite jewelers.
Perhaps not watching is what’s kept him so optimistic about relationships.
