In the wake of a mass shooting, New Zealand’s prime minister has drawn international praise for mixing empathy with swift, concrete action.
In the hours after the shooting, she wore a black head scarf while comforting victims’ families, embracing and grieving alongside them.
And on Wednesday, just six days after a man gunned down worshipers in two New Zealand mosques, killing 50, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern made a swift gesture: banning military-style semiautomatic weapons.
“We are one, they are us,” she said of her country’s Muslims, many of whom are migrants or refugees. That unifying cry has become a symbol of her response.
In the aftermath of the massacre, Ardern has strayed from the usual post-attack script — drawing international praise for her ability to mix empathy with concrete action, shaping her path as a compassionate but defiant and decisive leader.
Ardern, 38, the youngest female world leader, “has set high benchmarks for messaging and leadership during this crisis,” Sushil Aaron, a New Zealand-based journalist, wrote in a Times Op-Ed this week.
Her plan for immediate policy changes “stands in stark contrast to the stalemate and resistance to change that has stymied similar calls for restrictions on firearms in the United States,” Damien Cave, The Times’s Sydney bureau chief, and Charlotte Graham-McLay reported from Christchurch, where the attack took place.
Meanwhile, Ardern confirmed that victims and their families would receive financial assistance from the New Zealand government, and she called for a global effort to eradicate right-wing extremism.
“We cannot think about this in terms of boundaries,” she said.
It didn’t take long for leaders across party lines and around the world to recognize and applaud Ardern’s approach.
Even Judith Collins, a New Zealand politician and an opponent of Ardern’s party, called the prime minister’s work “outstanding” and praised her for wearing a head scarf.
By the 1920s, she was helping to oversee the newly created Women’s Bureau, which handled cases involving sex workers, runaways, truants and victims of domestic violence. Today, women detectives make up around 2 percent of New York City’s 36,500-member police force. Learn more about Isabella Goodwin here.
