MINNEAPOLIS — When Mohamed Ahmed’s third-grade daughter was assigned a school report about an African-American she admired, she chose to study her newly elected congresswoman, Ilhan Omar.
But as Ms. Omar’s comments about American Jews and Israel drew bipartisan rebukes in recent weeks, culminating Thursday with a House vote condemning anti-Semitism and other forms of hate, Mr. Ahmed had a conversation with his 8-year-old daughter about Ms. Omar.
Across Minnesota’s snow-covered Fifth Congressional District — a bright-blue bastion of independent coffee shops, Somali malls and proudly progressive politics — the voters who overwhelmingly elected Ms. Omar in November were conflicted about her recent remarks, sometimes along surprising lines. Ms. Omar’s comments, and the weeks of backlash, raised questions about tolerance and free speech in a place that consistently elects a diverse slate of politicians, as well as concerns about the future of a carefully crafted rapport between leaders of the area’s sizable Jewish and Muslim communities.
Mohamed Ahmed in the Cedar Riverside neighborhood, which is located in Minnesota’s Fifth Congressional District, and where voters overwhelmingly elected Ms. Omar in November.
“We don’t want these issues to derail the relationship,” said Steve Hunegs, the executive director of the Jewish Community Relations Council of Minnesota and the Dakotas, who said he was “appalled” by Ms. Omar’s most recent remarks.
Ms. Omar’s district, which spans Minneapolis and some of its inner-ring suburbs, is a place attuned to religious tension. Longtime members of the Somali community still speak about the profiling they experienced in the years after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and about the fear they felt after a mosque was bombed by white supremacists in nearby Bloomington in 2017. In those difficult times, they said, Jewish leaders in Minnesota made a point of stating their support.
“When religion is under attack, they stand by us, because they’ve been there,” said Zahra Ali, a Somali-American resident of Minneapolis who once saw Ms. Omar’s election as a beacon of hope but who did not plan to vote for her again.
“For her to go out there and target, on a daily basis, Jews, is very sad,” Ms. Ali said.
Ms. Omar, one of the first two Muslim women elected to Congress, was seen by voters as a symbolic counterweight to President Trump, who is deeply unpopular in Minneapolis and who has spoken critically about the region’s large Somali population. Ms. Omar, a Somali refugee who came to the United States as a girl, received more than three-quarters of the vote last year, taking over a seat that had been held by Keith Ellison, a fellow Democrat and the country’s first Muslim elected to Congress.
“Here in Minnesota, we don’t only welcome immigrants, we send them to Washington,” Ms. Omar told a jubilant crowd at her election night party.
Rabbi Avi Olitzky, who helps lead a congregation in suburban St. Louis Park, in Ms. Omar’s district, said some of his members had gone from wanting to make sure their congresswoman was better educated about anti-Semitism to frightened about her views.
“I think we’ve seen the recognition of the weight of her words, but the continued comments don’t reflect that sensitivity,” said Rabbi Olitzky, who said he had consulted with Ms. Omar and her aides in recent weeks. He suggested that the congresswoman should consider participating in bipartisan trips to Israel and making a visit to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington. Still, he cautioned: “I don’t know about bouncing back” from the damage already done.
Ms. Omar, who has apologized for some of her remarks, has insisted that she is not anti-Semitic. She has also drawn attention to bigoted attacks against herself. Ms. Omar tweeted an image of threatening graffiti that was reported at a Minnesota gas station, and suggested a double-standard after West Virginia Republicans displayed a poster that linked fading memories of the 9/11 attacks to her election.
But even with bipartisan misgivings about Ms. Omar, the biggest threat to her political future is from fellow Democrats, not Republicans, who are vastly outnumbered in her diverse, mostly urban district. There have already been mutterings about a primary challenge in 2020, and though no such candidate has yet emerged, patience among some Democrats is clearly wearing thin.
Rabbi Avi Olitzky, in his office at Beth El Synagogue in St. Louis Park, Minn. Rabbi Olitzky leads a suburban congregation in Ms. Omar’s district.
Still, the deeply liberal makeup of Ms. Omar’s district — a mix of urban and suburban neighborhoods where “Black Lives Matter” signs and L.G.B.T. rights flags are common sights — may shield her from political punishment. Ms. Omar trounced her primary opponents last year, and she built an enthusiastic coalition of supporters of different racial and religious identities.
And though many constituents, including some Muslims, saw Ms. Omar crossing a line and trafficking in anti-Semitic tropes, others, including members of the district’s Jewish community, said they were offended only by what they perceived as partisan, even racist, attacks on their congresswoman for legitimate criticisms of Israel.
“I feel like she’s being attacked because she’s a black Muslim,” said Ethan Wilensky-Lanford, 38, who is Jewish, and who distributed campaign literature for Ms. Omar last year.
Anne Winkler-Morey, also a Jewish resident of Ms. Omar’s district, said she had discussed the congresswoman’s comments with her Somali friends and did not find the remarks offensive.
But the comments had created an uncomfortable rift in the district, even among loyal Democrats who usually agree on politics. Khalid Mohamed, a Somali-American resident of Minneapolis who said he interned for Ms. Omar when she was a state legislator, reached out to a Jewish friend who had posted critiques of the congresswoman on Twitter.
Mr. Mohamed said he and his friend planned to meet for a meal to talk it out on Friday, sometime after morning prayers.