Damon Gulczynski holds us at arm’s length.
THURSDAY PUZZLE — There is nothing like a really tricky Thursday theme to brighten my day.
Fool me once, fool me twice, it matters not to me. If it’s a good concept, I will finish with a smile and a brighter outlook. And this puzzle by Damon Gulczynski made me smile.
It also gives me an opportunity to talk about lateral or divergent thinking, which you will need to use to solve this crossword puzzle. I think this is a beautifully done theme, so just for today, I’m going to skip the tricky clues section and focus on how to get yourself “unstuck” when the answer is not what it seems to be.
One of the most difficult things to learn as a puzzle solver is how to shift your mind to other possibilities when the answer you assume is right is proven wrong. That shift is called lateral or divergent thinking, and it’s good for those who would like to strengthen their creativity and problem-solving skills.
The human brain loves a pattern. Often, solvers may look at a clue, think they know the answer and get stuck there, because they are used to following an expected mental sequence. You’ve seen me do it, when I’ve said that I really wanted a clue to have a certain answer. That was me getting stuck in a pattern, and it’s only when I stare at the grid while my brain rifles through all the files in my head that I emerge with the right answer.
That’s not a very satisfying example of how lateral thinking works, though, so let’s try looking at a theme clue or two and figuring out the answers together.
At 17A, the clue is the rather terse “Tome.” On the surface, the word “tome” refers to a book, usually a very large, heavy one. This is where most people get stuck. It’s easy to hover over the dictionary definition of the word and not be able to think of anything else, and the clue cleverly misdirects you away from the answer, which turns out to be the mystifying FROM WHERE I STAND. Is that the name of the book?
Now look at 37A’s clue, “Notable.” We all know what that means, but why is the answer POWERLESS? Most notable people have quite a bit of power.
The answer to these questions lies both in the revealer at 64A and the ability to make that all-important mental shift away from the surface meaning of the clues.
The revealer clue is “Request needed to understand four clues in this puzzle,” and the answer is GIVE ME SOME SPACE.
Maybe there needs to be a space in between certain letters in the clue, which will turn the single word clues into a phrase that matches the answer.
What if we gave that “Tome” clue some space, say, between the letters “o” and “m”? That makes the clue read “To me,” which is much closer to FROM WHERE I STAND than some heavy book.
Similarly, we can give “Notable” some space so it reads “Not able,” which is a much better clue for the entry POWERLESS. I will admit that even after I figured out the shtick, I still parsed it incorrectly as “No table” and had a hard time figuring out how that meant POWERLESS.
Now go back to the other two theme clues and figure them out yourself. You have the tools you need to get yourself unstuck.
Admittedly, figuring out that the clue words need to be split takes some solving experience. But now you know. And it will be stored there in a file in your brain for next time.
Nicely done, Mr. Gulczynski.
The phrase GOON STRIKE (“Result of a labor dispute between a mob boss and their enforcers?”) came to me one day, and I thought it was kind of funny. I set out to make a puzzle around it but couldn’t quite get a tight set of theme answers, so I set it aside. When I came back to it, I decided to switch the roles of the theme clues and answers, and this puzzle is the result.
For the revealer, I really wanted I NEED SOME SPACE, but at only 14 letters it would have required me to pinch the theme answers closer or add a little strip of cheater squares in the last column (to avoid an impermissible two-letter entry), and I liked those options less than tweaking the revealer.
My favorite theme clue is “Often” — I just like the conversion to “Of ten.” My favorite nontheme entry is BEEFCAKE because it reminds me of me.
