Brendan Emmett Quigley’s Friday puzzle is what would result if the O.E.D. and Hunter S. Thompson had a crossword baby.
FRIDAY PUZZLE — I can’t help myself; I have one more column to write before I actually leave for the American Crossword Puzzle Tournament. After this, I’m really off, I swear.
Brendan Emmett Quigley is back with an incredibly crunchy puzzle that may seem difficult to some. Mr. Quigley is known, in traditional venues and on his own website, for his unusual and amazingly fresh fill (he is known for debuting the cryptic phrase WHY YOU LITTLE nearly 20 years ago, clued as “Angry parent’s yell”). This puzzle is no different. We’ve got entries for everyone in this one, including a newly designated ailment called WIIITIS, which may have thrown a lot of solvers off with the three consecutive I’s. Before you say anything, it is a real thing that has even been written up in an actual medical journal.
As a fan of the movie “Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse,” which plays with the MULTIVERSE theory by having several versions of the web-slinger converge from different dimensions, I also enjoyed the debut at 26A. — I also liked the throwback to the 1960s Italian film director CARLO PONTI.
There’s a lot more to enjoy and learn about in Mr. Quigley’s puzzle, but I’m going to let you dig for treasure. It’s more fun that way. Then come back here and let’s go over a selection of the trickier clues.
20A: Well, sure. If someone came into my house and messed up the flooring, I would most likely shout, “MISLAYER!” all while pointing a “J’accuse!” finger at him.
34A: A question for those who are in construction: Isn’t an H-BAR really an I-bar turned sideways? You can be honest with me. I won’t tell anyone.
42A: Most people would recognize the Easter Island statues, but did you know they are really called MOAI?
47A: Congratulations to the Italian soccer team JUVENTUS for making its New York Times Crossword debut.
4D: We haven’t seen the word SKALDS in a while. They were ancient Norse bards or poets who recited poems of valor about their heroes. Sounds like a good gig.
40D: I thought CARDI B would be a debut, but she’s been in the Crossword once before, in October 2018. Congratulations on that Grammy, Ms. B.
I have this game with myself where I try and find an answer that’s going to give Will pause while he’s reviewing grids. Basically, it’s an attempt at finding stuff “to get away with,” so to speak. I don’t always win this game, by the way. Still, it hasn’t stopped me. So that answer in this puzzle was [answer withheld for dramatic effect].
Joel and Sam knew it, of course, and they helped make my case. I should mention this was made and accepted back in early summer 2018. Well, imagine my dumb luck when the world’s biggest soccer star signed to 47A mere weeks after acceptance.
Glad they kept my clue.