PARIS — A woman enters a studio apartment, makes herself some coffee and presses play on a tape recorder. “Sit at the piano,” a male voice on the tape says.

A couple embraces passionately on the floor as dappled light filters across their bodies.
A man sits alone on a narrow bed. “I will be waiting for you,” he says, as the lights dim.
These are some of the poetic, surprising images from Ivo van Hove’s staging of Leos Janacek’s song cycle “Diary of One Who Disappeared,” which will come to the Brooklyn Academy of Music April 4-6.
Angular, lyrical and passionate, “Diary” — written for tenor, mezzo-soprano, a small chorus of three women, and piano — is rarely performed in concert, and it’s even more rarely staged. But it is pure drama. Based on an anonymous series of poems published in a Czech newspaper and completed in 1920, it tells the story of a young man who falls wildly in love with a Gypsy girl, abandoning his village and family to follow her.
It’s an unusual project for Mr. van Hove, the Belgian director who has become one of the most important voices on the international theater scene. He has directed more than a dozen operas as well as classic and contemporary plays; adapted films for the stage; and soon will tackle a signature American musical, with his revival of “West Side Story” scheduled to come to Broadway next year.
But a song cycle?
Mr. van Hove and his longtime partner, the designer Jan Versweyveld, drew from Janacek’s own history for the production. The story of “Diary” parallels the composer’s obsession with Kamila Stosslova, a married woman 35 years his junior, who inspired some of his most important works.
Since the mezzo-soprano part is slight, he decided to give the Gypsy girl, Zefka, more of a voice. He asked the Belgian composer Annelies Van Parys to add more music for the character, which she based on Romany folk songs.
Mr. van Hove also incorporated extracts from Janacek’s diaries that are read by an actor (Wim van der Grijn) who is dressed to resemble an older version of the cycle’s tenor protagonist (Andrew Dickinson), emphasizing the similarities between composer and character.
Working with the dramaturg Krystian Lada, Mr. van Hove and Mr. Versweyveld decided to make this main character a photographer, and the stage space, in part, a darkroom. “It’s an atelier, a world of imagination, in which the pictures that have been taken bring back the past that is sometimes forgotten,” Mr. van Hove said.
Mr. Versweyveld said the challenge was to create an intimate space in which the character looks back on his life and love, but also to evoke the woods, trees and natural light that he is recalling. The solution was an apartment in which the character lives and works, permeated by golden, mottled light when the memories of glimpsing and meeting Zefka are evoked.
“It’s really music theater,” said Mr. van Hove, who added that the show’s genre — a combination of spoken word, music and visual elements — greatly interested him. His adaptation of Thomas Mann’s “Death in Venice,” incorporating music by Weber, Schoenberg and Nico Muhly, will have its premiere on April 4 with the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam.
