LONDON — Three suspicious packages that appeared to contain homemade bombs capable of igniting a small fire were found Tuesday in and around transport hubs in London, the authorities said.
The three packages were described as similar: all midsize white envelopes with padded manila envelopes inside.
No one was injured, but the police issued warnings for people to be vigilant around city transportation hubs.
“These devices, at this early stage of the investigation, appear capable of igniting an initially small fire when opened,” a police statement read.
Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, said in a statement that he had been briefed on the incidents.
Just before 10 a.m., the police received a report of a suspicious package at the Compass Centre, an office building on the grounds of Heathrow Airport.
Employees at the building opened the package, “causing the device to initiate,” and part of the envelope to burn, the police said.
The building was evacuated and remains closed, but flights at Heathrow were not affected. The office building is outside the airport’s security perimeter.
Less than two hours later, at approximately 11:40 a.m., the British Transport Police were called to investigate another suspicious package, this one in the mail room at Waterloo Station, a bustling rail terminal in central London.
That package was not opened, and officers rendered the device safe. The station was not evacuated and train services continued to operate normally.
Then, at 12:10 p.m., the police were called to a report of a suspicious package at the offices at City Aviation House, which is on the property of London City Airport. That package, too, was not opened, the building was temporarily evacuated.
Flights to and from that airport were not affected.
The Irish police are also involved in the investigation into the incident. According to British and Irish news reports, at least one of the packages had an Irish stamp on it.
A spokeswoman for An Garda Siochana, Ireland’s national police service, said it was assisting the Metropolitan Police but would not elaborate further.
While the motive behind the transit center packages is still unknown, London has been target of terrorism many times over the last 15 years.
On July 7, 2005, suicide bombers killed 52 subway and bus travelers in London. In 2017, there were various deadly attacks on pedestrians on Westminster Bridge, on London Bridge and near the Finsbury Park Mosque. And a bomb that partially exploded on a commuter train that year burned 23 people.
Late last year, a parliamentary report detailed a “litany of errors” by the authorities surrounding those incidents.