Rajat Gupta was once a member of the financial elite: the head of McKinsey, a board member of Goldman Sachs and an adviser to Bill Gates. Then he was convicted in 2012 of tipping an insider-trading ring. Now Mr. Gupta, who served two years in prison, has spoken to Andrew about his plight.
Mr. Gupta still says he’s innocent of securities fraud, despite having been convicted of illegally slipping the hedge fund manager Raj Rajaratnam confidential information about Goldman Sachs. His only regret? Being a little too loose-lipped about corporate secrets.
Mr. Gupta forgave Mr. Rajaratnam when the two shared prison time. “We played Scrabble in prison together. We played chess. We had breakfast together,” Mr. Gupta told Andrew.
But he definitely hasn’t forgiven Preet Bharara, the prosecutor who put him behind bars. “Go after the hedge funds and their circle, play up the story in the press, and maybe no one would notice that the big banking executives were continuing to walk free,” Mr. Gupta wrote in a new book, out next week.
Since being released three years ago, Mr. Gupta has done some consulting in India, but hasn’t reconnected with many business associates from his previous life. “I didn’t want to put them in a difficult position,” he said.
European leaders have pushed back the deadline for Britain’s exit from the bloc, giving Prime Minister Theresa May and British lawmakers more time to avoid a no-deal Brexit, Stephen Castle and Steven Erlanger of the NYT write.
The E.U. doesn’t want Britain to crash out. But officials “made it clear that it is for Britain to make serious choices, and soon, and that failure should not be laid at the door of Brussels,” Mr. Castle and Mr. Erlanger write.
More: Over two million people have signed a petition to cancel Brexit. And Britain’s Financial Conduct Authority warned that the finance industry still faces big risks in a no-deal scenario.
The embattled plane maker will install an extra safety alarm in its 737 Max jets after two fatal plane crashes. But it’s unclear whether that, together with a forthcoming software upgrade, will be enough to prevent future catastrophes.
The new feature warns pilots if a plane’s “angle of attack” sensors, which determine the pitch of the plane’s nose, disagree with each other. A faulty sensor is suspected of triggering anti-stall software that may have helped cause the Lion Air and Ethiopian Airlines crashes. Until now, this warning system was an optional extra on the Max jets.
But it’s only one of two features that experts say could help make the planes safer, according to the NYT. The other is an indicator that displays the sensors’ readings, which will remain an optional feature. Neither has been mandated by the F.A.A.
But the damage continues to grow. Indonesia’s Garuda airline said today it was seeking to cancel a $4.9 billion order of Max 8 jets. “Our passengers, psychologically, they don’t trust flying with Max anymore,” a spokesman for the airline told the NYT.
Small countries, big companies and even just wealthy people can now turn to gun-for-hire hackers to settle their scores, according to an NYT investigation — turning the business into a multibillion-dollar industry.
 Two companies — NSO, an Israeli company, and DarkMatter, based in the United Arab Emirates — have developed sophisticated espionage operations, helped by former government hackers on staff. They help governments perform legitimate law enforcement investigations.
But there’s a darker side. The Mexican government is suspected of using NSO tools to spy on its own citizens, including journalists and activists. Saudi Arabia has been accused of using NSO products to spy on associates of Jamal Khashoggi. And former DarkMatter employees told the NYT that the U.A.E. used the firm’s tools to spy on Ahmed Mansoor, a prominent human rights activist.
And it’s lucrative. “Francisco Partners, a private equity firm, purchased a 70 percent stake in NSO for $130 million in 2013. Last month, NSO’s co-founders raised enough money to buy back a majority stake in NSO at a valuation of just under $1 billion,” the NYT reports. Moody’s estimates that the so-called lawful intercept spyware market is worth $12 billion.
Intellectual property rules for new pharmaceutical products could derail President Trump’s push to get his revised North American Free Trade Agreement through Congress, Ana Swanson of the NYT reports.
Jared Kushner, President Trump’s son-in-law, went to Saudi Arabia in October 2017 in his role as a White House adviser. But his brother, Josh, was there the day before on behalf of his investment firm, David Kirkpatrick of the NYT reports — raising questions about whether Jared could be evenhanded in dealing with the kingdom.
• Jared Kushner cut ties to Josh’s venture firm, Thrive Capital, including by selling his interest in its funds, after he joined the Trump administration. Previously, he had appeared to be closely involved in Thrive’s operations. Meanwhile, Josh Kushner has kept his distance from his brother.
• “It is reasonable to question Jared Kushner’s ability to be impartial,” Kathleen Clark, a law professor at Washington University in St. Louis, told the NYT.
More Kushner news: Charles Kushner, the father of Jared and Josh, has publicly defended both his real estate company and Jared. And the chairman of the House Oversight and Reform Committee claimed that Jared uses WhatsApp for official government business.
Policy reversals at the Fed and the European Central Bank often catch economists off guard. But they can have a profound effect on nations that don’t use the dollar or the euro, the WSJ reports.
As a result, small countries often adopt negative interest rates despite having otherwise healthy economies. That can be costly, particularly for commercial banks that have to pay the equivalent of billions of dollars to store funds.
Wells Fargo directors are reportedly in talks to hire Harvey Schwartz, the former president of Goldman Sachs, as their bank’s next C.E.O.
Ford Motor hired Tim Stone, who was most recently the chief financial officer of Snap, as its next C.F.O., replacing Bob Shanks.
Freddie Mac has named David Brickman, its president, as its next C.E.O., replacing Donald Layton.
President Trump plans to name Michael Kratsios as his administration’s first chief technology officer.
