And exit Brexit? Britain’s mess reaches a turning point.
 It’s far too early to know how he will do in the national spotlight. Running for president is far harder than running for the House or Senate. But O’Rourke has shown intriguing promise as a candidate. And I’m a fan of a diverse field.
As Matt Viser of The Washington Post wrote this week, O’Rourke offers “a more centrist brand of politics that could appeal to an untapped portion of the party electorate.” But unlike the other potential candidate who fits this description — Joe Biden — O’Rourke also excites many progressive voters because of his youth and energy.
For more on O’Rourke, try a 2017 profile from Christopher Hooks in The Texas Observer or a 2018 profile from Eric Benson in Texas Monthly.
I’ve been wary of the idea that Britain should hold a second vote on Brexit. In 2016, the British people voted to leave the European Union, by a margin of 52 percent to 48 percent. Given that result, the advocates for Brexit earned the chance to pass a plan in Parliament.
But now they’ve had that chance. They’ve had several chances, in fact. And they have utterly failed to develop a Brexit plan that can win a majority. The more that Britain has learned about the reality of Brexit — as opposed to the fantasy sold during the 2016 campaign — the further away Parliament has seemed from a solution.
That’s partly a reflection of the fact that the different pro-Brexit factions in Parliament keep blocking each other’s plans. “The fact that Brexiteers have chosen time and again to put Brexit in peril rather than put it into effect is one of the enduring curiosities of the Brexit saga,” Stephen Paduano writes in Foreign Policy.
So the time for a second vote seems to be arriving.
Ideally, a new vote would include two questions. The first would be a yes or no on Brexit itself. The second, which would matter only if Brexit passed again, would be a choice between a so-called “hard Brexit” and a compromise plan like the one proposed by Prime Minister Theresa May. The first vote would likely be close again, while the second would presumably be a landslide for the compromise.
In The Guardian, Anna Soubry — a member of Parliament who recently resigned from the Conservative Party over its Brexit stance — calls for a new referendum. “As the options wither for want of a settled majority, it will become clear that the only solution is a people’s vote,” she writes.
Anne Applebaum of The Washington Post notes that European Union officials have grown increasingly frustrated with Britain — and Britain needs Europe’s assent to prevent Brexit from taking effect automatically on March 29. An option Europe would almost certainly accept is a plan for a second vote.
One alternative to a second referendum: Britain could hold another general election and leave the matter in the hands of a new Parliament, as Dawn Foster suggested recently in The Times.
