After nearly 40 years as a reporter and editor at The New York Times, Susan Chira will depart next month to become the editor in chief of The Marshall Project, a nonprofit news organization that focuses on criminal justice issues.
In her new role, Ms. Chira, a senior correspondent and editor covering gender issues for The Times since 2016 and a member of a team that won a 2018 Pulitzer Prize for coverage of workplace sexual harassment, will succeed Bill Keller.
Mr. Keller, whose own 30-year run at The Times included eight years as the paper’s executive editor, joined The Marshall Project at its founding in 2014. Since then, he has guided it to a bevy of awards, including a Pulitzer Prize and two National Magazine Awards.
Upon Ms. Chira’s arrival, Mr. Keller will become a board member while pursuing teaching opportunities at Princeton University and Sing Sing Correctional Facility in Ossining, N.Y.
Ms. Chira was chosen as Mr. Keller’s successor after a monthslong search, during which more than 20 people were interviewed for the position.
Working out of offices about a mile north of The Times’s Midtown Manhattan headquarters, Ms. Chira will oversee stories about America’s courts, police departments, prisons and more. She said that she hoped to help The Marshall Project dig more deeply into injustice stemming from race, ethnicity and gender, and to pursue more investigative projects.
Marshall Project reporters, often working with other news outlets, including The Times, have investigated how law enforcement authorities handle rape cases, the practice of solitary confinement and private companies that profit from transporting prisoners.
Conceived in 2013 by Neil Barsky, a onetime hedge fund manager and former reporter for The Wall Street Journal, The Marshall Project is financed by donations and grants from the Roy and Patricia Disney Family Foundation, the Rockefeller Family Fund and the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation. Its current budget is $7.2 million.
Named for Thurgood Marshall, the former Supreme Court justice, the organization is often compared to ProPublica, another nonprofit journalism organization that teams up on articles with other publications. The Marshall Project began with 26 employees; it now has 38, with 26 in the newsroom.
Ms. Chira started her career at The Times as a trainee on the metro desk in 1981 after graduating from Harvard. Since then, she said, she has had “the most wonderful time” covering topics like education and business, reporting from Tokyo and writing a book about motherhood.
“We will miss her, but it is great for journalism that she will be running something as important as The Marshall Project,” he said in a statement.
Ms. Chira was one of the longest-serving foreign editors in the history of The Times, managing more than 50 correspondents and overseeing reporting that won several Pulitzers. She is also known for encouraging other journalists in their careers and recently developed a mentoring program at The Times.
At The Marshall Project, she said, she plans to make diversity a priority in recruiting. Many employees of The Marshall Project are early in their careers, Mr. Keller said, “the kind of environment perfect” for Ms. Chira.
