Tony Orbach and Andrea Carla Michaels demonstrate some tricky dance steps.
SUNDAY PUZZLE — I might have taken my cue from the title of this one, but I found today’s solve to be very danceable, even though it took me awhile to get through it. Tony Orbach and Andrea Carla Michaels are veteran constructors and great collaborators (with each other as well as with others), and I think this is a case where we can tell that there are two chefs in the kitchen. It seems jampacked with challenges and interesting ideas, and there is also a conversational tone, somehow. I can’t put my finger on it, but this grid has a whiff of banter.
I moved quite slowly through great swaths of this puzzle, although as a whole the cluing was not too esoteric. Some very straightforward clues sneaked up on me, like the ones for PETE, SPAY, STEAM, COLOR and USCG. In addition we got a few great “J” words like JOSS, JETLAG, MOJO and so on.
24A: The expression in this entry has become a bit of a pious cliché, so I wasn’t looking for LEANS IN to actually refer to someone trying to hear someone else.
36A: PETE Rose didn’t spring to mind at 36D, and I’m vaguely familiar with canteens and commissaries, so this was a mystery for some time. PXS, or Post Exchanges, sound like megastores for the military, not just grocery stores.
102A: I would call this little corner “I love the ’80s,” with references to the original “Garfield” cartoons and his girlfriend ARLENE, directions to REPAGE someone if they don’t respond to your “beep,” and a reference to headpieces popular in the 1880s (O.K., that one’s a stretch).
27D: This seems like too useful a string of vowels to be a debut, and yet we have apparently never seen JOAO in the Times grid. I have seen it many times before, with a tilde on the A, but never met a João or had to pronounce it.
There are eight theme entries today, at 26, 28, 42, 58, 72, 88, 105 and 109 across. All are punny clues that require the same letter substitution to answer.
I did O.K. at the bottom of the grid and solved 105A first, GARBAGE JUMP, and it went over my head not once but twice. First of all, I didn’t see the theme when I got this. JUMP made sense in relation to a gymnastics meet, but GARBAGE? Then I realized that the letter substitution, as specified by the puzzle’s title, was turning the common phrase “garbage dump” to GARBAGE JUMP by “spinnin’” off that D and slapping on the J. But I still didn’t get the joke until I thought about “garbage time” from a blowout game and extrapolated that to a gymnastic meet — I had just never heard the term applied to a throwaway performance elsewhere.
Once that happened I saw and loved 88A right away — “Write an order to replenish inventory of Levi’s?” had to be MAKE THE JEANS LIST. I also picked up 26A, “Vacuum-cleaner blockage?” as HOOVER JAM, which made me laugh (especially when I got JUST BUNNIES on the same line). A few of the others are a smidge tougher, but the root phrases are so pleasing any effort was well worth it.
I think I tried to make more of this fun theme than I needed to (or, then again, maybe I missed something excruciatingly obvious). First of all, three of the remaining theme answers were based on songs (one a classic, one a modern hit, one sort of weird but catchy, I guess). Then there was the collection of JAM, JUMP and JIG (plus the clue at 72A — no JIVE that I could find, though).
I even connected the “J”s on the grid in the theme entries to see what would come of it and got a rough sketch of a tricorn hat, or maybe an anvil. So if there was something choreographical about the theme today, I was off a few steps, but as it was there was plenty to like about what we had, which was bright and lighthearted.
Andrea: Tony’s a phenomenal musician, which added to a musicality of the overall puzzle. We are so on the same wavelength, enjoying riffing about theme ideas (which we could do forever). I’m lucky Tony had the large grid skills in addition to make all this happen.
Tony: Andrea and I started tossing ideas around for this theme years ago, did a completely different version at that time, and have been talking about getting back to it and revising it ever since. It was nice to have a fresh look at it and even incorporate some newer references that had cropped up since the last time we looked.
Working with Andrea is always fun — we have a blast coming up with and critiquing ideas, almost all of which is done via email, but best when we have lunch once every year or so when one of us is on the other’s coast. If we could do that more often, we’d make more puzzles!
Taking a dive?