MEXICO CITY — The #MeToo movement, nearly dormant in Mexico, was jump-started when an activist posted messages on Twitter last weekend in which she accused a young writer of having beaten and abused more than 10 women.
The tweets inspired an avalanche of hundreds of messages on social media in which women detailed everything from common indignities like lewd advances and harassment to sexual assault and rape.
“And that is why this matters so much,” Ms. Berman added.
The surge of women publicly accusing men — professors, filmmakers, novelists, journalists and businessmen among them — of mistreating them suggests that Mexico may be approaching a moment of reckoning with violence, harassment and mistreatment of women, an entrenched problem in a country that has made little space for accountability or public debates on the topic.
The moment was cathartic, inspiring women to share their stories publicly and privately. But while many accusers identified themselves and named the man they said had harassed or attacked them, fear of retaliation or social ostracism led most of them to remain anonymous or not name the attacker. Critics said this raised questions about whether the accusations would result in criminal prosecutions.
Ms. González said she had not been abused by Mr. Barona, but was speaking up on behalf of a close friend who said he had beaten her up a handful of years ago when they were in a relationship.
“I knew several women that were just too afraid and not ready to come forth, but allowed me to speak for them and name this person,” Ms. González said in an interview.
Mr. Barona rebutted the accusations a day after they were made public. “I want to categorically deny the accusations of violations and physical violence that I have been targeted with,” he said on Twitter.
Mr. Barona did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
But the response to the initial online accusations was immediate. A wave of new charges followed under the hashtag #MeTooEscritores, which translates to #MeTooWriters. They were followed by accusations in film, academia, the nonprofit sector, business, law, theater, medicine, politics and more.
A network of female journalists, United Mexican Journalists, which was created last year to develop strategies to confront sexual violence and harassment in their industry, created their own Twitter account and hashtag — #MeTooJournalists.
The women behind the journalism network said they would continue with their awareness campaign. They are also weighing whether to hand information about the most serious allegations of rape and assault to law enforcement authorities — which they would do only with the consent of the accuser — and whether to confront the top executives of the organizations where these attacks were reported to have taken place.
Because they said they lacked faith in the country’s legal system, several women said they felt social media was the perfect platform on which to speak out. The anonymity allows them to feel safe, they said, even if it makes the possibility of holding the men legally responsible very slim.
Even some members of United Mexican Journalists said they were afraid to speak openly, for fear of losing their jobs or suffering wider retaliation. But the fear of going on the record was justified, analysts and activists said, given the levels of violence against women in Mexico and the record of impunity.
After Ms. González’s tweets went viral, she began to be harassed online. It was scary and exhausting, she said.
“I can’t eat or sleep,” she said. But she added that she would not have done anything differently.
Almost a year ago, as the #MeToo movement was gathering momentum in the United States, Karla Souza, a Mexican actress starring in the American television show “How to Get Away With Murder,” spoke in an interview on CNN en Español about the abuse she said she had experienced at the hands of an unnamed director with whom she had worked on a different project.
Ms. Souza said this director showed up in her room in the middle of the night to talk about a scene they were working on. In the interview, she said she had rejected his advances in the past. On that night, she said, he raped her.
The trauma kept her from pressing charges or fully recovering from the experience, she said.
Although a few other women came forward after Ms. Souza’s account, it did not incite a broader movement in Mexico. She and the others were criticized for, among other things, not naming their aggressors — something analysts said could have dissuaded other women from speaking out.
