It’s Friday. You want “bread-sliced bagels” in this town? “While the extremely hospitable folks who work at New York’s bagel shops seemed more or less willing to oblige, they weren’t exactly happy about it,” Grub Street reported.
Weather: The mercury may get into the 60s, but the wind chill may make it feel much colder. Cloudy on Saturday with a high near 70, showers likely on Sunday.
Sarah Charlop-Powers is preparing to defend the Bronx against invaders.
Ms. Charlop-Powers, the executive director of a Manhattan-based nonprofit called the Natural Areas Conservancy, knows their names: Japanese knotweed and incised fumewort, among others.
They are plants.
They are washing down the Bronx River “from people’s yards in Westchester or parkland in Westchester,” she said.
They are a threat because they crowd out plants native to the 2,041 acres of forests in the Bronx. Yes, the Bronx has that much wooded acreage.
Invasive trees can create a canopy of foliage, depriving other species of sunlight. On the ground, the knotweed and incised fumewort “are so prolific and can carpet an area,” Helen Forgione, the conservancy’s senior ecologist, said.
The conservancy, working with several groups in the Bronx, plans to collect data on native plants and the soil, then coordinate with other groups to eliminate the invaders.
The effort is the latest step in managing the city’s forests. In 2017, the Prospect Park Alliance sent goats to Prospect Park in Brooklyn to do some weeding, which involved eating invasive species.
Last year, the conservancy worked with the alliance to plant trees on Lookout Hill in the park.
The conservancy is beginning a separate partnership for Manhattan’s Riverside Park, where Daniel Garodnick, the former City Council member who became chief executive of the Riverside Park Conservancy last year, is also worried about invasive species.
That can happen a lot, because Riverside Park is a rest stop for migratory birds.
New York City is starkly different today from what it was 50 years ago. Yet one aspect has barely changed: Its public schools remain among the most segregated in the country.
In 1964, students carried picket signs as part of a citywide school boycott over segregation in the classroom. Yet last week only seven black students were offered slots at New York’s most selective high school, Stuyvesant.
New York will ban single-use plastic bags from retail sales, becoming the second state after California to do so.
Suing the Sacklers: New York laid out a sweeping legal case against the family that owns Purdue Pharma, maker of the opioid OxyContin.
Congestion pricing could generate billions of dollars, but now the suburbs want a piece.
“[Expletive] idiots” is how an aide to Governor Cuomo described three legislators who criticized the governor’s fund-raising.
Senator Cory Booker’s road from enforcer to reformer began with rocky oversight of the Newark Police Department.
The biggest walls I saw as a child were along the Long Island Expressway, outside my house in Queens. A neighbor said “earth movers” had dug up the street to make room for the highway below.
Eventually, the adults won by slabbing more and more paint on the walls.
As time passed, my tastes changed. I now prefer my walls clean and my art on a canvas. And at tonight’s Moth StorySlam at the Bronx Museum, people will share their own true stories about walls, in five minutes or less.
The museum says the wall stories can run the gamut, from “building them up or tearing them down, piece by piece,” “your Humpty Dumpty moment” or “getting sick of being ‘just another brick’” in, well, you know.
Devotees of the Moth, a group dedicated to storytelling, tend to excel at this art form.
The open-mic show starts at 7:30 p.m. Tickets are $15.
It’s Friday — find a place without walls.
Metropolitan Diary: Little Help?
I was on the subway platform at Times Square at rush hour. I was trying to slip through a tight corridor between a staircase and the tracks when a man in front of me stopped and stooped over.
“What’s he doing?” I wondered, frustrated at having to pause.
I saw that he was reaching for a glove that couldn’t have been his: It was on the ground in front of him as he bent over.
I looked around, trying to figure out whom the glove belonged to and what the man was going do with it. I was intrigued, but mostly out of self-interest. If he started asking around about whose glove it was, I wouldn’t get as far down the platform as I wanted before my train arrived.
A man who looked like a construction worker started walking our way. The first man tossed the glove in his direction, like you would with a pal. The construction worker caught it, smiled, winked, turned around and walked away.
