When Karina Vetrano was found beaten and strangled in a Queens park nearly three years ago, the New York Police Department carried out one of the most intense and extensive manhunts in the agency’s recent history.
But defense lawyers for the man charged in the killing, Chanel Lewis, are now contending that the police swept up hundreds of black men in a “race-biased dragnet” before settling on him — information they argue should have been turned over to them before trial. They said they learned only recently that the police took DNA samples from at least 360 black men who had been previously taken into custody in parts of Queens and Brooklyn.
Six months after taking the DNA samples, investigators testified that they finally found a match in Mr. Lewis, whom detectives approached on a police lieutenant’s intuition. Mr. Lewis, now 22, confessed to the crime, though he later claimed he was coerced. His first trial ended with a hung jury.
As Mr. Lewis’s second trial is coming to a close, his defense lawyers are raising questions about whether prosecutors withheld critical evidence about the wide genetic canvass, as well as whether the police initially suspected that two white men had killed Ms. Vetrano. The lawyers said they will file motions in State Supreme Court in Queens on Monday, seeking a hearing to determine if prosecutors hid evidence favorable to Mr. Lewis.
The request for a last-minute hearing, which could lead to another mistrial, was the latest twist in a case that has dredged up questions about coerced confessions, racial profiling and the fallibility of the police. The trial has prompted a debate on social media and in the courtroom among observers who think the confession and DNA evidence is ample proof of Mr. Lewis’s guilt and others who believe that prosecutors have the wrong man.
Mr. Lewis’s lawyers said they received an anonymous letter on Thursday from a person claiming to be a police officer. The letter, first reported in the The Daily News, said that early on in the inquiry the police were looking for “two jacked up white guys from Howard Beach” as suspects in Ms. Vetrano’s murder.
If the letter truly came from a police officer, then it represents an extraordinary departure from the protocols governing how details of criminal investigations reach the defense and the public. The information typically comes from police officials’ public statements, evidence prosecutors turn over to the defense and witness testimony, not from an anonymous officer halfway through a retrial.
A Police Department spokesman said it was false that investigators had suspected two white men. But a person with knowledge of the investigation, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said it was true investigators initially thought the assailants might be white and that the police later had sought saliva samples from hundreds of black men in the search for the killer.
Mr. Lewis’s lawyers said that that information should have been turned over to them. Prosecutors are obligated under the Brady v. Maryland ruling from the United States Supreme Court to hand over evidence favorable to the accused, including police reports that cast doubt on a defendant’s guilt or witness statements that suggest someone else may have committed the crime.
“We think it’s a big deal that merits explanation at this point,” said Richard Joselson, the supervising attorney of the criminal appeals bureau of the Legal Aid Society.
The defense was aware that the police had obtained DNA from hundreds of people, but judges had denied their requests for the identities and races of the people who were tested. Ms. Vetrano’s relatives and neighbors also submitted DNA.
A spokeswoman for the Queens district attorney’s office said prosecutors will respond to the allegation that they withheld evidence when the trial resumes on Monday.
The police spokesman, Phillip Walzak, said the evidence proved that Mr. Lewis killed Ms. Vetrano and that the court had already ruled on the issues raised in the letter.
Ms. Vetrano, 30, went for a late afternoon jog in Spring Creek Park in the Howard Beach section of Queens on Aug. 2, 2016. When she did not return home, her father, Philip Vetrano, a retired firefighter, called his friend and neighbor, John Cassidy, a chief in the Police Department, Mr. Vetrano testified.
After Ms. Vetrano was found dead on a park path overgrown with weeds, an intense manhunt ensued. A task force of 100 detectives was assigned to investigate her death, according to testimony during the trial. In the end, the number of detectives on the case dropped to 10. The authorities offered a $35,000 reward for anyone with information leading to Ms. Vetrano’s killer.
The person with knowledge of the investigation said investigators were searching for two white men for nearly two weeks until Deputy Chief Emanuel J. Katranakis, the commander of the Forensic Investigation Division, received phenotype results suggesting the DNA collected from Ms. Vetrano’s neck and from her telephone belonged to a black man.
The next day, the chief of detectives, Robert K. Boyce, directed detectives to seek DNA samples from black men who had been arrested in the neighborhoods near the crime scene, the person said.
Roughly 384 black men were interviewed and gave saliva samples, the source with knowledge of the investigation said, offering a number even higher than the defense lawyers suggested. The samples were entered into the Local DNA Index System, or LDIS, a database maintained by the city medical examiner’s office.
A second person with knowledge of the investigation said that once detectives found out the DNA belonged to a black man they focused on black people who had recently been taken into custody in East New York in Brooklyn and Howard Beach and South Ozone Park in Queens. In addition, the person said, security cameras in the area did not show anyone leaving Spring Creek Park from the Queens side, leading investigators to instead focus on Brooklyn, believing the attacker had fled in that direction.
“You’re trying to find the killer and you use your resources as intelligently as possible,” the second person said.
Still, there was no DNA match, and the investigation stalled for six months. Then Mr. Lewis, who is black, was interviewed on the recommendation of a police lieutenant, John Russo. Months before the murder, Lieutenant Russo testified, he had spotted Mr. Lewis on two occasions “acting suspiciously” and walking slowly through Howard Beach, a predominantly white neighborhood.
Detectives obtained a saliva sample from Mr. Lewis, who lived in East New York, Brooklyn, roughly three miles away from Howard Beach, and forensics experts said his DNA matched the traces found on Ms. Vetrano’s neck and cellphone, as well as a mixture from two of her fingernails, prosecutors said.
Mr. Lewis at first denied he killed Ms. Vetrano, according to evidence presented at the trial. But after being in police custody for more than 11 hours, including four hours in the interrogation room, he told detectives and a Queens prosecutor in a videotaped interview that he had attacked Ms. Vetrano because he was angry that his neighbors had been playing loud music.
He also had a hand injury the day after the slaying that a doctor said was consistent with punching someone, prosecutors said.
Defense lawyers have argued that the police coerced the confession. Mr. Lewis, who lived with his mother and had graduated from a school for students with learning disabilities, appeared confused at times during the videotaped interview, and mumbled through some of his responses.
Defense lawyers also sought to raise doubts about the DNA evidence, which they maintain could have ended up on Ms. Vetrano’s cellphone or neck if they had both touched the same surface at some point.