Is Jordan Peele’s “Us” a metaphor for our politically polarized moment, a rallying cry for the dispossessed 99 percent or simply a nifty home-invasion movie?
What do the Tethered represent?
After several scenes of creepy build up, the “Us” protagonist Adelaide (Lupita Nyong’o) and her family come face to face with their own worst nightmares, though these invaders look awfully familiar. That’s because the four red-clothed figures who break into Adelaide’s vacation home are twisted mirror images of her husband (Winston Duke), her two children (Shahadi Wright Joseph and Evan Alex) and herself.
Peele calls these doppelgängers the Tethered, and he provides ample exposition about who they are and what they’re up to: Decades ago, a powerful cabal created duplicates of every American in a failed attempt to exert some sort of control over the populace. The project was shuttered, but the abandoned Tethered lived on in underground tunnels, gnawing on raw rabbit flesh until they could emerge and enact a bloody revolution.
Many pundits read “Us” as a socioeconomic satire, where the financially comfortable characters find themselves attacked by the Tethered, who stand in for those less fortunate.
Is the film about race?
Given the trenchant way that Peele tackled race relations in “Get Out,” it may be tempting to peer at “Us” through the same lens, even though the filmmaker has said that this entry is not explicitly concerned with those same themes.
Still, when it comes to the issues of privilege that can undergird structures of racial inequality, “Us” offers plenty to chew on. Though we initially side with Adelaide and her family as they fend off seemingly unprovoked attacks, the plight of the Tethered proves persuasive, too.
Obie noted that in the film’s final twist, the Adelaide we thought we knew is revealed to be a member of the Tethered who escaped long ago, leaving her people behind to wither as she ensconced herself in the better-off upper world.
What other double meanings are at play?
Are there other double meanings here that suggest new interpretations of the film? Peele once suggested that “Us” is about how we are all our own worst enemies, and indeed, these characters seem awfully unsatisfied.
Adelaide’s husband is jealous of those who are wealthier, her daughter bristles at pressure to become a track star, and a family friend (Elisabeth Moss) confesses to some plastic surgery while mulling a mooted dream of movie stardom. Each will eventually battle a doppelgänger who serves as a living manifestation of those issues and insecurities.
Another double meaning is right there in the title: “Us” is an acronym for the nation in which the doppelgängers claim conflicted citizenship.
