Yesterday, Cupertino got the kind of fevered coverage usually reserved for the unveiling of Apple’s latest gadget. But this time, the product wasn’t a watch or a phone.
During the two-hour event at the Steve Jobs Theater on Apple’s campus, the company’s leaders detailed its plans to take on Hollywood by creating its own TV shows and documentaries. They also announced a news subscription service and a credit card.
Yes, big-name celebrities like Steven Spielberg, Oprah Winfrey and Reese Witherspoon were on hand for the spectacle. But tech watchers were also paying close attention because the announcements are part of a major shift for the Silicon Valley mammoth.
Apple has spent a decade establishing its dominant place in consumers’ pockets by getting them hooked on iPhones. But after years of record-breaking profits, phone sales are slowing and the company is facing intense competition from the likes of Amazon and Netflix.
So, instead of betting on another gadget, Apple made clear yesterday that it’s “trying to make sure you never leave all those Apple devices you have acquired over the years,” as my colleagues Daisuke Wakabayashi and John Koblin reported.
That means Apple is bulking up on content and services, and focusing less on hardware.
Not that there isn’t a lot of Apple hardware already out there: The company counts roughly 1.4 billion active devices as the perfect vehicles for its new content.
What’s this about more subscription services?
First, there was Apple TV Plus, the video streaming service, which will have original programs and will include shows from networks like HBO, Showtime and CBS. Beyond that, details were sparse. No price was given.
But, as my colleague Edmund Lee explained, one thing’s for sure: You won’t be able to get your favorite Netflix shows.
There was more on Apple News Plus, which was described as the “Netflix of news,” but it also raised questions about Apple’s place in an information ecosystem that’s been brutal to existing publishers.
A subscription will cost $9.99 per month. It will let subscribers read 300 magazines as well as articles from newspapers including The Los Angeles Times and The Wall Street Journal.
Neither The Times nor The Washington Post has signed on.
Apple also announced a video game subscription service, Apple Arcade, which is set to start this fall.
• You can get 20 percent off the first week of San Francisco performances of “The Jungle,” a play about migrants in Calais, using the code NYTEVENTS here. The play starts today, but on Friday, you’ll see the show with Michael Paulson, a Times theater reporter, who will moderate a discussion.
What is the San Diego Zoo without its giant pandas? Californians are about to find out.
The bamboo-eating bears have been a consistent main attraction at the zoo for about a quarter of a century. But now, the last two pandas in its conservation program for the animals — a 27-year-old female, Bai Yun, and her son, 6-year-old Xiao Liwu — are set to be “repatriated to their ancestral homeland,” China.
The zoo said that the move honors the terms of its loan agreement with the Chinese government. On its website, visitors were encouraged to say their goodbyes in Panda Canyon until April 27 and share their memories using the hashtag #pandas4ever.
Mercifully, this may not be the end of panda watch: The San Diego Union-Tribune reported that zoo officials were planning to go to China for in-person negotiations in hopes of bringing pandas back.
