WASHINGTON — He likes one and admits to falling in love with the other. He treasures letters from each of them. And he believes the personal rapport he built with both could clear the way to historic agreements on trade and nuclear arms that have eluded his predecessors.
To President Trump, all diplomacy is personal, especially with the two Asian strongmen he has courted most avidly, Kim Jong-un of North Korea and Xi Jinping of China.
But Mr. Trump’s honeymoon with Mr. Kim came to an abrupt end in Vietnam last month, and his conviction that agreements between nations are little different than real estate deals between bosses now faces another stiff test with the Chinese president.
In trade talks with China that are heading toward a potential meeting with Mr. Xi, Mr. Trump hopes to overcome decades of distrust to sign an agreement that would end a bitter trade war between the world’s two largest economies.
But the debacle in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, where Mr. Trump not only failed to strike a disarmament deal but also was miles apart from Mr. Kim, laid bare a fundamental weakness in his deal making: his belief that bluster and force of personality can bridge deep-rooted differences and lack of preparation.
It also showed that strongmen, whom Mr. Trump has so ardently cultivated, can be as frustrating to negotiate with as democratically elected leaders.
Even more than Mr. Kim, Mr. Xi would bring a complex mix of advantages and vulnerabilities to a meeting with Mr. Trump. Rather than calibrating his approach to those realities, some worry the president will fall prey to the same pitfalls and miscalculations that doomed his meeting with the North Korean dictator.
The Chinese share those qualms. Plans for the two leaders to meet at Mar-a-Lago, Mr. Trump’s estate in Palm Beach, Fla., at the end of March are now on hold, largely because the Chinese fear that the president could walk out on Mr. Xi like he did on Mr. Kim.
In both cases, Mr. Medeiros said, the president is relying on his charm, as well as his ability to read people and improvise, to persuade his counterpart to agree to a difficult structural change: China, to overhaul its state-directed economy; North Korea, to give up a nuclear program that the Kim dynasty views as critical to its survival.
Yet Mr. Trump has shown a propensity to relax his terms as the negotiations unfold. He went from demanding that North Korea rapidly and completely disarm to saying he was in no hurry, as long as Mr. Kim stopped testing nuclear bombs or missiles.
He went from demanding that China abandon an array of what he calls predatory trade practices to undermining his own chief trade negotiator, Robert Lighthizer, when he began to explain the memorandums of understanding that would codify those concessions in a trade pact between the United States and China.
“Based on the Trump-Kim summit, it is clear that Trump’s partners know a lot more about where their bottom line is than Trump does,” said Minxin Pei, an expert in United States-China relations at Claremont McKenna College.
Having failed in Vietnam, he said, Mr. Trump might be even more motivated to make a deal with the Chinese president. Unlike the nuclear showdown with North Korea, which poses security risks but is a faraway threat to most Americans, the trade war with China has exacted heavy costs on American farmers, automakers and manufacturers.
“Trump cares more about his re-election than about forcing structural change in China,” Mr. Pei said.
Some of Mr. Trump’s top aides — like Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, and the chief economic adviser, Larry Kudlow — have urged him to find a compromise with Beijing, warning about the damage that his escalating tariffs could have on the stock market, which he views as a barometer of his presidency.
The divisions between hard-liners and pragmatists on Mr. Trump’s economic team are more pronounced than on his national security team, where Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, and the national security adviser, John R. Bolton, urged him to walk away from a bad deal with North Korea.
Mr. Kim and Mr. Xi, meanwhile, have shown an instinct to try to play Mr. Trump. In Hanoi, the North Korean leader proposed to dismantle a single plutonium reactor and extend the halt in nuclear and missile testing, in return for Mr. Trump’s lifting all economic sanctions.
The Chinese have offered to buy billions of dollars of American oil, gas and soybeans, which would give Mr. Trump an easy victory, in return for the United States’ rolling back its tariffs. But they have not yet agreed to enforcement mechanisms against more pernicious practices, like the forced transfer of American technology.
While Mr. Trump heaps praise on both leaders, there are telling differences in how he talks about them.
Mr. Trump is not yet ready to break up with Mr. Kim. But after the impasse in Hanoi, the president described him as “quite a character,” a line open to various interpretations.
“Trump understands there is a difference between the dictator of a small country versus the head of state of the largest country in the world,” said Victor D. Cha, who negotiated with Pyongyang during the George W. Bush administration.
Mr. Kim is a reclusive figure who traveled to Vietnam by train and governs with a tiny circle of cronies. Mr. Xi has roamed the world stage since rising to the top of the Communist Party in 2012. He fields a team of seasoned trade negotiators led by a Harvard-trained economist, Liu He.
Some analysts argue that the months of working-level negotiations between Mr. Liu and Mr. Lighthizer would make an unexpected breakdown, like the one in Hanoi, less likely.
And yet Mr. Trump’s mercurial personality looms large. The Chinese were caught off guard when he went ahead with tariffs on $200 billion of their exports. They were caught off guard when he walked away from Mr. Kim.
The collapse in Hanoi, analysts said, has echoed loudly in Beijing, where officials are leery of sending Mr. Xi into another unpredictable encounter with Mr. Trump in Florida. With so much at stake, they are pushing to button up any agreement beforehand.
For Mr. Trump, the biggest hurdle to a Nixon and Mao moment in Palm Beach may be that Mr. Xi is simply unwilling to risk the kind of on-the-fly deal making that the American president — and Mr. Kim — seem to relish.
