WASHINGTON — One of the key prosecutors in the special counsel’s investigation into Russian election interference is leaving the team soon, the Justice Department said Thursday, in another signal that the inquiry is winding down.
The prosecutor, Andrew Weissmann, who helped lead the cases against the former Trump campaign officials Paul Manafort and Rick Gates, “will be concluding his detail to the special counsel’s office in the near future,” said Peter Carr, the special counsel’s spokesman.
Mr. Weissmann has been in talks with New York University Law School about a job, but has not officially taken a role at the school.
“Andrew has been involved with N.Y.U. Law in the past and we have been talking with him about returning to the law school following his current commitments,” Michael Orey, the public affairs director at the law school, said in a statement.
The F.B.I. said David W. Archey, the lead F.B.I. agent in the special counsel’s office, left the special counsel’s team this month, a signal that the office’s investigative work has come to a close.
Mr. Archey moved to the F.B.I.’s Richmond, Va., field office on March 4 to become the special agent in charge, the bureau said in a news release.
The departures, which NPR first reported, have been closely scrutinized for clues about what they say about the apparent conclusion of the special counsel’s work. The inquiry’s findings seem sure to send shock waves through Washington, whether or not prosecutors found that President Trump or any member of his inner circle worked with Russia to interfere in the election or obstruct the investigation.
Already the investigation — and speculation about when it will end and what its findings will reveal — has consumed the city, and is the focus of cable news reports, book deals and conversations at bars, restaurants and parties.
Officials inside the Justice Department are preparing for the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, to deliver his confidential report on the investigation’s findings to William P. Barr, the attorney general, according to multiple people inside the department who have been briefed on the planning. Mr. Barr will then summarize those findings and present them to Congress.
But the White House legal team and others have incorrectly predicted an imminent end to the investigation for more than a year. And Democratic lawmakers have vowed to obtain Mr. Mueller’s full report, no matter what Mr. Barr presents to them, guaranteeing that the submission of the report will not end debate over the Mueller inquiry and its findings. The House voted overwhelmingly on Thursday to pass a bipartisan resolution calling on Mr. Barr to release the full findings of the special counsel’s investigation to the public.
Mr. Weissmann, 60, has been considered a key player on Mr. Mueller’s team and one of its most aggressive prosecutors.
A graduate of Princeton University and Columbia Law School, Mr. Weissman previously worked as general counsel at the F.B.I. while Mr. Mueller was the director.
He gained a reputation as one of the most relentless prosecutors in the case against Enron, the energy company implicated in a widespread accounting fraud. Not only did he secure indictments of the company’s top officers, Kenneth L. Lay and Jeffrey Skilling, he also charged the wife of the company’s chief financial officer with tax fraud and won a case against Enron’s accounting firm, Arthur Anderson, which helped lead to the firm’s demise. The Supreme Court eventually overturned the decision in the Arthur Andersen case.
Within Mr. Mueller’s team, Mr. Weissmann maintained his own office, a sign of his seniority.
He helped construct the cases against Mr. Manafort, Mr. Trump’s former campaign manager, and Mr. Gates, who was Mr. Manafort’s business partner and later deputy on the Trump campaign.
Mr. Manafort was convicted on financial fraud charges stemming from his political consulting work in Ukraine and pleaded guilty to conspiracy and obstruction of justice in two separate court cases.
This Friday there will be a status hearing for Mr. Gates, whose sentencing has been delayed four times. He pleaded guilty to charges of financial fraud and lying to investigators and has been cooperating with the special counsel.