Last year, the composer and conductor Esa-Pekka Salonen took part in a discussion about the future of classical music at New York University. He found it interesting, he said in a recent interview, but also exasperating.
Mr. Salonen — who seemed for a time happy to float in that just-fine realm of pure music, writing his own works and conducting selectively — is now diving back into those troubled institutions. The San Francisco Symphony recently made the surprise announcement that in 2020, when Michael Tilson Thomas steps aside after 25 years as its music director, Mr. Salonen will be his replacement.
Since the late 1960s, when the fiery young Pierre Boulez said that the only solution to the entrenched conservatism of classical music was to blow up the opera houses and destroy all the art of the past, there have been calls for systemic change.
Yet Boulez mellowed over time, and became a revered figure at leading opera houses and orchestras, working within the system to improve it rather than exploding it. And Mr. Salonen, who came to attention as a flinty Finnish modernist composer, has taken a similar course. Yes, he wants to shake things up, but from the inside. In taking on another orchestra directorship, a decade after leaving a landmark tenure at the Los Angeles Philharmonic, he hopes to find the sweet spot between gutting the system and maintaining what works.
Mr. Salonen will arrive in San Francisco with something of a head start: Mr. Thomas has fostered a climate of experimentation. And Mr. Salonen certainly proved himself a model of fresh thinking during his 17-year tenure as music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic. He has more recently refreshed the Philharmonia Orchestra as its principal conductor — including, in recent years, explorations of digital technology and virtual reality projects.
A symphony orchestra, Mr. Salonen said, is too often described as a mechanism with pieces people have put together. To him, an orchestra is an “organism” that “kind of grows.” Better ways to present it and integrate it into the community must be found.
Symphony orchestras and opera companies must accept that there is no musical mainstream, either, so institutions should try to reach “as many people as possible by catering to different tastes,” he said. That means not just unusual ventures of the kind he oversaw in Los Angeles — the Minimalist Jukebox series; festivals of film music; “The Tristan Project,” a performance of Wagner’s opera that employed as backdrops videos by Bill Viola — but also now and then a concert or mini festival devoted to Brahms or Sibelius, for those who want an immersion in a single composer.
Who will help him conceive these programming blocks? Though he doesn’t know yet what to call them, Mr. Salonen has recruited a roster of mostly younger, visionary artists to advise him and create their own programs — a kind of “brain trust,” he said. This diverse creative team includes: the pianist and film composer Nicholas Britell; the soprano Julia Bullock; the flutist, educator and champion of new music Claire Chase; the violinist Pekka Kuusisto; the composer and guitarist Bryce Dessner; the composer Nico Muhly; the jazz bassist and vocalist Esperanza Spalding; and the artificial intelligence entrepreneur Carol Reiley.
The “grid” will have to be loosened to allow these artists creative leeway, Mr. Salonen said. He says he’ll make it happen.
“The good thing,” he said, “is that the actual material we are dealing with on a daily basis is fantastic” — some of “the best things humankind has ever produced.” He remains convinced that the ideal way to engage new listeners and give meaningful performances of those masterpieces is to present them alongside comparably ambitious modern and contemporary works.
A concert can provide that belonging. A program of symphonic music in a grand hall as an antidote to isolation bred by social media? Mr. Salonen — an explorer and, in the best sense, a traditionalist — makes a persuasive case.
