Representative Ilhan Omar, a freshman Democrat from Minnesota, came under scrutiny again this week because of her comments about Israel.
The remarks in question came during a discussion at a Washington bookstore on Wednesday about how critics have repeatedly labeled Ms. Omar’s criticism of Israel as anti-Semitic. She argued that the label is being used in bad faith to shut down debate.
Some conservative news outlets also posted articles critical of the comments. And Marshall Wittmann, a spokesman for Aipac, said in a statement that the accusation of “dual loyalty” was alarming.
“The charge of dual loyalty not only raises the ominous specter of classic anti-Semitism, but it is also deeply insulting to the millions upon millions of patriotic Americans, Jewish and non-Jewish, who stand by our democratic ally, Israel,” Mr. Wittmann said.
The event, billed as a “Progressive Issues Town Hall,” was held at a Busboys and Poets and moderated by its owner, Andy Shallal. Ms. Omar spoke alongside three fellow Democrats in Congress: Rashida Tlaib of Michigan, Pramila Jayapal of Washington and Mark Pocan of Wisconsin.
Ms. Omar and Ms. Tlaib became the first Muslim women elected to Congress in November. The group spoke to the friendly audience about a wide variety of topics, including immigration and the crises in Venezuela and Yemen.
“I know that’s a very sensitive topic and I know it’s an issue that has been out there and it’s used oftentimes to quiet people, to disparage them, to isolate them,” he said.
He asked Ms. Omar and Ms. Tlaib to discuss how the issue was playing out in the political sphere and how progressives could support them so their criticism of Israeli policies would not be seen as anti-Semitic.
Ms. Tlaib, who is Palestinian-American, then talked about her love for her grandmother, who lives in the West Bank, and her drive to humanize the discussion around the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
“This conversation and debate around human rights for everyone, this conversation around what that looks like, is not centered around hate, it’s actually centered so much around love,” she said.
Ms. Omar sounded a similar note, saying the country had not “uplifted” the stories of Palestinians. But she added that she had heard Jewish constituents, colleagues and friends say that some Palestinians do not want or deserve safety.
She said she did not “go into the dark place” of assuming those people were Islamophobic. But she said she was afraid that people were labeling her and Ms. Tlaib as anti-Semitic because of their Muslim faith.
Ms. Omar said she felt pained that she had been linked to intolerance. But she argued that the persistent focus on those accusations was detracting from substantive discourse about American foreign policy.
“We end up defending that, and nobody ever gets to have the broader debate of what is happening with Palestine,” she said to loud cheers.
The criticism of the two women also extended to their facial expressions. Mr. Chait linked to an article on Jewish Insider, which said Ms. Omar and Ms. Tlaib had “smiled along furtively” after someone in the crowd yelled, “It is about the Benjamins,” echoing the deleted tweet that had been condemned by Republicans and Democrats, including Speaker Nancy Pelosi.
The shout occurs around the 59-minute mark in the video. After Ms. Omar’s office called Jewish Insider’s description “not accurate and frankly dangerous,” the site stood by it in an editor’s note.
Ms. Omar was also the target of an anti-Muslim poster that caused an uproar at the West Virginia State Capitol on Friday, according to local news outlets.
The poster, which was displayed during a Republican event, juxtaposed two images. One on top showed the World Trade Center burning on Sept. 11, 2001, with the caption “‘Never forget’ - you said..” Below it was a photo of Ms. Omar, with the caption “I am the proof - you have forgotten.” It was not clear who made the poster.
The outrage led to the resignation of at least one staff member and an injury to another person after a lawmaker reportedly kicked open a door. The chairwoman of the state Republican Party issued a statement saying that the party did not approve or condone the sign or other acts of hate speech.
