Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. scrambled on Sunday to contain a quickly growing crisis for his likely presidential bid, putting forward several former female aides and allies to praise his treatment of women after Lucy Flores, a former Nevada legislator, accused Mr. Biden of kissing and touching her.
Mr. Biden also issued a sweeping statement acknowledging that he had shown “expressions of affection” to people during his years on the campaign trail, but said, “not once — never — did I believe I acted inappropriately.” It was the second damage-control statement to come from his team since Ms. Flores made her allegation on Friday, and it was released minutes before she appeared on CNN and argued that Mr. Biden’s behavior with her at a 2014 campaign event was “disqualifying” for a presidential candidate.
Mr. Biden’s advisers indicated on Sunday that the accusation would not dissuade him from entering the 2020 campaign, which they suggest he still intends to do at the end of April or just after. But Ms. Flores’s claim, and Mr. Biden’s attempt to rebut her story without dismissing it — or her — offered a vivid illustration of the #MeToo-era challenges that await a 76-year-old political veteran known for his close physical contact with women and men, including hugging, kissing and touching them.
The allegation came shortly after Mr. Biden faced criticism for saying he wished he “could have done something” when Anita Hill accused Justice Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment — even though he led the Senate committee that questioned her — leading some in his party to brace for an extended reckoning about Mr. Biden and gender if he enters the race.
The often garrulous Mr. Biden, treading gingerly at a moment when women around the world are coming forward to share details about mistreatment by men, only issued a statement through his aides rather than grant interviews. “We have arrived at an important time when women feel they can and should relate their experiences, and men should pay attention,” Mr. Biden said.
She first leveled her charges in an essay published on Friday in New York magazine’s The Cut. Ms. Flores, a candidate for lieutenant governor of Nevada in 2014, said that when Mr. Biden visited that year to campaign for her and other Democrats, he came up behind her before the rally, put his hands on her shoulders and planted “a big slow kiss” on the back of her head.
Ms. Flores said she felt compelled to come forward now because she believed Mr. Biden’s behavior with women was being left out of political conversations as he prepares for a possible presidential run.
Mr. Biden has drawn attention in the past for his intimate touching of political allies, their family members and even supporters he has just met — gestures that are seen as excessive to the point of creepy by some but viewed as harmless by his defenders.
Mr. Biden’s allies said he often drew close to people he sensed were nervous before they went on stage in an effort to relax them, suggesting that is what he was doing with Ms. Flores. On Sunday night, Stephanie Carter, the wife of former Defense Secretary Ashton Carter, said Mr. Biden had been doing exactly that in 2015 when the vice president was memorably photographed holding her shoulders at Mr. Carter’s swearing-in ceremony.
And, in recognition of the political peril the former vice president now finds himself in, Mr. Biden’s female aides and supporters rushed to his defense over the weekend, some of them citing anecdotes about when he, for example, offered to get coffee himself when a male colleague asked one of his female aides to do it.
But some of Mr. Biden’s potential Democratic rivals, as well as one top White House aide, were less charitable, suggesting he must answer to the specific claim.
Senator Amy Klobuchar, a Minnesota Democrat, said on ABC’s “This Week” that “people raise issues and they have to address them, and that’s what he will have to do with the voters if he gets into the race,” adding that she has “no reason not to believe” Ms. Flores.
President Trump’s allies made little effort to deny their glee about the accusation, but at the same time evinced little self-awareness about the multiple sexual misconduct charges Mr. Trump himself has faced.
Mr. Trump would face a hard time making an issue out of the allegation, given that his mistreatment of women far exceeds anything Mr. Biden has been accused of.  In the weeks before the 2016 election, an “Access Hollywood” tape surfaced in which he was heard making vulgar comments about women.
In Nevada, some who know Ms. Flores called her fearless, driven and a champion of women.
But some influential figures in the state’s political establishment, which is still led by former Senator Harry Reid, view her with far less favor.
After losing her bid for lieutenant governor, Ms. Flores ran for a Republican-held House seat in 2016 but again fell short in the primary.
But in that same year, she endorsed Mr. Sanders’s campaign for president. That early support helped win her a seat on the board of Our Revolution, the pro-Sanders advocacy group, and an appointment to a reform commission convened by the Democratic National Committee after the contentious 2016 primary between Mr. Sanders and Hillary Clinton.
Ms. Flores said she was not paid for her essay in New York magazine. A spokeswoman for the magazine declined on Sunday to comment on Ms. Flores’s piece but confirmed that Ms. Flores was not compensated.
Ms. Flores, who now lives in California, started her own company dedicated to empowering Latinas. Over the weekend, a post appeared on Facebook that appeared to be promoting Ms. Flores’s essay and her company, Luz Collective.
“One small way to support Lucy Flores right now? Pick up something from her patriarchy smashing Alpha Latina merchandise on Luz Collective,” the post said. Ms. Flores said a friend posted the message without her knowledge.