Kirstjen Nielsen, the Homeland Security secretary, urged Congress to confront what she called a “humanitarian catastrophe” on the southern border by supporting President Trump’s border wall, though it is not clear how a wall would alter the flow of asylum seekers or address their needs.
She was also defiant in the face of criticism of how the administration treats migrant families at the border, especially separating families.
Separately, in a setback for Mr. Trump, the U.S. trade deficit in goods ballooned to $891.3 billion in 2018, its highest level in history. The deficit expanded mainly because of the strong U.S. economy, which allowed Americans to purchase more from abroad, and the strong dollar, which raised the international prices of U.S. exports.
2. Senator Martha McSally, Republican of Arizona and the first woman in the Air Force to fly in combat, said that she had been raped by a superior officer while serving.
Also on Capitol Hill, House Democrats were accusing their party’s leaders of treating Representative Ilhan Omar unfairly. They ultimately put off a vote on a resolution condemning anti-Semitism, as critics said Ms. Omar was unfairly singled out.
3. The Supreme Court is getting an education in rap.
Hip-hop stars including Meek Mill, above, Fat Joe and 21 Savage filed a brief urging the court to hear the appeal of a Pittsburgh rapper challenging his conviction. The artist, Jamal Knox, who raps under the name Mayhem Mal, was sent to prison for two years for threatening police officers in his song.
4. Mark Zuckerberg said he would shift Facebook’s platforms to emphasize private, encrypted communication, a major turn from public sharing.
After grappling with years of scandal over data privacy, the Facebook founder and chief executive said he wanted to create systems that would offer users a “digital living room” where they can expect their discussions to be fully private.
In other tech news, Tesla is shutting down most of its dealerships — just three months after a sprint to open new locations.
5. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s former top adviser and close friend tried to defuse a political scandal gripping Canada.
In testimony before a parliamentary committee, the adviser, Gerald Butts, pictured above, denied that any improper pressure was put on the former justice minister to settle a criminal case. He said the government wanted to consider a negotiated settlement for a company accused of bribery because thousands of Canadian jobs were at stake.
Mr. Butts’s testimony may help mitigate the crisis, which has threatened the prime minister’s political future. We broke down how Mr. Trudeau became ensnared.
6. The chef Mario Batali has surrendered his stake in all of his restaurants.
Of all the famous chefs and restaurateurs accused of sexual harassment, Mr. Batali is the first to pay such a price.
The Bastianich family, which has partnered with Mr. Batali for 20 years, and other partners are regrouping to form a new company. Mr. Batali is also selling his shares in Eataly, the global chain of luxury Italian supermarkets.
In other #MeToo developments, R. Kelly gave his first interview since being charged with sexual abuse, in which he screamed, cursed and pleaded to the camera. He now is heading back to jail for not paying child support.
7. Good news and bad news in the fight to combat overprescription of opioid painkillers: Prescriptions fell. Chronic pain patients have suffered.
In a letter to be sent to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, more than 300 medical experts, including three former White House drug czars, say that federal guidelines aimed at curbing addiction are harming pain patients who find relief only through high doses of opioids. Above, a doctor and a pain patient in Nebraska in 2016.
They say the guidelines are being used as cover by insurers to deny reimbursement and by doctors to turn patients away, leaving them in withdrawal and in misery, some to the point of suicide.
8. Thousands of runners, wrestlers, pictured above, soccer players and fitness fanatics exercise every evening on the beaches and streets of Senegal’s capital, where exercise is a way of life.
With every breath, they inhale increasingly dangerous air. Dakar’s air exceeds more than five times the limits set by the World Health Organization for levels of damaging airborne particulate. One official estimated that a third of the population has some kind of lung ailment.
“Sometimes it feels like I’m about to get choked,” one champion swimmer said.
Our music critic offers a glowing review of Solange’s new album, “When I Get Home.” The album “is built for gentle, repeated immersion, not instant gratification,” he writes, one example of Solange’s step away from ordinary pop expectations.
We also have a review of the latest installment of “Captain Marvel,” starring Brie Larson as the spacefaring comic-book superhero. It is the 21st entry in the interconnected Marvel movie franchise since it began in 2008, but the first to focus principally on a woman.
10. Finally, today is the first day of Lent for many Christians around the world.
But before giving something up, residents in Hamtramck, Mich., have long celebrated Fat Tuesday with paczki, Polish pastries. Pronounced “PAWN-chkee,” the doughy pastries are filled with custard or fruit. Lines form well before sunrise at bakeries around the city. Above, the New Martha Washington Bakery on Tuesday.
Residents see parallels in the stories of the Polish immigrants who came decades ago and those of the newer arrivals from the Middle East and Asia.
Have a sweet night.
