We start today with a new report about Jared Kushner’s security clearance, the aftermath of the failed U.S.-North Korea talks, and details of a peace plan in Afghanistan.
Mr. Trump overruled concerns from intelligence officials last year and ordered his chief of staff to give top-secret security clearance to Mr. Kushner, his son-in-law and senior adviser, according to four people briefed on the matter.
John Kelly, then the White House chief of staff, wrote an internal memo saying he had been “ordered” to grant the clearance. The top White House lawyer at the time, Donald McGahn, also wrote a memo outlining his reservations.
The president told The Times in January that he had taken no role in Mr. Kushner’s receiving his clearance.
Background: Mr. Kushner’s initial background check took more than a year. Officials had raised questions about his ties to overseas governments and investors, and about his initially unreported contacts with foreigners.
The two sides traded blame on Thursday after the second summit meeting between President Trump and North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, collapsed with no deal.
Mr. Trump said Mr. Kim was unwilling to dismantle enough of his nuclear weapons program to warrant lifting sanctions, an assertion the North later disputed.
News analysis: Mr. Trump negotiated directly with North Korea, an approach his predecessors avoided. The risk of doing so is that if you fail, there are few places to go, our national security correspondent writes.
What’s next? History suggests that the North Koreans may try to pressure Mr. Trump by escalating. The North has the world’s fastest-growing nuclear arsenal.
The Daily: Today’s episode investigates why the meeting fell apart.
All American troops would withdraw from the country within the next five years under a new Pentagon proposal being discussed in peace talks with the Taliban.
The plan would transfer responsibility for training the Afghan military to international troops, and largely shift American operations to counterterrorism strikes. It has been met with broad acceptance in Washington and among NATO officials.
Negotiations with the Taliban to end the war, now in its 18th year, resume on Saturday.
How we know: Parts of the plan were shared with The Times by more than a half-dozen current and former American and European officials.
The party’s leaders emphasized on Thursday that they intend to pursue multiple investigations of President Trump’s actions rather than an effort to impeach him, after this week’s testimony by Michael Cohen. That position puts the leadership at odds with some rank-and-file Democrats and liberal activists.
Another angle: It’s unclear whether Mr. Cohen’s testimony about Mr. Trump’s potentially criminal conduct will shift opinion on either the left or the right. But he did implicate Allen Weisselberg, the Trump Organization’s longtime chief financial officer, who may now face further scrutiny.
“Leaving Neverland,” which appears on HBO starting Sunday, is a four-hour movie about the musician’s alleged pedophilia, focused on the stories of two men who say they were his victims as children.
Our critic at large, Wesley Morris, writes about wrestling with his fandom as the agonizing stories unfold.
India-Pakistan tensions: Pakistan released an Indian pilot today who was shot down during this week’s escalating tensions between the two countries.
The 2020 election: Jay Inslee, the governor of Washington who has made climate change and the environment his signature issues, joined the crowded field of Democratic presidential candidates today.
Indictment near for Netanyahu: Israel’s attorney general has announced a plan to indict Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on charges of bribery, fraud and breach of trust.
An appeal to Amazon: Gov. Andrew Cuomo has been working behind the scenes to persuade the company to resurrect its plans to open a campus in New York City, including a personal pitch to Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s founder.
Departure at HBO: The cable network’s chief executive, Richard Plepler, is leaving after 27 years there. He is said to have felt that he had less autonomy since AT&T acquired HBO’s owner, Time Warner, last year.
Snapshot: Above, Edda, a pug that officials seized from a family in Germany and then sold on eBay for 750 euros, roughly $850, to cover an unpaid tax bill. On Thursday, a spokesman for the city of Ahlen called it “a pragmatic solution” to an outstanding debt, but the case has prompted outrage from animal rights activists and others.
In memoriam: André Previn, an Oscar- and Grammy-winning composer, conductor and pianist, blurred the boundaries between jazz, pop and classical music. He died on Thursday at 89.
Phone review: Samsung’s new Galaxy S10 Plus is an excellent (albeit $1,000) device with an innovative wide-angle camera. But it lags Apple in biometrics, our technology columnist writes.
Record baseball contract: Bryce Harper has reached a free-agent deal with the Philadelphia Phillies for 13 years and $330 million, the most ever guaranteed to a baseball player.
Credit...David Malosh for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Simon Andrews.
Cook: Cauliflower gets the Philippine adobo treatment in this vegetarian dish.
Watch: “Free Solo,” the Oscar-winning documentary about the rock climber Alex Honnold, is among our small-screen recommendations for the weekend.
Go: When in Venice, join the locals for cicchetti, the Italian version of tapas.
Read: Clive Thompson, a longtime tech writer, brings an anthropologist’s eye to the world of programming in “Coders: The Making of a New Tribe and the Remaking of the World.” It’s one of 12 books to watch for in March.
Smarter Living: When you’re cleaning out your closet, try finding a new life for your unwanted clothes, whether by selling, donating or recycling them. In 2015 Americans sent 10.5 million tons of textiles to the dump and just 2.5 million tons to be recycled.
We also have ideas on how to keep fresh on long days of travel.
Theodor Geisel, better known as Dr. Seuss, was born 115 years ago on Saturday.
He had a unique take on the English language. His inventive use of rhythm and rhyme is at once ridiculous and intoxicating to children and parents alike.
His titles have sold a staggering 650 million copies in more than 45 languages — including Latin, Hebrew and Catalan — and are available in 110 countries.
This global expansion came with a tricky obstacle: how to translate him.
The solution? Hire local poets to work with translators. That’s how “Snuvs” from “Oh, the Thinks You Can Think!” became “Lhufas” in Portuguese, and “Hakken-Kraks’” from “Oh, the Places You’ll Go!” became “Scracchi Stridenti” in Italian.
And as for Sam I Am? In Spanish, he’s Juan Ramón, and he’s obsessed with huevos verdes con jamón.
The last time an American spacecraft carried astronauts into orbit was in 2011. On Saturday, SpaceX and NASA will test a replacement for the space shuttle.
To Mark Josephson, Eleanor Stanford, John Dorman and James K. Williamson for the break from the news. Karen Thorne, a content strategist, wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about the failure of the U.S.-North Korea talks.
• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: Monday, in French (5 letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• Fifty years ago, the book “A Day in the Life of The New York Times” chronicled 24 hours at the Gray Lady. On its anniversary, we look at how the news organization operates today.