On March 2 in Dubai, Roger Federer joined Jimmy Connors as the only male tennis players in the open era with 100 career titles. With a victory on Sunday over John Isner in the final of the Miami Open, Federer, 37, is now eight titles behind Connors’s record of 109.
Here’s a look at Federer’s 101 titles.
Number of Grand Slam titles — eight at Wimbledon, six at the Australian Open, five at the United States Open and one at the French Open. His most recent came at the 2018 Australian Open.
The number of times he has won the tournaments in Halle, Germany, and his hometown, Basel, Switzerland — his most of any events.
Number of titles on hard courts, most of any surface. (Hard courts are the most common surface on tour.) He has won 18 tournaments on grass and 11 on clay. His first title, in Milan, is one of only two on indoor carpet.
Most titles in one year, in 2006. The first came against Gaël Monfils in Doha, Qatar, in January; the last against James Blake at the Masters Cup, the former name of the year-end finals, in Shanghai in November.
The only year since 2001 in which Federer has not won a tournament. He sustained a knee injury in January and shut down his season in late July in order to fully recover.
Number of countries in which Federer has won a title, including Japan, Qatar, Sweden, Canada, Portugal, Turkey and the Netherlands.
Number of different opponents, from 25 different countries, who Federer defeated in finals — including Novak Djokovic, Jiri Novak, Philipp Kohlschreiber, Mark Philippoussis, Andre Agassi, Igor Andreev, David Nalbandian and Nikolay Davydenko. Twenty-five of those opponents are now retired, according to the ATP.
Number of times he has beaten Rafael Nadal in a final, most of any opponent. Who’s No. 2? Andy Roddick, with seven.
Number of times he won a tournament final in straight sets.
Length of his shortest title-clinching win, a 6-2 6-2 victory over David Goffin in Basel in 2014.
Length of his longest title-clinching win, a 5-7, 7-6 (6), 7-6 (5), 3-6, 16-14 victory over Roddick in the 2009 Wimbledon final. The victory gave Federer his 15th major title, breaking Pete Sampras’s record.
His lowest ranked opponent in a final, but it was a familiar name. On Oct. 2, 2005, Federer, then 24, defeated 18-year-old Andy Murray, 6-3 7-5, in the final of the Thailand Open in Bangkok. It was the first of 25 career meetings between the two, and the first ATP Tour final of Murray’s career.
Number of times Federer defeated Ivan Ljubicic in a tournament final. Ljubicic, 40, is now one of Federer’s coaches.
Number of times Federer has lost in a tournament final, missing a chance to add to his trophy case.
