Impostor syndrome is not a unique feeling, but some researchers believe it hits minority groups harder.
Last May, I walked into a room of impeccably dressed journalists at a media event in Los Angeles. I tugged on my pilly cardigan and patted down my frizzy bangs.
When a waiter presented a tray of sliced cucumbers and prosciutto and asked, “Crudité?” I resisted the temptation to shove three of them into my mouth and instead smiled and replied, “No, thank you.” I was focused on the task at hand: pretending not to be a fraud among this crowd of professionals.
Ironically, I was at the event to interview someone about impostor syndrome.
The psychologists Pauline R. Clance and Suzanne A. Imes coined the term in 1978, describing it as “internal experience of intellectual phoniness in people who believe that they are not intelligent, capable or creative despite evidence of high achievement.” In other words, it’s that sinking sense that you are a fraud in your industry, role or position, regardless of your credibility, authority or accomplishments.
This is not a unique feeling, and it hits many of us at some point in our lives. But some researchers believe it hits minority groups harder, as a lack of representation can make minorities feel like outsiders, and discrimination creates even more stress and anxiety when coupled with impostorism, according to Kevin Cokley, a professor of educational psychology and African diaspora studies at the University of Texas at Austin.
“I was interested in whether impostorism would be an even greater predictor of negative mental health outcomes in minorities than discrimination,” Dr. Cokley said. “And so I conducted a study and it’s exactly what I found.” Most everyone has felt like a fraud because of their own insecurities, and while Dr. Cokley said it’s important not to homogenize minority groups as having a single shared experience, the issue does become more complicated for minorities, who may be treated as impostors in the workplace.
“People tell you your story doesn’t matter, and that sucks,” Issa Rae, the star and co-creator of the HBO series “Insecure,” told me at that media event in Los Angeles. Hollywood is an industry that is especially vocal about inclusion. While celebrities call for more diversity, women and minorities are still disproportionately represented according to a report from U.C.L.A. Ms. Rae said this lack of representation has emphasized her own battle with impostor syndrome.
Dr. Cokley said he was inspired to study impostor syndrome after experiencing it in his own field, where he was in the ethnic minority, too.
In his study, published in The Journal of Counseling Psychology, Dr. Cokley found that impostorism can augment discrimination some minority groups may already feel, which adds to their stress.
He and his colleagues found that African-American college students had higher levels of anxiety and discrimination-related depression when they had significant levels of impostorism.
Rosanna Durruthy, the head of global diversity, inclusion and belonging at LinkedIn, said that as a minority, you can begin to dismiss your own perspective, credibility and authority.
“Being alone puts you in a circumstance where you’re not only questioning yourself, but also looking for agreement in others,” she said.
Ms. Durruthy added that minority workers should remember that they bring a different, unique perspective, which is a valuable asset.
Learning to be assertive is easier said than done, especially when you feel like an outsider, and Ms. Durruthy added that the issue is a systemic one that companies should be willing to address themselves. On an individual level, however, she and Dr. Cokley suggested a few “impostor-slaying” tactics.
It’s important to find workers with similar backgrounds and experiences.
Many workplaces offer their own affinity groups, also called employee resource groups or shared interest groups, for employees who may need the support of peers with shared experiences. You may also be able to find affinity alumni networks through your college, and on social media platforms like LinkedIn or Facebook, or just create a more intimate group with a few friends dealing with the same issue. You just want to surround yourself with other people who can relate.
A mentor is especially helpful for those dealing with impostorism because he or she can serve as a professional anchor, Ms. Durruthy said. Your mentor will ideally have experiences similar to your own and be willing to share advice on how to deal with those experiences.
“Look for someone whose accomplishments and approach to how they perform, how they interact with people, how they think about things, you find valuable,” she said.
A mentor should also encourage you to hone your own unique perspective and skills, Ms. Durruthy said.
When your impostor feelings take over, this daily diary can serve as a reminder that you’ve earned your way to this position.
A work diary can also help you identify discrimination.
“You don’t really know whether your feelings of impostorism are due to being a minority — i.e., being underrepresented — versus being treated differently,” Dr. Cokley said.
If you feel you’re actively being discriminated against, make sure to document the issue if you can, and review your company’s anti-discrimination policy as well as federal and state laws, which can be found on the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission website.
Another benefit to keeping a work diary: You can use it to keep track of your own progress and accomplishments. That way, when it’s time to negotiate your next raise, you’ll have evidence to make the case for a pay increase.
Ms. Rae said that while she still occasionally battles with feeling like an impostor, it helps to have a mantra reminding herself that she’s worked hard to earn her spot.
