WASHINGTON — President Trump escalated a bitter clash with some of America’s closest allies on Sunday, lashing out through his advisers at Canada’s prime minister in unusually personal terms and leaving himself with a diplomatic crisis as he arrived in Asia to negotiate a nuclear agreement with North Korea.
Left unclear was what exactly Mr. Trudeau had said that so offended Mr. Trump. During his Saturday news conference, the prime minister was relatively measured but repeated his position that Canada “will not be pushed around” and would respond to American tariffs with tariffs of its own.
Mr. Trudeau on Sunday publicly ignored the dispute, instead hailing “the historic and important agreement” that “will help make our economies stronger & people more prosperous,” as he wrote on Twitter.
At the G-7 summit, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada expressed his opposition to President Trump’s trade policies and American tariffs on Canadian steel.
I told the president that we would be moving forward with retaliatory equivalent tariffs as of July 1, and he expressed to me that he thought that would be a mistake. And I certainly agree that it’s not something that we want to do. We do not want to harm American workers. We do not want to harm trade between Canada and the United States. But the administration’s choice to impose illegal and unacceptable tariffs, illegitimate and unacceptable tariffs to Canadian steelworkers and autoworkers and on the Canadian economy, must be met with an equivalent response. We know a renegotiated Nafta is good for Canada, good for the United States and good for Mexico. And as the president, the vice president, many people have said, it’s possible to get to a win-win-win, and that’s exactly what we are going to continue to work to do. If you put an expiry date on a trade deal, that’s not actually a trade deal. So that’s our unequivocal position. There will not be a sunset clause. Canada has been unequivocal that we will not, cannot sign a trade deal that expires automatically every five years. That is not a trade deal.
Roland Paris, a former foreign affairs adviser to Mr. Trudeau, went further. “Big tough guy once he’s back on his airplane,” he wrote on Twitter. “Can’t do it in person, and knows it, which makes him feel week. So he projects these feelings onto Trudeau and then lashes out at him. You don’t need to be Freud. 
Other members of the Group of 7 stood with Canada against Mr. Trump.
Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain issued a statement through an aide saying she was “fully supportive of Justin Trudeau.” The German foreign minister, Heiko Maas, on Sunday called on European nations to stick together following Mr. Trump’s announcement.
Mr. Trump never really wanted to attend the Group of 7 meeting, but aides pressed him to go even as they feared it would be a disaster because he was being forced to do something he did not want to do. He rebelled by showing up late and leaving early.
During closed-door meetings, Mr. Trump largely listened through most issues, firmly crossing his arms and swiveling a bit in his seat, according to people who were in the room. At points, he looked around trying to catch the eyes of others, as if looking for reassurance, the witnesses said. Some smiled back; others did not.
Negotiators worked late Friday night to craft a statement that all seven leaders could sign. Mr. Trump’s delegation objected to the term “rules-based international order” until negotiators compromised by expressing support for “a” rules-based order rather than “the” rules-based order.
In a section on trade, the Americans insisted on using the word “reciprocal,” one of Mr. Trump’s favorite terms. They compromised by expressing support for “creating reciprocal benefits.” They did not refer directly to the Iran nuclear agreement, which Mr. Trump just pulled out of, but the Europeans included a reference to the United Nations Security Council resolution that endorsed the deal.
The negotiators included agree-to-disagree language on climate change and on an international commitment to reduce plastics in the world. And then the statement was released on Saturday night, only to have Mr. Trump disavow it. Mrs. May learned only as her helicopter arrived at the airport for her to board her plane to return to London.
Josef Braml of the German Council on Foreign Relations said Mr. Trump considered diplomacy a waste of time. “He is about to destroy what’s left of the liberal world order because he thinks rules and institutions help America’s rivals, China and Europe,” he said.
Laurence Nardon, director of the North American program at the French Institute of International Relations in Paris, said Mr. Trump’s behavior was a negotiation trick. “It’s like when a person leaves the room and slams the door, but is hoping the other person will run after them and follow them into the corridor,” she said.
In Washington, Democrats and some Republicans were upset at the outcome. But Mr. Trump received support from a few Republicans who cheered his tough stance.
