Social Q’s is turning 10.
For readers who haven’t been keeping up with the advice column in Styles — for 520 weeks and counting — that adds up to about 2,100 social tangles. They’ve ranged from the traditional (trash-talking exes) to the timely (white privilege in middle school) to the bizarre (lying about being Jewish on a dating app and looking for tips to keep up the ruse). I try to put four of them right every week. Occasionally, I succeed. Not bad for 10, right?
When I was 10, back in the ’70s, I was less of a fixer and more of an acrobat, leaping away from something bad inside me. I had no name for this terrible thing, and only flashes of awareness that it was linked to my feelings for a fellow fourth grader named Todd. I didn’t get that it was a crush, or that the only thing separating mine from the garden variety on TV shows and songs on the radio was that its object was another boy. Still, I felt stabs of shame and back-flipped away from them as convincingly as I could.
We’re all ashamed of something. But shame is particularly good training for advice columnists. It teaches us to look beyond the surface. Back in fourth grade, I was cruel to Todd as a cover for my feelings. People in hiding learn to deflect. But they can also come out of hiding if they feel safe. That’s what happened to me in college (after a spell of being treated much worse than anything I’d dished out to poor Todd).
That’s the spirit of Social Q’s, too: looking hard at villains until we see people just like us. Fear and shame bring out the worst in anyone, and compassion — even for our rudest in-law or nastiest neighbor — can often make things better. Of course, victims need comforting, too. That’s the basic recipe.
But it took more than grade-school wisdom for The Times to commission Social Q’s. It took the worst tragedy of my life to get my big break. When I was 23, a fledgling gay man testing the waters in New York, one morning, just before dawn, my father picked up a rifle in Vermont and shot himself. No one had an inkling of his despair, much less his ability to muster such violence.
We struggled for years, my mother and brothers and I, to understand how we could have missed something so big. We blamed ourselves; we blamed each other. Our hearts broke for him and raged at him. But none of these postures satisfied for long. So, we persisted. I even wrote a novel in a comic voice that paired my burgeoning sexuality with my father’s death. Humor was the only vehicle I could find to make so much guilt and grief and shame palatable.
That book, “Father’s Day,” somehow landed on the desk of Mary Suh, then the deputy editor of the Styles section. She liked its voice. And after clearing more than a few administrative hurdles, we were collaborating on the particulars of an advice column: the breadth of questions, the length of answers, its sweet-and-salty tone.
It was an accident that Social Q’s debuted on Father’s Day in 2008, but its anniversary strikes me every year. In a split second, or maybe longer, my father decided that life wasn’t worth living. But Social Q’s begs to differ. The questions keep rolling in — some silly, some tricky, some painful — often as many as 100 per week. But every one of them reflects an engagement with life: the elderly woman trying to process the #MeToo movement; the teenager grappling with Confederate flags in his neighborhood; the mother struggling with unexpected condolences for the loss of her child.
I keep answering them, and readers keep recording their enthusiastic objections and agreement and thoughtful amendments. (Just try to stop them, or take a look at the flood in my inbox on Monday mornings.) Still, I’m grateful to every one of them. We will never agree on how to live in the world. But by engaging with Social Q’s, readers are proof positive that how we live, and the fact that we choose to live, makes all the difference.