Charlotte Fox, who climbed to dizzying heights as the first American woman to conquer three 26,000-foot or higher mountains and once defied a freak blizzard as she descended Mount Everest, died on May 24 in Telluride, Colo. She was 61.
Ms. Fox was found dead inside her home in the Rocky Mountains from injuries apparently suffered after slipping down a steep flight of stairs, Emil Sante, the San Miguel County Coroner, said.
But the fatal blizzard struck overnight on May 10, 1996 — her 39th birthday — when she had reached her goal and was already descending. Turning around was no longer an option.
Everest was the third jewel in Ms. Fox’s triple crown. She also reached the top of two other mountains with heights of at least 8,000 meters, or 26,246 feet: Gasherbrum II, in Pakistan, in 1994 and Cho Oyu, in the Himalayas, in 1995. She was the first American woman credited with surmounting all three.
Ms. Fox was dauntless, but she never discounted the elemental dangers in the challenging avocation she had chosen, or in her daily slogs as a ski patroller in Telluride and Snowmass, Colo.
In 1993, her boyfriend at the time, Mark Bebie, died in an avalanche while ice climbing in the Canadian Rockies. Her husband, Reese Martin III, was killed in 2004 in a paragliding crash in Washington State. He was 49.
That belief was why her friends and acquaintances were less stunned by her death than by how she died.
Returning from dinner, weekend guests discovered her body at the bottom of a 77-step hardwood staircase connecting the four stories of her house on Tomboy Road, which undulates along a mountainside. Her front door is on the top floor.
Kim Reynolds, a personal coach, also grappled philosophically with the nature of her friend’s death.
Charlotte Conant Fox was born on May 10, 1957, in Greensboro, N.C., the only child of Ann Robinson Black and Jared Fox, whose father founded Blue Bell, the manufacturer of Wrangler jeans. Her parents divorced when she was young.
An expert water skier and equestrian as a child, Ms. Fox graduated from Hollins College, now Hollins University, Roanoke, Va., with a degree in American studies. She planned on then spending a year in the Rockies mulling what to do next.
In addition to her mother, survivors include her brother, Ralph R. Black, and her stepmother, Rachel Camp.
In her mountain climbing career, Ms. Fox was the first American woman to reach the summit of Gasherbrum II, between Pakistan and China. She also climbed, in South America, Aconcagua, Huascarán, and Chopicalqui; Mount Vinson, in Antarctica; Mont Blanc, in the Alps; and Kilimanjaro, in Africa. In addition, she scaled all 54 Colorado peaks above 14,000 feet.
She also found philanthropy gratifying. She served on several boards, including the Access Fund, which preserves climbing sites; the American Alpine Club; and the dZi Foundation, which supports social services and other projects in the Himalayas.
Ms. Fox’s generosity extended to individuals, including a friend whom she presented with a bracelet. The inscription was particularly apt from an alpinist who had surveyed the world from its highest vantage point, on Everest, and survived.
