Olivia Anne Holt and Philip Paul Iekel are to be married June 3 at Kingsway Christian Church in Omaha. Pastor John Payton, a licensed minister with the Berean Fellowship of Churches, is to officiate.
The bride, who is 25 and taking her husband’s name, is the international partnership liaison for the Council of Protestant Churches of Nicaragua, a Nicaraguan community development organization. She graduated from Northwestern College.
She is a daughter of Lori L. Holt and Keith W. Holt of Omaha.
The groom, also 25, is a design engineer and drafter at Engineering Ministries International in Managua, Nicaragua. He graduated from Iowa State University, from which he also received a master’s degree in civil engineering.
He is a son of Sheryl D. Iekel and Paul F. Iekel of Atlantic, Iowa.
In December 2014, Mr. Iekel, then a junior at Iowa State, received a brochure in the mail that was the result of a donation he made to a best friend, who had interned with a ministry in India the previous summer.
While flipping through the pages, he came across the name Olivia Holt, and stopped flipping.
“She talked about her experience in Nicaragua,” he said. “Her commitment to the work she was doing, her passion for others, and love for God jumped off the page.
Though Ms. Holt initially felt the letter, “was a little weird,” she determined that Mr. Iekel “was a really nice guy,” after reading it.
Three months later, Mr. Iekel received a beat up letter in the mail.
“It was from Olivia, she thanked me for the letter and words of affirmation, which had come as she was making a number of career-altering decisions,” Mr. Iekel said.
She included her email address, and he wrote her one with the subject aptly named “Letter,” a thread that would go on to include 35,000 words as they got to know each other.
After nine months of email exchanges, Mr. Iekel asked Ms. Holt — who lived 70 minutes away by car in Omaha — if he could meet her for dinner.
There was, however, an elephant in the room.
“O.K. then. I like you,” he replied, and a long-distance relationship soon followed.
By summer 2017, Ms. Iekel was living in Nicaragua and Mr. Iekel was six months from finishing college.
Shortly thereafter, a work opportunity arose for Mr. Iekel at an engineering nonprofit organization in Nicaragua.
