After meeting with North Korea’s top nuclear negotiator at the White House, President Trump announced that he would hold talks with Kim Jong-un after all. Their historic summit meeting is scheduled for June 12 in Singapore.
Mr. Trump has vowed not to repeat the errors of his predecessors in dealing with North Korea. But he appears to be treading the same path, which has become all the more dangerous given the North’s advances in developing nuclear weapons in the last 30 years.
 Test your knowledge with our news quiz. Here’s the front page of our Sunday paper, and our crossword puzzles.
2. In a confidential memo to the special counsel, Robert Mueller, above, President Trump’s lawyers argued that he could not possibly have committed obstruction — because he has unfettered authority over all federal investigations. Here’s the memo, with notes from our reporters.
It’s part of a bid to prevent Mr. Mueller from forcing Mr. Trump to answer questions. His lawyers fear that if Mr. Trump answers, he risks exposing himself to accusations of lying to investigators, a potential crime or impeachable offense.
For more from Washington, check out our roundup of this week’s biggest stories in American politics.
3. It was quite a week in Europe.
Italy swore in a euroskeptic government that has worried the financial markets. (Above, the new prime minister, Giuseppe Conte.) Then a pro-Europe government in Spain suddenly collapsed, ushering in a Socialist-led government.
Amid the sudden political uncertainty, President Trump announced tariffs on aluminum and steel imported from the European Union, Canada and Mexico, raising the potential of an all-out trade war.
“I’d hate to see what’s in store for people who aren’t allies,” said one analyst.
4. ABC abruptly canceled “Roseanne” hours after the show’s star and co-creator, Roseanne Barr, posted a racist tweet about Valerie Jarrett, a former adviser to President Barack Obama.
The revived sitcom had been one of the top-rated shows in the country, delivering an audience that network television had not seen in years. But we talked to people who worked on the set, who said that for all the success, there was a sense of foreboding. Above, Sara Gilbert and Ms. Barr in a scene from the show.
And later in the week, the comedian Samantha Bee came under fire for using a vulgar epithet to describe Ivanka Trump on her TBS show. The cable network has taken no disciplinary action against her, igniting criticism from the right of a double standard.
5. As hurricane season begins, a new study by researchers from Harvard found that the death toll in Puerto Rico from Hurricane Maria could exceed 4,000. The government had put the number at 64.
Residents died at a significantly higher rate during the three months after the hurricane than in the previous year, many from delayed medical care. The researchers say their estimate remains imprecise, with more definitive studies still to come. We examined why the death tolls are so different.
Above, shoes displayed in San Juan on Friday to commemorate the dead.
6. A head-spinning field of 27 candidates is competing to replace Jerry Brown as governor of California.
Mr. Brown, who has served as governor for 16 of the last 40 years, remains a popular figure. Two of the top contenders to replace him are Gavin Newsom, above, the lieutenant governor, and Antonio Villaraigosa, the former mayor of Los Angeles. But they each bring baggage to the race.
The first round of voting is on Tuesday, and the top two finishers will advance to the November general election, regardless of party, under California’s nonpartisan election system.
7. Less than a year after Iraqi security forces and their allies recaptured Mosul from the Islamic State, the city is coming back to life. Above, an amusement park there.
Our reporter Rukmini Callimachi followed in the soldiers’ footsteps as they took the city back, collecting documents from abandoned Islamic State outposts. The resulting investigative story, “The ISIS Files,” helps explain how the terrorist group ruled for nearly three years. She and her editor answered readers’ questions about the series, and the ethical and legal issues it raised.
We’re up to Chapter 7 in our new podcast, “Caliphate,” in which Rukmini takes listeners inside the Islamic State. Listen here.
8. The F.B.I. has an urgent request for anyone with a small office or home office internet router: Reboot it now.
A sophisticated malware system linked to Russia — and to the same group that hacked the Democratic National Committee before the 2016 election — has infected hundred of thousands of routers in the U.S.
The malware, dubbed VPNFilter, is capable of blocking web traffic, collecting information and even disabling devices. To be safe, the F.B.I. recommends that users also upgrade firmware, reset passwords and disable remote-management settings.
9. All the talk going into the N.B.A. finals was about how it was a colossal mismatch: The Golden State Warriors would be running out a lineup full of All-Stars, against a Cleveland Cavaliers team that relied far too heavily on LeBron James.
But proving that the games are played for a reason, the Warriors barely prevailed in Game 1. Each team’s star players had their moments, but none could compare to the incredible performance by James, who scored 51 points in 48 minutes.
The Warriors’ explosive third quarters are legendary. Our reporters say their halftime routine may explain why.
Game 2 is on Sunday at 8 p.m. Eastern. You can watch on ABC, and we’ll have live coverage.
10. Finally, books to check out this summer, an investigation into where America’s recycling goes and a rumination on the joys of eating alone (in Paris). We have those stories and more in this collection of our best weekend reads.
For more suggestions on what to watch, read and listen to, may we suggest our guide to the best summer binge watching, a glance at the New York Times best-seller list or our music critics’ latest playlist.
You can sign up here to get our Morning Briefings by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning, or to receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights.
