Book Review|What Do Mark Twain, Carpentry and Commodes Have in Common?
What Do Mark Twain, Carpentry and Commodes Have in Common?
205 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.95.
The higgledy-piggledy provenance of these pieces — The Sewanee Review, two book introductions (a Twain collection, Dickens’s “The Pickwick Papers”), an address to the 2004 graduates of Colby College and so forth — might make you think you’re about to dig into a smorgasbord of frozen leftovers. But it turns out that Russo the nonfiction writer is a lot like Russo the Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist. He is affably disagreeable, wry, idiosyncratic, vulnerably bighearted, a craftsman of lubricated sentences. In the end, you almost always want Russo to go on.
That said, the danger of rounding up writing assignments originally executed for different purposes is that you cannot help measuring them against one another. Russo’s graduation speech is better than most such peppy pensées aimed at the yet-to-be employed, but it hardly exceeds the limits of the genre. Neither does his look at “The Pickwick Papers,” which (unlike his rounded introduction on Twain) is written in a professorial shorthand that might make you feel like a student who didn’t complete the reading assignment.
As a whole, the book is a quest to understand nothing less than why life turns out the way it does, whether you’re J. D. Salinger or some guy named David — a supposedly superior talent to Russo when they both attended the University of Arizona. Their creative-writing professor fawned over him, giving David a sparkling A to Russo’s pitiful B. If that didn’t make it clear who the professor thought would succeed, one day, after remarking that most writers have about a thousand pages of guano in them, he turned to Russo and said, “In your case, make it 2,000.” That prognosis visited several decades of self-doubt and anxiety — “those dread whisperers” — on Russo, but he did the spadework and stuck it out, while his friend pretty much gave up.
He weaves scenes from these destiny-swapping years — the gut-punching failures; the life of teaching that enabled the life of writing — with literary long takes, illuminating a winding road trip. Of special interest to fans who can’t get enough scoop on the real place — Gloversville, N.Y. — that inspired his most celebrated novels, Russo sprinkles these pages with a number of boyhood anecdotes, including an unflinching set piece on his construction-working father, a Utah Beach war hero who returns home to embrace a beta-dog existence, much to the distress of his son. Russo the American lit Ph.D. makes appearances too, demystifying his craft with lessons drawn from his broad reading. Among other curious topics, he explores a pet theory that Fitzgerald might have regretted writing “The Great Gatsby” in the first-person voice of Nick Carraway, but by the time he realized the consequences it was too late to start again.
Perhaps what’s most admirable about these essays is their genial and searching tone. In this know-it-all age of thought-leader messiahs and thumb-taunting Twitter Torquemadas, Russo places his faith in the ideals of art — ambiguity, paradox, heresy, the sublime — over the black-and-white ideologies of our current politics. Leave it to a fiction writer to remind us that the world is, more often than not, stubbornly subjective.
Pain and laughter also react chemically in “Imagining Jenny,” a standout, which was originally published as the afterword to a memoir by Jennifer Finney Boylan. Here, Russo recounts the brutal week he spent at the bedside of the author, a friend of many years, as she underwent gender reassignment surgery.
In a semi-state of shock over what’s about to happen to his former beer-drinking buddy Jim, a fellow professor at Colby, Russo confesses to a series of anxious gaffes — referring to Jenny as him — and seeks “solace and understanding in narrative,” even though these were “cautionary parables of transformation, of men who turn into wolves, into vampires, even into insects.” He also makes an un-woke joke about the surgery.
The problem for Russo is that destiny decided long ago that this was the only one for him.