Watch the final episode of “Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown.” And Jamie Foxx hosts the BET Awards.
BET AWARDS 2018 8 p.m. on BET. Meek Mill has been steadily getting back to performing since his release from prison in April, appearing at the Rolling Loud Festival and Summer Jam. His performance at this awards show is sure to be rousing. Jamie Foxx hosts, while other stars include Nicki Minaj, Janelle Monáe, Migos, 2 Chainz and YG. Plus, the upstart British singer Ella Mai will bring her suave Top 10 single “Boo’d Up” to the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles.
DATELINE 7 p.m. on NBC. The NBC News correspondent Jacob Soboroff travels 2,000 miles along the United States-Mexico border for this investigative piece on the current border crisis. He talks with families seeking asylum, rides along with border patrol and accompanies activists in their quest to shield undocumented migrants from harm. He also interviews Kirstjen Nielsen, the secretary of homeland security, who has been the target of much ire over the last week.
THE PACIFIC WAR IN COLOR 8 p.m. on Smithsonian. We’ve grown accustomed to seeing approximations of World War II in vivid color in films like “Dunkirk,” “Letters From Iwo Jima” and “Saving Private Ryan.” But this series goes further, compiling color footage to shed new light on the war and its ghastly violence. Home movies are culled from the collections of soldiers, including Gen. Douglas MacArthur. The first episode, titled “An Ocean Apart,” documents Japan’s blitz against China, Pearl Harbor and Australia and the subsequent American mobilization for the war.
ANTHONY BOURDAIN: PARTS UNKNOWN. 9 p.m. on CNN. In the final episode of this food and travel show, Bourdain traveled into the deep recesses of the Himalayas to explore Bhutan. He learned how nomadic herders use different parts of the yak for various purposes, and discussed death with Buddhist monks. “It is considered enlightening and therapeutic to think about death for a few minutes a day,” he said in conversation during the episode. Mr. Bourdain died earlier this month.
PREACHER 10 p.m. on AMC. This supernatural West Texas drama returns for its third season. Dominic Cooper stars as Jesse Cutler, a whiskey-swilling small-town preacher who suddenly develops a superpower in which others are compelled to obey him. “It’s a blasphemous blood bath, a metaphysical action caper, stylized and splattery, that doesn’t have great depth but makes up for it with volume,” James Poniewozik wrote in his review for The New York Times. In Season 3, Jesse brings his ex-girlfriend and an Irish vampire to the Louisiana plantation where he was raised, where more strangeness awaits.
LAST WEEK TONIGHT WITH JOHN OLIVER 11:30 p.m. on HBO. If you’re in China, you might not be able to read this article. John Oliver was censored on Weibo, a popular Chinese microblogging platform, after airing a segment that critiqued President Xi Jinping’s human rights record and mentioned his passing resemblance to Winnie-the-Pooh. Mr. Oliver delights in angering authority, so you can imagine what he might do in this week’s segment.