The administrative law judge recommended that Dr. Helfmann pay a fine and a share of the investigative costs. The board went further, ordering that Dr. Helfmann’s license be suspended for two years, Ms. Coryell wrote. During the first year, he will not be able to practice; during the second, he can practice, but only under supervision. Dr. Helfmann also will have to pay a $10,000 civil penalty, take an ethics course and reimburse the state for some of its investigative costs. The suspension is scheduled to begin in September.
New Jersey began to investigate Dr. Helfmann after a ProPublica article published in The New York Times in December 2015 that described the lawsuits and the information they contained. The allegations involved Dr. Helfmann’s patients as well as those of his colleagues at Short Hills Associates in Clinical Psychology, a New Jersey practice where he has been the managing partner.
Dr. Helfmann is a leader in his field, serving as president of the American Group Psychotherapy Association, and as a past president of the New Jersey Psychological Association.
The information was subsequently redacted from court records after a patient countersued Dr. Helfmann and his partners, the psychology group and the practice’s debt collection lawyers. The patient’s lawsuit was settled.
Dr. Helfmann has denied wrongdoing, saying his former debt collection lawyers were responsible for attaching patients’ information to the lawsuits. His current lawyer, Scott Piekarsky, said he intends to file an immediate appeal before the discipline takes effect.
“The discipline imposed is so disproportionate as to be shocking to one’s sense of fairness under New Jersey case law,” Mr. Piekarsky said in a statement.
Mr. Piekarsky also noted that the administrative law judge who heard the case found no need for any license suspension and raised questions about the credibility of the patient who sued Dr. Helfmann. “We feel this is a political decision due to Dr. Helfmann’s aggressive stance” in litigation, he said.
Dr. Helfmann sued the state of New Jersey and Joan Gelber, a senior deputy attorney general, claiming that he was not provided due process and equal protection under the law. He and Short Hills Associates sued his prior debt collection firm for legal malpractice. Those cases have been dismissed, though Dr. Helfmann has appealed.
Dr. Helfmann and Short Hills Associates also are suing the patient who sued him, as well as the man’s lawyer, claiming the patient and lawyer violated a confidential settlement agreement by talking to a ProPublica reporter and sharing information with a lawyer for the New Jersey attorney general’s office without providing advance notice. In court pleadings, the patient and his lawyer maintain that they did not breach the agreement. Dr. Helfmann brought all three of these lawsuits in state court in Union County.
Throughout his career, Dr. Helfmann has been an advocate for patient privacy, helping to push a state law limiting the information an insurance company can seek from a psychologist to determine the medical necessity of treatment. He also was a plaintiff in a lawsuit against two insurance companies and a New Jersey state commission, accusing them of requiring psychologists to turn over their treatment notes in order to get paid.
