LEXINGTON, Ky. — It was one of the biggest games of the University of Kentucky basketball season, and Scott Pruitt had scored two of the best seats in the arena: a few feet from the action, in a section reserved for season-ticket holders who had donated at least $1 million to the university.
It has been an auspicious turnaround for Alliance and for Mr. Craft, who in nearly four decades in the coal industry had felt unwelcome at the E.P.A., apparently never even setting foot in the agency’s headquarters, one executive told an energy conference last November.
Mr. Pruitt’s mostly behind-the-scenes relationship with Mr. Craft is emblematic of his unorthodox approach to leading the E.P.A., where he often blurs the lines between personal and official relationships and has created the impression at times that he does the bidding of the industries the agency regulates. As administrator, he has become the subject of a dozen ethical and other investigations, including several focused on his ties to lobbyists and others with business before his agency.
Emails and schedules show that Mr. Craft and Mr. Pruitt planned to meet at the Ritz-Carlton resort in Naples, Fla., for a gathering of the National Mining Association’s board of directors. Mr. Pruitt even met with the board of Mr. Craft’s company in a private dining room at the Trump International Hotel near the White House, according to schedules and emails made public by the E.P.A. in response to records requests.
Jahan Wilcox, an E.P.A. spokesman, said that Mr. Pruitt paid $130 in cash for each ticket. An email from the E.P.A. ethics office approving in advance the purchase of the tickets said that payment would be made by check, but since it was a cash transaction, there is no receipt.
Mr. Craft, 67, and Mr. Pruitt, 50, have deep ties to Kentucky. Mr. Pruitt, who was born and raised in the state, briefly played baseball at the University of Kentucky on a scholarship; Mr. Craft, also a Kentucky native, earned both his undergraduate and law degrees from the university. Both men later advanced their professional lives in Oklahoma, where Alliance has its corporate headquarters and where Mr. Pruitt served as a Republican state lawmaker and attorney general before joining the Trump administration.
Their targeting of the Obama-era controls imposed on the coal industry has angered environmentalists, who praised efforts by the E.P.A. under the Obama administration to reduce lead and other toxic substances in power plant emissions, while also addressing climate change concerns related to carbon dioxide releases.
“The fact that industry no longer has an adversary in its government, and specifically at the E.P.A., is a huge step forward in common-sense regulation,” said Ashley Burke, a spokeswoman for the National Mining Association.
Mr. Lovell said that while Alliance welcomed the changes Mr. Pruitt had brought to the E.P.A., the coal company had not been treated differently from its industry peers.
“We did not receive any special treatment from the E.P.A.,” Mr. Lovell said.
A Friend at the E.P.A.
“It is critically important to preserve the fleet of existing coal-fired power plants,” the American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity, an industry group where Mr. Craft is a board member and a past chairman, said in a letter in April to the E.P.A.
The E.P.A. was no longer in the business of “picking winners and losers,” he added, a reference to the Obama-era restrictions that the industry has argued put coal producers at a disadvantage.
“It will be wonderful to see the Crafts,” Sydney Hupp, then an aide to Mr. Pruitt at the E.P.A., said in an email setting up the event.
After Mr. Pruitt spoke to the group, the board backed the Trump administration’s decision to leave the Paris climate agreement. The E.P.A.’s inspector general is investigating an allegation that the board’s decision came at Mr. Pruitt’s request, which could amount to a violation of anti-lobbying laws.
Mr. Wilcox, the E.P.A. spokesman, said that Mr. Pruitt’s appearance had been cleared by agency ethics officials and that he did not eat dinner at the event.
Documents show that Mr. Craft and others in the industry have sought the E.P.A.’s help, particularly in decreasing costs related to air and water pollution controls at coal-powered plants.
Mr. Craft and other coal industry executives fear this conclusion will mean shutting down the coal-burning furnaces. That’s why, in May last year, they complained to the E.P.A. that the water treatment requirement was “projected to cost electricity generators hundreds of millions to billions of dollars.” Ten days later, Mr. Pruitt announced that he would postpone the rule for at least two years.
Emails show that a security agent from Mr. Pruitt’s staff coordinated with university police to make arrangements for his visit. Matt Bevin, Kentucky’s governor, a Republican, planned to be part of Mr. Pruitt’s group, and they were to be accompanied by an E.P.A. security detail and Kentucky state police officers, the emails said. Police were also informed of Mr. Pruitt’s premium seats and his plans to visit the Crafts, along with the locker room complex largely funded by Mr. Craft and named for him.
As attorney general, Mr. Pruitt directed state officials to challenge the E.P.A., including a lawsuit that accused the agency of improperly trying to compel two Oklahoma coal-burning power plants to overhaul their emissions systems to improve air quality in nearby federal wilderness areas. That regulation affected plants fueled with coal from Alliance’s mines.
By 2013, Mr. Craft, his company and nearly a dozen other coal industry lawyers, consultants and executives were contributing to Mr. Pruitt’s bid for a second term, even though he faced no real opposition. Many of those donations came in November 2013, just weeks after Mr. Pruitt disclosed that he would ask the Supreme Court to take up the case involving the Oklahoma power plants. Mr. Pruitt ultimately lost that case.
Even with the changes under Mr. Pruitt’s E.P.A., the coal industry faces formidable obstacles, particularly because of the abundance of cheap natural gas.
