WASHINGTON — Larry Kudlow, the director of President Trump’s National Economic Council, spent Tuesday morning calling friends who said they expected him to return to his White House job after recovering from a mild heart attack that landed him in the hospital on Monday.
Mr. Kudlow, 70, seemed to be back to his usual self, friends and colleagues said, as he placed and fielded calls from Walter Reed Medical Center. On Tuesday afternoon, White House officials said Mr. Kudlow remained in the hospital and confirmed they expect him to return to his position.
Other people who spoke with Mr. Kudlow on Tuesday said they expected he would return to his position as Mr. Trump’s top economic adviser. The high-profile position includes advising the president on trade and economic policy and, in Mr. Kudlow’s case, making frequent television appearances to promote what the administration considers its economic successes.
“He’s O.K. and will be back on the job,” said Stephen Moore, an economist at the Heritage Foundation and a longtime friend of Mr. Kudlow’s.
The economist Arthur Laffer, another longtime friend, said that Mr. Kudlow had called him on Monday from his hospital bed.
Asked whether he expected Mr. Kudlow to return to work, Mr. Laffer said he had never considered the possibility that he would not.
Mr. Kudlow had complained to colleagues of exhaustion in recent days. Friends said they had begun to worry about his health after he looked uncharacteristically fatigued at a series of events. He did not respond to messages from colleagues on Sunday and he canceled a key meeting on Monday, before being hospitalized and having doctors insert a stent.
Mr. Kudlow is a former Wall Street economist and a frequent adviser on economic issues to conservative political candidates, including Mr. Trump, whose campaign tax plan Mr. Kudlow helped write. He was also a longtime radio and television host, including more than a decade on CNBC.
Mr. Laffer, whose friendship with Mr. Kudlow has spanned several decades, has spoken at least once a week with Mr. Kudlow since he started working at the White House. He said that Mr. Kudlow had occasionally complained about his health in the past, but had not done so since he began working for Mr. Trump.
“I do not think the stress levels at the White House are anything like he had at CNBC,” Mr. Laffer said.