The investigation into President Trump’s former lawyer and “fixer” Michael D. Cohen has ensnared the publisher of The National Enquirer, further thrusting the media company into a federal inquiry involving a onetime top lieutenant to a sitting president.
Prosecutors with the Southern District of New York subpoenaed executives at the publisher, American Media, this spring, according to people who have been briefed about the move but agreed to share the details about it only on the condition of anonymity.
The prosecutors had already asked for communications between Mr. Cohen and American Media’s chairman, David J. Pecker, and its chief content officer, Dylan Howard. That request was part of a search warrant they secured for Mr. Cohen’s home, office, hotel room and electronic devices in April.
The people familiar with the investigation said prosecutors sought similar communications from Mr. Howard and Mr. Pecker.
During the presidential campaign, American Media had arranged to effectively silence Karen McDougal, a former Playboy model who claimed to have had an affair with Mr. Trump years earlier, with a $150,000 payout.
The payment caught the attention of investigators conducting a broad investigation into Mr. Cohen’s efforts on behalf of Mr. Trump during the campaign, as well as his own business dealings. It is also the subject of a complaint at the Federal Election Commission.
The New York Times reported in February that Mr. Cohen had been in contact with Ms. McDougal’s lawyer at the time, Keith Davidson, as Mr. Davidson was negotiating with American Media on her behalf; Mr. Cohen was not directly a party to the deal.
Even with this administration’s heated invective against the news media, federal subpoenas of media companies remain exceedingly rare. Justice Department officials tend to approve them only after a deliberative process at the agency’s highest levels.
Several First Amendment lawyers said in interviews that the situation involving American Media and Mr. Cohen was equally unusual.
American Media has denied any wrongdoing. And Mr. Pecker has portrayed the deal with Ms. McDougal as a business arrangement, noting that it also included rights to use her on its magazine covers and to publish fitness columns under her name.
At the Federal Election Commission, American Media is facing claims that the payment to Ms. McDougal constituted an illegal political contribution to Mr. Trump, meant to stanch negative publicity against him during the campaign.
Political donations to candidates are capped at $5,400 per individual during election cycles, and candidates may not receive money directly from corporate treasuries. American Media has denied that the payment constituted a contribution.
News of the subpoena was first reported by The Wall Street Journal.