Longtime Democratic members of Congress in New York City are facing something new this year: healthy competition, giving the party’s voters real choices in New York’s June 26 primary.
In the 14th Congressional District, which spans Queens and the Bronx, Representative Joseph Crowley is defending his seat against an insurgent campaign from Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a former campaign organizer for Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont. Mr. Crowley, the Queens Democratic leader, has ambitions of succeeding Representative Nancy Pelosi as the House Democratic leader that could redound to the city’s benefit. But Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, 28, has won an impressive measure of support, casting herself as a grass-roots alternative to an incumbent with deep sway in local politics.
In the 16th Congressional District in the Bronx and Westchester County, Representative Eliot Engel is facing a Democratic primary challenge from Jonathan Lewis, a Scarsdale businessman who co-founded a company that invested in municipal bonds.
Representative Carolyn Maloney, who was first elected to Congress in 1992, is also locked in a tough battle in the 12th Congressional District, which covers Manhattan’s East Side and parts of Queens and Brooklyn. Ms. Maloney’s opponent, Suraj Patel, president of his family’s Indiana-based hotel management company, has raised just over $1 million, only slightly short of Ms. Maloney’s roughly $1.4 million.
In heavily Democratic New York, primary races are often more important than the general election. But the scheduling of this month’s primaries, on the last day of school, and nearly three months before the more widely publicized primaries for governor and other statewide offices, seems intended to depress turnout and protect incumbents. Increased competition, though, could help stir interest in the races and make these Democratic races more democratic.
One district where change would be welcome is the Ninth Congressional District, in the heart of Brooklyn. The challenger is an energetic young community organizer named Adem Bunkeddeko, who is running against Representative Yvette Clarke. We endorse Mr. Bunkeddeko in the June primary.
Mr. Bunkeddeko faces a tough race. Ms. Clarke has represented the district for more than a decade.
Mr. Bunkeddeko’s résumé is impressive, and his biography is inspiring. The son of Ugandan war refugees, Mr. Bunkeddeko, 30, grew up in a one-bedroom apartment in Queens with three of his siblings before graduating from Haverford College and Harvard Business School. He managed congressional campaigns for the Democratic Party in Arkansas and helped low-income families as an organizer in Brooklyn. He also worked at New York’s Empire State Development Corporation, the business arm of state government — and a potent political training ground.
Mr. Bunkeddeko has said that he wants to focus on bringing federal housing dollars back to Brooklyn, of critical importance to a district that includes neighborhoods from Park Slope to Crown Heights where rents have soared, putting enormous pressure on poor and middle-class New Yorkers. One of his proposals — to fight for Mitchell-Lama-style developments that could include tens of thousands of units of affordable housing — may be a difficult sell in Washington. But that kind of big thinking is refreshing, and sorely needed in Congress. And he has promised to broaden constituent services to offer much-needed legal services to immigrants and other residents.
When asked about her most significant legislative accomplishments, Ms. Clarke noted her role along with other Democrats in passing the Affordable Care Act. She also listed her work helping secure funding to support financially struggling hospitals in central Brooklyn. She added that she has legislation before Congress now that would require state Medicaid programs to report data to the federal government on opioid abuse. It’s a measure, she says, that would help the country find trends and fight the epidemic. Another of her bills, introduced with two other members of the New York congressional delegation this year, would provide funding for public housing and rental assistance to help prevent foreclosures.
Yet major legislative accomplishments have been regrettably far between in her tenure in Congress. Residents of Brownsville, Park Slope, Prospect Lefferts Gardens, Flatbush, Sheepshead Bay and Crown Heights deserve a more energetic advocate in Washington.
If they vote for Mr. Bunkeddeko on June 26, they will get one — and give this promising newcomer a chance.