New York|Taxi Drivers in New York Are Struggling. So Are Uber Drivers.
Taxi Drivers in New York Are Struggling. So Are Uber Drivers.
Pedro Acosta, a driver for Uber, helps Kiara Correa Acosta, 17, into his car in Brooklyn. Mr. Acosta, who has driven for Uber since it arrived in New York in 2011, says he has seen his income steadily decline even as the cost of living in the city has gone up.
After a growing furor among Uber drivers in New York City in 2016 over plunging incomes, Uber relented and made a rare concession: It agreed to recognize a local driver group.
The group, the Independent Drivers Guild, was not quite a union, but it would meet regularly with Uber management and advocate for drivers. Still, there was lingering suspicion that the guild was a pawn for Uber since it accepts money from the powerful company.
But two years later, the guild is taking an increasingly confrontational stance toward Uber as it pushes for higher pay and a cap on new drivers.
Backed by veterans from the Barack Obama and Bernie Sanders presidential campaigns, the guild is drawing attention to the plight of Uber drivers struggling to make a living — just like taxi drivers.
After a taxi driver killed himself last month — one of six driver suicides since December — the Independent Drivers Guild called for new regulations in stark terms, saying city leaders had ignored “widespread exploitation.” While Uber as a corporate behemoth has eviscerated the yellow cab industry, front-line workers in both worlds share a common bond over their economic desperation.
“How many more of our families must be shattered before the city will act?” said Sohail Rana, an Uber driver and guild member.
Yet some continue to doubt the guild’s independence. Leaders will not say how much Uber pays the guild as part of its agreement to represent drivers or how many dues-paying members it has. But officials at Uber are hardly pleased by the group’s decision to go after its bottom line.
The guild’s campaign comes as New York City is considering stricter rules for Uber and other ride-hailing services that have flooded the streets with vehicles. Mayor Bill de Blasio and the City Council are under pressure to address several issues: setting fair wages for drivers, reducing street congestion and stabilizing the crashing values of taxi medallions.
Last Monday, Uber’s chief executive, Dara Khosrowshahi, visited City Hall as part of a global charm offensive to repair the company’s image. Mr. Khosrowshahi met with Corey Johnson, the City Council speaker, who said recently that it had been a mistake not to rein in Uber’s growth in 2015, when Mr. de Blasio tried unsuccessfully to institute a cap.
Uber has become hugely popular in New York, and its trips outpaced yellow taxis for the first time last year. There are about 65,000 vehicles affiliated with Uber in the city, which provide more than 400,000 trips per day, according to the Taxi and Limousine Commission. Lyft, its main rival, tallies about 112,000 trips per day. City law caps the number of yellow taxis at about 13,500; they typically make about 300,000 trips each day.
New Yorkers get cheap rides in nice vehicles — and a respite from the failing subway — while Uber is moving toward an initial public offering next year at a value of $48 billion. But many of the drivers who New Yorkers and Uber executives rely on are feeling hopeless.
Drivers are trapped in predatory car loans. The money they make from each trip is relatively paltry after fees, like sales tax, are deducted and after Uber takes its cut of more than 20 percent.
Pedro Acosta began driving for Uber shortly after the service arrived in New York in 2011. At first, he made a good living. Uber enticed drivers, promising they would make $5,000 during their first month. But then the app started reducing its rates.
Mr. Acosta made 4,457 trips for Uber last year, or more than 85 rides each week. He made about $30,000 after expenses, according to his tax returns, an amount that he said was difficult to live off in an increasingly expensive city. He has six children, and his wife works giving massages and facials.
His expenses add up quickly — a $750 monthly car payment, insurance, gas, oil changes, professional clothing. To buy his 2016 Mitsubishi Outlander SUV, Mr. Acosta took out a loan with an interest rate of 17.7 percent. He makes a point of wearing a tie in hopes of improving his rating as a driver and making his children proud.
A survey by the Independent Drivers Guild found that one-fifth of drivers had household incomes of less than $30,000 per year. A survey by a competing group, the New York Taxi Workers Alliance, which represents taxi and ride-hailing service drivers, found that about 44 percent of drivers made incomes between $20,000 and $39,000.
Mr. Acosta, a guild member, pays $18 in dues each month. The group has given him a voice, he said, like when it fought to allow passengers to tip from within the app — an idea Uber embraced last year. Most riders still do not tip, though. “They got used to not paying a tip,” he said.
The guild is now calling for change. It wants a minimum pay rate for app drivers, similar to the metered fare taxi drivers earn; a limit on Uber’s commission; and a halt to licensing additional drivers.
The City Council is considering a series of bills, including one that would restrict the number of for-hire vehicles. At the same time, the city’s taxi commission is studying driver pay and is planning to propose new rules this summer to address the problem.
Meera Joshi, the city’s taxi commissioner, said an influx of vehicles has made it much harder for drivers to find trips.
“The pay, from what we can see, has been declining, in part because of the competition among apps to offer the lowest passenger price,” Ms. Joshi said.
Alix Anfang, a spokeswoman for Uber, said the driver pay study was a good idea.
“We believe that all full-time drivers in N.Y.C. — taxi, limousine and Uber alike — should be able to make a living wage and support their families,” Ms. Anfang said.
The drivers who have taken their lives were from across the industry — men who drove taxis and for livery and black car services. The latest suicide was Abdul Saleh, a yellow taxi driver who leased his cab and died last week, according to the Taxi Workers Alliance.
In light of the taxi driver suicides, Mr. Khosrowshahi said he would support a fee on Uber trips to pay for a “hardship fund” to support taxi medallion owners who are struggling. Medallions once sold for more than $1 million and now go for as low as $175,000.
Bhairavi Desai, executive director of the New York Taxi Workers Alliance, slammed the “hardship fund” as a public relations stunt and an attempt to avoid new regulations. Ms. Desai is a frequent critic of the Independent Drivers Guild, arguing that its leaders cannot be trusted because they receive money from Uber. Ms. Desai says the guild’s attacks on Uber are meant to give the impression that it is not cooperating with the company.
“They have to create tension to have some level of credibility,” Ms. Desai said.
The taxi workers alliance, which was founded in 1998 and has about 4,000 dues-paying members, has also pressed for new rules, including a vehicle cap and minimum fare rate.
But the Independent Drivers Guild’s message is more polished. The guild, which is affiliated with a regional branch of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, hired Revolution Messaging, the company behind Mr. Sanders’s digital campaign in 2016. It was founded by staffers from Mr. Obama’s 2008 campaign.
Last week, the guild’s executive director, Ryan Price, criticized Mr. Khosrowshahi’s “hardship fund” as another fee that would hit workers.
“Uber’s C.E.O. needs to address the widespread hardship faced by drivers for his own company before considering taking another cut from our sub-minimum wage pay,” Mr. Price said.
Facing low wages and long hours, some Uber drivers have quit. But Mr. Acosta keeps working for the company because he needs a job with flexibility. One of his sons has spina bifida and uses a wheelchair. He has to take him to many appointments.
“I don’t have any other choice,” Mr. Acosta said.