A by-no-means exhaustive list of the things our editors (and a few contributors) find interesting on a given week.
Founded by childhood friends Fiona Mackay and Alexis Barrell in 2017, the artisanal clothing and textile brand Karu — named after South Africa’s semidesert Karoo region — is nothing if not international. Mackay is a New York City-based brand consultant, Barrell designs clothing and homewares in Jaipur and the two originally met while growing up in Cape Town. Together, they create patterned cotton sleepwear, airy linen dresses and handmade block-printed textiles.
This month, the brand will release a pair of made-to-order mohair rugs, created in partnership with the South African rug producer Frances Van Hasselt, who grew up on one of the oldest Angora goat farms in the Karoo, and today runs her eponymous brand, Frances V. H, out of Cape Town. The collaboration will feature two initial designs — in muted desert tones, with touches of indigo and mustard — with more to follow this September. The Patchwork rug, a fusion of imperfect rectangles, references vintage quilting techniques, while Blok Huis nods to the simple geometry of the farmhouses that dot the Karoo. Made in standard and custom sizes using hand-spun mohair from angora goats sheared on Van Hasselt’s family farm, which has won industry accolades for its ethical practices, the reversible designs are woven over the course of six to eight weeks by skilled female weavers in the Eastern Cape — the final step in a local and sustainable supply chain.
This literary encounter became the springboard for Hicklin’s new project, the Deep Water Literary Festival, which kicks off today in Narrowsburg, N.Y., the Delaware Valley town where Hicklin, the editor of Out magazine, owns a home and also runs the bookshop One Grand. Throughout the weekend, all 24 books of “The Odyssey” will be read, relay-style, by a cast of talents both local and famous. Visitors, plied with themed cocktails — such as La Sirène, made of honey whiskey and preserved lemon — will be sent on a looping odyssey of their own through the town, listening to each portion at a different landmark while taking in video projections, culinary demonstrations and theatrical performances specially paired with select sections.
Odysseus’s journey to the underworld will be presented by the Man Booker Prize-winning author Marlon James inside a candlelit Lutheran church; his reunion with his son, Telemachus, will be narrated by the actor Mark Ruffalo, with a live drawing of the scene by the artist Andrew Ondrejcak. Other featured guests include A.M. Homes, Masha Gessen, Dylan Baker, Penny Arcade and Jake Shears of the Scissor Sisters. The festival’s main route will be illuminated by neon signs made by the local artist Wayne Heller, featuring iconic phrases from the text (“the wine-dark sea,” “sleep delicious and profound”).
Next week in Paris, 70 plaster and bronze sculptures made by Alberto Giacometti will go on display at the new Giacometti Institute, housed within a stately Art Deco mansion in Montparnasse not far from the artist’s former studio. Alongside them will be a collection of several of Giacometti’s paintings, etchings and notebooks, some of which have never been shown before. After a series of lawsuits between the artist’s family and two quarreling institutions, the consolidation of this collection in a permanent institution will, at long last, make the archive accessible to the public. “We want to address the public through the personality of the artist, because the history of art becomes much more lively and easier to understand,” says Catherine Grenier, the director of the Giacometti Institute.
When Joanna Williams of Kneeland Co. walks into a store, chances are that her eye will land on something out of the ordinary, and usually not for sale. This is one of the unique talents of the Los Angeles-based creative consultant, whose library of vintage and antique textiles is a source of inspiration for fashion and interior brands including Dries Van Noten, Prada, Christopher Kane, Isabel Marant, Pierre Frey and Studio Four NYC.
On a trip to India this spring, a friend took Williams to the oldest perfumery in New Delhi, Gulab Singh, which has been making perfumes from fresh flowers and sandalwood oil since 1816. “As lovely as the fragrances were, I was drawn to their collection of antique perfume bottles,” Williams says. “They’re beautiful — some etched, others hand-painted — and I fell madly in love with them.” Along with some 160 other pieces that Williams has collected on her travels — mostly in Mexico (where her Irish great-grandfather settled after fighting in the Mexican Revolution) and India, which she calls her “bliss” — a selection of the bottles will be available at Kneeland Co.’s first pop-up in Los Angeles and online from today.
T’s own special art issue has me thinking about a group show called “Drawing a Blank,” curated by Ben Broome, which opened yesterday with a big party at 1850 Amsterdam Avenue, in Harlem. Broome used to work for a blue-chip gallery in London but soon became jaded by the experience, and inspired by his own group of talented friends — artists, musicians and filmmakers — put together the first “Drawing a Blank” in 2016 in an old parking lot in London. Now, he has taken the idea to New York for the first time. Among the works featured will be a piece by the filmmaker Frank Lebon (Tyrone’s younger brother) which is based on the discovery that a 17-year-old named Jaunty had tattooed the titles of two other of his artworks on his body. At the opening, Lebon taped Jaunty to the wall, so only the tattoos were visible, before eventually cutting him free of the tape, leaving remains like a chalk outline of a body. The American painter Chase Hall, whose work deals with identity and the ways in which African-Americans are perceived in imagery, also contributed work.
