Low-speed torque and whisper-quiet operation make electric vehicles an attractive alternative for commercial uses, and the incognito answer to Teslas and Bolts.
McKinsey & Company, the management consulting group, forecasts that electric light- and medium-duty trucks — a group that includes pickups, flatbeds and some trash haulers — could achieve between 8 percent and 34 percent sales penetration by 2030. The wide range depends on market conditions: Fleet owners need parity in the total cost of ownership between a traditional diesel-powered vehicle and an electric one. And municipal air-quality regulations may spur or slow down the adoption of electric commercial fleets.
Mr. Hensley said two factors were holding back the commercial electric market: a limited number of models and the relative infancy of fast-charging technology.
The Workhorse Group, based in Cincinnati, has signed a letter of intent to sell 500 electric pickup trucks to Duke Energy, with delivery starting this summer. The $52,000 vehicles, made in the company’s plant in Union City, Ind., “will do anything a conventional pickup will do, including towing and hauling,” said Steve Burns, Workhorse’s chief executive.
Workhorse has just concluded a deal with UPS to sell the company 950 electric delivery vans, adding to the 50 that UPS has been testing. And a joint venture of Workhorse and the truck builder VT Hackney is one of five finalists in the United States Postal Service’s bid to replace its fleet of mail delivery vehicles. The Postal Service is also evaluating gasoline and hybrid vehicles, but typical mail delivery route distances make an electric vehicle a viable proposition, Mr. Burns said.
The Chinese company building Antelope Valley’s electric buses, BYD, is unknown to most Americans, but it is the world’s largest manufacturer of electric vehicles — everything from forklifts to passenger cars and semi trucks.
The company is building the buses in Lancaster, and has also supplied electric buses to the University of California; Eugene, Ore.; and more. Low operating costs are a main selling point.
The company has demonstrated its electric garbage trucks to City of Los Angeles sanitation officials and has a deal to sell 20 articulated buses to the operator of Los Angeles International Airport, Mr. Miller said.
The Antelope Valley Transit Authority is receiving $46 million in state and federal funding to help buy its 80 electric buses. While some of its buses run consecutive multiple routes as far as 558 miles a day, they can be charged wirelessly whenever a route is finished, adding 20 miles of range every 10 minutes. Mr. Engel said he expected the authority to save $1 million per year in fuel costs alone.
Other companies are running commercial electric vehicle demonstration projects and gearing up for production.
Tesla says it will make its Tesla Semi electric truck next year, with prices beginning at $150,000. And Thor Trucks, based in Los Angeles, also plans to offer an electric semi truck next year. It expects to charge $150,000 for a version with a 100-mile range, and $250,000 for a 300-mile version.
Siemens, the German technology company, recently conducted a one-mile eHighway demonstration at the Long Beach and Los Angeles ports using trucks that drew power from overhead wires, much the way trains and streetcars are powered.
