Cottages — I’ll stick with what they’re called around here — are big in Canada, if more prevalent in some parts of the country (like Manitoba) than others (much of British Columbia). And, unlike in much of the United States, going to a summer place is for blue-collar workers as well as for bankers.
We even have academic experts on the subject: Peter A. Stevens, a professor of history at Humber College in Toronto, has done research on cottage culture.
The abundance of cottages in parts of Canada has one obvious cause, he said: There’s a lot of land but not a lot of people.
The earliest cottages popped up near resort hotels on lakes that were linked to cities by trains and then, steamships. (Lake of Bays, where my wife’s cottage is, also had a tiny railway that ran between two ships for just over a mile.) It was the expansion of highways and a government land policy in Ontario that Professor Stevens said set off the post-World War II cottage boom.
Much of Canada is, of course, “Crown land” — owned by the government. The government leased areas with logging or mining potential to companies, but also leased or sold small properties, usually along lakes, at low prices to city dwellers for summer retreats.
“If you have lands that can’t be used for resource development, the resource becomes the scenery,” noted Professor Stevens, who while growing up in B.C. spent a week each summer at an uncle’s cottage on Vancouver Island’s Sproat Lake.
The New York Times wrote about this Canadian phenomenon way back in 1966. Under the headline “Cottage Frenzy Seizes Ontarians,” our correspondent John Lee reported from an auction in Parry Sound, Ontario, that lots typically sold for about $500 (about $3,800 today after adjusting for inflation) but the rampant cottage mania had pushed some to $3,000 ($23,000 today).
Professor Stevens said that the dizzying rise of cottage prices today for properties within the pull of Toronto’s real estate gravity was because Crown land was now scarce. As everywhere, those sky-high prices, in turn, have led to that most divisive of subjects between longtime cottagers and newcomers: the tearing down of modest homes to build mansions.
Another interesting thing about cottage life is how they can create crossroads among Indigenous Canadians and everyone who came later. Professor Stevens said that some First Nations in Ontario had benefited by leasing land for summer places, but there are also fights over issues like Indigenous hunting and fishing rights and land claims.
That relationship is the subject of a humorous play, “Cottagers and Indians,” by Drew Hayden Taylor, an Ojibway playwright. It will tour Ontario this fall and in February return to Toronto’s Tarragon Theater, where it was staged earlier this year.
Professor Stevens, who is writing a book on Ontario’s affection for cottages, spends a lot of time at them but doesn’t own one. “My wife is not a cottage person,” he explained.
Are you? Please send us a picture of your summer place and a note about your favorite cottage routine to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| We may share them in another newsletter or through our Reader Center.
If they build it, you may pay. Mahinda Rajapaksa, Sri Lanka’s former president, thought that a massive port was just what his country needed. No one else did. But Chinese state-owned enterprises were happy to lend vast amounts of money to build it. In a deeply reported story, my colleague Maria Abi-Habib lays out how that debt was a noose. Now, Sri Lanka has handed the port and 15,000 acres of land over to China for 99 years.
From the archives. The Times famously proclaims each day on its print front page to offer “All the News That’s Fit to Print.” It can be a hoot to see how editors defined that in the past. By way of example, I offer a tall tale from 1895 about a “Canadian woodsman,” a moose and their encounter in Mecunoma, a long-vanished village in Muskoka.
—Catherine Porter takes you inside the Fraser Mustard Early Learning Academy in Toronto where there are 630 students ages 4 to 6, most of them children of immigrants. The biggest challenge for the teachers of their 24 classes of kindergartners: They speak more than 40 languages.
—Fred Sasakamoose was invested into the Order of Canada last month partly for being a pioneer for Indigenous players in professional hockey. Stephen Smith used the occasion to look into the general scarcity of Indigenous players at the highest levels of the sport despite their generally widespread participation in hockey.