Matt (Guitar) Murphy, a master bluesman who played with Howlin’ Wolf, Etta James, Chuck Berry and Memphis Slim but was best known as a member of the Blues Brothers band, died on Friday in Miami. He was 88.
The cause was a heart attack, his wife, Kathy Hemrick, said.
Mr. Murphy began his career in Memphis before moving in the 1950s to Chicago, which was then at the epicenter of a new kind of hard-driving, heavily electrified blues. His harmonically sophisticated, jazz-inflected guitar playing established him as a mainstay of the Chicago scene, and a true original.
Mr. Murphy’s talent came to the attention of John Belushi and the keyboardist Paul Shaffer in 1978 as they searched to recruit musicians for the band that Mr. Belushi and Dan Aykroyd, both stars of “Saturday Night Live” at the time, planned to take on tour as the Blues Brothers.
They had asked the songwriter Doc Pomus for help. “He was known as a guru figure,” Mr. Shaffer said in a telephone interview.
Mr. Shaffer and Mr. Belushi had paid a visit to Mr. Pomus at Kenny’s Castaways, a music club in Greenwich Village.
The band — whose other members included Mr. Shaffer, Lou Marini on tenor saxophone, Steve Jordan on drums, Duck Dunn on bass and Steve Cropper on guitar — recorded an album, “Briefcase Full of Blues,” at the Universal Amphitheater in Los Angeles in 1978. They subsequently appeared on “S.N.L.,” went on tour and made a movie.
Mr. Murphy continued to perform with the band and appeared in “Blues Brothers 2000,” Mr. Landis’s 1998 sequel.
Although Mr. Murphy had been performing since the late 1940s, Mr. Belushi and Mr. Aykroyd “definitely put me in business,” he told the guitarist Tom Guerra in an interview on the website of his band, Mambo Sons.
Matthew Tyler Murphy was born on Dec. 28, 1929, in Sunflower, Miss., to Daniel and Lizzie Murphy. His mother died when he was a youngster, and he and his siblings moved to Memphis, where his father was a porter at the famed Peabody Hotel.
Mr. Murphy nurtured his love of guitar playing by listening to records by T-Bone Walker, Blind Boy Fuller and others. But his musical influences also included the jazz saxophonists Stan Getz and John Coltrane.
In Memphis, he played with Howlin’ Wolf, the blues pianist and singer Memphis Slim and the bandleader Tuff Green. Memphis “was one of these hot spots where cats could come from everywhere else and get the surprise of their life because there were so many good musicians there,” Mr. Murphy told Mr. Guerra.
Nonetheless, he soon left for the even more fertile musical turf of Chicago. He became a staff guitarist at Chess Records with the help of the bassist Willie Dixon, which led to many years of session work. Mr. Murphy recorded with Chuck Berry, Muddy Waters and Sonny Boy Williamson.
In 1963, he electrified European audiences with his performance of “Matt’s Guitar Boogie,” backed by Mr. Dixon, Memphis Slim and the drummer Billy Stepney, on the American Folk Blues Festival tour.
In the early 1970s, Mr. Murphy joined the harmonica player James Cotton’s band. The group’s 1974 album, “100% Cotton,” included two songs written by Mr. Murphy.
Mr. Murphy formed his own band in the 1980s and recorded three albums as a leader between 1990 and 2000. One of his sidemen on the 1990 album “Way Down South” was his brother Floyd Sr., an accomplished guitarist in his own right who played with Little Junior Parker, Big Mama Thornton and Rufus Thomas.
Mr. Murphy had a small stroke during a performance around 2001 — he was treated by paramedics but did not go to the hospital — and a more severe one a year or so later. He underwent extensive physical therapy and retired, but he resumed performing at the 2010 Chicago Blues Festival with Mr. Cotton (who died last year).
Mr. Murphy continued to perform, making one appearance at Eric Clapton’s Crossroads Guitar Festival at Madison Square Garden in 2013. His wife said he had been planning a new recording.
In addition to her, his survivors include two sons, Melvin and Christopher.