Times Insider|She Knows How to Make an Exit. You’re Reading It.
She Knows How to Make an Exit. You’re Reading It.
A New York Times obituary writer for 14 years, Margalit Fox takes a crack at her own epitaph.
For this obituary writer, the end has come.
I don’t mean, thankfully, the undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveler returns — the “end” I’ve written about in more than 1,400 obituaries for The New York Times. I mean the end of my career at this newspaper.
My new book, “Conan Doyle for the Defense: The True Story of a Sensational British Murder, a Quest for Justice, and the World’s Most Famous Detective Writer,” was published this week, and in what may be the most foolhardy decision of a foolhardy life, I have decided to pursue a long-held dream of writing books exclusively. After 24 years at The Times, I will officially pass through the doors of 620 Eighth Avenue for the last time on Friday, June 29.
In newsrooms across America, the obituary department was long a convenient Siberia. Obits was where they sent you if they wanted to punish you but didn’t quite have enough on you to fire you. It was where they sent you if you were deemed only a heartbeat away from needing an obit yourself.
But the fact that it was a job nobody wanted also meant that it was a job — a full-time writing gig on a big-city newspaper — that I could finesse my way into. It took me nearly 10 years.
So I began writing advance obits, assigned by Marvin Siegel, then The Times’s obituary news editor. It is the Sisyphean task of obit editors to stockpile “advances” for as many of the newsworthy undead as possible, and when Marv took the job he commissioned a blizzard of them from colleagues throughout the newsroom. In the coming years, writing in my spare time, I would produce dozens.
Today, the subject of the first advance I ever wrote, in 1995 — a major American scholar — is still going strong at 90-something. He remains, blast him, almost obscenely productive, forcing me to update his obituary several times a year.
In 2004, when a staff job opened in obits, I raced to apply. To his everlasting credit, Marv’s successor, Chuck Strum, took a flyer on this unknown copy editor and let her become, well into her 40s, a cub reporter.
Writing daily obits only reinforced what I had long suspected: It is the best beat in journalism. The reason is simple: In following their subjects from cradle to grave, obits are the most narrative genre in any daily paper. For a writer, there is little better than being paid to tell stories.
Obit writers chronicle the lives of the world’s movers and shakers, of course — the presidents, kings and queens, and captains of industry. These obits are required reading, but they rarely produce those exquisite frissons of pleasure that come from reading (or writing) about something wondrous and strange.
And so it is the frisson-makers — history’s backstage players — whom we writers love best of all. Those unsung heroes and heroines are rarely household names. Yet in ways large and small, they have changed history: They are people who, for good or ill, have put a wrinkle in the social fabric.
I have also had — it is much-needed leavening — the delicious, often downright campy pleasure of telling the stories of people who cast the form of midcentury material culture. Among my favorites is the wonderfully named Massachusetts sculptor Don Featherstone, who, be he saint or sinner, shaped the postwar suburban landscape by inventing the lawn flamingo.
Also in this deeply pleasurable vein were obits for the inventors of the Frisbee, the Pet Rock, Etch A Sketch (which was given the most wonderful headline design ever to grace a news obituary), Stove Top stuffing and the crash-test dummy. One of my favorite assignments ever was the obit of Leslie Buck, who invented the Anthora, the blue-and-white Greek-themed cardboard cup from which generations of Gothamites drank their coffee — and without which a bevy of New York cop shows would not look remotely the same.
The single greatest reward of writing obits, I have learned, is the chance to touch history. This was brought forcibly home to me in 2013, when I reported the obituary of a man named Tom Christian. Mr. Christian was the longtime chief radio operator on Pitcairn Island, responsible for keeping that speck of rock in the Pacific in contact with the world. As might be expected for someone from that place with that name, he was a direct descendant — the great-great-great-grandson — of the Bounty mutineer Fletcher Christian.
In reporting news obits, it is our policy to speak, whenever possible, with our subjects’ families. On The Times’s nickel, I dialed Pitcairn, nearly 6,000 miles from New York. I got a connection clear as crystal, and reached Mr. Christian’s daughter, who gave me (in a lilting accent that to my uneducated ears sounded pure New Zealand) the biographical details I sought.
“She was a decent stylist. She didn’t get too many things wrong.  At times she wrote obits with tears in her eyes, but far more often she wrote them from joy. It was the joy that sprang from the extraordinary privilege of tracing the arc — in sweet-smelling newsprint, damp with ink — of lives well lived.
Keep up with Times Insider stories on Twitter, via the Reader Center: @ReaderCenter.