Just another night eating vegan shepherd’s pie in musical Camelot.
LAMBERT’S COVE, Mass. — James Taylor was 22 when he bought 175 acres of woods here with the proceeds from his first record deal. On a stormy June afternoon nearly half a century later, Carly Simon, his ex-wife; their children, Sally Taylor and Ben Taylor; Ben’s partner, Sophie Hiller, and their friends, the musicians John Forté and David Saw, were gathered in the rambling house that has grown up like a wagon wheel around the original structure, with hallways that hopscotch over rooms and staircases in odd places.
Ms. Simon, or Mama C., as this group calls her, lives in the place, as do Ben and Ms. Hiller, in a house next door. They were strewn over a pair of plump green velvet sofas in front of a crackling fire — it was that cold — to practice for a performance they would give in the Berkshires earlier this month, though the men kept wandering outside, despite the pouring rain, for recreational breaks.
“How nice not to be the focus for a change,” Ms. Simon said.
Their show, a medley of songs that includes some of her old hits, would open a yearlong multimedia installation at Mass MoCA’s Kidspace by Consenses, the arts organization that Ms. Taylor founded half a dozen years ago. Paintings by fifth-grade students have been reinterpreted by artists from around the world in different forms from music to perfume to poetry.
This artistic game of telephone, as Ms. Taylor puts it, is also the basis of an educational program she has developed that focuses on empathy and perception. It has been a career shift for someone who, like nearly every person in her very large extended family, has mostly worked as a musician — though she resisted what she refers to as “the Gig” until she was in her 20s.
Now 44, Ms. Taylor was dressed on this day in a taut beige halter top, a Sri Lankan skirt, strings of beads and dangling bell earrings borrowed from her mother. She wore her abundant curly blond hair tied in a knot. At Brown University, Ms. Taylor studied medical anthropology, a major she created after taking time off to research the health benefits of coca leaves with Andrew Weil, the alternative medicine guru, in Peru. “No, that’s not a joke,” she said cheerfully.
It was a typical day in musical Camelot, a shabby-chic Bohemia bedazzled with rock star mementos. In a downstairs bathroom, at about knee level, there’s a photograph of Jimi Hendrix and Mick Jagger backstage at Madison Square Garden taken by Eddie Kramer, who produced Ms. Simon’s first album; they look like teenagers. If you’re sitting down in there, one of Ms. Simon’s many gold records, the single of “Nobody Does It Better,” has been strategically placed.
Divorced from Mr. Taylor in 1983, Ms. Simon, now 73, named what became her compound Hidden Star Hill. There is a gazebo, two barns, a horse shed and many outbuildings. Also five goats, four dogs, two miniature horses and two donkeys.
Ms. Simon shares the house with her boyfriend of 12 years, Richard Koehler, a surgeon who took this reporter’s coat, offered her tea and then repaired to a barn to work on a sailboat he is restoring. “He reminds me of Myles Standish,” Ms. Simon said.
Mr. Forté, 43, and Mr. Taylor, 41, have been friends since high school. Soft-spoken but with a rock star’s sheen, Mr. Forté, a producer of the Fugees, the 1990s-era band, grew up in the Brownsville neighborhood of Brooklyn and went to Phillips Exeter Academy on a scholarship.
In 2000, he was arrested on charges of drug possession with the intent to distribute, and spent seven years in prison before his sentence was commuted by George W. Bush, largely through the efforts of Ms. Simon and an unlikely ally — Orrin Hatch, the Republican senator from Utah.
Ben Taylor, who wore a chest-length beard and enormous laced boots, asked if he could go join Mr. Saw and Mr. Forté, who were out on the porch and seemed to be generating their own version of a cannabis product, judging from the faint tang that had begun to mingle with the perfume of the peonies that crowded the room.
Then it was time to rehearse. “Let’s get axes and Mama,” Ms. Taylor said.
“Please don’t be afraid to say you hate it,” Ms. Simon said of her singing.
Mindful of the shadow cast by her famous parents, she had resisted entering their field, unlike her brother, who hasn’t been as bedeviled by the challenges of the family business, and long ago made his peace with its hardships.
Ms. Taylor formed a band, bought a van and christened it “Moby” (for the whale, not the musician), and toured for five years. She organized every aspect of the band’s work: the performances, the press and the distribution of the music, packing up each CD with a thank-you note.
Ms. Taylor knew the toll touring takes on a young family. When she married Dean Bragonier, a former restaurateur who now runs a nonprofit that promotes dyslexia curriculums in middle school — Ms. Taylor, Mr. Bragonier and Ms. Simon are all dyslexic — she gave it up for good.
Their son, Bodhi, is now 10. Mr. Bragonier is from Martha’s Vineyard too, though the couple lives in Cambridge, Mass. They met when they were teenagers, as Ms. Taylor’s parents did. Mr. Bragonier was the (clothed) lifeguard at the nude beach Ms. Taylor used to frequent.
“Those cheeks,” she added, patting them.
It was time for dinner: vegan shepherd’s pie. Ms. Simon led a tour through the meandering house while Morgan Rietzas, who owns a taxi company here, waited patiently in the driveway for this reporter. Mr. Rietzas, it turned out, is the saxophonist for the Boogies, a decades-old disco tribute band that Ms. Taylor used to headline when she was in her 20s.
