New York|Ocasio-Cortez Toppled a Giant. Are These N.Y. Democrats Next?
Ocasio-Cortez Toppled a Giant. Are These N.Y. Democrats Next?
The night after Representative Joseph Crowley’s stunning defeat, another Bronx politician who faces an energetic primary challenge from the left, State Senator Jeffrey D. Klein, happened to be holding a birthday party at Limani, the upscale Rockefeller Center restaurant.
The topic, inevitably, turned to the fate of Mr. Crowley. Making the case why his own primary would be different, Mr. Klein told attendees the story of when he ran into Mr. Crowley, whose district overlaps with Mr. Klein’s, at a Bronx parade last year.
The victory of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a 28-year-old activist, over Mr. Crowley, one of the state’s most powerful Democrats, has reshuffled New York’s political order. As emboldened progressive activists dream of their next targets, Mr. Klein and the band of renegade Democrats he led in Albany, who for years broke with the Democratic Party to help keep Republicans in power in the State Senate, are at the top of the list.
The districts of two of the eight senators, those of Mr. Klein and Jose R. Peralta, overlap with the seat that Ms. Ocasio-Cortez won, underscoring just how close to home the progressive insurgency had struck. Like in Mr. Crowley’s race, younger female candidates are challenging both men.
Ms. Biaggi, the granddaughter of a former congressman, Mario Biaggi, got an important boost on Thursday when an influential union in New York, Local 32BJ of the Service Employees International Union, endorsed her, as did the New York City Council speaker, Corey Johnson, who also endorsed three other challengers to members of Mr. Klein’s former group, the Independent Democratic Conference.
Beneath the banner headline of Mr. Crowley’s defeat, there were other signs on Tuesday of anti-establishment energy coursing through the Democratic Party in New York. In Brooklyn, Representative Yvette Clarke barely survived a challenge from a 30-year-old newcomer, Adem Bunkeddeko, that she had claimed she was “laughing” off. Representative Carolyn Maloney, in a district that covers parts of three boroughs, was held below 60 percent by a 34-year-old challenger, Suraj Patel. And in the Syracuse area, the national party’s handpicked candidate for the House, Juanita Perez Williams, was routed by Dana Balter, the preferred pick of local Democrats.
Two officials who worked on Mr. Crowley’s campaign said Mr. Klein should be concerned about Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s victory, particularly if she uses her newfound influence and campaigns against him.
Ousting the former I.D.C. members has been a top priority of New York progressives for months, with phone banking to identify voters in their districts dating back to last November.
“There is a lot of cross-pollination between the grass-roots folks who were powering Ocasio-Cortez’s campaign and those interested in insurgent campaigns for State Senate,” said Lisa DellAquila, co-leader of TrueBlue NY, an activist group.
Mr. Klein, who confirmed the parade anecdote (“He wasn’t happy,” Mr. Klein recalled of Mr. Crowley), said the difference between him and the defeated congressman is his own constant presence in the district, which even Mr. Klein’s critics have acknowledged.
Mr. Klein touted his legislative accomplishments, such as gun control and paid family leave; his opponents cite the long progressive wish list he helped bottle up by empowering Republicans.
He also called Ms. Biaggi accepting Mr. Johnson’s endorsement “bizarre.” “I find it strange that my opponent would accept an endorsement from somebody who was one of the loudest supporters of Joe Crowley,” Mr. Klein declared.
For Ms. Biaggi, the endorsement of S.E.I.U. 32BJ is one of her most significant to date. Hector Figueroa, the union’s leader, said Mr. Klein had declined to sit for an endorsement interview, as did State Senator Diane J. Savino of Staten Island, another former member of the I.D.C.
The I.D.C. formally disbanded this spring, in a deal brokered by Mr. Cuomo, to reunite with the mainline Senate Democrats. Mr. Cuomo had for years tacitly supported the split among them, as it allowed him greater leverage in legislative negotiations.
Ms. Nixon made Mr. Cuomo’s blessing of the arrangement, which helped keep Republicans in power, a centerpiece of her early campaign. The group dissolved soon after.
But Mr. Figueroa remains skeptical of just how dead the I.D.C. is. He said Mr. Klein had “betrayed” unity deals before and feared they could regroup.

Jessica Ramos, a 33-year-old former aide to Mr. de Blasio who is challenging Mr. Peralta in Queens, said she had crossed paths with Ms. Ocasio-Cortez on the campaign trail in recent months and hoped “to speak to her soon” about her own race.
The other former I.D.C. members facing challengers are State Senators Jesse Hamilton of Brooklyn, Marisol Alcantara in Manhattan, Tony Avella in Queens, David J. Valesky in the Syracuse area and David Carlucci in the Hudson Valley.
Ms. Biaggi said she watched Tuesday’s election returns in her campaign’s headquarters: her house.
