General Trainor, left, alongside his co-author, Michael R. Gordon, then the chief military correspondent for The New York Times, being interviewed by Tim Russert on “Meet the Press” in 2006.Credit...Alex Wong/Getty Images for "Meet the Press"
Lt. Gen. Bernard E. Trainor, a Marine combat veteran of the Korean and Vietnam Wars who forged a second career as a military analyst and co-author of three books taking a highly critical view of American policy in the wars with Iraq, died on Saturday at his home in Potomac Falls, Va. He was 89.
After leading infantrymen in two wars and serving as a senior commander at Marine headquarters in the Pentagon, General Trainor turned to journalism. He was the military correspondent of The New York Times from 1986 to 1990 and later an analyst for ABC News and NBC News.
In their trilogy of books, published from 1995 to 2012, General Trainor and Michael R. Gordon, who was the chief military correspondent of The Times, drew on classified documents; interviews with military personnel, American officials, Iraqi officials and their rivals; oral histories; and the authors’ own visits to battle sites.
The final book, “The Endgame: The Inside Story of the Struggle for Iraq, From George W. Bush to Barack Obama” (2012), analyzed the American invasion and occupation of Iraq beginning with the capture of Baghdad in 2003 and ending with the departure of the last American troops in December 2011.
General Trainor and Mr. Gordon concluded that while “potential flash points” in sectarian strife remained in the aftermath of America’s military presence in Iraq, “the greater threat to the country’s American-initiated experiment in democracy” was “the authoritarianism” of the Iraqi prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki.
They credited the “surge” of American troops undertaken by President Bush in 2007 with giving many Iraqi citizens, including former insurgents, “a partner they could trust.” But they also found that the heightened American military presence had not led to any reforms in Iraq’s factionalized government. They faulted both President Bush and President Obama for missteps.
General Trainor turned to journalism after leading infantrymen in two wars and serving as a senior commander at Marine headquarters in the Pentagon.
In their first book, “The Generals’ War: The Inside Story of the Conflict in the Gulf” (1995), General Trainor and Mr. Gordon took a critical look at the American military strikes in early 1991 that repulsed Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait — the campaign known as Desert Storm, begun by President George H. W. Bush.
General Trainor and Mr. Gordon cited a lack of coordination among the branches of America’s armed forces and criticized their “emphasis on a quick victory,” arguing that it allowed much of Mr. Hussein’s Republican Guard to escape and left him with loyal troops to bolster his regime and suppress his Shiite opponents.
In citing what they called “the misreading of the foe,” they contended that Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and Gen. Tommy Franks, the commander of American troops, “believed that their victory would be sealed with the seizing of Baghdad,” although the Americans were not fighting “a purely conventional war” but a foe that included paramilitary forces loyal to Saddam Hussein and dispersed throughout Iraq.
Bernard Edmund Trainor was born in a Manhattan hospital on Sept. 2, 1928, and grew up in the Bronx, one of two sons of Ann (Whelan) Trainor, a homemaker, and Joseph Trainor, who auctioned fruit arriving in New York for sale at grocery stores. Bernard graduated from Cardinal Hayes High School in the Bronx.
As The Times’s military correspondent, General Trainor covered United States-Soviet relations, the civil war in Nicaragua, the Iran-Iraq war and Pentagon affairs. He was later director of the national security program at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard and a senior fellow of the Council on Foreign Relations.
He and his wife, the former Peggy Hamilton, were married for 59 years. In addition to her, General Trainor is survived by their four daughters, Claire Lemoine and Kathleen, Theresa and Saxon Trainor; and five grandchildren. His daughter Saxon is an actress and acting coach. His brother, Joseph, died earlier.
Apart from his analysis of international conflicts, General Trainor wrote in a very personal vein of his combat experiences, relating to his time leading Marines in Korea and Vietnam, and the mark they left on him.
