The unexplainable record, the over-the-top pregame theatrics, even the hot climate.
Every time the Vegas Golden Knights add to their growing list of awe-inspiring playoff performances, Billy Lindsay experiences déjà vu.
“It brings everything back,” said Lindsay, a member of the Florida Panthers during their early years in the N.H.L.
Before the Golden Knights’ magical run to the Stanley Cup finals in their inaugural season, the Panthers of the 1990s were the standard-bearers for N.H.L. expansion teams.
In their first season, 1993-94, the Panthers amassed 83 points, the most of any N.H.L. expansion team up until Vegas’s 109 this season. Florida missed the playoffs by a point.
Two years later, the Panthers did make the playoffs — and reached the franchise’s first and only Stanley Cup finals. It was a surreal season that helped prompt a hockey takeover in South Florida.
The Golden Knights’ unlikely, expedited journey to this year’s Cup finals is unheard-of by major sports league standards. But if any other franchise can relate to what Vegas is going through, even on a smaller scale, it would be the Panthers.
They have been where the Golden Knights have been, and where Vegas does not want to go.
Bad trades, a questionable move to the suburbs and a sharp decline in team performance over the years put the brakes on the Panthers’ fast start. Since that 1996 finals run, Florida has made the playoffs only four times, and twice in the past 17 years.
The team is consistently in the bottom third in attendance every season, and was 28th in the league this season, averaging 13,851 spectators. And in a region known for transplants and retirees, many of the fans who do show up are rooting for the visiting team.
“I’m not going to lie, it has been tough to stick with them sometimes,” said Todd Little, 48, a Florida native and a longtime Panthers fan.
Before the playoff droughts and empty arenas, Little can remember when professional hockey was a breath of fresh air in Miami. He was present at the packed event where the team unveiled its original jerseys.
While Little had been a hockey fan before the arrival of the Panthers, rooting for the Edmonton Oilers, most of the locals were just learning the game. That included many members of the Panthers’ staff.
Jordan’s staff helped secure more than 7,000 full season tickets before opening night.
As with the Golden Knights, Florida’s front office assembled a roster consisting of high-energy, defensive-minded castoffs who were granted a fresh start.
Moller joined the Panthers in their second year and has worked for the team since in broadcast roles. He is the franchise’s longest tenured employee.
Led by Vanbiesbrouck and wing Scott Mellanby (70 points), the Panthers entered the 1996 playoffs as the No. 4 seed and defeated the Bruins, the top-seeded Philadelphia Flyers and the Pittsburgh Penguins with Mario Lemieux and Jaromir Jagr to win the East. The Panthers lost in the Cup finals to the Colorado Avalanche, the former Quebec Nordiques, who were in their first season in Denver.
Panthers fever quickly swept South Florida, from the Canadian snowbirds who resided in Hollywood, Fla., to new fans around Little Havana. Twelve-foot Panthers banners hung down I-95 between the Dade County line and downtown Miami.
Jordan said there was the string of 100 straight sellouts in the rollicking, compact Miami Arena, which had a capacity of 14,700. (Today, that would be the smallest arena in the N.H.L.) A who’s who of Miami at the time — Jimmy Buffett, Gloria Estefan, Celine Dion, Robin Gibb, Dan Marino and Rony Seikaly — were regulars at games.
The 1995-96 season was called the Year of the Rat after Mellanby killed a rat in the Panthers’ locker room between periods during the home opener. From then on, fans hurled plastic rats on the ice after every goal. As the playoffs progressed, thousands of plastic rats rained on the ice as opposing goalies took cover inside their nets. The league banned the practice after that season.
But the good times did not last. After the ’96 run, the front office began dismantling the team’s core. Little said the trade of center Stu Barnes to the Penguins for Chris Wells was called “the worst transaction in the history of the team” by Panthers fans.
As the losses mounted, more players and the head coach soon followed, and the team was out of the playoffs by 1998. “The culture of the organization changed,” Little said.
That year, the Panthers moved 30 miles north to the National Car Rental Center (now BB&T Center), a new 19,200-seat arena in Sunrise. In the transition, the team lost many of its Miami-based fans, as well as the atmosphere of its old stamping grounds.
In subsequent years, wins, attendance and local relevance continued to fade. From 2001 to 2011, the Panthers had a 10-year playoff drought. Lindsay returned as an opposing player to see a half-empty arena in Sunrise.
“Seeing this franchise suffer, it was frustrating and it did hurt as a player, because it was a place that I always called home,” said Lindsay, who is now a radio commentator for the Panthers.
The Golden Knights, especially if they win the Stanley Cup, may be immune to some of the problems that plagued the Panthers. Vegas already has a new arena, right on the Strip.
There has been reason for hope for the Panthers in recent years. The Panthers qualified for the playoffs in the 2015-16 season — led by the current Golden Knights coach, Gerard Gallant. They have a talented young core including Aleksander Barkov, Evgenii Dadonov and Vincent Trocheck.
“I feel like they’re back on track,” said Little, who is the co-managing editor of a Panthers fan blog.
Lindsay, too, hopes the Panthers’ second act happens soon. But he also knows that sometimes magic happens only once. Even if the crowds, the wins, the plastic rats and Buffett reappear. Even if Vegas wins the Stanley Cup this year, next year, and the year after that.
“You can never recapture that magic, that energy, that goes into that first Stanley Cup run with a new franchise,” he said.