Mr. Hiseman married Ms. Thompson in 1967; she survives him. Besides her and his son, he is survived by a daughter, the singer Ana Gracey; a sister, Jill Hiseman; and four grandchildren.
Mr. Hiseman left the Bluesbreakers to start the jazz-rock fusion band Colosseum in 1968, with an initial lineup that included two other former Bluesbreakers, Tony Reeves on bass and Dick Heckstall-Smith on saxophone.
While Colosseum often touched down in the blues, its two 1969 albums, “Those Who Are About to Die Salute You” and “Valentyne Suite,” and its 1970 album “Daughter of Time” also drew on big-band jazz, Bach, Japanese music and contemporary chamber music. Its albums reached the Top 10 in Britain, although they received less notice in the United States. After recording “Colosseum Live” in 1971, the group disbanded.
Mr. Hiseman went on to form the progressive-rock band Tempest. Over two years and two albums, it featured the guitarists Allan Holdsworth and Ollie Halsall, who became known as musicians’ musicians.
Mr. Hiseman’s next band featured the guitarist and singer Gary Moore, who had been in (and would return to) Thin Lizzy. Although Mr. Hiseman initially called the band Ghosts, he was persuaded to use the name Colosseum II instead.
Colosseum II made three albums, releasing them in 1976 and 1977 — difficult times for progressive rock with the punk era dawning — before breaking up. Its members, joined by Ms. Thompson, became the core of the studio band for Mr. Lloyd Webber and his brother, the cellist Julian Lloyd Webber, on the 1978 classical-rock fusion album “Variations,” which became a crossover hit and supplied the theme for “The South Bank Show,” an arts series on British television.
Mr. Hiseman joined his wife’s group, Paraphernalia, in 1979, and the couple recorded her jazz and classical compositions and toured through the next decades. They built a recording studio, provided music for films and advertisements, and signed other musicians to their publishing company, Temple Music.
From 1974 to 2002, Mr. Hiseman and Ms. Thompson were also part of the United Jazz + Rock Ensemble, a collective of avant-gardist German and British jazz musicians that recorded 14 albums.
In 1994, Mr. Hiseman picked up where he had left off with Colosseum’s members from 1971. Their reunion lasted until a farewell concert in 2015; Ms. Thompson took over on saxophone after the death of Mr. Heckstall-Smith in 2004.
In April, Mr. Hiseman formed JCM, a trio with the Colosseum members Clem Clempson, on guitar, and Mark Clarke, on bass. The group made an album, “Heroes,” that contained music written by former collaborators Mr. Hiseman had outlived, among them Mr. Bruce, Mr. Holdsworth, Mr. Heckstall-Smith, Mr. Bond and Mr. Halsall.
JCM began a tour in April, but canceled it as Mr. Hiseman’s brain tumor advanced.
In his long career, Mr. Hiseman released only two albums under his own name as a leader: “A Night in the Sun,” a 1982 collaboration with Brazilian musicians, and “About Time Too!,” a 1986 collection of drum solos recorded live.
