Adam Liptak, the Supreme Court correspondent for The Times, analyzes the 5-to-4 ruling in favor of the Trump administration’s limits on travel from several mostly Muslim countries.
The 5-to-4 decision upholding President Trump’s travel ban basically did two things. The majority said that the president had been given vast authority over immigration and national security by Congress and that he acted consistent with that authority. The second thing it did was reject the claim that the travel ban was infected by religious discrimination. “Donald J. Trump is calling for a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States.” The majority discounted the president’s statements and said the role of the courts was to look at the face of the presidential proclamation issued in September, and that proclamation, the court said, was lawful. The Supreme Court has occasionally looked at the scope of presidential power, and it’s gone both ways. It imposed some limits on President George W. Bush’s ability to hold people in Guantánamo Bay. It rejected President Truman’s attempt to seize the steel industry during the Korean War. And it forced President Nixon to turn over tapes concerning the Watergate scandal that led to his departure from office. The crux of the argument against the travel ban was based on President Trump’s tweets and statements on the campaign trail and in office, in which he suggested that he was singling out Muslims for discriminatory treatment. In the lower courts and now at the Supreme Court, there was a strong partisan divide, with every Republican appointee voting to sustain the travel ban and every Democratic appointee in dissent. The majority opinion gave rise to a very striking dissent from Justice Sonia Sotomayor, who spoke at length in the Supreme Court courtroom about the terrible precedent the majority set and how it resonated with some of the darkest periods in American history, notably the internment of more than 100,000 Japanese-Americans during the Second World War. The decision was a major statement on presidential power in the area of immigration and national security, but it didn’t break new ground. The ruling had no particular practical impact because months ago, the Supreme Court allowed the travel ban to go into effect while it considered the case. What it did instead was decline to impose special legal rules on an idiosyncratic president who speaks in ways that are unfamiliar to American traditions and to say that it was considering the presidency and not President Trump in ruling on his travel ban.
WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court upheld President Trump’s ban on travel from several predominantly Muslim countries, delivering to the president on Tuesday a political victory and an endorsement of his power to control immigration at a time of political upheaval about the treatment of migrants at the Mexican border.
The court’s liberals denounced the decision. In a passionate and searing dissent from the bench, Justice Sonia Sotomayor said the decision was no better than Korematsu v. United States, the 1944 decision that endorsed the detention of Japanese-Americans during World War II.
The court’s travel ban decision provides new political ammunition for the president and members of his party as they prepare to face the voters in the fall. Mr. Trump has already made clear his plans to use anti-immigrant messaging as he campaigns for Republicans, much the way he successfully deployed the issue to whip up the base of the party during the 2016 presidential campaign.
Mr. Trump, who has battled court challenges to the travel ban since the first days of his administration, hailed the decision to uphold his third version as a “tremendous victory” and promised to continue using his office to defend the country against terrorism, crime and extremism.
The vindication for Mr. Trump was also a stunning political validation of the Republican strategy of obstruction throughout 2016 that prevented President Barack Obama from seating Judge Merrick B. Garland on the nation’s highest court after the death of Justice Antonin Scalia. Justice Neil M. Gorsuch, Mr. Trump’s choice to sit on the court, was part of the majority upholding the president’s travel ban.
The decision came even as Mr. Trump is facing controversy over his decision to impose “zero tolerance” for illegal immigration at the United States’ southwestern border, leading to politically damaging images of children being separated from their parents as families cross into the country without proper documentation.
But as Mr. Trump celebrated his travel ban victory, a federal judge in California ordered the government to stop separating children from their parents at the border and to reunite families already separated.
Late Tuesday night, the judge said that all families must be reunited within 30 days and that children under 5 must be returned to the custody of their parents within two weeks.
The judge’s order came as the president faces a second legal challenge about the family separations. Seventeen states and the District of Columbia filed a lawsuit on Tuesday in federal court seeking to stop the practice.
Mr. Trump and his advisers have long argued that presidents are given vast authority to reshape the way that the United States controls its borders. The president’s attempts to do that began with the travel ban and continues today with his demand for an end to the “catch and release” of unauthorized immigrants.
In remarks on Tuesday in a meeting with lawmakers, Mr. Trump vowed to continue fighting for a wall across the southern border with Mexico — his favorite physical manifestation of the legal powers that the court says he rightly wields.
“It stops people we don’t want to have,” the president said.
Activists and politicians publicly voiced their responses to the Supreme Court ruling to uphold President Trump’s limits on travel from several predominantly Muslim nations.
Mr. Trump’s ban on travel had been in place since December, when the court denied a request from challengers to block it. Tuesday’s ruling lifts the legal cloud over the policy.
But the chief justice said the president’s comments must be balanced against the powers of the president to conduct the national security affairs of the nation.
The chief justice repeatedly echoed Stephen Miller, Mr. Trump’s top immigration adviser, in citing a provision of immigration law that gives presidents the power to “suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens” as they see necessary.
The provision “exudes deference to the president in every clause,” the chief justice said.
Even as it upheld the travel ban, the court’s majority took a momentous step. It overruled the Korematsu case, officially reversing a wartime ruling that for decades has stood as an emblem of a morally repugnant response to fear.
Chief Justice Roberts said Tuesday’s decision was very different.
“The entry suspension is an act that is well within executive authority and could have been taken by any other president — the only question is evaluating the actions of this particular president in promulgating an otherwise valid proclamation,” Chief Justice Roberts wrote.
Justices Anthony M. Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, Samuel A. Alito Jr. also joined the majority opinion.
Justice Sotomayor accused her colleagues in the majority of “unquestioning acceptance” of the president’s national security claims. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg joined Justice Sotomayor’s dissent. Justice Sotomayor accused the court of inconsistency, noting that a stray remark from a state commissioner expressing hostility to religion was the basis of a ruling this month in favor of a Christian baker who refused to create a cake for a same-sex wedding.
Justice Kennedy agreed that Mr. Trump should be allowed to carry out the travel ban, but he emphasized the need for religious tolerance.
The court’s decision, a major statement on presidential power, is the conclusion of a long-running dispute over Mr. Trump’s authority to make good on his campaign promises to secure the United States’ borders.
Only a week after he took office, Mr. Trump issued his first travel ban, causing chaos at the country’s airports and starting a cascade of lawsuits and appeals. The first ban, drafted in haste, was promptly blocked by courts around the United States.
A second version, issued two months later, fared little better, although the Supreme Court allowed part of it go into effect last June when it agreed to hear the Trump administration’s appeals from court decisions blocking it. But the Supreme Court dismissed those appeals in October after the second ban expired.
In January, the Supreme Court agreed to hear a challenge to Mr. Trump’s third and most considered entry ban, the one issued as a presidential proclamation. It initially restricted travel from eight nations — Iran, Libya, Syria, Yemen, Somalia, Chad, Venezuela and North Korea — six of them predominantly Muslim. Chad was later removed from the list.
The restrictions varied in their details, but, for the most part, citizens of the countries were forbidden from emigrating to the United States, and many of them are barred from working, studying or vacationing here. In December, the Supreme Court allowed the ban to go into effect while legal challenges moved forward.
The State of Hawaii, several individuals and a Muslim group challenged the latest ban’s limits on travel from the predominantly Muslim countries; they did not object to the portions concerning North Korea and Venezuela. They said the latest ban, like the earlier ones, was tainted by religious animus and not adequately justified by national security concerns.
The challengers prevailed before a Federal District Court in Hawaii and in San Francisco before a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
The appeals court ruled that Mr. Trump had exceeded the authority Congress had given him over immigration and had violated a part of the immigration laws barring discrimination in the issuance of visas. In a separate decision that was not directly before the justices, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, Va., blocked the ban on a different ground, saying it violated the Constitution’s prohibition of religious discrimination.