Mr. Bornstein is a co-founder of the Solutions Journalism Network, which supports rigorous reporting about responses to social problems.
If you’re eager to be reminded that humane and inspiring civic leadership still exists, read on. Over the past three years, nine communities in the United States have reached a rigorous standard known as “functional zero” for either veteran or chronic homelessness — a standard that indicates that homelessness is rare and much briefer than in the past for their populations — and 37 others have accomplished measurable reductions toward that goal.
What’s illuminating is how they’re doing it: by making whole systems smarter.
For the first time, many communities across the country are collecting and maintaining real-time data and lists of the names of people experiencing homelessness, and from those deepening their understanding of the dynamics of a complex and ever-changing problem. They’re also imitating the kind of command-center-led coordination efforts that have been crucial to historic public health victories, such as the eradication of small pox and the near-eradication of polio. And they are linking in a national network, capturing and sharing effective strategies, as they emerge, to improve their performance.
Rockford is one of 77 communities in the United States that are part of the Built for Zero initiative coordinated by Community Solutions, an organization that led the 100,000 Homes Campaign that my colleague, Tina Rosenberg, and I have previously reported on in Fixes (here, here, here and here).
The 100,000 Homes Campaign, begun in 2010, aimed to provide permanent supportive housing to that number of people experiencing chronic homelessness. In four years, campaign partners around the country sharply improved their efficiency, collectively placing 105,580 people in permanent supportive housing. However, during that time, national estimates of chronic homelessness decreased by only about 22,000 people. In some places, it didn’t go down at all, because more people were becoming homeless than were getting housed.
The 100,000 Homes Campaign was all about counting up to a big goal. In retrospect, that approach still left half the job to figure out — like having a strong offense but not yet knowing much about defense. Built for Zero, by contrast, asks communities to count down to the goal of zero homelessness. To get there, all the organizations working on homelessness in a defined region need to coordinate regularly and tally their respective inflows and outflows. “In most communities working to end homelessness, even if they know that their programs are working individually, they don’t know if it is adding up to fewer homeless people overall,” said Beth Sandor, the founding director of the Built for Zero initiative.
Community Solutions has a crew of 25 people working on the Built for Zero initiative. They focus on helping communities build the collaborations and processes to gather and share real-time data. “More than 60 communities that we’ve worked with now have comprehensive, real-time, person-specific data about the homeless population,” said Jake Maguire, a co-director of Built for Zero. This allows them to experiment with new ideas and get quick feedback. It also makes it possible to respond to needs far more rapidly than in the past.
The Gulf Coast of Southern Mississippi, a Continuum-of-Care community that spans six counties, is another region that reached functional zero for veteran homelessness in 2015. Today, any veterans who fall into homelessness there are linked almost immediately to service providers who help them get Veterans Affairs benefits and into housing in less than 30 days. “We’re working to get back to our 2015 average of 11 days,” said Mary Simons, the executive director of Open Doors Homeless Coalition, which leads collaborative efforts in the region.
In the Built for Zero methodology, after communities build a local team and are sharing real-time data, the next milestones are achieving steady reductions in homelessness, getting to zero and sustaining it. As they work more effectively, they also focus on other dimensions like youth and family homelessness, which are very different problems and require different responses.
Another region that has ended veterans’ homelessness and is closing in on ending chronic homelessness is Montgomery County, Md. Homeless advocates there have also been using name lists not just to identify people who are experiencing chronic homelessness but also to catch people who are on the verge of becoming chronically homeless.
They have also taken the unusual step of identifying people in permanent supportive housing who don’t want to be there and would be safe in regular housing, which is less intrusive and less expensive. To make the change happen, however, they needed to persuade the county housing authority to approve funding. “In order to make a successful budget ask, we needed to show that we had looked at programs and found efficiencies,” said Nili Soni, the continuum-of-care coordinator for Montgomery County’s Department of Health and Human Services. The person-level data helped them make the case.
All of these local successes get turned into mini case studies and are logged in Built for Zero’s menu of strategies. So if a community partner wants to know how to do effective street outreach or improve housing retention or get more landlords to accept people who have been homeless as tenants, there’s an inventory of proven ideas to draw from. For example, when Ms. Jaeger and Ms. Walker, in Rockford, were looking for ways to encourage landlords to accept higher-risk clients, they read about a community that had created a fund that could reduce the financial risk for landlords. Then they got the local community foundation to do the same.
