For those who have lived their entire lives in New York City — and even more peculiarly, in Manhattan — the itch to find something stable and rooted can become an obsession.
Cusi Cram, 50, a playwright and lifelong Manhattanite, scratched and scratched until she came up with “St. Vincent’s: Novenas for a Lost Hospital,” which is being workshopped through Sunday at the Rattlestick Playwrights Theater in Greenwich Village.
Not only a play about a unique corner of New York, it is also a search for the substance of what lasts in a city of perpetual flux, framed, ingeniously, around the 161-year history of St. Vincent’s Hospital — a New York institution “that an order of determined women who cared willed into being,” the narrator says. The hospital closed in 2010, the last Catholic medical center in Manhattan.
Here the dead and the living have equal claim to the stage, each other, the audience. They speak and argue across centuries. A 19th-century Haitian revolutionary and hairdresser leans over the shoulder of a 20th-century Irish nurse. One doctor faced with a cholera epidemic in the 1840s trades shoptalk with another who is treating AIDs patients in the 1980s.
A holy man recalls that in a fury, he intended to burn down the old St. Patrick’s Cathedral until he had a whiskey, neat, on Mott Street and thought better of it. In the early 1990s, dying men have sex in a hospital ward, or imagine that they did, and share their fantasies with the first American-born saint, Elizabeth Bayley Seton, who danced with George Washington at one of his birthday parties and has been dead for about 160 years.
The play grew, Ms. Cram said, from discussions with Rattlestick’s artistic director, Danielle Topol, about moving theater outside the walls of a building — “St. Vincent’s” closes with a procession of the audience to a memorial park — and her collaboration with Guy Lancaster, a dramaturge who tracked ironies and graces across centuries.
Most of those stories are evoked but not lingered on. Instead, a prevailing theme is the complex relationship between science and religion, surfacing in the 19th century when a doctor is officially — though not really — forbidden to do anatomy studies by Catholic scruples over the defilement of bodies. In the 20th century, a doctor wants to apply for a grant to develop a drug that would prevent transmission of H.I.V., saving lives but also removing inhibitions to unprotected sex. The sister in charge tells him that church hierarchy opposes “prophylactic” practices.
“But I am trying to prevent infection, not conception,” the doctor argues.
“This isn’t Scrabble night at the convent,” retorts the doctor.
The Elizabeth Seton of “St. Vincent’s” gives an answer about enduring.
