The changes come amid strong signals from Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s administration that it will push to legalize marijuana across New York State. But with any new legislation months away, and Mr. de Blasio facing mounting pressure to address a steep racial disparity in marijuana arrests, the city took another step on Tuesday toward shrinking a pool of arrests that no longer exists in some states.
The new policy, which will take effect on Sept. 1, will not curb police officers’ power to stop and search people who they think are smoking marijuana. And because it exempts from the no-arrest policy certain people with criminal records, many of them black, it is unlikely on its own to shift the focus of marijuana enforcement away from the nonwhite New Yorkers who have for decades been the targets of arrests.
But with Cynthia Nixon criticizing Mr. Cuomo’s position as she bids for the Democratic nomination for governor and the New York City Council pressing the Police Department to explain the disparities in arrests, the two oft-feuding Democrats have reached a sort of consensus that public opinion has shifted.
“We’re doing what we can do right now,” Mr. de Blasio said at a news conference.
Tuesday’s announcement was another attempt by the city to preserve the Police Department’s enforcement powers without falling too far behind a broad shift in favor of legalizing marijuana.
The police commissioner, James P. O’Neill, convened a 30-day working group in May to review enforcement after The New York Times published an analysis of the racial disparities, and Mr. de Blasio said one of the goals of the new policy would be to reduce those disparities.
But the working group’s 19-page report did not attempt to explain the racial disparity, beyond suggesting that nonwhite people may smoke marijuana in public at higher rates and that racially skewed enforcement was a byproduct of broader societal forces.
At the news conference with the mayor, Mr. O’Neill said that people with criminal histories should be punished more harshly for so-called quality-of-life crimes.
“If you have a propensity to commit crimes, and our job is to keep people safe, and if you’re going to commit quality-of-life violations, I think the consequences have to be higher,” he said.
Summonses for unlawful possession of marijuana, a noncriminal violation, can come with fines up to $100, though city officials said the fine amounts were ultimately up to judges and could change depending on someone’s criminal history.
Defense lawyers say the real impetus for marijuana enforcement is often not an arrest or summons itself, but rather the opportunity for police officers to stop and search people and check for open warrants in other cases. They said the fact that the new policy preserves officers’ authority to search people they stop for smoking marijuana suggests that the Police Department believes smokers merit closer scrutiny than people, for example, who are caught drinking in public — something they say there is little evidence to support.
Beyond the arrests based on someone’s criminal history, people caught smoking in public would also be arrested if they did not have identification or were smoking in a way that created an “immediate threat to public safety,” said Rodney Harrison, the Police Department’s chief of patrol. He said, for example, that officers would be given discretion to arrest people who are smoking around children in a park or smoking while operating heavy machinery. To protect against unsafe driving, people caught smoking in the driver’s seat of a car would also be arrested.
He said the police had to arrest people caught smoking while on parole or probation because it represented a violation of the terms of their release. The number of people held in city jails on state parole violations has increased in recent years, a trend that runs counter to the city’s goal of closing Rikers Island.
The district attorneys in Manhattan and Brooklyn both said recently that they planned to stop prosecuting many marijuana cases, creating the potential for a patchwork of different policies across the city’s five boroughs. The city’s new policy was intended to create a more consistent strategy. And the Brooklyn district attorney, Eric Gonzalez, who appeared alongside the mayor at Tuesday’s news conference, voiced support for the exceptions in the city’s new policy.
