VIENNA — A decade ago, when Ayad Akhtar was teaching acting classes here, he would often pass the Burgtheater, the monumental building on the Ringstrasse that houses one of the largest and most influential theaters in the world.
“I was a much younger man and used to think, ‘My God, if I could ever have a play there someday!’ It seemed the most far-fetched thing you could ever imagine,” Mr. Akhtar, 47, recently recalled.
In the intervening years, he has become one of America’s foremost playwrights, winning the 2013 Pulitzer Prize for drama for “Disgraced” and seeing his work — which digs deeply, often discomfitingly so, into the Muslim-American experience — produced at theaters around the country.
Along with his success at home, Mr. Akhtar has forged particularly close ties to the German-speaking world, where his works are extremely popular, especially for a writer who is both American and living.
A 2016 production of “Disgraced” marked Mr. Akhtar’s Burgtheater debut and won him a top theatrical honor here. And late last month Mr. Akhtar was back at the Burg for the local premiere of his 2014 drama “The Who & the What,” about the patriarch of a Pakistani-American family and his freethinking and outspoken daughter.
They were speaking at a reception after Felix Prader’s stripped-down production at the Akademietheater, the Burg’s second, smaller stage, where remaining performances are sold out. Along with the playwright and the actors, they were crammed into the theater’s small canteen, shouting their congratulations and conversations in an atmosphere thick with cigarette smoke and fragrant Austrian white wine.
Not too long ago, this sort of casting would have given the playwright pause. He had qualms last year when he found out — shortly before curtain — that the 2017 Hamburg premiere of the same work had also been cast entirely with white actors, although Germany has a larger and more diverse population than Austria.
Even beyond issues of ethnicity, American playwrights working in Europe have to acclimate themselves to the visions of directors, who often adjust plays’ settings and sometime even alter the texts.
An earlier production of “Disgraced,” directed by Martin Kusej, was presented in Turin, Italy, and in Munich. Mr. Kusej, soon to be the artistic director of the Burg, and currently at Munich’s Residenz Theater, set the play entirely on a square of carved coal.
“Martin deconstructed the play and I was humbled and encouraged at moments to see that my text could withstand the stress test. But not in every moment,” Mr. Akhtar admitted with a laugh, adding that he does not disapprove of such disruptions.
In addition to the Burgtheater premiere, the playwright is here to teach an acting class. Above and beyond these commitments, he just seems glad to be back in this culture-rich city.
That his plays have found an engaged audience here isn’t something he takes for granted.
His latest work, “Junk,” which was nominated for a 2018 Tony Award for best play, and explores the impact of Wall Street chicanery in the 1980s, has already been presented in Hamburg and Munich.
And of course the religious and cultural conflicts at the heart of much of his work are amply echoed in European nations, particularly Germany, which has seen its national identity evolve as the country has absorbed immigrants and refugees, some from Muslim countries.
