In a blow to NASA’s prestige and its budget, America’s next great space telescope has been postponed again.
NASA announced on Wednesday that the James Webb Space Telescope, once scheduled to be launched into orbit around the sun this fall, will take three more years and another billion dollars to complete.
A report delivered to NASA by an independent review board estimated that the cost of the troubled Webb telescope would now be $9.66 billion, and that it would not be ready to launch until March 30, 2021.
The board, headed by Tom Young, a former agency manager and aerospace executive, was appointed last spring after parts fell off the telescope during a shake test at its primary contractor, Northrop Grumman in Los Angeles.
In remarks at a press briefing Wednesday, Mr. Young ticked off some of the factors that had led to the crisis, including human errors, excessive optimism and the complexity of the spacecraft.
The telescope, named after former NASA Administrator James Webb, is the agency’s long-awaited successor to the Hubble Space Telescope. It is a collaboration between NASA and the European Space Agency.
More than twice as big as the Hubble, the Webb will be the largest and most powerful telescope ever built for space, but its development has been plagued with headaches and delays.
Eight years ago, amid budget overruns that threatened the solvency of NASA’s other projects and earned Webb the sobriquet “the telescope that ate astronomy” from Nature magazine, Congress almost canceled the program. Instead, lawmakers ordered a strict budget cap of $8 billion to develop the telescope. Delays already added nearly $800 million.
The new report means that NASA will surely need another $837 million and exceed that cap. Congress will have to reauthorize the telescope at a cost yet to be determined to other missions. Among the missions that could be threatened, astronomers say, is an ambitious space telescope called WFirst to study dark energy and hunt exoplanets.
The Webb review comes as the House Science Committee, under Representative Lamar Smith of Texas, has been studying how well NASA estimates costs and manages big projects. The answer is, not so well. Testifying before the committee, NASA’s Inspector General Paul Martin criticized the agency’s culture of optimism, saying that project promise of scientific brilliance made them difficult to rein in. “While a few projects in NASA’s recent past have been canceled because of poor cost and schedule performance, a too-big-to-fail mentality pervades agency thinking when it comes to NASA’s larger and most important missions,” he told the committee in mid-June, according to a news bulletin from the American Institute of Physics.
The Webb telescope mirror is 6.5 meters in diameter, or just over 21 feet, compared with 2.4 meters for the Hubble. That makes it seven times larger than the Hubble in light-gathering ability. The Webb was designed to use that power to see farther out in space and deeper into the past of the universe and the smoky aftermath of the Big Bang.
The goal is to explore a realm of cosmic history about 150 million to one billion years after time began — known as the reionization epoch, when bright and violent new stars and the searing radiation from quasars were burning away a gloomy fog of hydrogen gas that prevailed at the end of the Big Bang.
That ambition requires the Webb to be tuned to a different kind of light than our eyes or the Hubble can see. Because the expansion of the cosmos is rushing those earliest stars and galaxies away from us so fast, their light is “red-shifted” to longer wavelengths the way the siren from an ambulance shifts to a lower register as it passes by.
So blue light from an infant galaxy bursting with bright spanking new stars way back then has been stretched to invisible infrared wavelengths, or heat radiation, by the time it reaches us 13 billion years later.
As a result, the Webb telescope will produce cosmic postcards in colors no eye has ever seen. It also turns out that infrared emanations are the best way to study exoplanets, the worlds beyond our own solar system that have been discovered by the thousands since the Webb telescope was first conceived.
In order to see those infrared colors, however, the telescope has to be very cold — less than 45 degrees Fahrenheit above absolute zero — so that its own heat does not swamp the heat from outer space. Once in space, the telescope will unfold a giant umbrella the size of a tennis court to keep the sun off it. The telescope, marooned in permanent shade a million miles beyond the moon, will experience an infinite cold soak.
The sunshield consists of five thin, kite-shaped layers of a material called Kapton. Way too big to fit into a rocket, the shield, as well as the telescope mirror, will have to launch folded up. It will then be unfolded in space in a series of some 180 maneuvers that look in computer animations like a cross between a parachute opening and a swimming pool cover going into place. Engineers refer to that series of events as “six months of anxiety.” Needless to say, way out there, it will be forever beyond the reach of astronaut repair crews.
NASA had disclosed in March that several problems arose during tests. Among other things, the tennis-court-sized sun shield ripped during a practice deployment. And cables designed to keep the shield taut had too much slack and could have snagged during the real unfurling in space, a million miles from help.
