At a recent dance held by the Big Apple Ranch, a Manhattan L.G.B.T.Q. country-western dance club, Croft Vaughn, a longtime dancer, called the club his church.
“Every other week I’m reborn on the dance floor. It’s a ritual, it’s a renewal and it’s also community,” said Mr. Vaughn, who works in finance.
Mr. Arroyave is also a member of the Big Apple Ranch’s official dance team, Manhattan Prairie Dogs, whose performances the club calls “a combination of country-western and high camp, outrageous costumes and fabulous choreography.” He dresses up to dance even when he’s not performing: He recently danced wearing a sleeveless, low-cut red dress, silver headband, red earrings and black cowboy boots, in contrast to his regular work attire, a white lab coat and slacks.
Same-sex couples perform on TV shows such as “So You Think You Can Dance” and “Dancing With the Stars,” while a gay couple, Caroline Privou and Petra Zimmermann, competed at the prestigious Blackpool Dance Festival in England, in May.
The reference here is to the gender-neutral concept of leaders and followers, roles assumed by dancers and terms that are favored by L.G.B.T.Q. dancers. These terms replace the more traditional concept and role of a man leading his partner, a woman. In same-sex social dancing, anyone can assume either role, regardless of the gender the dancer identifies with; dancers sometimes even switch roles mid-dance, a difficult skill developed by more experienced participants.
And then there is Midsummer Night Swing, an outdoor mainstream social dance party that is held over several weeks every summer at Manhattan’s Lincoln Center and welcomes same-sex dancers. It takes place this year from Tuesday through July 14.
Midsummer Night Swing features a different type of dance each night, offering a lesson and a dance, as well as frequent demonstrations. The Big Apple Ranch in recent years has sent instructors and dancers to demonstrate and teach country-western dance. Last year, the Manhattan Prairie Dogs performed, wearing poodle skirts that converted into wedding dresses.
But for same-sex dance aficionados, what matters most is getting out on the dance floor to celebrate their passion.
Ms. Balfour said same-sex social dancing could also improve posture, circulation and general well-being, and create bonds of intimacy and trust.
“I love to see the look of delight on people’s faces when they get it,” she said.