Even though Central Park, like the rest of Manhattan, is largely man-made, not natural, it is a place to experience in person, not secondhand through images, regardless of their authenticity, nor through narratives, no matter how illustrative.
That said, Stephen Wolf, who teaches literature and humanities at Berkeley College in New York, offers up a combined guidebook and autobiography that’s the next best thing to being there.
His “Central Park Love Song: Wandering Beneath the Heaventrees” (Griffith Moon Publishing) is an eloquent, evocative ode that encompasses New York history, past and contemporary protagonists, geography and botany so gracefully that reading his book is like, well, a walk in the park.
As Manhattan grew more dense, a consensus emerged to create a park. But where? And how much of what was then mostly barren acreage should be denied to future developers?
The author’s storytelling is charming. His factoids are fascinating. And he weaves his own escapades in the park since New York’s near-bankruptcy in the 1970s to its 21st-century renaissance by conjuring up virtually every relevant 19th- and 20th-century literary reference imaginable.
That buying the roughly one square mile bordered by Fifth and Eighth Avenues and 59th and 106th Streets (the original northern boundary) cost more than the purchase of all 663,268 square miles of Alaska. That the Great Lawn is the largest open space in Manhattan. That sheep had actually roamed the Sheep Meadow since the Civil War until Robert Moses exiled them.
That lampposts on park drives are coded to identify the nearest cross street. And that more gunpowder was used to blast rock into the formation that Calvert Vaux and Frederick Law Olmsted Sr. had prescribed than what more than 600 cannons had fired during the Battle of Gettysburg.
Mr. Wolf recalls an all-too-credible hoax in 1874 when The New York Herald reported that wild beasts had escaped from the Central Park Zoo. The book details a precise census of the number and type of trees that populate the park.
