113 pp. New Directions. Paper, $15.95.
As many good writers can tell you, stories aren’t just about how much you put into them but also about how much you leave out. No organized literary movement has been more imaginative at engineering ways to explore the difference than Oulipo, the loosely bound group of (mostly French) poets, fiction writers, scientists and philosophers that formed in the early 1960s and relentlessly developed a wide variety of sometimes complex, and sometimes simple, arbitrary structures into which to pour their stories, novels, poems and language puzzles. The most famous was the lipogram, requiring its author to write prose without a particular letter — as in George Perec’s fabulous and syntactically nutty novel “La Disparition” (1969), written without an “e,” which eventually led to arguably the world’s greatest work of literary translation, performed without a net by Gilbert Adair in his English version, “A Void.” Get it? Avoid the “e” and be left in a void. Playing games with words is what Oulipo is all about.
But no Oulipo member invented more complex structures than the late, great Harry Mathews, who died in 2017 and whose algorithms often resembled those blackboard-size landing coordinates constantly being sketched in “Hidden Figures.” The point, for Mathews, was never the algorithms themselves but the fiction they produced. After all, nobody cares about the scaffolding; they only care about the beautiful new building it leaves behind.
It is hard to imagine the past half-century of pleasurable reading without the many strange books that clattered forth from Mathews’s linguistic contraptions. Novels like the dentally obsessed “Tlooth” (1966), which includes several puzzle-plotted mini-stories (spires, cyphers, codes and something that looks like a lopsided labyrinth) along the route taken by its characters as they flee a “prison house” of religious language in Siberia. Or what may be his best novel, “Cigarettes” (1987), which plots out a series of interlocking dual relationships over several decades. Despite the extreme formal variety of his books, several things unite them: They are funny, unpredictable, playful and absorbed by issues of love, death, fraud and art.
Posthumous books almost always feel half-formed, coincidental, unpublished for a reason. Sadly, they usually come at a time when the author who wrote them deserves to be remembered for better books; instead, they end up being remembered for these broken little relics dug up from the basement. “The Solitary Twin,” however, may well be the last great surprise Mathews pulled out of his deep bag of tricks. It is funny, perplexing, consistent and unusual, with all the characteristic Mathews obsessions. It may also be one of the best places to start enjoying his work.
The publisher and the psychologist form one of the many multiplying sets of twins in this book — locked together in a combined identity while pursuing different interests and desires. People confess secret identities to their partners, stories beget more stories, and, late in the novel, one major character even stops being referred to as “Berenice” and starts going by “I,” which might signal a shift from third person to first person or might just be her new name. Eventually, it’s hard to identify anybody without a scorecard. Then again, like any fraudulent accountant worth his or her salt, you would probably need two of them.
Instead, they feel like storytelling. They feel like a beautiful “game” about people finding their way free of a world that doesn’t always want them to be free at all. A game of pure pleasure.
For whenever Mathews rigged the game, his readers always won.