In the run-up to the 2016 election, Russian trolls wielding ads and memes used Facebook as a tool to darken lines of division. More recently, one corner of Facebook has emerged in pursuit of the opposite: civil conversation, even among those who disagree. It has become part of Bethany Grace Howe’s morning routine, right alongside her yogurt and cup of tea.
The New York Times’s Reader Center put out a call early last December inviting readers to apply to join a Facebook group where they could offer feedback on The Times’s coverage and talk about how the news affects them. Ms. Howe, 49 — a longtime media scholar, journalist and reader of The Times since she was 13 — was among the first 100 people chosen to join the group.
“It was like, O.K., this is too good to be true,” she said.
And it soon became clear that the group was a lot more than just a place to talk about the Gray Lady.
It has come to mean enough that she is now working to organize a real life meet-up of group members near her in Oregon, where she is a doctoral student of mass media studies examining questions of transgender identity and depictions in media.
The Reader Center group is one of four Facebook groups that The Times has created since last spring. There’s NYT Australia, where the focus is Australia but the discussion regularly stretches wider, run by the journalists in The Times’s Australia bureau. There’s Now Read This, an online book club co-managed by The New York Times Book Review and “PBS Newshour” where members discuss a different book every month, guided in part by questions from the two news organizations. And there’s The New York Times Podcast Club (which I help run), where podcast lovers can talk about what they’re listening to and Times employees select a show every week for discussion.
These are different from The Times’s institutional Facebook page, or pages run by sections like Styles or Science, which you might follow to see their news articles show up in your feed. In these groups, people at The Times — and collaborators — guide discussions and often engage with group members. Administrators must approve people before they can join, and must sign off on individual posts, too. They can also delete comments or remove members if things get nasty or inappropriate.
When asked about their involvement in the groups, a half-dozen other active members gave reasons similar to Ms. Howe’s. People joined the groups looking for a place to talk about an interest (books, podcasts, the media, the news around the world), and for the most part, they’ve stuck around and become regulars because of the wide range of tastes and perspectives they encounter within them. For Ms. Howe, one such encounter stood out.
In mid-March, she jumped into a discussion about a Democrat, Conor Lamb, winning a special House election in a Pennsylvania district that Donald J. Trump had won easily in 2016. The conversation had turned to the idea of being willing to compromise on certain values to support a candidate with broad appeal from a party that aligns generally with your beliefs.
Ms. Howe grappled with that idea but eventually grew frustrated, explaining that while she understood the necessity of compromise in politics, to her, something like protections for transgender people felt non-negotiable. How could she compromise on her civil rights?
But then a Latina member of the group chimed in, explaining how she twice voted for Barack Obama even though she found his position on undocumented immigrants to be draconian. Ms. Howe called it an “epiphany moment” that helped her understand the limitations of any one person’s viewpoint, including her own.
That conversation, and others in the group, changed her perspective and gave her an “understanding of the types of moral, internal debates that people have every day in this country,” she said.
She is still angry about structural injustices, but she is not angry at the people she has a beer with to discuss them.