Book Review|Should We Worry About Trump’s Fawning Admiration of the Military?
Should We Worry About Trump’s Fawning Admiration of the Military?
In his short time in office, President Trump has surrounded himself with senior military officers and expressed unquestioning admiration for the armed forces, even going so far as to propose a military parade on Veterans Day — something more typical of Beijing or Moscow. Should we be worried?
The best answer can be found in a book by Samuel Huntington that came out more than six decades ago. When most people think of Huntington, they remember his book “The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order,” or perhaps his hostility to Latino immigration in his latter years, but they would be far better off reading “The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of Civil-Military Relations.” First published in 1957, it is by far the most influential book on the subject — and itself a source of no small controversy.
Ambitious and deftly written, “The Soldier and the State” is an argument for civilian mastery over a professional military. For Huntington, modern military officers were like doctors or lawyers, with a specific professional expertise: managing violence. Whether in the United States or even the Soviet Union, their proper ethic was realistic, conservative and prudent, more wary of going to war than their reckless or crusading civilian masters.
Crucially, a suitably professionalized military stands aloof from politics. It should avoid the disastrous examples of Germany’s domineering general staff in World War I or Japan’s bellicose generals in World War II, whose political dominance brought confusion, fanaticism and ruin. Instead, Huntington believed that maximizing the professionalism of the armed forces would render them “politically sterile and neutral.” There would be no need to fear military domination or coups, because the officer corps would shun politics.
Precisely because of the American military’s prestige, Huntington’s warnings about its politicization by civilians are worryingly relevant — as demonstrated when Trump signed his Muslim travel ban in the Pentagon’s Hall of Heroes. Of course, Trump is hardly the first president to use the military as a prop. Ronald Reagan began to return salutes from the troops even though previous presidents had underlined their civilian status by not saluting, and in May 2003, George W. Bush prematurely claimed victory in Iraq by strutting in a flight suit on an aircraft carrier with a “Mission Accomplished” banner. Obama’s State of the Union speech in 2012 began and ended with panegyrics to the troops, which Jonah Goldberg of National Review called “disgusting” and reminiscent of North Korea. Even so, Trump has broken new ground in trampling the norms and regulations that restrict the political behavior of service members. He gave a partisan, campaign-style talk at MacDill Air Force Base in February 2017, and last July, at the commissioning of the U.S.S. Gerald R. Ford, he urged sailors to lobby Congress on health care and military spending. Here was the commander in chief trying to enlist warfighters as his personal boosters.
Trump’s efforts to defile the military’s political neutrality match up with his contempt for other American institutions with independent professional codes: the judiciary, Justice Department and F.B.I. officials, intelligence agencies and the press. Yet as Huntington’s book suggests, military professionalism could curb some of Trump’s worst abuses of power, as when Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, his national security adviser at the time, bluntly acknowledged the evidence of Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election, or when Mattis pressed the president to back away from his campaign promises to torture detainees.
