HONG KONG — Tens of thousands of dollars in cash. Documents listing locations of United States Cyber Command outposts. A passcode-protected thumb drive, hidden behind a sock in the toe of a shoe.
He described meeting the operatives in private rooms in Beijing hotels and teahouses, and said they paid him to attend events on forensics, information security and military communications. They paid him, he said, by buying computer forensic products from him at inflated rates.
When he allegedly started working for the Chinese, Mr. Hansen had no known financial means beyond a military pension of $1,900 a month, the Justice Department said.
A business partner in Beijing, Zhao Wenhua, said he last spoke to Mr. Hansen at the end of 2017. They met in 2009, Mr. Zhao said.
He was not aware that Mr. Hansen had been arrested, Mr. Zhao said. “I am very surprised,” he said in a telephone interview.
Mr. Zhao was vague about whether he introduced the two operatives to Mr. Hansen as the complaint alleges. Mr. Zhao first said it had been seven years since he had spoken to the two operatives. Then he backtracked and said that he didn’t know them.
His business relationship with Mr. Hansen revolved around buying American computer products, Mr. Zhao said.
Mr. Zhao’s company, Beijing Huaheng Technology Co., sells a number of products from digital forensic companies, according to its website, including Digital Intelligence, AccessData and ElcomSoft.
Mr. Hansen has owned or had senior management positions in several Salt Lake City-based entities, according to the Justice Department’s complaint. One is NuveStack, a company whose website offers information technology services. Another is the American & Chinese Friendship Promotion Society, whose website says its sole mission is to do just that.
Mr. Hansen’s LinkedIn profile lists work experience at all three entities, and says he is the director of public-private partnerships at a Salt Lake City company called Broadway Capital, whose website says it provides “superior financial services.” The LinkedIn profile also says Mr. Hansen has made more than 175 trips to China and that he has an “extensive network” of government, business and military contacts there.
Multiple attempts to reach all four entities by phone and email were unsuccessful.
Reached by telephone late Monday, a duty officer in the press office at the Defense Intelligence Agency’s headquarters in Washington said that he was not familiar with the case against Mr. Hansen.
In the complaint, the Justice Department said that Mr. Hansen told an American undercover agent in April that China would pay $200,000 for the operations plan of the American military regarding “potential military intervention with China.” Earlier, he had told an undercover agent that China was interested in material about North Korea, investigators said.
On Saturday, Mr. Hansen flew from Utah to Seattle, where he had a connecting flight to China from the Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, the complaint said. During his layover, he met with a former associate who was assisting the F.B.I. in what turned out to be a sting operation. In a car near the airport, Mr. Hansen took notes on classified documents that the associate provided, and said that they would be valuable in discussions with Chinese intelligence, the complaint said.
After being dropped off by his associate, Mr. Hansen walked about a block before he was arrested by F.B.I. agents, the complaint said. He was carrying handwritten notes that included numbers from the classified documents, the complaint added.
As for how to handle future classified documents, investigators said, Mr. Hansen had a suggestion for the informant: Cut a hole in a nearby tree and hide them inside.