The president’s partner in Dubai has tapped a company controlled by the government in Beijing to help build a project featuring an 18-hole course designed by Tiger Woods.
The Dubai partner of President Trump’s real-estate company said this week that it had awarded China State Construction Engineering Corporation a $20 million contract to develop part of the 55 million square foot property. Under the deal, China State Construction will help build the roads and infrastructure linking up the complex, called Akoya Oxygen.
Among its other amenities, the Akoya Oxygen project will include a Trump-branded golf club. The Trump World Golf Club Dubai will feature restaurants, high-end practice facilities and a well-stocked pro shop, according to the developer, Damac Properties, a Trump Organization partner in the Middle East that has helped generate millions of dollars in income for the president.
“The Trump Organization licenses the Trump brand name to Damac and has agreed to manage the golf course,” Amanda Miller, a spokeswoman for the Trump Organization, said.
Damac and CSCEC did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
The new deal builds on previous infrastructure work the Chinese company has done on the project affiliated with the Trump brand. It is also building a luxury 53-floor apartment building overlooking the Dubai canal as part of a separate Damac project.
The company’s most recent deal with Damac was reported earlier by McClatchy.
The transactions strike at the heart of what critics say are conflicts of interest as Mr. Trump continues to hold on to his real-estate business even as he serves in the White House. The Trump Organization pledged not to engage in any new deals overseas while Mr. Trump was in office.
Mr. Trump promised to stay away from his business while he was in office, but has also said that it would be too punitive for him and his investors to have to divest from his company completely.
Both the Justice Department and Mr. Trump’s lawyers have said the accusations of violating the Constitution are groundless.
Mr. Trump has profited greatly from his business dealings with Damac and its chairman, Hussain Sajwani, who is sometimes called the Donald of Dubai.
Mr. Trump was paid $2 million to $10 million by Damac in 2016 for Trump Organization golf properties in Dubai. He also continues to benefit from them via management fees. In 2017, he personally earned $141,433 in fees, according to his most recent financial disclosure. In 2016, he earned $12,984 in fees.
Donald Jr, and Eric, Mr. Trump’s second son, attended the wedding of Mr. Sajwani’s daughter in April.
At the same time, some American lawmakers are trying to block a lifeline President Trump has extended to ZTE, a Chinese telecommunications company that faced shutting down after Washington officials blocked its access to American technology.
CSCEC is one of China’s largest construction firms. It has recently expanded its business around the world. In New York City, its American subsidiary China Construction has become a familiar player in public works projects including the renovation of the Alexander Hamilton Bridge and the West Eighth Street-New York Aquarium subway station in Brooklyn.