Rachel Campos-Duffy, a Fox News contributor, drew stinging criticism this week after she compared immigration detention centers favorably with public housing, backing up her thesis by citing the opinions of unnamed African-Americans.
Ms. Campos-Duffy defended her comment on Friday night in a series of text messages with The New York Times, saying that she believed the facilities where immigrant children are being detained are safe and secure.
Ms. Campos-Duffy did not directly address criticism that associating black people with public housing was a stereotype. She said that she based her comment on a recent conversation with one man who is African-American, not multiple African-Americans, as she originally stated.
“I mentioned it because I HAD just spoke to an African American who complained to me about never seeing this level of media attention about Black kids being separated from their parents and that some of the facilities he saw looked nicer and safer than the projects he grew up in,” she wrote.
Online, critics pointed out that all kinds of people live in public housing, and that children there are not kept in cages. The New York City Housing Authority, the country’s largest public housing authority, served about 171,000 families in public housing as of Jan. 1, 2015; 45 percent were black, according to data the agency provided on its website.
Ms. Campos-Duffy, a former reality TV star who appeared on MTV’s “Real World: San Francisco” in the early 1990s, is now a television personality who offers commentary on everything from politics to parenting. Last year, she was included on Newsmax’s list of the 50 most influential Latino Republicans. She is married to United States Representative Sean Duffy, a Republican from Wisconsin.
Both Ms. Ingraham and Ms. Campos-Duffy referred to an article that described a facility for unaccompanied immigrant children as similar to a boarding school. The article, in The San Diego Union-Tribune, reported that the facility had classrooms and a play area with soccer goals, for example.
On Friday, Ms. Campos-Duffy wrote that she was not surprised at the reaction to her comment, which she said came from the political left.
“Conservative minorities are accustomed to being attacked for telling the truth,” she said.