RABAT, Morocco — The leader of protests over economic and social problems in Morocco’s northern Rif region was sentenced to 20 years in prison, provoking outrage among his family and activists.
A court in Casablanca convicted the protest leader, Nasser Zefzafi late Tuesday on charges of undermining public order and threatening national unity. A number of other activists were also jailed for up to 20 years.
Mr. Zefzafi was arrested in May 2017 after organizing demonstrations in his hometown Al Hoceima in the Rif. The protests began after Mouhcine Fikri, a poor fishmonger, was crushed to death in October 2016 while trying to retrieve fish from a trash compactor. Authorities had confiscated his stock and tossed it into a garbage truck.
His death unleashed building anger over economic deprivation and humiliation suffered by the Berbers in the historically neglected Rif region. Protests spread across rural Morocco, where many feel the powerful coterie of those who enjoy royal patronage corruptly profits at the expense of the people.
A video, which could not be independently verified by Reuters, was shared by Moroccan social media users who said it showed people marching in Al Hoceima and the nearby town of Imzouren to protest the sentence.
“We were expecting such a cruel sentence because officials in this country have never surprised us with good news,” Mr. Zefzafi’s father, Ahmed, told Reuters.
“I met my son today. His morale is high. 
The Al Hoceima demonstrations, along with those in the mining town of Jerada in early 2018, have been the most intense since unrest in 2011 that prompted King Mohammed VI to devolve some of his powers to an elected parliament.
As part of the same verdict, three Al Hoceima protesters — Nabil Ahmijeq, Wassim El Boustani and Samir Aghid — were also given 20 years in prison. Another 35 activists were jailed for between two and 15 years, and one got a one-year suspended sentence.
A government lawyer, Mohamed Al Houssaini Karout, told Reuters that the sentences were very light compared with what the law allowed.
“Some defendants were tried on three charges punishable each by capital punishment, a life sentence and 30 years in jail but they only received 20 years in prison,” he said.
Some of the accused had been indicted on charges of serious crimes including attacking law enforcement officers, “some of whom are permanently handicapped,” he added.
However, Naima El Gallaf, a lawyer for the activists, described Mr. Zefzafi’s sentence on her Facebook page as cruel and retaliatory.
An activist and lawyer, Bouchra Rouissi, told Reuters that there would be an appeal after consultation with the defendants.
“These are unfair sentences,” she said.
After the Rif protests, King Mohammed dismissed the ministers of education, planning and housing and health, as well as other officials, for falling short of implementing a development plan for the region.