As a model for diplomacy, the Singapore Summit had its highs and lows. But as a platform for displaying the singular performance art of Donald Trump, it was a solid 10.
President Trump was on his best behavior, as is so often the case when he is dealing with dictators. Gone was the chest-thumping, insult-hurling ranter who had threatened to light up “Little Rocket Man” with a “fire and fury like the world has never seen.” Instead, Mr. Trump unleashed his version of a charm offensive on Kim Jong-un.
With the world looking anxiously on, Mr. Trump was flattering — gushing even — about his North Korean counterpart. The two leaders were all smiles and friendly pats, and that 13-second handshake, complete with Mr. Trump’s Clintonesque elbow grab, seemed to go on forever.
Mr. Trump was even more effusive about Mr. Kim after their session, sounding more like he was deconstructing a blind date than analyzing a diplomatic meeting.
Mr. Trump’s chumminess with one of the globe’s most notorious despots would have been noteworthy under any circumstances. It was all the more striking coming on the heels of the president slamming Justin Trudeau, the prime minister of Canada — one of America’s closest allies — as “weak,” “meek” and “very dishonest.” But from a Trumpian perspective, the contrast makes perfect sense.
Whatever he does or does not understand about history or policy or statecraft, Mr. Trump has a keen sense of how to engage authoritarian thugs who crave respect and legitimacy. It’s how he’s wired. The grand show of respect, the fawning language, the pomp and circumstance — it all melts this president’s butter and inclines him favorably toward his flatterers. He considers himself a strong leader, and such blatant ego-stroking is how he likes to be handled. Why wouldn’t the same hold true for the likes of Mr. Kim — or Vladimir Putin?
Dealing with men like Mr. Kim is, on some level, comfortable ground for Mr. Trump. Such negotiations are a higher-stakes, global version of the world he came up in, one of cutthroat real estate developers and shady businessmen and mobsters. That is the arena Mr. Trump knows, and the one he respects.
The world sneers at strongmen like Mr. Kim, Mr. Putin and Rodrigo Duterte, the president of the Philippines, regarding them as uncivilized thugs, and Mr. Trump feels similarly disrespected. Dispositionally speaking, these are Mr. Trump’s people. As such, the president feels more confident and less defensive with these people than he does with leaders with whom, from a geopolitical perspective, he is on more equal footing. This is especially true of Mr. Kim, a global pariah from a devastatingly poor and dysfunctional nation to whom Mr. Trump can feel superior in every way.
Plus, Mr. Trump is way taller than Mr. Kim. And for this president, size does matter.
As for why Mr. Trump is so committed to tackling the North Korea tangle, there are a couple of key Trumpian impulses at play — beyond whatever concerns the president may have long harbored regarding nuclear proliferation, of course. Most simply, Mr. Trump loves a deal. Cutting big deals on his own is what he thought the presidency was going to be all about. The realization that he must contend with the squabbling foot-draggers in Congress has been a constant source of frustration to him on the domestic front. But on foreign policy, he has way more wiggle room to make his mark.
But if he somehow can pull off this trick, boy oh boy, won’t everyone be amazed. This is ultimately what makes North Korea so irresistible to Mr. Trump. There are indeed lots of bad actors and dangerous regimes and looming threats on the world stage. But which regime is seen as the most unpredictable, the most isolated, the craziest of crazy? If Mr. Trump can crack this nut, he’ll surely get the adulation — not to mention the Nobel Peace Prize — that he is so desperate for.