Dr. Seguin is working on a book about lynching in America.
From the late 1800s well into the 20th century, thousands of people, mostly black and poor, were murdered by lynch mobs that sometimes burned their victims alive, castrated them or cut their bodies up into little pieces that were passed around as souvenirs.
Southern newspapers justified these horrors by calling lynching victims “fiends,” “brutes” or “ravishers,” leaving their guilt unquestioned. Lurid details of supposed rapes of white women by black men, often entirely fabricated, were recounted in Southern papers to justify, or even to incite, lynchings.
In a landmark move, The Montgomery Advertiser recently apologized for its role in justifying and promoting lynching. But many Northern papers were just as complicit.
A Michigan Mob’s Vengeance on a Colored Ravisher.
My research, and that of many others, shows that Northern newspapers slowly and unevenly became more critical of lynching starting around the 1890s when activists like Ida B. Wells made American lynching an embarrassment in the eyes of the “civilized world” (Britain and Europe generally).
The British press began to take a serious interest in American lynching when, in 1891, a New Orleans mob broke out of jail 11 Italian immigrants, who had just been acquitted or mis-tried on charges of murdering the police chief, and hanged them. Italy demanded that the federal government prosecute the mob, and when that didn’t happen, it cut off diplomatic ties with the United States.
While Ida B. Wells was on a speaking tour of Britain in 1894, she used the political fallout of the New Orleans lynching to draw international attention to the lynching of black Americans.
Wells had tried for years, mostly unsuccessfully, to turn the Northern white press against the brutality of lynching. The New York Times quoted Wells at length in July 1894, detailing a speech she gave summarizing her success in publicizing American lynching in Britain.
Yet shortly thereafter, The Times ran an editorial that, although denouncing some overzealous lynch mobs as “savages,” argued that rape, “a crime to which negroes are particularly prone,” was an extreme provocation to white Southerners, and therefore there was no reason for the British public to “interest itself” in American lynching.
We should welcome The Montgomery Advertiser’s efforts to come clean about the past. It is well past time that other papers, both Northern and Southern, follow their example. Perhaps a new memorial to Ida B. Wells being planned in Chicago can serve as an occasion.