Is the Future of the Supreme Court in the Hands of These 2 Senators?
Senators Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski, both moderate Republicans who favor abortion rights, are facing pressure from liberal activists to defend Roe v. Wade in the impending confirmation battle over President Trump’s Supreme Court nominee.
Justice Anthony Kennedy’s decision to retire from the Supreme Court is putting abortion rights back into the spotlight. President Trump has long vowed to nominate pro-life jurists. “Under my administration, we will always defend the right to life.” Democrats, as a minority party in the Senate, have almost no chance of blocking Trump’s nominee on their own. So liberal activists have been quick to put pressure on two moderate female Republicans who openly favor abortion rights. “Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski, you cannot vote for these nominees and claim you are pro-choice.” Collins of Maine and Murkowski of Alaska could be pivotal swing votes in the coming Senate confirmation battle. Republicans need a simple majority. So if even one of these two breaks ranks, and every Democrat votes against it, the nominee wouldn’t get through. “Roe v. Wade has said that a woman has the right, that reproductive right, to choose. And I have supported that.” Both senators have veered from the party line before: They were the only two Republicans to vote against all three Obamacare repeal propositions in 2017. “My choice and vote really matter in Washington right now.” Both women did vote for President Trump’s conservative nominee, Neil Gorsuch, but now the stakes are higher with abortion rights on the line. Even if Collins and Murkowski both vote against the nominee, Democrats from red states, like Joe Manchin of West Virginia, could still help push through Trump’s pick.
WASHINGTON — Justice Anthony M. Kennedy’s retirement announcement was less than a day old when liberal activists rallied on the steps of the Supreme Court on Thursday, invoking the names of two Republican senators who, they believe, hold the future of Roe v. Wade in their hands.
