Proto-Canadians, disguised as British troops, set the torch to Washington in 1814, during the War of 1812.
We are now going to explain the War of 1812 to you. Why not?
The New York Times then confirmed the CNN report, as did The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.
It’s unclear if the president was trying to make a joke during what was, reportedly, a tense call about his decision to impose steep tariffs on metals imported from Canada, Mexico and the European Union.
Any lesson on the War of 1812 probably isn’t the most vivid memory people have from their high school history classes, so its details may be fuzzy to many. 
No, Canada did not burn down the White House during the War of 1812, which was fought with Britain over maritime rights. What is now Canada was not yet a country in 1812, but rather British colonies.
“The inferno was so great that the glow in the night sky was seen from 50 miles away,” the White House Historical Association wrote.
So you can’t really pin that on Canada, considering that Canada didn’t exist. But it is a bit more complicated than that.
The United States did invade the colonies that later became Canada and were, at the time, controlled by the British. Ask some people in Canada and they would very much feel it was their war, marked by American aggression.
Former Prime Minister Stephen Harper, Mr. Trudeau’s Conservative predecessor, made a point of extensively commemorating the war at its 200-year anniversary, spending millions in 2012 on events, advertising and exhibitions.
Other Canadians were bewildered by Mr. Harper’s focus on the war, as many Canadians are just as unfamiliar with the war as Americans. The United States couldn’t muster much interest in remembering the war; legislation in New York to plan events was vetoed in 2009, 2010 and 2011 because of tight finances and a $1.4 million price tag.
Some people might think the War of 1812 inspired the famous “1812 Overture” by the Russian composer Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky. It didn’t.
It did, however, spawn another noted piece of musical history that has been in the news lately: “The Star-Spangled Banner.” Francis Scott Key composed the words as the British bombarded Fort McHenry in Baltimore from warships, according to the White House Historical Association.
The sides came to a peace agreement in 1814, when neither side cared to continue fighting.