Some of the titles recently available from the online video game marketplace Steam have names — like Suicide Simulator — that are fairly self-explanatory. Others have more innocuous titles that conceal the darker thrust of their game play: In the forthcoming Kindergarten, for instance, cartoon children are shot in the head by the school principal or hacked apart by the janitor.
It was a role-playing game called Active Shooter, however, that recently inspired broad protest, including condemnation from the parents of victims of the mass shooting in Parkland, Fla. Last week, the game, in which players prowl a school campus from the point of view of an attacker, had its scheduled release canceled by Valve Corporation, the software and technology company that operates Steam.
Valve, which is based in Bellevue, Wash., and prides itself on being “boss-free since 1996,” arrived at the policy change collectively. Mr. Lombardi said a “large group” was involved in the decision-making process, but couldn’t say exactly how many people that included.
By Thursday evening, a page for the game AIDS Simulator, a creation of the same developer and publisher as Suicide Simulator, had been removed from the Steam store.
Arcane Raise, the publisher of AIDS Simulator, said it had been caught off guard by the removal of its entire game catalog from the Steam store. “We have received no communication from Valve and thus are unsure of the situation, only that our games have been removed and access to our publishing system was restricted,” the company wrote in a message on Twitter.
“Every game we published was checked and approved beforehand by Valve,” it added in a public post.
According to the website steam-tracker.com, provocative titles began to vanish from the platform at a greater clip late Thursday. Valve did not immediately respond to questions regarding the fate of those games.
Still, perhaps in a sign of how little the games’ brand of humor has resonated with members of the public, an online petition to suppress the release of Active Shooter, which has already been pulled, continues to gain signatures.
