Scheduled to open on Saturday and run to Nov. 4, the show is the latest manifestation of a vogue for examining an artist’s image as a creation in its own right. Last year, the Brooklyn Museum exhibited Georgia O’Keeffe’s androgynous, understated attire; and a show of artworks by Gluck at the Brighton Museum in England included examples of the British artist's mannish 1920s tailoring.
But “Making Her Self Up,” which includes drawings and paintings, as well as choice items from Ms. Kahlo’s wardrobe, will bring added edge to this approach thanks to the pop culture embrace of the artist’s appearance, and the exhibition’s attempt to tell a new story about what, exactly, lay behind her look: a desire to accommodate and distract from her physical disabilities.
The Kahlo likeness — reduced to a shorthand of flower-studded braids, unibrow, rosy lips and bright blouse — gazes today from products including socks and yoga pants. Her style informs magazine fashion shoots, retail displays and even a Barbie doll. Yet in none of these representations does Ms. Kahlo appear as anything other than an able-bodied woman.
At age 6, Ms. Kahlo had polio, which left her right leg shorter than her left. She was teased at school for her withered leg and limp, said Circe Henestrosa, co-curator of the exhibition, and her dress became a way to conceal it. “She’d wear three or four socks to level her legs, and started to wear long skirts,” Ms. Henestrosa said.
Then, when she was 18, a school bus carrying Ms. Kahlo collided with a tram, and her body “was pierced through to the pelvic bone,” the curator said. She suffered more than 20 bone fractures, most to the spine.
Over her lifetime, Ms. Kahlo had more than 30 operations, including, in 1953, the amputation of her right leg. She died the next year, at age 47.
The boxy huipil blouses were made without fastenings, and could drop loosely over a back brace or plaster cast. Their short length was well suited to working while seated, whether in a chair, bed or wheelchair. The long flowing skirts covered her wasted leg, and their motion helped conceal her limp.
The 22 outfits that will be on show are among those discovered in 2004 at the Casa Azul, Ms. Kahlo’s home in Coyoacán, Mexico. They had been stored for almost half a century after the death of her husband, the muralist Diego Rivera, along with 6,500 photographs (among them works by Edward Weston, Tina Modotti, Man Ray and Nickolas Muray, Ms. Kahlo’s lover), as well as drawings, letters, documents and personal possessions.
In the exhibition are back braces, reinforced with metal bars and covered in leather; three medical plaster casts that had been cut off Ms. Kahlo’s torso; a pair of handmade boots, decorated with Chinese embroidery and with a built-up sole for the right foot; and a prosthetic leg, sculpted by the artist and dressed with an embroidered red leather boot, bells and ribbons.
Clothes for disabled women tend to be promoted in terms of functionality, said Eleanor Lisney, a founding member of the disabled women’s collective Sisters of Frida, which is based in Britain. But, she added, “What we wear is part of us: That has to reflect the fashion that’s going on around us, we don’t want to be left out.” Thanks to the work of activists such as Sinéad Burke, the 3.5-foot-tall Irish woman who describes herself as a “little person” and who has been lobbying for fashion-world recognition of diversity, things are starting to shift.
Witness this exhibition.
Ms. Kahlo “didn’t allow her disability to define her, but it was an integral part of her life,” Ms. Wilcox said. The gorgeous, jewel-bedecked image that the artist constructed for herself wouldn’t have been the same without it.