At Bianca Saunders’s debut presentation at London Fashion Week Men’s last Saturday, an all-black cast of models in the designer’s casually elegant clothing slouched around looking forlorn and holding glasses of milk and wildflowers. The desirable garments — glossy high-waisted nylon pants, off-kilter white T-shirts and gently ruffled shirts — coupled with the evocative mise-en-scène confirmed Saunders’s place among a new wave of buzzed-about young London designers.
Saunders, 25, graduated from the Royal College of Art last year and launched her namesake label this past month. “I made this collection in four weeks,” says the designer, who was recently awarded the British Fashion Council’s NewGen sponsorship. The prize enabled her to put together a lineup of looks and present as part of the council’s high-profile Ones to Watch program — a whirlwind experience that has left her somewhat breathless. “It’s all just happened at once,” she adds.
Her men’s wear, available at the boutiques Machine-A in London and L’Eppoche in Japan, offers a playful twist on the mundane. The pieces contain unexpected gestures that distort the familiar — a smocked shoulder on a shirt that rises along the nape of the neck, flared high-waisted pants with boxy proportions, slinky jersey tops and vests that reveal flashes of skin. “Nylons, jerseys and denim — those are my paintbrushes,” she says of the signatures which she infuses, working closely with the stylist Ib Kamara, with references to her British-Jamaican heritage and rude boy culture.
 “It’s about an uncomfortable middle ground,” she says. “It is about creating something for the guy who sits somewhere in between on the spectrum of masculinity and femininity.” Gendered garments may seem somewhat archaic within the increasingly gender-fluid fashion world, but in the Caribbean community there are still concrete codes of identity, which Saunders reimagines in her collections. She is also working against the stereotypes of hyperaggressive and hyper-sexualized blackness that pervade popular culture, she explains.
Born in Catford, in Southeast London, Saunders is keen to point out that her roots are thoroughly working class. Both of her parents are British-born Jamaicans — her father is a plasterer and her mother is a hairdresser — and she is one of six children. “My mother has always been a go-getting person, which I’ve got from her,” she says with a smile.
Saunders says that her work often draws comparisons to that of fellow South London-born designer Grace Wales Bonner, who has also explored black male identity in her award-winning men’s wear. But while Wales Bonner focuses on African diasporic culture, Saunders’s vision of black masculinity is closer to home, rooted in South London. “A lot of my work has the idea of being relatable but with something odd — things that look familiar, but aren’t,” she says. Familiar, yes. Ordinary, certainly not.