Politics|Ted Cruz Is Running Again. Trump Is Still Making Things Complicated.
Trump and Cruz: Friends? Enemies? Frenemies?
Legislation by Senator Ted Cruz countering the Trump administration’s policy on families at the border was the latest twist in a hot-and-cold relationship.
“All of us who are seeing these images of children being pulled away from moms and dads in tears, we’re horrified.” Ted Cruz has proposed emergency legislation to end the Trump administration policy of separating families that cross the border illegally, a policy facing increasingly bipartisan criticism. “This has to stop.” This is not the first time Cruz and Donald Trump have found themselves at odds with each other. “Donald, you’re a sniveling coward.” “This guy’s a liar.” There was not much that Cruz and Trump left unsaid in the lead-up to the 2016 election.  You’re the basket case.” It all came to a spectacular showdown at the Republican National Convention when Cruz refused to endorse Trump. “Vote your conscience.” Even as the crowd turned up the heat. “Endorse Trump! Endorse Trump!” But then, shortly before the election, he did a full 180, voicing his support for Trump after all. Since then, the epic feud has been lost in the annals of history, as Cruz aligned himself with the president. “This is an all-star cabinet. You look at Judge Gorsuch. And then you look at the executive action. Or on the economic side. I think we’ve seen a lot of strong substance in this opening month.” Fast forward to now. Cruz’s main rival is no longer Donald Trump, but Representative Beto O’Rourke, a Democrat now gunning for Cruz’s Senate seat. O’Rourke is breaking Texas Democratic fund-raising records and seeking to ride a wave anti-Trump furor all the way to Washington. “No wall is needed. The U.S.-Mexico border has never been safer than it is today.” If O’Rourke won in the November midterms, he would be the first Democratic senator from Texas to be elected in over two decades. “Texans don’t want to see a return to the high-tax, high-regulation, high-spending days of Barack Obama.” And while Cruz still has a significant lead in the latest polls, the race has been closer than expected and Republicans have taken notice. So after Cruz extended a hand into the future in a radio interview with Breitbart in April — — Trump also let go of any bad blood on his side. “Full endorsement for this man. Ted Cruz. Where’s Ted?” [crowd cheers] And this is how, with their eyes set on the prize, even two old rivals seem to have seen the ancient wisdom in party loyalties and pragmatic alliances. What remains to be seen, is whether their alliance can survive this latest controversy.
SAN ANTONIO — Senator Ted Cruz had an idea: legislation to keep immigrant families together at the border — stanching a political crisis created by President Trump — while also adding judges to speed up asylum requests.
Mr. Trump had a different impulse: make Mr. Cruz’s life exceedingly complicated.
This was not a first.
Over the last three years of a many-chaptered political life, some things have changed for Mr. Cruz — Mr. Trump, in the Texas senator’s estimation, has gone from “terrific” to “pathological liar” to pretty O.K. after all — and some things have stayed the same. The main constant: the president disrupting his best laid plans.
After conceding defeat to Mr. Trump in a vicious 2016 presidential primary, Mr. Cruz, 47, is now facing career mortality in a re-election fight back home, even as he takes care to keep a foothold in the national conversation.
He is one of several ambitious conservatives, and perhaps the most ambitious and most conservative, feeling his way through a Republican metamorphosis under Mr. Trump that a colleague, Senator Bob Corker, recently compared to cultish behavior.
Mr. Trump wiped out a generation of Republican talent on the way to his 2016 victory, including Mr. Cruz and Senate peers like Marco Rubio and Rand Paul. And as he stands for re-election through midterm headwinds, Mr. Cruz — as much as any leader in his party — is straining to straddle the boundary between this political moment and the next one, whatever it might look like: He recognizes that popularity with the party’s base requires intense loyalty to Mr. Trump, a man he once called erratic and dangerous. He also hopes to be around long after Mr. Trump is gone.
For now, Mr. Cruz is still considered a solid favorite for re-election, but a swell of anti-Trump activism, even in this signature Republican state, has raised the degree of difficulty. Representative Beto O’Rourke, his Democratic opponent, has outpaced him in fund-raising and attracted wide-scale media attention. And that was before the Trump administration’s policy of separating immigrant families at the border became the latest minefield in the race.
Democrats have focused on a piece of Mr. Cruz’s bill stipulating that asylum requests be heard within 14 days — insufficient time to prepare a proper case, critics say. Mr. O’Rourke, who called the family separations “torture,” seems likely to keep immigration policy central to his campaign.
This is also still Texas. Most polls show Mr. Cruz with a clear lead, as high as double digits. And compared with competitive races for Republican-held Senate seats in Nevada, Arizona and Tennessee, Democrats in Washington view this contest as a less promising prospect, despite their enthusiasm for Mr. O’Rourke.
Mr. Cruz’s perceived advantage in the race owes, in large measure, to his reputational repair work since the 2016 Republican National Convention, when he pointedly refused to endorse Mr. Trump, to ferocious booing.
While many Republicans have changed their minds on the president, few have swerved with Mr. Cruz’s performative zeal — consistent with a career that has included a recitation of “Green Eggs and Ham” on the Senate floor and the selection of a running mate, Carly Fiorina, six days before dropping out in 2016.
He began that presidential primary by wrapping Mr. Trump in a strategic “bear hug,” as he once told donors, pouring on the praise. He ended it — after Mr. Trump suggested Mr. Cruz’s wife was unattractive and insinuated without evidence that his father was involved in the Kennedy assassination — by unburdening himself to reporters hours before quitting the race.
Mr. Cruz’s convention speech in 2016, during which he urged Republicans to “vote your conscience,” disappointed even some longtime supporters in Texas. At a breakfast the next morning, several delegates from the state jeered him; one held a “Clinton-Cruz 2020” sign. Mr. Cruz told the crowd he would not be a “servile puppy dog” in service of party unity. He endorsed Mr. Trump two months later.
Mr. Cruz and White House officials now speak with mutual warmth, recounting their work together on tax legislation, disaster relief for Texas after Hurricane Harvey and the pardon granted Dinesh D’Souza, the conservative author and filmmaker.
“Surprisingly good,” Mr. Cruz said of their relationship.
Last month, Mr. Trump endorsed Mr. Cruz at the National Rifle Association convention in Dallas.
“You’re looking at allies,” said Kellyanne Conway, the White House counselor, who herself supported Mr. Cruz for president before joining Mr. Trump.
In interviews with Republican activists and voters, few seemed to hold a grudge against Mr. Cruz for his 2016 speech.
The gathering also laid bare the full measure of Mr. Trump’s party takeover, his likeness and vocabulary infusing every inch of this festival of glimmering red cowboy hats and conservative swagger.
“Is he awesome or what?” said Dan Patrick, the lieutenant governor.
“Isn’t it great to see a president working hard to make America great again?” asked George P. Bush, the Texas land commissioner and son of Jeb Bush, once Mr. Trump’s favorite target.
Senator John Cornyn’s tribute came with production value. His team aired a video demonstrating the bond between “Big Don” and “Big John,” with “It Takes Two” playing over a reel of policy accomplishments.
Asked if he feared the party had become defined more by fealty to Mr. Trump than conservative ideology — as Mr. Corker, the Tennessee senator, and Representative Mark Sanford of South Carolina, who recently lost his House primary, have suggested — Mr. Cruz did not answer directly. He did allude to the assassination of Julius Caesar.
Mr. Cruz seems determined to find the political ups — and an audience — wherever he can, leaning into his national reputation for villainy among liberals. His most recent bid for wide exposure came last Saturday, in a charity basketball game against Jimmy Kimmel, the left-leaning late-night host.
The event was hatched in an after-hours Cruz tweet challenging Mr. Kimmel, who had mocked the senator’s appearance.
