The fatal shootings of two paralegals on Friday in Scottsdale, Ariz., have been linked to the killing of Steven E. Pitt, a forensic psychiatrist known for his work on high-profile cases like the JonBenet Ramsey investigation, and who was shot miles away less than a day earlier.
Dr. Pitt, 59, was shot dead as he was leaving his office building on Thursday around 5:30 p.m., Sgt. Vincent Lewis, a spokesman for the Phoenix Police Department, said on Saturday. His department released a sketch of a suspect the day after the killing.
Witnesses told the police they had heard “a loud verbal argument and they heard shots,” Sergeant Lewis said. Dr. Pitt was found “critically wounded” on a walkway outside his office building on North 71st Street, Sergeant Lewis said, and pronounced dead at the scene by the Phoenix Fire Department.
Less than 24 hours later, Scottsdale patrol officers responded to a call at 2:15 p.m. Friday about a shooting around 10 miles from where Dr. Pitt was shot, the Scottsdale Police Department said.
When the officers arrived, they found a woman with a gunshot wound to the head, the police said in a statement. “The victim had walked to a bus parked in the intersection to ask for help,” the statement said. She was taken to a hospital, where she later died.
The officers then “followed a blood trail” to a business on First Street, the police said. Inside, they found a dead woman who had been shot in the head.
On Saturday, the police identified the victims as Veleria Sharp, 48, and Laura Anderson, 49. Both women worked as paralegals at the law firm of Burt Feldman Grenier in Scottsdale, the police said.
The double homicide occurred at the law office, the police said, adding that there was a suspect, though they did not provide a name.
The Scottsdale Police Department also announced it was investigating a fourth homicide in the area. The police responded to a call just after midnight Saturday about a shooting at a business approximately halfway between the other killings, said Sgt. Benjamin Hoster, a spokesman for the Scottsdale Police.
The police did not know whether that shooting was related to the previous two attacks, Sergeant Hoster said. On Sunday, they identified the man as Marshall Levine, 72, and said he was found dead in his office, which indicated he was a “life coach,” Sgt. Hoster said.
He said that the police had been receiving “continual” tips from the community, but that no arrests have been made. Late on Saturday, the authorities announced that the potential reward for tips leading to an arrest and conviction in the homicides had been increased to $21,000.
Sergeant Lewis said he could not provide details about how the two crimes were connected, or whether the same person was suspected of both crimes. Sergeant Hoster said that although the department believes that the homicides are related, he could not offer any details about the suspect or suspects. He also said the police had not determined whether there was a connection between the paralegals’ law firm and Dr. Pitt and his practice.
Dr. Pitt and his firm, Steven Pitt & Associates, frequently consulted with the Phoenix Police Department, Sergeant Lewis said, most notably in the recent case involving the so-called serial street shooter, in which a suspect is in jail awaiting trial.
Throughout his career, Dr. Pitt served as a consultant on several well-known cases, including the JonBenet Ramsey homicide investigation, the Columbine High School massacre and the “Baseline Killer,” who was found guilty in Arizona of murdering nine people more than a decade ago.
Sergeant Lewis noted that it “was fairly uncommon” for Phoenix police to receive a call about a shooting in the area where Dr. Pitt was killed. Scottsdale Police records show that only five homicides occurred in the department’s jurisdiction in 2017.
The law firm Burt Feldman Grenier released a statement in which it praised the two paralegals who were killed.
