You served for two years as George W. Bush’s ethics counsel. Since Donald Trump took office, you and a couple of other ethics experts have been in high demand, especially on cable TV. You may dislike Trump, but you have to admit, he’s been a boon to the ethics-industrial complex. Well, he certainly created a lot of attention on ethics issues. Previously, people would violate ethics rules, but it was not quite as rampant as what’s going on here. We’ve been through a phase somewhat like this before, during Watergate, when ethics was front and center in the news.
You were about 12 years old when Watergate happened. Were you paying attention as a kid? Oh, yeah, I was watching those hearings. I remember hearing a man named Archie Cox had been fired and asking, Who fired him? The president. What was he doing? Investigating the president. You figure that out: There’s something wrong with that.
Which of President Trump’s potential ethical violations bothers you the most? Well, that depends on how broadly you define ethics. If ethics is limited to financial conflicts of interest — that’s really what I did in the Bush White House — that’s a huge problem for me because Trump refused to sell his businesses. We don’t know where he’s getting his financing. All we know is he won’t share his tax returns. Certainly, since he was elected, things have blown up in areas relevant to ethics. It’s a scary situation if you have a president obstructing justice, particularly when it’s about whether his political campaign was infiltrated by a foreign adversary.
Who is the worst ethical offender in Trump’s orbit? Probably Scott Pruitt. His conflicts of interest have a direct impact on environmental regulations and our ability to protect the planet. Then he has the gall to try to use his Christian faith to stay in office. I’m active in the church myself. I find it a really offensive use of religion when you have somebody in there who’s clearly corrupt, and he’s destroying the environment, and he’s using religion to justify it.
What happens after Trump? Has he permanently moved the goal posts on the ethical behavior of a president, or will we go back to the norms and standards we had before him? I think we’ll go through a period when there’s a revival of concern about ethics. After Watergate, we got the Ethics in Government Act, which has a lot of additional regulations. The course I teach, Professional Responsibility, was brought into law-school curriculums and required by most states for admission to the bar beginning in the 1970s. I think we’re going to go through another period when people insist on higher standards of ethics from both political parties.
You’re a lifelong Republican, but now you’re running for Senate in Minnesota as a Democrat. It’s Al Franken’s former seat, which is a little paradoxical because you’ve been very vocal that he shouldn’t have resigned in the first place, in the face of sexual-misconduct allegations. I do not know the facts. It’s the same problem we have with Trump — everyone wants to jump to conclusions. With Trump, it’s Republicans jumping to conclusions that he’s done absolutely nothing wrong despite glaring evidence that he has. The House and Senate Judiciary Committees need to investigate. With Franken, an ethics committee needed to investigate and find out the facts. I would have fully supported that.
Why not stay with the G.O.P. and try to save it from the inside? When people are making up stories about Bob Mueller on Fox News and those get traction in congressional committees and in the White House, at a certain point, I’ve got to say no. At what point are we moving from a situation where I’m in the moderate wing of the party that plays by essentially the same rules as the Democrats, to a party that really is behaving as if it does not want to function in a democracy?