Yes, the winters are long and brutal, but in warmer months this river-oriented metropolis is bursting with life — including celebrations of First Nations culture.
Our columnist, Jada Yuan, is visiting each destination on our 52 Places to Go in 2018 list. This dispatch brings her to Saskatoon, Canada; it took the No. 18 spot on the list and is the 17th stop on Jada’s itinerary.
Five minutes outside of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, a steady stream of roadside motels and Chinese takeout joints faded into the most intensely flat landscape I have ever experienced. A turn of the wheel and it was as if the Canadian world had depopulated, leaving nothing but open road and yellow, rustling grain fields and a snow globe’s worth of cotton ball clouds floating overhead.
I was headed to Wanuskewin Heritage Park, dedicated to honoring and fostering an understanding of the cultures of First Nations people and their relationship to this land. The name is Cree, meaning “seeking peace of mind.” Statues of stampeding bison charged the door of the interpretive center — the one permanent structure on these 600 acres. A profound stillness descended, amid great gusts of wind.
Moments later, a monk in full habit strolled past us, reading scripture.
Whenever I told fellow Americans that Saskatoon was coming up on the 52 Places list, the most common response I’d get was, “Where?” To be honest, the biggest city in the province of Saskatchewan — itself a Texas-sized slice of Canada’s vast prairies sandwiched between Alberta and Manitoba — was off my radar, too. But it shouldn’t be. Yes, the winters are long and brutal, but in warmer months this river-oriented metropolis, 300 miles north of the Montana border, is bursting with life. I took in stunning natural beauty, experienced a unique arts scene, much of it centered around First Nations culture, and gorged on good food.
I had arrived at Wanuskewin at dusk to spend the night outdoors in a tipi — a bit of an intimating prospect given that it was the second day in May and temperatures, Saskatonians told me, had only gotten out of the bitter cold range that week. (Think 40 degrees Fahrenheit below zero in winter.) I’d been wearing my puffy jacket everywhere and even so, had to sleep with an even puffier jacket and sleeping bag, all under a bison hide, next to a propane-powered heater, to make it through the relatively balmy night, at two degrees above freezing.
And yet I woke up grinning. In the video I submitted for my application for the 52 Places job, I said that there was a part of my soul that only fills up when I travel. This night, on these very special grounds, it had overflowed.
During summer, Wanuskewin opens its tipis for groups of a minimum of 15 people, or smaller groups with a minimum charge of 690 Canadian dollars (about $542) — usually scouts or families who bring their own sleeping bags and crash on the floor. But because the season hadn’t started and I was alone, they matched me with a Saskatoon buddy, Ashlyn George (more on her later), and asked us to give them feedback on a new Deluxe Tipi Experience they’re planning to offer this year (prices available on request), with equipment provided.
It operates much like the student sleepovers with a big educational component and is geared to travelers like me who don’t have gear. All proceeds go back to park operations. Highlights: eating First-Nations-inspired cuisine at the museum restaurant; cooking bannock flat bread on a stick by campfire; snuggling under the cocoon of the buffalo skin; and drinking tea in starlight with good company.
In 2015, Ms. George landed the coveted job of being the fourth Saskatchewanderer, the official travel blogger for the province, in a program that’s still going strong. She’s also, I quickly found out, a local celebrity, and, in a sense, a pioneer for the job I’m doing now.
For a year, she lived out of her car (and hotels) and documented everything from flying a jet in formation with the Royal Canadian Air Force to the majesty of the northern lights. There are key differences to our mandates: She was working for the government as a function of the tourism arm; could bring a lot more stuff with her since she had a car; and got to go home every once in a while. But she’s also the first person I’ve met who’s done a version of this job and knows what the other side looks like.
She gave me a good tip to make it through all the multitasking: Hide in a bathroom for 5 minutes on a hectic day filled with activities to take a moment to process where you are and what you’re experiencing. But my main takeaway was how much she appreciated the opportunities her year on the road had afforded her. Now she runs a blog and a company focused on outdoor adventure travel for solo female travelers called The Lost Girl’s Guide to Finding the World. I know she helped this lost girl.
The most powerful part of my time in Wanuskewin, though, were three presentations by Cree women telling the stories of the voiceless in their culture.
And Randi Lynn Nanemahoo-Candline, whose Cree name is Morningstar Dancing Deer Woman, gave us a vast and fascinating cultural overview, ranging from how Indigenous people hunted through buffalo jumps (luring bison into stampeding off cliffs) to the native practice of men battling to disgrace one another (to let another man get close enough to touch you was a great shame) rather than to kill.
She also spoke powerfully about her mother’s history as a residential school survivor who had been taken away from her family and sent to a boarding school run by nuns and paid for by the government as part of a forced assimilation program that lasted 100 years, until the last one closed in 1996. “My auntie told us that if you tried to speak Cree they would stick a needle in your tongue,” Ms. Nanemahoo-Candline said. Atoning for those wrongs was the mandate for a Truth and Reconciliation Commission, established in 2008.
Ms. Nanemahoo-Candline, a dancer, also showed us the red dress she uses to symbolize the fact that Indigenous women are victims of violent crimes at a far higher rate than women of other ethnic groups. She believes the problem traces directly from the inherited trauma of residential schools. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau started a national inquiry on it in 2016, that has since come under fire from Indigenous groups who question its effectiveness.
I couldn’t leave town without spending a time at the Remai Modern, a newly opened museum that is fast putting Saskatoon on the international art map. It is one of the largest museums in Canada dedicated to modern and contemporary art and owes its existence to an astounding pledge of 103 million Canadian dollars from Ellen Remai (pronounced REY-me), a local patron. That donation also includes a Picasso collection worth 20 million dollars.
It is through her support, said Gregory Burke, the museum’s executive director, that they could afford to bring in a controversial exhibit from the multimedia provocateur Jimmie Durham. When it came to the Whitney Museum in New York, the Durham exhibit came under attack because there is debate over whether the artist — an activist for Indigenous rights in the 1970s — is actually Cherokee, as he has identified as in the past.
Be warned: Shave an hour off whatever closing time you see on Google or Yelp and you might get there before the kitchen closes. Congress Beer House stays open later than most and serves a delicious mac and cheese. Hometown Diner was my breakfast spot; try the s’mores doughnut. And celebrate the city’s large Ukrainian population at Baba’s Homestyle Perogies, where you can get your cabbage roll fix at a drive-through window.
— Bring a jacket, no matter the time of year.
— You’ll need a car. I tried taking the bus for my first day; the 20 minutes of waiting in the cold changed my mind.
— When you need those extra clothes, some local parlance: a beanie is a “toque” and a hoodie is a “bunnyhug.” Both can be found at a very good outdoors shop called Outter Limits.
— Fill your soul with unbridled sports enthusiasm: hockey (the Blades are the local junior team) or indoor lacrosse (Saskatchewan Rush), as I did.
— The Remai puts their artists up at the James Hotel. I stayed right on the river in the Delta Bessborough, an old railway hotel that looks like a castle.
Next dispatch: Buffalo, N.Y.