President Trump began the week, as is his wont, by having a Twitter fit about the continuing Russia investigation.
Arguably more noteworthy, and more troubling, is the president’s emerging effort to pre-emptively place the blame for what promises to be a tough election cycle for congressional Republicans on what he now regularly denounces as the partisan, “rigged,” “unconstitutional” machinations of Mr. Mueller and his investigative team. Message to the nation: Don’t blame me if my party takes a beating in November. The Witch Hunters are busy manipulating the system.
With this assertion, Mr. Trump is going for a twofer: He is once again trying to delegitimize the special counsel’s investigation and at the same time is laying the groundwork to dismiss the results of the November elections as having been corrupted by the “MEDDLING” of Mueller & Company.
It’s not hard to grasp why Mr. Trump might be feeling uneasy about his party’s fortunes. In American politics, midterm elections tend to be a referendum on the sitting president. When a leader’s approval rating sits below 50 percent, as Mr. Trump’s has so solidly remained, his party typically loses seats in Congress. And that’s absent such extreme circumstances as a special counsel inquiry raising questions about awkward issues like collusion and obstruction of justice.
Faced with the possibility of failure, Mr. Trump was not content simply to trash his opponent. He felt moved to sow doubt about the integrity of the entire electoral process.
To be fair, politics isn’t the only area where Mr. Trump is eager to burn down the system in order to protect his own interests — or at least salve his own ego. Back in his reality-TV days, he was known to whine about how “The Apprentice” would have won boatloads of awards if only the Emmys weren’t so terribly “unfair” and all about “politics.” Delegitimization is Mr. Trump’s go-to move, to be used whenever the occasion (read: potential disappointment) arises.
But whining about getting stiffed by Emmy voters is one thing. Undermining the public’s faith in key democratic institutions and processes is quite another. In the hierarchy of Trump toxicity, this may be the most insidious.
It is, unfortunately, also central to his political message. At the core of what Mr. Trump is selling is the idea that all of government and politics and culture are rotten, and that only he can be trusted to get things back on track. But on those occasions when he fails to deliver, don’t look for him to accept responsibility. He’ll just find another reason to blame the system.