While working at a venture capital firm, Ms. Lake saw that many entrepreneurs were “totally unqualified, totally normal people.” That inspired her to be one herself.
Katrina Lake has enjoyed storybook success as an entrepreneur.
After graduating from Stanford University in 2005, she worked at a consulting firm and a venture capital firm before attending Harvard Business School. With her M.B.A. in hand, she moved to San Francisco and founded a technology company, Stitch Fix, in 2011.
Stitch Fix has upended the traditional shopping experience. Customers fill out an online survey about their likes and dislikes, then a company stylist assembles a box of clothing and sends it out. Customers keep what they want for a fee, and return what they don’t want for free.
The company grew fast, and last year, Ms. Lake took Stitch Fix public. Though Stitch Fix priced its shares below the expected range, the stock is trading above its offering price, and the company is now valued at nearly $2 billion. Ms. Lake remains chief executive, making her one of the most prominent female executives in Silicon Valley.
This interview, which was condensed and edited for clarity, was conducted in the Stitch Fix offices in San Francisco.
So you grew up in San Francisco?
I did. One of the very few. They say there are more dogs in the city than children under 18, which is a crazy statistic. The city has changed a lot in the time that I’ve lived here. My dad is a doctor in the public university system. He’s had, I think, exactly two employers in his whole life. And my mom is a public-school teacher.
It was either Banana Republic or a smoothie shop. Or it would have been lifeguarding. I don’t know, actually. At Banana Republic, I learned that so much of your work experience is enjoying the people you work with. Optimizing for who you're around is important.
What did you think you were going to be growing up?
I thought I would be a doctor, and I even took the MCAT. But I didn’t really imagine myself going to work 9 to 5, or 7 to 7, whatever you do in a hospital. I kind of just delayed that journey, and I got a job in consulting. Then I worked at a venture fund for two years, and I went to Harvard Business School from there.
What was the venture fund like?
It was so boring. To be clear, I was not a venture investor. I was a venture note taker, memo creator, analyst. But I got to meet hundreds of entrepreneurs, and I got the entrepreneur bug. You have these ideas in your head of what an entrepreneur looks like — Mark Zuckerberg or Bill Gates, these child geniuses who dropped out of school. But then I met hundreds of entrepreneurs that are all just totally unqualified, totally normal people. That inspired me.
So I took advantage of having a V.C. signature. I could meet with entrepreneurs and get to know what the space was like, learn about innovation in retail. But the job itself was just boring.
How did you get the idea for Stitch Fix?
How did the business scale?
We first launched the company in April 2011. I had 29 clients that were mostly my friends, and then that became 35. Then we added 35 more the next month, and then we added 110 more the next month, and then like the two months after that we were adding 200 or 300 a month. We didn’t even have a website and hundreds of people were wanting to try it. That was just a real moment of validation. If these strangers are sending me $20 on PayPal to get a shipment of clothes sent to them, there’s something here.
I tried Stitch Fix for a while. I got three boxes, and walked away with one pair of jeans and two pairs of socks.
That’s not super successful. Give us another shot.
Do you worry about this being a fad?
We have enough data to be able to know that there is a percentage of people for whom we are the primary way that they’re shopping. I think there's still a lot more opportunity.
Do you like being a public company, or is it a pain?
So far, it’s made us better. Every year, regardless of being public or not, my job has been different than the year before. So I think I’ve been in the habit of needing to rehire myself in this job, in this role with these responsibilities. And this year is definitely different than in years past. We’ve always balanced profitability with growth. Now that's a commitment that we’ve made to the public market.
That’s really interesting to say that your job has been different every single year. What are you doing now that you didn’t a year ago?
The first year, my job was every single Monday we shipped fixes. We all got in an assembly line, and everybody's wearing sweatpants, taping boxes shut. Our printer would break and we'd need to print labels, and I’d go run to Office Depot and buy a new printer. It was just absurd what that job was like.
In the last few years, my job has evolved to be a lot more about the people around, just making sure that we have the best leaders and helping us to fulfill our potential. This year, the addition of new public shareholders in addition to our private shareholders has been just a different dynamic.
There’s so much waste in fashion today. How do you try to not just make that problem even worse by buying so many clothes and sending them out?
There are all kinds of reasons that we want to avoid it. It’s wasteful, it’s wasting resources, it’s wasting money. Our model inherently is a model that focuses on how to reduce it. And we’ve done a lot of in-kind donations. If we have end-of-season product or product that we’re not moving, we have some great partnerships in place, so that we can feel like it’s going to a good home, even if it’s not kind of a paying client’s home. That’s definitely in stark contrast to high fashion. There, they literally burn the stuff.
In our case, it was really hard to raise money. So we built a company that’s doing $1 billion in revenue with $42 million of capital. Meanwhile, there are lots of mostly male C.E.O.s out there who have raised billions and billions of dollars.
 How has that changed the way you run the company?
Even though my journey was hard, there are many, many, many women before me for whom the journey was harder, if not made impossible. My friends’ moms have told me just horrible things about what their work environments were like, and it’s made me really grateful and thankful to be living in this day and age. Even though it could use some improvement, it’s better than it was before.