Love|Pete Buttigieg Might Be President Someday. He’s Already Got the First Man.
Pete Buttigieg Might Be President Someday. He’s Already Got the First Man.
Though Cupid appears in many guises it is safe to say he has seldom taken the form of a hard-boiled, deep-fried, sausage-wrapped cholesterol depth charge called a Scotch egg. Yet there, on their first real-time date in September 2015, at the Fiddler’s Hearth pub in South Bend, Ind., were Peter Buttigieg, 36, and Chasten Glezman, 28, and there, alongside a pint of Irish cider and an icy draft Guinness, not the usual pretzels or beer nuts but an order of Mr. Buttigieg’s favorite bar snack.
The Scotch egg turned out to be an early indicator of compatibility for the couple.
“Once I saw he was down for the Scotch egg, I knew it had a shot,” said Mr. Buttigieg, who is the mayor of South Bend.
Far from being just the out-gay mayor of a scrappy rebounding Rust Belt city, Mr. Buttigieg is a singular politician: a Democrat in a Republican stronghold; a high school valedictorian who graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Harvard and who also attended Oxford as a Rhodes scholar; a political comer who, after winning election at 29, quickly set about reversing an economic decline in this northern Indiana city, where the last Studebaker rolled off a South Bend assembly line in 1963; a Navy veteran who, in 2014, took an unusual leave-of-absence from his civic day job to serve a tour of duty in Afghanistan.
He is also one of a handful of Democrats that, in a New Yorker article, were cited by President Barack Obama as the future of the Democratic Party, an anointing whose potential ramped up this spring when, with an eye on the 2020 race, Mr. Buttigieg’s own political action committee began supporting legislative races in Georgia, Arizona, Michigan, Colorado and Ohio.
“Yes, he knows it’s ridiculous to think about jumping from a City Hall for 101,000 people to the White House,” Politico wrote of a relative novice who has yet to hold federal office, while also noting Mr. Obama was far from the only heavyweight urging the young mayor to aim high.
It would be easy enough, scanning Mr. Buttigieg’s professional résumé, to see in it a steady progression of red-letter milestones, and yet the way forward was not always easy, as Mr. Buttigieg made clear in a coming-out essay written in 2015 for The South Bend Tribune. The mayor’s public declaration was motivated in part by, as he said, “a need to have a personal life,” but also by a religious freedom bill signed by Mike Pence, the state’s governor then, that its critics claimed would give businesses the ability to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation.
“How does a sitting mayor in Indiana who’s gay find a date?” Mr. Buttigieg said.
The solution was as close as the nearest keyboard, as Mr. Glezman was also discovering 95 miles away in Chicago, where he was then starting a master’s degree in education at DePaul University while working as a substitute teacher in Illinois public schools.
Meeting at first for a series of long-distance beer dates on FaceTime, the two men slowly uncovered other’s quiddities (Mr. Glezman loves Skee-Ball and does improv comedy; Mr. Buttigieg has a weakness for claw-vending machines); explored their divergent personalities (Mr. Buttigieg is, by his own account, uncommonly introverted for a politician; shy in relationships, Mr. Glezman in public is a natural performer); and values derived from their shared Midwestern upbringings.
Their individual coming-out narratives became a further point of connection for the two in the early days of a burgeoning relationship, which by the end of 2016 had grown serious enough for Mr. Glezman to move in with the mayor, commuting to Chicago three days a week to complete his degree. “I had already been out, but only to a handful of close friends,” Mr. Buttigieg said. And, while Mr. Glezman had been openly gay for more than a decade before the men met, he encountered real obstacles on the road to visibility.
Mr. Glezman left home soon after disclosing his sexuality to his parents, and couch surfed with friends for a time and lived out of his car.
Mr. Glezman tended to prefer putting on plays in his basement to breaking down an engine; or reading Hardy Boys mysteries to playing touch football; or binge-watching old movies to freezing in duck blinds and deer stands. What he found in a partner was someone who relieves the pressure on him of conforming to conventional masculine stereotypes like shouldering a shotgun when the guys in the family put on camo gear and go hunting on Thanksgiving Day.
And so, on June 16, a 90-degree day — dressed in three-piece Ted Baker suits from Nordstrom of differing but complementary shades of blue and matching socks — Mr. Glezman and Mr. Buttigieg were married by the Rev. Brian G. Grantz at the Episcopal Cathedral of St. James before 200 guests from their newly blended families and divergent worlds. In a nod to the significance of the event, the 30-minute ceremony, which was livestreamed on YouTube, featured a reading from Justice Anthony Kennedy’s majority opinion in Obergefell v. Hodges, the landmark 2015 case that granted marriage equality to same-sex couples in the United States.
After the ceremony, the newlyweds were driven in the back of a cherry red 1961 Studebaker Lark VIII to stop briefly at a South Bend Gay Pride Week block party, where the beaming couple donned rainbow-colored beads, greeted the crowd and took photos with joyful attendees.
“There are so many things about the community we have a chance to feature,” Mr. Buttigieg said. And in fact the reception was so communitarian that it felt almost crowdsourced: tacos from the Rico Suave food truck; sliders from South Bend’s the Beard & the Boss (even the pork was local, provided by Gunthorp Farms, a fourth-generation Indiana operation); beer from South Bend Brew Works; an assortment of regional cheeses from Oh Mamma’s deli; salads from Cafe Navarre; lattes and coffee from Zen Cafe, housed inside LangLab; artisanal chocolates from local Violet Sky chocolatier; specially created ice cream from the Outside Scoop, flavored with honey harvested from community gardens or whiskey from an Indiana distillery.
“We have a lot of people coming from other places, and we wanted to give them a window and a glimpse into this really cool city,” said Mr. Glezman, who, after relocating to South Bend, moved with Mr. Buttigieg to an old frame fixer-upper they share with a skittish rescue mutt they named Truman.
“People think Indiana must be a drab place to be,” said Mr. Glezman, adding that almost from the outset, serendipity has colored his experience of the old industrial city on the St. Joseph river — a town that, if the pundits have it right, the couple may someday leave behind for Washington.
“On our first date, we went to see the South Bend Cubs play the Great Lakes Loons,” he said, referring to two Class A minor league teams. Afterward, the couple toured the downtown on foot and walked along the St. Joseph River to view interactive illuminated sculptures there known as River Lights. As they headed back to the stadium and their parked cars, they tentatively took each other’s hands for the first time just as postgame fireworks lighted up the night sky.
