BEIJING — North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, arrived in Beijing on Tuesday amid an escalating trade conflict between China and the United States, one that gives him an opening to play the powers against each other as Washington presses him to dismantle his nuclear arsenal.
“This could be regarded as an intuitive response to Trump’s escalation of the trade war,” Shi Yinhong, a professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing, said of China’s invitation to Mr. Kim.
The surprise trip, just a week after his landmark summit meeting in Singapore with President Trump, is the North Korean leader’s third visit to China since March. His two-day trip was announced by Xinhua, China’s official news agency, as Mr. Kim was arriving on Tuesday morning; his previous stops in China were not made public until after they were over.
For his first one, in March — which was also his first trip abroad, and his first meeting with a head of state, since becoming the North’s leader — Mr. Kim arrived in Beijing aboard an armored train, and he spent two days in the capital for talks with President Xi Jinping. In May, Mr. Kim visited the port city of Dalian, also spending time with Mr. Xi.
This time, Mr. Kim arrived much as any other foreign leader might, landing at Beijing’s international airport and taking a stretch limousine to the city center.
Analysts said Mr. Kim was likely to deliver a personal briefing about what happened behind closed doors during three hours of talks with Mr. Trump last week, the first meeting ever between leaders of the United States and North Korea. On Tuesday night, Mr. Xi gave a banquet for Mr. Kim and pledged that their two countries’ relationship would continue to improve, according to Chinese state television.
Andrei Lankov, a Russian expert on North Korea who has lived in the North and still has ties there, said Mr. Kim would be seeking to take advantage of the trade conflict between the United States and China, deepening their rivalry to ensure they do not join forces against him, as they did last year on the United Nations sanctions over his weapons program.
“He wants to further disrupt the united China-U.S. front, which somewhat surprisingly emerged last year, but now is in critical condition due to the trade war,” Mr. Lankov said.
For its part, China would like Mr. Kim to pull back a bit on the bonhomie he showed Mr. Trump in Singapore, analysts in Asia said.
China, they said, sees the trade dispute with Washington as a more serious threat than Mr. Kim’s nuclear arsenal. When Mr. Kim and Mr. Trump were threatening each other’s countries with destruction last year, it gave China, as the North’s main ally and trading partner, leverage with Mr. Trump on trade.
Now, the analysts say, China would like Mr. Kim to be a little less cooperative with the United States — enough so that Mr. Trump might ease up on the tariffs, in the interest of keeping China in his corner where Pyongyang is concerned.
How did North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, go from being an international pariah to a smiling diplomat in a matter of a few months?
History is made as Kim Jong-un crosses the border. It’s the first time a North Korean leader has set foot in the South. This step is the latest chapter in Kim’s head-spinning makeover from a stern-faced despot into a smiling diplomat. Somebody President Trump ridiculed as “Little Rocket Man” — “Rocket Man is on a suicide mission for himself” — has suddenly become “very honorable.” “He really has been very open, very honorable.” Here is how Kim did it. Kim may have felt that he had the leverage to turn a diplomatic corner once he was able to show that his country could be a nuclear power. Kim kicks off his charm offensive by dispatching his so-called army of beauties to the Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang. He also sends his sister Kim Yo-jong — the first time a member of the Kim family visited South Korea since the Korean War. She becomes an overnight sensation in the South. Kim hosts a delegation of high-level South Korean officials in Pyongyang. The officials from the South deliver a bombshell to the White House: Kim wants to meet Trump, and Trump, shocking the world, says yes. “Trump responded saying yes.” “Surprise, praise, skepticism.” “This was indeed a shocker.” Kim secretly leaves the country for the first time since taking power. His destination: Beijing, where he visits with Chinese President Xi Jinping. It’s Kim’s first meeting with another head of state. Kim hosts the International Olympic Committee in Pyongyang to thank them for their support and to say that North Korea will take part in the Tokyo and Beijing Olympics. Kim loosens North Korea’s iron grip on pop culture as he and his wife rock out at a two-hour K-pop concert in Pyongyang. He even poses for a photo with a popular South Korean girl band, Red Velvet. Kim secretly meets and has a photo op with then-C.I.A. director Mike Pompeo, signaling planning is underway for a summit. North Korea announces a new pledge to end nuclear and missile testing and close a nuclear test site. Kim takes his historic stroll and calls for an age of peace. It may mark the beginning of a historic thaw. Whatever happens, it’s clearly the start of a new Kim Jong-un.
Essentially, Mr. Kausikan said, Mr. Trump is using Mr. Kim against China, and Mr. Kim is using China against the American president. “It’s a triangular relationship, with Kim in the middle,” he said.
Mr. Kim’s visit Tuesday seemed to indicate that relations between the neighboring states were warming, after recent years of strain as the young leader accelerated the country’s nuclear and missile programs.
China has backed United Nations sanctions against North Korea, but it has also recently indicated it is willing to offer economic assistance — a move some see as intended to anger Washington.
In the joint declaration they signed in Singapore, Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim pledged to move ahead with the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. But the wording of the agreement was vague and included no clear timelines. The Americans insist that international sanctions will remain in place until Pyongyang completely dismantles its nuclear program.
But China has suggested that the Singapore meeting alone was a good-will measure that should prompt the easing of those penalties.
Mr. Lankov said that in his visit this week Mr. Kim would be trying to find ways to defuse the sanctions’ pressure without openly flouting them. This could be done by sending North Korean workers to China on nonworkers’ visas, for example.
Mr. Kim has promised his people dramatic economic growth, and China is well positioned to advise the North on how to transform a rural economy into a modern one, experts said. A delegation of North Korean provincial leaders visited China recently to inspect major cities, where they saw glimmering skyscrapers and high-speed trains.
Mr. Kim has yet to visit most of China, but even its most advanced cities might pale in comparison to Singapore, where he spent a night inspecting the skyline and visiting a high-end casino complex.
But China should not risk its international reputation by going too far, Professor Kim said. “Sanctions were designed to bring the North to the negotiating table, and they came, but it’s not clear whether they want to negotiate or buy time,” Professor Kim said.
After six years of never venturing abroad, and rarely accepting foreign visitors to his capital, Pyongyang, Mr. Kim almost appears to be making up for lost time.
In addition to his Singapore meeting with Mr. Trump, he has been to South Korea twice this year. President Vladimir V. Putin has asked him to visit Russia in September, and after Mr. Trump said he “absolutely” planned to invite Mr. Kim to the White House, North Korea’s news media said Mr. Kim would accept.