How perfectly appropriate for Cynthia Ozick, a master stylist and short story writer herself, to provide a review of William Trevor’s “Last Stories” (May 20). A virtuoso crafts a brilliant appraisal of another virtuoso.
In his review of Jimmy Carter’s “Faith” (May 20), Garry Wills is correct in writing that “the religious right has long been not a religion but an ideology.” He could have made that clearer if he had not cited the Rev. Jerry Falwell as the founder of the Moral Majority, the earliest and for a long time the most important organization of the religious right.
In fact, the Moral Majority was created by three conservative political activists, two Roman Catholics and a Jew: Richard Viguerie, a direct-mail expert servicing conservative political causes; Paul Weyrich of the Committee for the Survival of a Free Congress; and Howard Phillips of the Conservative Caucus. The organization was conceived as a way of weaning away from the Democrats the vote of the normally politically uninvolved fundamentalist and conservative evangelical Christians whom Carter, as a self-declared “born again” Christian, brought to political life during his campaign.
With assistance from politically involved evangelicals like Robert Billings, a leader in the Christian day school movement, Viguerie, Weyrich and Phillips not only found and chose Falwell to lead the Moral Majority but even gave the organization its name.
A Generation of Gifted Writers?
In his cover review of Rachel Kushner’s “The Mars Room” (May 7), Charles McGrath wrote that “Rachel Kushner’s second novel, ‘The Flamethrowers,’ instantly established her as one of the most gifted writers of her generation — on the same tier as Jennifer Egan and the two Jonathans, Franzen and Lethem.” Why are the examples of the “most gifted writers of her generation” all white folks? Paul Beatty, Colson Whitehead, Junot Díaz and Sherman Alexie immediately come to mind as some of the “most gifted writers of her generation.” They have the major awards to back up such a claim and they are of Kushner’s generation: Kushner was born in 1968; Egan in 1962; Lethem in 1964; Franzen in 1959; Whitehead in 1969; Beatty in 1962; Díaz in 1968; Alexie in 1966. Book critics should not have only a white American imagination. They must have an imagination that encompasses all Americans.
I’m surprised that in his essay “The Mystery Buffs in the White House” (May 27), Craig Fehrman failed to mention F.D.R.’s son, Elliott Roosevelt, who wrote a series of D.C.-based mysteries in which his mother, Eleanor, was the detective.
