The official party took place at the Plaza Hotel. The unofficial one was at the Carlyle.
After the Tony Awards concluded Sunday night, the audience made a beeline for the official after-party at the Plaza Hotel, where D.J.s played disco and there was a buffet with slightly more flavor than dust.
Marginally better fare was found in the basement-level food court, where a number of winners were also camped out.
Tony Kushner, whose play “Angels in America” won three awards, including best revival of a play, was by the wall, posing for photos and remarking on how nice it was to see a show like “The Band’s Visit” clean up with multiple awards.
“Smart subtle stuff usually gets punished,” Mr. Kushner said, before adding, “have you seen my husband?” He was referring to Mark Harris, an author and journalist who is now at work on a biography of Mike Nichols.
Mr. Harris was nowhere to be found. Instead, there was Andrew Rannells, waltzing around with Zachary Quinto, his co-star from “The Boys in the Band,” and Mr. Quinto’s boyfriend, Miles McMillan.
Also close by, standing near the mini-doughnut station, was Michael Cera. Where was his Tony for best featured actor in a play?
Oh, right. The winner was Nathan Lane, who starred in “Angels in America” as Roy Cohn. He arrived moments later, trailed by a large entourage, and more winners and presenters.
Ari’el Stachel, who won best featured actor in a musical for his role in “The Band’s Visit,” darted by in his white tuxedo jacket, black pants and sneakers. “I’m a rebel,” he said, when asked about his outfit.
Around 1 a.m., Mr. Kushner found Mr. Harris and headed to the Carlyle Hotel for a bash hosted by Rick Miramontez of the Broadway P.R. firm DKC/O&M. Red bracelets were handed out to the V.I.P.s, granting them access to the penthouse suite. Andrew Garfield was there, talking to Bee Shaffer. Mr. Rannells and Mr. Quinto were also making their party rounds.
The lounge downstairs was bustling as well. Matthew Morrison walked through and ran smack into Laurie Metcalf, who won her second Tony in two years for her role in the revival of Edward Albee’s “Three Tall Women.” She asked Mr. Morrison whether he had plans to return to Broadway.
Then Jordan Roth, who produced several of the evening’s big winners, ran into Ms. Metcalf, and they kissed hello, congratulated one another and began talking about their love for Broadway.
“I’m just a theater rat,” she said.
Mr. Roth said, “Let’s be rats together!” No doubt he has the means to make it happen.