“We should do more and talk less.” With that statement Shadd Cary questioned the anti-slavery establishment and helped define a new role for black women. But her work didn’t end there.
Since 1851, obituaries in The New York Times have been dominated by white men. With Overlooked, we’re adding the stories of remarkable people.
That was the message that Mary Ann Shadd Cary, 25, wrote in a long 1848 letter to the abolitionist and African-American statesman Frederick Douglass, who had asked readers of his North Star newspaper for suggestions on improving life for black people in America.
Shadd Cary, a woman eager for change, demanded action, not rhetoric.
Douglass printed the letter, an unapologetic critique of the established male-dominated abolitionist movement and its propensity for long-winded discourse, and it became Shadd Cary’s first published work. While it put her at odds with some in the older generation, it also established her as a youthful, unconventional voice, and was the first step in her journey to becoming a prominent journalist and activist.
“It was fearless, and it was fierce,” Jane Rhodes, the head of the African-American Studies department at the University of Illinois, Chicago, and the author of “Mary Ann Shadd Cary: The Black Press and Protest in the Nineteenth Century” (1999), said of the letter.
“She really was unafraid and she carried that throughout her life,” Rhodes said.
Shadd Cary was the first black woman in North America to edit and publish a newspaper, one of the first black female lawyers in the United States and an advocate for granting women the right to vote.
The America that Shadd Cary was born into was just a few decades away from civil war. Hundreds of thousands of black Americans were enslaved in the South, and although she herself was free, being young, black and female made her part of one of the country’s most marginalized groups.
Born on Oct. 9, 1823, in Wilmington, Del., she was the eldest of 13 children who were raised in a home that often served as a refuge for fugitive slaves. Her parents, Abraham Doras Shadd and Harriet Parnell, were abolitionists, but even as free blacks living in the North, they faced deep-seated discrimination and segregation.
Because black children were not allowed to be educated in Delaware, her parents moved the family to Pennsylvania in 1833. After finishing her education at a Quaker boarding school, Shadd Cary became a teacher.
In 1850, when Congress passed the Fugitive Slave Act — which compelled Americans to assist in the capture of runaway slaves, and levied heavy penalties on those who did not comply — Shadd Cary and some other members of her family left the United States for Canada.
She considered the move to be a political one, and she believed she would have greater freedom to continue to fight for the abolitionist cause across the border.
She published several pieces that advertised Canada as a safe haven for former slaves and free blacks, including a pamphlet, “Notes of Canada West,” that detailed where black Americans should settle and what they could expect, and urged them to take the journey north.
In 1853, Shadd Cary founded The Provincial Freeman, a paper published initially in Windsor, Ontario, then in Toronto and Chatham, Ontario. “Devoted to antislavery, temperance and general literature” was the slogan.
Her progressive approach and unorthodox outlook alienated some people. She criticized abolitionists who did not fight for full equality and instead supported segregated schools and communities. She also denounced refugee associations that gathered funds to support fugitive slaves but turned a blind eye to free blacks who were forced to live in poverty.
But Shadd Cary was less concerned with being a lady than she was with having a voice.
At great personal risk, she also brought her paper, and its message, back across the border into America.
She would ride a horse or take a stagecoach to different communities and talk about life in Canada, and then she would collect subscriptions to pay for the paper.
She married Thomas F. Cary, a barber in Toronto, in 1856. He died just four years later, while she was pregnant with their second child, Linton. Their first child was a daughter, Sarah Elizabeth.
Eventually, The Provincial Freeman became financially unsustainable, and it ceased publication by 1859. But Shadd Cary’s advocacy work continued while she taught at an integrated school in Chatham.
When the Civil War began, Shadd Cary returned to America and recruited blacks from the North to fight for the Union Army. She settled in Washington after the war and founded a school for the children of freed slaves, believing that education offered them more opportunities.
In 1870, she graduated from Howard University with a law degree.
She then thrust herself into the suffrage movement, addressing the House Judiciary Committee in January 1874 as part of a group of women petitioning for the right to vote.
“I am not vain enough to suppose for a moment that words of mine could add one iota of weight to the arguments from these learned and earnest women,” she began, but then detailed how, as “a colored woman” and yet as “a resident of this district, a taxpayer,” she was allotted only a portion of the rights of her male counterparts.
It would be many years before women won the right to vote. And despite her barrier-breaking life, Shadd Cary’s legacy largely faded from view in the decades after she died on June 5, 1893.
Even in the spheres she helped shaped through tenacity and sheer force of will — the abolitionist movement of her youth, where her progressive ideas drew ire, and, later, the suffrage movement, where black women were often marginalized — she was at once a powerful force and a woman on the fringe.
