Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
COLOR ME BUSHWICK at Pickthorn (June 15-17). Pickthorn is a salon in Bushwick, Brooklyn, and the title of this festival is a tribute to its focus on both hair (specifically via the celebrity colorist and salon owner Chelsey Pickthorn) and music. Now in its fifth year, the event has long surpassed novelty — three days of free shows featuring 23 diverse acts (mostly from around Brooklyn) squeezed into a bite-size space for a rare event that actually bears out Bushwick’s D.I.Y. reputation. Though there’s plenty to see onstage, including buzzy bands like Jackie Mendoza and HRNY FLWR, attendees can also take in local art and even (naturally) get a haircut.
RHIANNON GIDDENS at Rumsey Playfield (June 16, 7 p.m.). Few people make recasting long-overlooked parts of American musical history more fun than Rhiannon Giddens, a singer, songwriter, banjoist and fiddler whose work is usually characterized as Americana or folk. Her music exposes the racial fault lines of those genres by reclaiming parts of them — like the banjo itself — that are now associated with white music despite their origins in black music; her omnivorous sourcing shows through in covers that include the Staples Singers, Patsy Cline and Blu Cantrell’s “Hit ’Em Up Style.” But in the process, the 2017 MacArthur Foundation Fellow takes an aesthetic that’s long been the stuff of museum archives and makes it sound vibrant, danceable and brand-new.
GRIZZLY BEAR AND SPOON at the Prospect Park Bandshell (June 20, 6:30 p.m.). As two of the most reliable peddlers of hook-filled indie-rock tunes, Grizzly Bear and Spoon are a natural fit as co-headliners. Grizzly Bear are in their second decade of playing together, while Spoon are in their third — and both are supporting new, critically acclaimed albums. Their tour is catnip for those who like their music guitar-driven and contemplative but still easy to nod along to. The show is one of the BRIC Celebrate Brooklyn Festival benefit concerts, and one dollar from every ticket sold will go to the musicians’ charity PLUS1 to support the Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund.
KOOL & THE GANG at Flushing Meadows Corona Park (June 16, 5 p.m.). Not many bands can safely assume everyone in America has heard at least one of their songs, but thanks to the inescapable G-rated party anthem “Celebration,” Kool & the Gang can. The Jersey City natives have more hits than you may remember, though, not only because of their ability to nail the exact intersection of funk and disco, but also because of the prolific sampling by hip-hop producers in the 1980s and ’90s that gave Kool & the Gang’s biggest songs and album cuts new life. The chance to be outdoors and hear “Summer Madness” — the breezy source material for D.J. Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince’s classic “Summertime” — should not be missed.
MAKE MUSIC NEW YORK (June 21, 10 a.m.). Music festivals can be exhausting, expensive or both. Enter Make Music New York, a citywide summer solstice celebration that quite literally comes to you with free concerts sprawling across all five boroughs. They include Stevie Wonder singalongs (lyrics provided) around Harlem hosted from a truck with a piano and speakers on its bed, Thievery Corporation’s Natalia Clavier performing under the Manhattan Bridge during the World Cup match between Denmark and her native Argentina, and much more. Overwhelmed? The festival has an app (on iTunes and Google Play) so you can find music wherever the longest day of the year takes you.
J. D. ALLEN at Nublu 151 (June 18, 8 p.m.). If you’d like to measure an improviser’s sincerity under a harsh light, ask him to play an entire album’s worth of ballads. Without quick tempos or ready-made energy to lighten the load, cracks reveal themselves quickly. But this tenor saxophonist has somehow managed to pull it off. He plays in a style guided closely by his antecedents — Ben Webster, Sonny Rollins, Branford Marsalis — but it’s personal and steadfast enough to establish its own convictions. At Nublu 151, Mr. Allen celebrates the release of “Love Stone” — nine ballads, mostly sourced from the back pages of the great American songbook — joined by the bassist Gregg August and the drummer Rudy Royston.
RAVI COLTRANE, MATTHEW GARRISON AND JACK DEJOHNETTE at ShapeShifter Lab (June 15, 7:30 and 9 p.m.). This all-star trio unites three improvisers who are not only well versed in jazz’s standard practice, but also interested in thickened atmospheres and architectural abstraction. Their debut record, “In Movement,” was a highlight of 2016. Don’t be surprised if there’s a reference or two made to John Coltrane at this concert: Last week Impulse! announced that it would release a newly discovered album, recorded in 1963 by the John Coltrane Quartet; that group featured the fathers of both Ravi Coltrane and Matthew Garrison. Then again, don’t be surprised if they stick to their own material, either: The trio speaks a spellbinding dialect all its own.
VIJAY IYER TRIO AND MATANA ROBERTS at Le Poisson Rouge (June 16, 7:30 p.m.). This pianist’s trio is one of contemporary jazz’s proven entities: They’ve got a distinctive, unified polyrhythmic language, fueled by clean energy but full of magnetism and purpose. They perform here on a bill with Matana Roberts, an alto saxophonist and a multimedia storyteller of manifold approach. Any performance of hers is worth attending, but her solo shows are a special kind of captivating.
‘SALUTE TO RUSSELL MALONE’ at the Tribeca Performing Arts Center (June 21, 8 p.m.). Mr. Malone has been a standard-bearer of mainline jazz guitar for the past 30 years, holding fast to the legacies of Grant Green and Wes Montgomery while welcoming the silkier influence of George Benson. It’s reflective of his talent and flexibility that, at just 54, a concert is being held in his honor featuring such luminaries as the elder tenor saxophonists Jimmy Heath and Houston Person, the drummer Lewis Nash and the vibraphonist Steve Nelson. This show marks the close of the 46th season of Highlights in Jazz.
‘SONGS FOR CONNIE’ at Greenwich House Music School (June 15, 7:30 p.m.). Connie Crothers was a pianist, composer, organizer and educator. And in all things, she was first and foremost a melodist: She insisted on giving your ear something tuneful to ride alongside, even as she worked with a deep language of condensed harmonies and spiky rhythm. Ms. Crothers, who died in 2016, taught extensively and compassionately, and developed a large cohort of devoted students (in this way, she resembled her own mentor, the pianist Lennie Tristano). At this concert, eight vocalists will give performances in her honor, including the National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master Sheila Jordan and the venturesome singer Jay Clayton.
KAMASI WASHINGTON at Forest Hills Stadium (June 15, 7:30 p.m.). This tenor saxophonist — a blistering, continental colossus of jazz uplift and spectacle — returns this month with “Heaven and Earth,” his first full-length since “The Epic,” the biggest breakout success in jazz over the past decade. At nearly two-and-a-half hours, the double album is nearly as sprawling and orchestral as its predecessor, with heaving solos crushed against humongous statues of horns. Mr. Washington performs here with his ensemble on a bill with the rock band Alt-J.
