Because marriage is an ever-evolving experience, we constantly shift, change and, in some cases, start over. In It’s No Secret, couples share thoughts about commitment and tell us what they have learned along the way.
Who Sara Blakely, 47 and Jesse Itzler, 49.
Occupations She owns Spanx, the shapeware brand; he is an entrepreneur and author. His new book, “Living with the Monks,” was published May 29 (Hachette/Center Street).
Their Marriage 9 years, 7 months and counting.
The couple married Oct. 18, 2008 at the Gasparilla Inn in Boca Grande, Fla., before 400-plus guests. They live in Atlanta with their four children, ages 2 through 8.
A few months later they met again at another charity function, this time on her turf, in Atlanta. Soon after they started dating. A year went by. They bought an apartment in Manhattan. In March 2008, Mr. Itzler got down on one knee on the street near the Time Warner building, pulled out a gold band from his pocket, and nervously asked Ms. Blakely to marry him. “He had been single for 40 years so this was a big deal for him,” she said.
When they entered their apartment, Mr. Itzler had five other rings, hidden scavenger-hunt style, throughout the home. The last was an emerald cut diamond engagement ring.
Ms. Blakely: I’ve learned it’s important not trying to change someone, and not trying to understand him, just love him. I’m along for the ride. So is he. We have each other’s back and are each other’s cheerleaders.
If we can’t decide on something, we rock, paper, scissor it. Whoever wins best out of three, it goes in their court. When we’re fighting or mad at each other, we stop and slow dance for 30 seconds to a minute. One of us will reach out for the other, there’s no music. It takes us out of the moment and lets us be kinder.
Jesse is a very happy human. It’s real and beautiful and it’s who he is. He’s full of ideas and adventure and has this zest and love for life. I admire that. Years ago my father said, “Marriage is the most important decision and the easiest one to make.” I didn’t understand that at the time, but do now. The person you marry has the greatest impact on your daily happiness.
When you’re married you have soul growth because everyday is a compromise. I’ve learned patience, acceptance and forgiveness.
I wouldn’t be lost without him. I don’t believe someone completes me. I was a whole person and felt comfortable on my own. So did he. We met each other and wanted to share our journeys. I’m glad I did. I have four little faces at the breakfast table every morning reminding how amazing that decision was and is.
Mr. Itzler: I’m not a great communicator. I under index; she over indexes. I had to learn to listen and express myself rather than having her guess. I’ve learned the importance of being on the same page.
Everything changes once you have kids and I’ve learned a lot how to co-parent. You’re both co-pilots, and we come from a world where we have been our own pilots because of being entrepreneurs.
She’s an encyclopedia in marketing and business and there are nuggets that rub off every day. She’s got good intuition. I realized that she’s usually right. She takes criticism really well; I don’t. She’s a processor; I’m an all-in guy. I’m uber spontaneous. She’s got to live with that, it’s part of the marriage and the process.
Marriage is a partnership, a friendship, a family, and a work in progress. I got married older, so I was already at a second chapter in my life. In your 40s, there’s a maturity around how you want to spend your time and who you want to spend your time with. When you have those answers, it makes marriage a little easier.
She’s a human adventure. There’s always excitement and newness. I have a very good understanding of what makes her tick, and she has that for me. And she allows me to do things I want to, and vice versa. That takes away a lot of potential for resentment. We also understand each other’s needs.
We both share inner 8-year-olds. They both shine a lot. When you’re 8, and you meet someone you like, you want to bike together with that person all day. We’ve held onto that as adults.