In the beginning, and the middle, and the end, as always, there was the Puerto Rican flag: countless thousands of them waving as the National Puerto Rican Day Parade marched and danced up Fifth Avenue in Manhattan on Sunday in the steady drizzle, flags worn as ponchos, flags adorning T-shirts and hats and flip-flops.
But there was also a different version of the flag on display this year: black and white instead of red, white and blue, stripped of color to remind spectators — and anyone in Washington who might have been watching — of the parade’s grim backdrop: the destruction and continuing aftermath of Hurricane Maria, and what many view as the federal government’s inadequate response to the disaster.
And there was another new symbol, emblazoned on banners and T-shirts: a number, 4,645, representing a recent estimate by public-health experts on the hurricane’s death toll on the island, far in excess of the official death toll.
The 61st annual parade, held under gloomy skies, was part party, part protest march, part memorial, part pep rally, sometimes all in one person.
Maria Torres stood behind the barricades on a block of Fifth Avenue lined with high-end boutiques, cheering and waving at the floats. She wore a ball cap that said “Puerto Rico se levanta” — Puerto Rico rising — and carried a sign: “I’m from Luquillo, P.R. I am a Hurricane Maria survivor! Yo no me quito:” — meaning I’m not giving up or I’m not leaving.
The Bronx borough president, Ruben Diaz Jr., typically rides on a float with a D.J. pounding out music. This year, he marched on foot, wearing a black T-shirt that said “4,645+” above the legend “Remember! Register! Resist!” After starting at the front with other politicians, Mr. Diaz, also a Democrat, turned around and walked against the parade traffic to join a group of protesters.
A few blocks away, a group called Uprose carried signs demanding an audit of Puerto Rico’s crippling public debt, which tops $70 billion. The demonstration did not sit well with some spectators.
As the parade passed Trump Tower, the president’s New York residence, many marchers extended middle fingers toward the building. An older blind man, escorted by other marchers, wore a sign around his neck that read, “We don’t need your paper towels,” followed by an obscenity — a reference to President Trump tossing rolls of paper towels to storm victims at a relief center when he visited the island in October.
For all that, the dissenters were in the minority. Along the crowded avenue, the sound systems boomed, floats of musicians strummed the small 10-string guitar called the cuatro, a marcher in a giant frog costume embodying the coqui, Puerto Rico’s unofficial mascot, drew cheers.
A troupe of girls in short red frilly dresses with red bows in their hair danced tightly choreographed routines to “I Like It” by Cardi B. and last summer’s smash “Mi Gente.” Sponsored floats from Coca-Cola, Procter & Gamble and Murray and Lanman Florida Water Cologne broadcast cheery corporate messages.
