• The odds of Athenahealth getting sold just got much higher.
• Alexander Nix, the former Cambridge Analytica C.E.O., just got grilled by British lawmakers.
• Google’s annual shareholder meeting, where the company’s workplace diversity efforts will come under scrutiny.
• ZTE’s rescue may come soon, but what will the U.S. get in return?
• The Disney-Comcast battle comes to Britain.
Margrethe Vestager, the E.U.’s antitrust chief, has made it clear that Europe will be one of the tech industry’s biggest regulators. The FT’s reported that her commission plans to fine Google over the dominance of its Android mobile operating system, underscoring that point yet again.
A penalty is expected in the Android case, but its size is unclear. The commission is empowered to impose fines of up to $11bn — which is 10 percent of the global turnover of Google’s parent company Alphabet — but typically decisions are at the lower end of the range.
The decision will mark an escalation of the commission’s battle with Google, which began eight years ago with an investigation into comparison shopping, then only a narrow part of online commerce. Though that case concluded with a €2.4bn fine, it has not led to significant changes to Google’s business.
As the FT notes, this penalty could have big ramifications for Google. Its Android operating system dominated smartphone market worldwide because Google gave it away for free. But Ms. Vestager has been looking into whether the Silicon Valley behemoth improperly forced phone makers to favor services like Chrome and Google search, as well as stopping others from developing competing operating systems using the open-source parts of Android.
Google has been in the sights of the E.U. for some time. Last year, Ms. Vestager’s commission levied a record $2.7 billion fine over the company’s shopping comparison service. That didn’t do much to dent Google’s core businesses, but the Android case might be a different matter.
One last question: Will investors care? So far, shares in Google’s parent, Alphabet, were down less than 1 percent after the FT story was published. Its market value: almost $789 billion.
The electronic medical records company just ousted its C.E.O., Jonathan Bush, after a series of new revelations came to light about allegations made against him over inappropriate behavior at the workplace and domestic abuse.
To ensure athenahealth maximizes shareholder value and is best positioned to realize the full potential of its premier health care technology platform, the board has authorized a thorough evaluation of strategic alternatives, including a potential sale or merger or continuing as an independent company under new leadership.
Over the past two weeks, Mr. Bush (Athenahealth’s co-founder, and a cousin of George W. Bush) had taken fire for a variety of disclosures about his conduct, both at the workplace and at home.
• Bloomberg reported on other allegations, including a 2009 complaint by an Athenahealth employee who described a “sexually hostile environment” at the company.
Athenahealth has the investment banks Lazard and Centerview Partners and the law firm Weil, Gotshal & Manges advising it on a potential sale.
In the meantime, Mr. Immelt — the former G.E. chief who joined the company in February, and whose entrance Mr. Bush told me was like scoring “a decade’s worth of guitar lessons from Elvis” — became executive chairman. Marc Levine, the company’s C.F.O., is taking a more hands-on role in daily operations.
Members of the British government’s digital, culture, media, and sports committee tried to catch him out with questions about a series of media reports on Cambridge Analytica, but they didn’t seem to unsettle the ex-C.E.O.
Things didn’t start well for Mr. Nix. He argued with Damian Collins, the chair of the committee, about whether he was allowed to give an opening statement to provide “few clarifications” about what happened when he last testified before the same panel. He wasn’t.
Did Mr. Nix take $8 million from the consulting firm before it collapsed, as the FT reported this morning?
What about reports that suggested that Cambridge Analytica removed items from its offices, before the British government’s Information Commissioner’s Office searched the premises?
Did Cambridge Analytica techniques such as bribery, honey traps and extortion to help nations win elections, as Mr. Nix claimed in secret recording made by the British broadcaster Channel 4?
Did Mr. Nix mean to mislead the politicians during his last hearing (in February, before the Cambridge Analytica scandal exploded)? Then, one member of the committee asked about Cambridge Analytica’s possession of data obtained from Global Science Research, which has been originally gathered from Facebook users.
How useful was the Facebook data to Cambridge Analytica, which was used to inform the company’s work in the U.S.?
Did national security take a back seat in Facebook’s data sharing?
An NYT investigation shows that the Chinese hardware manufacturer Huawei, which has a cozy relationship with Beijing, was one of four Chinese companies that Facebook gave access to its users’ personal data.
Facebook officials said the agreements with the Chinese companies allowed them access similar to what was offered to BlackBerry, which could retrieve detailed information on both device users and all of their friends — including religious and political leanings, work and education history and relationship status.
Elsewhere in Facebook news: A new Apple privacy feature will let Safari users block tracking by “like” buttons. Inside the ugly breakup between Facebook and the two founders of WhatsApp. And the NYT Editorial Board asks: Can Facebook be cut down to size?
Mick Mulvaney, the acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, announced that he was dismissing the bureau’s consumer advisory board, which provides feedback on its rules and policies.
By law, the bureau must convene the advisory board and hold an in-person meeting with its members at least twice a year. The bureau canceled a meeting scheduled for February, and last week it canceled one planned for this week.
Anthony Welcher, who, as one of Mr. Mulvaney’s deputies, oversees external affairs for the bureau, told those members of the board, which now numbers 25, that it would be reconstituted as a smaller group.
The consumer advisory board’s members are consumer activists, academics, entrepreneurs who run financial start-ups and industry representatives from companies including Citi, Discover, and Mastercard.
The White House has said that it plans to help A.I. researchers develop better artificial intelligence systems by making government data available to researchers to help them. But the nation remains at risk of being overtaken as a global A.I. leader, as other nation states appear to value the technology more highly.
That’s a small, but nevertheless welcome, promise from an administration that has received criticism for placing too little importance on encouraging the development of A.I.
America’s A.I. policy: While Mr. Trump’s administration did promise earlier this year to ensure that America remains the world leader in artificial intelligence, the president himself has often been quiet on the topic. That’s perhaps not too surprising. Along with robotics, A.I. is part of the automation trend that could erode many jobs in America — so encouraging its development could be seen as running contra to Mr. Trump’s election pledges.
So far, a big part of the administration’s approach to giving A.I. research a push has focused on removing regulatory barriers so that industry can apply the technology more quickly. It also says that it’s increased investment in R.&D. for “A.I. and related technologies” by more than 40 percent since 2015 — though it’s not clear what those “related technologies” are.
Other nations are making A.I. pushes: Countries such as Britain and France have published ambitious A.I. policies that put in place funding, education, and governance initiatives. Large American tech firms are setting up bases there, where a lot of their fundamental A.I. research takes place. Facebook has a large lab in Paris, for instance, and Google’s DeepMind is based in London.
China and Russia have also been outspoken in their desire to be dominant powers in artificial intelligence. In fact, China is already giving America a run for its A.I money: It published more patents and academic articles relating to the technology than the U.S. did in 2017.
A big problem for America: Such enthusiasm about A.I. overseas is already luring academics away from the U.S. Most notably, Geoffrey Hinton, an early pioneer of machine learning, has relocated to Toronto to run a Google research center. Other high-profile academics could follow his lead, and Mr. Trump’s immigration rules might make it harder for foreign talent to replace them.
Maintaining an edge in artificial intelligence will be incredibly valuable for America. The direct benefits to the economy are huge, if difficult to accurately predict. And the technology is more important than just that, as it will form a huge part of the nation’s military and security operations over the coming years (just ask Google). But until the Trump administration starts making more noise — and bigger policy moves — about A.I. being a priority, it runs the risk of losing first place in the race.
ZTE may soon be rescued. What the U.S. gets in return? Unclear.
The White House and Beijing are said to be near a deal to save ZTE, one in which the embattled Chinese telecom company would pay a fine of more than $1.4 billion. But it isn’t apparent what else the U.S. would get for pardoning a company that Washington views as an arm of Beijing.
Many commentators reckon the ZTE talks are aimed at wringing trade concessions from China, though the Trump administration insists otherwise. And China has reportedly offered to buy $70 billion worth of agricultural, energy and industrial products if the U.S. drops its threat of tariffs. But some people in the administration doubt that proposal.
• Mexico imposed $3 billion worth of tariffs on American goods like pork and cheese in response to Mr. Trump’s tariff on imported metals.
• As the Nafta talks sputter, the White House is seeking separate trade deals with Canada and Mexico.
• Senator Bob Corker wants Congress to have the power to block tariffs.
Rupert Murdoch is going to face Comcast in a bidding war for one of Europe’s pay-TV crown jewels, Sky. The U.K. government has cleared 21st Century Fox to bid for full control of the satellite broadcaster — so long as it sells Sky News to Disney, or someone else.
But something bigger is at work. Comcast is also challenging Disney’s $52.4 billion bid for most of Fox, which includes 39 percent of Sky. (Got all that?) If Comcast could buy the 61 percent of Sky that Fox doesn’t already own, it would be a considerable blow to the Disney deal. Oh, and Comcast is expected to fight hard for the other Fox assets that Disney wants, too.
The only sure winners? Sky shareholders, who have seen their company’s stock price climb 22 percent since Comcast said it would bid.
Then Mr. Musk wheeled out his hype machine. To allay fears over manufacturing holdups, the C.E.O. said it was “quite likely” that his company could build 5,000 of its Model 3 cars a week by the end of this month. Tesla’s head of worldwide sales, Robin Ren, announced a plan to build the company’s first factory outside the U.S., in Shanghai. And then there was a mention of free Autopilot trials.
The big question: Though Tesla has convinced investors not to meddle with its management, its cash burn is impossible to ignore. Can the carmaker keep its promise and ramp up production fast enough to overcome that?
• The U.S. now has more job openings than unemployed people. That could become a barrier to economic growth.
