Mr. Salonen, jet lagged after flying in from London and fresh from a rehearsal with the New York Philharmonic, was speaking at David Geffen Hall while preparing for “Foreign Bodies,” a one-night-only interdisciplinary extravaganza on Friday that marks the end of his three-year tenure as the orchestra’s composer in residence.
But the program isn’t only a showcase of Mr. Salonen’s work; he shares billing with the New York premiere of a violin concerto by Daniel Bjarnason, a video installation by Tal Rosner and choreography by Wayne McGregor. If anything, the evening is a manifesto for what Mr. Salonen thinks the 21st-century concert could — and should — be.
Oh, and drinks will be allowed in the hall — a rarity at Lincoln Center.
“I’m not trying to say that every concert has to have all kinds of bells and whistles,” he said over a Nespresso in one of Geffen Hall’s green rooms.
It’s a glimpse at what might have been had he become the Philharmonic’s director, as many critics hoped he would. (He said he wasn’t interested in the job.) Still, Mr. Salonen has been a fixture in New York, with regular appearances at Geffen, the Metropolitan Opera and Carnegie Hall. His music is well represented by the Philharmonic, by way of the composer residency, and visiting orchestras.
Indeed, that’s why he didn’t want “Foreign Bodies” to be all about him.
He said there is much talent among today’s young composers, whom he has championed both in major halls and smaller spaces like National Sawdust in Brooklyn. And they don’t have to adhere to the strict definitions of new music that once bedeviled Mr. Salonen and his peers.
As for himself, Mr. Salonen remains committed to symphonic music, but he has lofty ideas about where to take the art form next. He’s a bit of a tech fanatic — you might have even seen him in a series of Apple commercials, and he was a force behind an app made for the Philharmonia Orchestra, where he is principal conductor. He thinks 360-degree sound systems and virtual reality, which could put audiences in the center of the action and show what he calls “the near-mysterious ways” orchestras work, are the next frontier.
Will Mr. Salonen be the first composer to try?
