Scott Rogowsky hosts HQ Trivia, a daily live trivia app. “They have makeup now, so they come and do a little hair and makeup — a little gel, a little powder,” he said.
The comedian is a big believer in grocery shopping, a proper egg white-to-yolk ratio, Mets games and daily chats with his parents.
Scott Rogowsky hosts HQ Trivia, a daily live trivia app. “They have makeup now, so they come and do a little hair and makeup — a little gel, a little powder,” he said.Credit...
As the host of HQ Trivia, the daily live trivia app, Scott Rogowsky has not had a real vacation since last July, when his sister got married. Even on Sundays, he cannot let down his trivia regulars, whom he calls his “HQties.” Mr. Rogowsky, 33, is also the host of “Running Late With Scott Rogowsky,” a live talk show that takes place on stages throughout the city. The comedian recently moved to TriBeCa, where, he said, he lives with dozens of Bed Bath & Beyond coupons his mother foisted upon him.
It’s impossible for me to sleep late. I generally wake up around 9, 9:30. I wish I could get a solid nine hours; it’s always around six. I just found out I have sleep apnea.

If I’m in the shower sometimes I’ll blurt out some lyrics to whatever song’s in my head that day. It’s a lot of Migos and Drake.
For breakfast I’ll make scrambled eggs, with maybe some chopped turkey or chicken sausage, mixed in with broccoli and kale, whatever I have around. The yolk-to-white ratio is important. I found one egg yolk to three whites is a good ratio. I’m a big juice guy. I try not to buy smoothies — smooth my own with frozen fruit and all that.
I’ve begun transitioning my “Hoarders”-esque vintage clothing collection — over 3,000 T-shirts, sweatshirts, jerseys, jackets and hats — into my apartment, where I plan to establish a weekly habit of eBay listings. I like the idea that I bought them for $2 and sold for $20.
When I go out to brunch now, they have this crispy French toast. Delicious, amazing, but I can’t do it. At the risk of being super boring and annoying, “I’m trying to cut carbs.” I’ll let my friend make the reservation. I’m not too picky about these things.
I like watching movies during the day, especially at the IFC. They have all those great weird movies. Also, I still haven’t seen “Hamilton.” Now, because of my HQ schedule, the Sunday matinee is the only show I can go to. I’m always two years late with the hot Broadway show. Who’s in it? The fourth generation cast? Is George Hamilton playing Hamilton at this point?
I love grocery shopping. It’s one of my favorite things. I don’t want to become an ordering-food-online person. Dried fruit is a huge part of my diet. Mango, persimmon, banana.
Softball season’s here. I’m a ringer on a few leagues, but I haven’t had a chance to play yet this year. Maybe I’ll go to a 1 p.m. Mets game. I’ve always been the guy that goes on StubHub and gets the cheapest ticket possible and moves down, but this season I’m hosting a talk show with Mets players, and they’ve been hooking me up with great seats.
I’ll go to work around 6 or so, get ready for the game at 9. I’m Googling to know the story behind everything we ask. Pronunciation is also part of it.  The artist Paul Klee — K-L-E-E — I called him “klee” and I got a lot of Twitter feedback: Hey dummy, it’s pronounced “clay.” They have makeup now, so they come and do a little hair and makeup — a little gel, a little powder.
There could be 200 people watching or two million — but from my point of view, I’m always talking to the same one camera, so there’s nothing to get nervous about. Sometimes I forget how special it is to be commanding such a large audience, so for the games that attract millions of players, I’ll tape a photo of Obama’s inauguration below the camera to give me perspective. For the smaller turnouts, I’ll use a photo of Trump’s inauguration.
I usually talk to my parents after the 9 p.m. game when I’m walking home. We talk pretty much every day. Some Sundays I visit. They’re 45 minutes away on Metro-North, so it’s very easy. I have my Fitbit, I get my steps. I generally walk or bike everywhere.
I’m always checking email, and now Twitter. For seven years, I tried to tweet at least one joke a day. I read that the Library of Congress is saving all the tweets. I must be so boring for all the 3,000 who followed me before HQ. Now, most of my tweets are about HQ, or interacting with HQties.
This Fitbit is so great. It tells me when I go to bed. Last Sunday, it was 1 a.m.
Sunday Routine readers can follow Scott Rogowsky on Twitter @ScottRogowsky.