Coming to a brownstone near you: the green roof, the newest must-have in urban gardening.
Over the past decade, acres of living roofs have appeared in New York City, as commercial building owners have transformed their rooftops into meadows of wildflowers, sprawling beds of sedum, and even vegetable farms, reaping the environmental benefits. Now individual homeowners — those lucky enough to have a roof or terrace that can accommodate a patch of dirt — are beginning to follow suit.
About 1,200 buildings in the city have green roofs, covering almost 60 of the nearly 40,000 total acres of rooftops, said Michael Treglia, an urban spatial planner with the Nature Conservancy, which has been working to create a comprehensive map.
Susan and Neil Whoriskey have one of those green roofs, in Brooklyn Heights. Last fall, the couple hired Inger Staggs Yancey, of Brooklyn Greenroof, to install a sedum garden on a 250-square-foot section of their townhouse roof.
But what about the downside? We talked to New Yorkers who have green roofs — and some who specialize in installing them — to find out what it takes to plant and maintain a living roof.
How Hard Are They to Install?
Planting a living roof is more involved than just putting out a few flower pots, so unless you have professional experience, it is not the sort of thing you should attempt on your own.
On top of the outermost layer of your roof (or the waterproof membrane, as it is known in roofing parlance), a protective mat or layer of insulation is laid down. That is followed by a root barrier (to keep the plants from growing down into your bedroom), a drainage layer, soil and, finally, the plants.
Sedum, that spongy, low-growing succulent, is favored by many green roofers in the Northeast for its short roots and drought-resistant properties.
The upfront costs of planting a living roof can be considerable, from about $10 a square foot to $40 a square foot, depending on the size and complexity of the project. Over time, however, green roofs can reduce energy and maintenance costs by protecting your rooftop and building equipment from excessive exposure to sun during the warmer months and increasing heat retention during the cooler ones.
Andrew Franz, an architect in Manhattan, installed an expansive living roof for clients with a three-bedroom TriBeCa penthouse. The layers of soil and vegetation created an “insulated building envelope” that significantly reduced their heating and cooling costs, said Mr. Franz, who worked with Plant Specialists, a landscape consultant, to develop and install the green roof.
Is It Safe to Pour All That Dirt and Water on the Roof?
Again, consult the experts. Before turning your roof into a grassy knoll, you should talk to an engineer to make sure it can support the additional weight — not just the dry soil and planting layers, but the extra load involved when it is saturated with water.
And that is not the only water-related consideration. “It is a real pain to repair roof leaks underneath a planted green roof, because you have to dig it out,” said John Heidenry, a managing partner at Red Bridge Homes, in Hoboken, N.J.
Most green roof installers recommend planting only on new or recently renovated rooftops, but even then there can still be problems. When a leak was discovered at a two-family townhouse in Hoboken that Mr. Heidenry built with his partner, Peter Slifirski, the 960-square-foot living roof had already been planted — with three pallets of topsoil, eight evergreens and nearly 3,000 sedum plugs.
There are also logistics to consider: For instance, how are you going to haul all those 50-pound bags of drainage rock up there? That was a dilemma Lory Henning faced when installing a green roof on the two-family brownstone she shares with her wife, Cindy Keiter, and three cats, a project she chronicled on her blog, ProjectHappyLife.
The couple rented a crane to hoist six big bags of dirt and three pallets of sedum tiles up to the roof. But other materials, including 164 bags of drainage rock, arrived after the crane had been returned. Ms. Henning, who worked as a stage manager for Blue Man Group and is skilled in woodworking and metalworking, designed a gantry to haul the heavy things up through a roof hatch.
Just below the green roof Mr. Franz designed in TriBeCa is a sunken courtyard with a retractable glass roof that "brings views, natural light, better air circulation and accessible outdoor space" into the home's living areas, he said.
What About Resale Values?
A living roof, real estate agents say, tends to boost a property’s value.
Buyers seem to agree. The Sankarans bought their brownstone six years ago for less than $2 million, and after a renovation that included installing the green roof, they recently put the house on the market for $4 million. They now have an accepted offer.