The Marlins overtook the Mets on the scoreboard and in the standings on Saturday.
And for the second game in a row, Miami beat the Mets with a rookie pitcher making his first major league start.
Brian Anderson hit a two-run homer off Jacob deGrom and the Marlins climbed out of last place in the National League East by rallying past the reeling Mets, 5-2.
“We’re not in last place? Awesome,” said J.T. Riddle, whose scratch R.B.I. single put Miami ahead to stay.
The Mets (32-48) lost for the 10th time in 11 games and fell into last place for the first time this year. They finished 5-21 this month for the worst June in franchise history, and they have plummeted from 10 games over .500 to 15 under at an earlier date than any team in major league history, according to the Elias Sports Bureau.
The rebuilding Marlins (34-50) went 14-14 in June, their best month this season.
They seem to get better as they get younger. Pablo Lopez (1-0) allowed two runs in six innings in his major league debut Saturday, less than 24 hours after Sandy Alcantara won his first big league start. Both are 22.
The last time two pitchers on the same National League team earned wins in their first career starts over consecutive days was in 1967 when Gary Nolan and Mel Queen did so for the Reds, according to Stats LLC.
DeGrom took a 2-0 lead into the sixth, but Anderson’s fifth homer of the year tied it. Riddle beat out a dribbler to the first baseman for a two-out R.B.I. hit that put Miami ahead.
Drew Steckenrider pitched a perfect eighth, and Kyle Barraclough earned his eighth save with a 1-2-3 ninth. Steckenrider has thrown 15⅔ consecutive scoreless innings, and Barraclough has thrown 20⅔. They are two more reasons the Marlins are on the rise.
DeGrom (5-4), who departed after six innings trailing 3-2, fell to 1-4 in his past five starts despite allowing only 15 runs. His earned run average, the lowest in the majors coming into the game, rose to 1.84.
Four pitchers have made their first major league start against the Mets this year, and they’ve combined to go 3-0 with an E.R.A. of 1.57. … Pablo Lopez was the 17th rookie and 12th rookie pitcher used by the Marlins, both most in the majors … Noah Syndergaard (finger) and Jason Vargas (calf) are expected to start against each other in a simulated game next week at Class A Port St. Lucie … Steven Matz (3-5, 3.69), who has thrown 13⅓ consecutive scoreless innings at Marlins Park, is scheduled to start the series finale Sunday against Dan Straily (3-3, 4.82).