In a wide-ranging campaign speech, the president spread inaccuracies on health care, the steel industry, military spending and Representative Maxine Waters.
President Trump mounted a case for electing more Republicans to Congress in November with misleading attacks on Democrats and exaggerated boasts of his achievements at a campaign rally in Fargo, N.D., on Wednesday night.
Mr. Trump also updated his familiar stump speech — and its repeated inaccuracies — with a few new claims. Here’s a fact check.
This month, the Trump administration announced a new rule that would allow small businesses to join together and set up association health plans. But Mr. Trump is counting his enrollees before the plans hatch.
Under the rule, association plans will not be offered until at least Sept. 1, so it is impossible that “millions and millions” have already enrolled under the rule.
The association plans may not have to provide “essential health benefits” that the Affordable Care Act requires for individual and small group market plans. These benefits include coverage for maternity care, mental health care and prescription drugs. As a result, the new plans could be cheaper and lure younger, healthier people away from Affordable Care Act marketplaces, driving up costs for those plans.
The Congressional Budget Office projected that about 4 million people would enroll in these association health plans by 2023. Avalere, a health consulting firm, estimated that 3.2 million would enroll by 2022, up from an initial enrollment of 130,000 by 2019.
Mr. Trump is embellishing remarks made by Representative Maxine Waters, Democrat of California, and falsely suggesting he has not urged physical violence himself.
At a rally in Los Angeles on Saturday, Ms. Waters urged those who are opposed policies that result in the separation of immigrant children from their families to confront top Trump administration officials.
Mr. Trump’s supporters have interpreted her use of the term “push back” as violence, but Ms. Waters has denied calling for harm and argues she only sought peaceful protest.
(For what it’s worth, the White House itself has used “push back” numerous times in reference to, among other things, California’s immigration laws, criticism of the C.I.A. director, and reporting from The New York Times).
Mr. Trump announced that he would impose tariffs on steel and aluminum imports in March. But since then, the United States Steel Corp. has not announced the opening of a single new plant, let alone six.
The company has announced that it would restart two blast furnaces at a plant in Granite City, Ill., one in March and the second in June.
Mr. Trump may have been referring to each individual component of the steel-making process at Granite City as its own plant, an analyst explained to the Washington Post Fact Checker, but those parts are not new either.
Mr. Trump signed into law a $700 billion military spending bill into law in December — and most Democrats voted for it.
Those who voted against the bill in the Senate included three Republicans, four Democrats and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, an independent who caucuses with the Democrats. In the House, 63 Democrats voted against the bill, but 127 Democrats supported it.
He falsely said Democrats “want open borders and crime” (most Democrats have voted for border security measures).
He wrongly asserted that Representative Nancy Pelosi, the House Democratic leader, “wants to protect” the gang MS-13 (she has not said that).
He exaggerated the number of MS-13 members who have been deported as in the “thousands” (this is not possible).
He misleadingly claimed to have “already started” to build a border wall (construction has not begun).
He exaggerated the United States’ trade deficit with the European Union as $151 billion (it’s $101 billion).
He falsely claimed that the European Union does not import American cars (it does).
He falsely boasted that wages are rising “for the first time in 22 years” (they’ve been rising for several years).
And he claimed to have “saved our family farms and our small businesses by eliminating the estate tax” (the tax affected only about 80 small businesses or farms last year).
