An investigation at the National Institutes of Health concluded that the $100 million trial had been tainted by funding appeals to the alcohol industry.
On Friday, an advisory panel to Dr. Francis Collins, director of the N.I.H., recommended that the trial be stopped altogether. Shortly afterward, Dr. Collins agreed.
While the advisory group was not asked to determine whether N.I.H. officials violated federal policy, investigators did find that there “was frequent email correspondence” among the staff of the alcohol institute, outside scientists and alcohol industry representatives.
Alcohol industry officials offered input into the design of the trial, the investigators found.
The contacts by staff with industry officials and others took place before the Foundation for the N.I.H., which has the authority to seek donations for government studies, was given permission to raise private funding for the trial.
Dr. Michael Siegel, a professor of community health sciences at Boston University and an early critic of the alcohol study, applauded the N.I.H. for discontinuing the research.
In a statement, Dr. Mukamal denied any wrongdoing and said he and his colleagues “stand fully and forcefully behind the scientific integrity” of the trial.
“We are deeply disappointed that issues raised have led to a recommendation to end the trial and negate the extraordinary efforts of its participants, investigators, scientific and ethics review boards, and many dedicated staff members,” he wrote.
N.I.H. policy prohibits employees from soliciting, suggesting or requesting donations, funds or other resources to support the institutes’ activities. After The Times revealed the industry’s financial interests in the study, Dr. Collins ordered an internal investigation into whether that policy had been violated.
He also asked a working group of his advisory committee to review the scientific merits of the government trial. That study, called M.A.C.H., was already underway, but enrollment of volunteers was suspended on May 10.
The international study, a 10-year-long randomized clinical trial that aimed to recruit 7,800 participants at 16 sites around the world, is the kind of ambitious, broad-reaching scientific project that few agencies other than the N.I.H. could attempt.
Carried out under the auspices of the alcohol institute and led by Dr. Mukamal, the study was to examine the effects of alcohol on adults aged 50 and older who were at high risk for heart disease. Half were to be asked to consume a single serving of alcohol of their choice every day, while the other half were to abstain.
A review by two N.I.H. officials concluded the number of participants and the follow-up time were insufficient to assess important adverse outcomes of daily alcohol consumption, particularly its relationship to cancer.
The trial also did not include heart failure as a primary endpoint, and alcohol consumption is associated with a higher risk of heart failure, the investigators said.
Outside experts also have criticized the design of the study.
Though the goal was to recruit an equal number of male and female participants, for example, Dr. Mukamal has acknowledged the study would not be large enough to detect gender differences unless they were pronounced.
The exclusions were meant to protect volunteers, but they would have altered the results of the trial and minimized the potential harms, particularly to older adults, noted Dr. Richard Saitz, chair of the community health sciences department at Boston University School of Public Health.
“Industry influence on the N.I.H. research agenda should be avoided. It's very important that N.I.H. make research decisions independently,” said Dr. Adriane Fugh-Berman, a professor of pharmacology at Georgetown University.
