Opinion|Kim Jong-un Isn’t Tough. North Koreans Are.
Kim Jong-un Isn’t Tough. North Koreans Are.
Ms. Weiss is a staff editor and writer for the Opinion section.
Now the president has discovered a new figure of admiration.
In an interview that aired on Fox Wednesday evening, Bret Baier asked Mr. Trump about Kim Jong-un: “You sometimes call people killers. He is a killer. He’s clearly executing people,” said the Fox News anchor, all but spelling out the right answer for Mr. Trump.
Let’s talk, Mr. President, about toughness.
Tough is Yeonmi Park.
As a young child, Ms. Park believed that Kim Jong-il, Mr. Kim’s father, was so powerful that he could read her mind. At 9 years old she witnessed the public execution of her friend’s mother. The state had decided that death was the proper punishment for the crime of watching a Hollywood movie.
I Escaped North Korea. Here’s My Message for President Trump.
Yeonmi Park and her family suffered tragically under the North Korean regime. Now she’s urging the United States to pressure Kim Jong-un to end the holocaust against his own people.
When I saw the president of South Korea hugging Kim Jong-un I asked myself: Would he do the same with Hitler? Now the world is cheering Trump. “I gave the president of the United States a standing ovation...” for engaging with one of the most For engaging with one of the most brutal dictators ever. The future of peace and security for the world, for the whole world. This regime has the worst human rights record on earth. This man runs concentration camps, deliberately starves people for control, and assassinates members of his own family. I escaped North Korea When I was 13 years old. Up until then, my life was a torture. I survived the famine that killed two to three million people. I ate dragonflies to survive. I passed starved bodies on the way to school. My father [was] deported to prison camp for more than 10 years. His crime? Informal trading to find food for our family. Ever since I spoke out against the dictators my relatives disappeared. President Trump, you are sitting down with this dictator without asking for any concessions. Kim is clever. He is using this moment to sanitize his global image. and prove how supreme he is at home. I’ve seen this show before. When I was seven years old. The supreme leader, my god, met with the South Korean president. And guess what happened after that? Nothing changed. Kim Jong-il got richer and Kim Dae-jung won the Nobel Peace Prize. So President Trump: While you have Kim Jong-un’s attention, use it to free North Koreans. The nukes can be removed. What can be more urgent than human life? We have to free these prisoners first. As a leader of the free world, you must hold the worst dictator on earth accountable. To the American public: You have the power to tell your president he needs to fight for human rights in North Korea. Use it.
At 13, she escaped to China with her mother.  They raped Ms. Park, too. Somehow the pair managed to make their way on foot through the freezing Gobi Desert, following the stars north to freedom in Mongolia. Today Ms. Park lives in the United States. She is married and has a child. And she is using her freedom to roar against the dictator whom she compares to Hitler.
Tough, Mr. Trump, is Eunsun Kim.
When Ms. Kim was 11 she wrote a will, sure she would die having gone days without food. Her father and grandparents had already died of starvation, and Ms. Kim had been left alone in a cold apartment after her mother and older sister had gone to search for something for the family to eat. “I wasn’t afraid of death. I had seen so many people dying during that time,” Ms. Kim has said.
After six days, her sister and mother returned with no food, but with a determination to survive. The three eventually escaped to China where they were sold by human traffickers. It took them nine years to reach safety in South Korea.
“In North Korea, we have eyes but we cannot see. We have ears but we cannot hear. We have mouths but we cannot say what’s wrong or right. But now I have found freedom, so I know how important it is,” Ms. Kim has said. She is using that freedom to insist that North Korea is a giant prison.
Tough is Hyeonseo Lee.
She witnessed her first public execution at 7 and watched people dying in the streets from starvation. At 17, Ms. Lee escaped the Hermit Kingdom by crossing the frozen Yalu River. After living underground in China for a decade, she managed to smuggle other members of her family out of the slave state.
Having grown up in a country with no freedom of movement, of speech, of thought, of religion, adjusting to a free life in South Korea, where she now lives, is a challenge. “To me, realizing freedom, democracy is really difficult. I’m still learning every day, every minute” she has said.
Tough, Mr. Trump, is Kang Chol Hwan.
In 1977, at 9 years old, after his grandfather was accused of treason, he was sent to the Yodok labor camp along with his younger sister, his grandmother, his father and his uncle. For 10 years he lived in a mud shack. He ate rats and cockroaches and worms. His fellow prisoners had tuberculosis and hepatitis. He was forced to watch public executions. He was beaten and tortured and, for a time, his forced labor included burying the corpses of other prisoners.
After his release from the gulag, he obtained a pirate radio and slowly began to learn about the outside world. In 1992, he escaped to China. Today Mr. Kang chairs the North Korea Strategy Center, which aims to expose the state’s evils and to bring freedom to the North Korean people.
Tough is Joseph Kim.
When Mr. Kim was a 13-year-old boy he watched his father starve to death. After his mother and sister escaped to China he became an orphan, living on the streets and surviving by eating wild plants and roasted grasshoppers. In 2006, he made his escape to China, feeling as if he had nothing to lose, because he knew he was likely to die of starvation if he remained.
In China, he was taken in by Christians who connected him to Liberty in North Korea, a California-based organization that helped him resettle in the United States, where today he is a student at Bard College and an activist for North Korean freedom.
Tough, Mr. Trump, is Oh Chong-song.
The North Korean soldier was shot several times by his fellow soldiers as he defected to South Korea in November by running across the Demilitarized Zone. The surgeon who saved his life in the South said his body was like a “broken jar” — ravaged not just by the bullet holes, but by giant parasites. In the hospital, plagued by nightmares that he was back in the North, Mr. Oh was comforted by a South Korean flag hung in his hospital room.
Tough, Mr. President, is Ji Seong-ho — a man you yourself praised at your State of the Union.
In 1996, during the height of the country’s great famine, Mr. Ji tried to steal some coal from a train in order to trade it for food. He was so weak, however, that he passed out during his mission and was hit by a passing train. He had to have his arm and leg amputated. Without anesthesia.
The double amputee escaped the North on wooden crutches, which he now holds aloft as he beseeches audiences to fight for freedom in North Korea.
These are a few of the names we know. What we don’t know are the names of the more than 25 million souls who are somehow managing to survive in this hell on earth ruled over by your new favorite tough guy.