When the historian Nell Irvin Painter decided to leave a chaired professorship at Princeton to go to art school — embracing a new field and a new life at the age of 64 — it wasn’t so much the art part that baffled people as the school part.  If she wanted to paint, why not simply retire and devote her days to painting? Why endure a crowded commute from her home in Newark to sweat it out with 18-year-olds for the minor distinction (for her) of yet another undergraduate degree?
In her candid and cheerfully irreverent new book, “Old in Art School: A Memoir of Starting Over,” Painter says she never really questioned her decision to go back to school. 
Painter gets more playful with these questions than she initially lets on. One of the most enjoyable aspects of “Old in Art School” is seeing her relax her historian’s grip on social meaning and open up to new ways of seeing.
Which isn’t to say that she loses sight of the art world — or The Art World, as she occasionally, and only somewhat facetiously, puts it. She quickly learned that school wasn’t an idyll or a refuge; if anything it was a hothouse, especially at the Rhode Island School of Design, also known as RISD, where she decided to pursue a graduate art degree.
In “Whitewalling,” D’Souza says that museums and galleries (the “white walls” of her title) might often mean well, but the inadequacy of good intentions is part of her point. She focuses on three controversies that roiled the art world over the decades — including, most recently, the exhibition of “Open Casket,” Dana Schutz’s painting of Emmett Till, in the 2017 Whitney Biennial — to explore how artists and curators have handled issues of race and artistic freedom.
Reading D’Souza on how curation works can be clarifying. She’s excellent on “the censorial function of curating itself,” which might value “ambiguity, open-endedness, even dissension” on the one hand, but will always — by definition — entail some form of exclusion on the other. She also shows how predominantly white institutions, even those identifying as transgressive or avant-garde, have historically “sucked moments of black protest back” onto their terms.
At under 150 pages, “Whitewalling” is a laser beam of a book, unwavering and on target. “Old in Art School” is more meandering, pleasingly and profoundly so, as Painter negotiates the artist she’s becoming: not identical with her historian self, but not running away from it either.
“I was losing my reverence for coherence,” Painter writes at one point. And at another: “Don’t ask me to resolve the contradiction.” At the end of this memoir, she resolves “not to see myself through other people’s eyes,” and to trust her own more. It took her six years of art school and six decades of life, but she emerged with a growing body of work as well as a measure of self-acceptance — which, in a world full of bias and blind spots, can be the hardest thing to learn.