Style|Can Twitter Save the Dictionary?
Can Twitter Save the Dictionary?
As the industry struggles, these thirsty dictionary empires battle peppily for online dominance.
Back in February 2016, the Merriam-Webster Twitter account began gunning for the presidential candidate Donald J. Trump.
It corrected his misspellings. It weighed in on his use of the term “big league” during a debate. After the election, when Kellyanne Conway introduced the idea of “alternative facts,” it piped up with the definition of “fact.” It expressed itself as you might expect an animate dictionary would: gently correcting the administration’s usage errors.
Merriam-Webster had about 80,000 followers on Twitter when Lauren Naturale, now 35, took over the account the month before.
By the time she left, in May 2017, Merriam-Webster’s account had about 445,000 followers. Ms. Naturale won three Webby awards for her work and was featured in Entertainment Weekly’s Best of 2016 list.
By bringing the dictionary into line with other playful brand accounts in industries as disparate as fast food, tires and telecommunications, she succeeded at what she says her boss, Lisa Schneider, the dictionary’s first chief digital officer, had asked her to do: Get people to pay attention on Twitter. Other dictionaries took note.
But not everyone at Merriam-Webster appreciated Ms. Naturale’s Trump-trolling tweets. Even as the account drew a surge of positive attention from the media, Ms. Naturale was barred, for months, from publicly revealing that she was behind it. When she did begin to grant interviews, they were conducted by email so that the message could be carefully controlled.
She said Ms. Schneider told her multiple times that a change in the direction of the feed was needed and implied that Ms. Naturale was trying to advance her own personal political agenda. She quit in part because, she said, Ms. Schneider was upset by the idea that Merriam-Webster was being seen as a politically progressive dictionary.
It’s largely true that, since Ms. Naturale left, Merriam-Webster’s feed has not undergone a noticeable change. In fact, the brand’s outspokenness has proved to be contagious. Dictionary.com, the online reference site owned by IAC (though perhaps not for long?), has also begun to tap out political tweets — and theirs are often far more direct.
“Being able to go into a forum like Twitter and tell that story, let people connect those dots, was a really interesting thing,” Ms. Sliter said.
The account now has about 276,000 followers to Merriam-Webster’s 684,000 and, these days, is quick to comment on current events. After “Roseanne” was canceled late last month because of a tweet its star had sent, Dictionary.com had opinions.
Their tweets, which are sourced from Dictionary.com, are not always as reliable as one might hope a dictionary would be.
The Ambien tweet relies on an inaccurate supposition. Ambien’s maker, Sanofi, says the name is a combination of “a.m.,” as in morning, and “bien,” from the French word for good.
Ms. Sliter acknowledges that her company’s Twitter strategy is similar to Merriam-Webster’s, though she says that Dictionary.com is more self-deprecating, and more focused on talking about the news and trends.
So … do the two dictionaries get along?
John Cheney-Lippold, a professor of American culture at the University of Michigan who specializes in digital media, said that dictionaries had a particular interest in promoting their brands since President Trump catalyzed a post-truth news environment.
“They are trying valiantly to reassert themselves as the epistemic chiefs of the world,” he said.
There’s another reason that dictionaries have taken to tweeting. Their industry, wedged between the fast-shifting media and publishing industries, has been struggling.
Not all dictionaries have leapt into the fray. The Oxford English Dictionary still tweets like, um, a dictionary. The Oxford Dictionaries account is comparatively restrained, as is the American Heritage dictionary.
Ms. Schneider said that Merriam-Webster was a profitable publisher — “which is quite an achievement” — and noted that it had won several Webby awards in 2017. But Ms. Stamper is not sure how much the online acclaim matters. She pointed out that Merriam-Webster had lost a significant number of editors over the last four years.
