As his confidence has grown, so has his appetite for provocative self-expression. He has become a red carpet magnet, thanks to his luxuriant locks and penchant for avant-garde couture. And he is producing and hosting a biting series of web videos that take aim at the coarsening of American culture and its association with President Trump.
Broadway theater owners, who control which shows get homes, are mostly older white men, deal makers and schmoozers in conservative suits. But if Mr. Roth is atypical for his industry’s leaders, he’s O.K. with that. In fact, he acknowledges that he is challenging societal gender norms with his styling.
Mr. Roth’s company, Jujamcyn Theaters, is the smallest of the big three Broadway landlords, with about 500 employees. The company is privately held by Mr. Roth, who would not discuss its financials.
But it appears to be punching above its weight, responsible for 20 percent of Broadway’s overall grosses while owning just 12 percent of the 41 theaters. Still, conversations about Mr. Roth within the industry invariably include some degree of puzzlement over his evolving appearance and his fondness for the spotlight.
Yet even those who are mystified by Mr. Roth’s performative extracurriculars give him credit as a businessman who has aggressively wooed the shows he wants, is generous to artists working in his theaters and has overhauled customer service practices in a change-averse industry.
He locked down “Frozen,” the first Disney show for Jujamcyn, after executing a complex (and costly) real estate transaction that allowed him to expand the stage at the St. James Theater by building into an alley owned by a neighboring nonprofit.
And he courted Mr. Springsteen — the biggest get of the season — with persistence and hunger, and a bit of a leg up because he already knew the singer socially.
But Mr. Furman said he has appreciated Mr. Roth in action — aggressively pursuing shows, nurturing his theaters and tending to artists and investors (“the notes he leaves you!”).


He is also an outspoken Democrat — not unusual in the bounds of Broadway, but striking because his father, the real estate investor Steven Roth, is a Republican who is a business partner, friend and confidant of President Trump.
Mr. Roth’s anti-Trump activism has traditional manifestations. He is a frequent political contributor who gave $134,000 to Democratic causes in 2016, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. And this month he is hosting an event introducing the theater industry to Swing Left, which is seeking to influence the midterm congressional races.
Mr. Roth’s journey to moguldom was, obviously, eased by his family’s money and connections. Not only is his father one of the most successful businessmen in New York, but his mother, Daryl Roth, is also one of the most prominent Broadway producers, with 10 Tonys and a long history of support for work about gender and sexuality.
“His mom is a great producer, and his dad is a real estate tycoon, and, like it or not, being a theater owner is real estate — that’s the name of the game,” said the director Michael Mayer (“Spring Awakening,” “Head Over Heels”). He has known Jordan Roth since he was in college, when Daryl Roth, wanting her son to have a gay role model, introduced them, Mr. Mayer recalled.
During a series of interviews, Mr. Roth was open but careful — he speaks slowly, and takes long pauses to consider his words. And he was emotional, tearing up, for example, as he talked about how much he loves “Frozen,” both as he imagined that it could be the first show to which he brings his younger son, and as he marveled at public vulnerability of its stars.
He joined Jujamcyn in 2006 as a resident producer; the next year, he became a vice president. In 2009, he bought a stake and became president, while simultaneously working on his M.B.A. at Columbia, and in 2013 he became the company’s majority owner.
He lives in a high-style apartment, overlooking the Hudson River in the West Village, with his husband, the television producer Richie Jackson, who this fall is producing the Broadway revival of another classic of gay theater, “Torch Song.” Together they are raising two boys — they co-parent Jackson, who is 18, with Mr. Jackson’s ex, the actor BD Wong, and they also have a toddler, Levi, who is about to turn 2. The family has a second home in East Hampton, where Mr. Roth has discovered a new passion: English gardens.
Even as he redefines the role of a Broadway bigwig, Mr. Roth is surrounded by its history. He works from an office above the St. James once occupied by David Merrick, the legendary Broadway producer, and when I asked about the Merrick legacy, he dropped his voice to a stage whisper.
“I can’t believe you just said that,” he said, before grabbing a copy of a new book called “Becoming Barbra.” (Actually, he asked an assistant to grab the book. Mr. Roth has a lot of helpers.) He opened to a series of photos of Ms. Streisand meeting with Merrick in 1963, and pointed to one in which, over the Merrick’s shoulder, you can see the weather-pockmarked facade framing an office window. Mr. Roth brought me to his window to proudly point out the same dimpled masonry, untouched by time.
His office is spare — the one nod to razzle-dazzle is a set of 22-inch-high electrified letters, T-H-E-A-T-R-E, that Mr. Roth salvaged from the Virginia Theater, which was being rechristened the August Wilson, and mounted on his wall. 
