Mr. Friedman is a professor and director of the Policing Project at New York University School of Law.
The Supreme Court decided on Friday that before the government can get your cellphone location records — well, at least more than six days’ worth of them — it must have probable cause to think you did something wrong, and a warrant.
 It provides, as the court majority recognized, “a comprehensive chronicle of the user’s past movements.” Yet, before this decision, law enforcement agencies were gathering this data on countless people without even showing that the person whose information they collected had done anything wrong.
But the 5-4 decision in the case, Carpenter v. the United States, should give you little comfort. The growing use of technology by law enforcement agencies to monitor or target people — particularly people and communities of color — is expanding at head-spinning speed, and nothing the courts do is going to stop that.
This decision, written by Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., only confirms that. His opinion didn’t overturn the rule that says that any time the government wants information on you that you’ve provided to a third party, the government can get it, even though in the digital age most of your information is now in the hands of third parties like cellphone companies, internet providers and social-media giants like Facebook. He stressed how “narrow” the decision was and didn’t rule out giving the government freedom to track you for up to six days.
And two of them would even have wound back the law by more than 50 years to say the Fourth Amendment no longer protects “reasonable expectations of privacy” but only property rights, leaving us without constitutional recourse for all of our digital information.
Almost every day brings another story of how policing technology is chiseling away at our civil rights and liberties. License plate readers already record our movements on the ground; drones will soon peer down at us from the skies. Artificial intelligence will power facial recognition tools in CCTV and police body cameras to identify us as we move about. Algorithms will target where crime will supposedly occur next, and who might commit it. All of these technologies will be in the hands of government agencies that have the power to keep us under watch, to handcuff us, to lock us up.
There is promise in these technologies, to be sure. Drones can locate a missing child or map a traffic accident from the sky so that cars and trucks aren’t stuck for hours. Pod cameras — short for police observation devices, affixed to utility or traffic poles or buildings — can catch criminals in the act in violence-torn neighborhoods. Location tracking of cellphones can identify serial armed robbers.
For all of its benefits, however, policing technology can also do unfathomable damage.
Let’s start with the obvious: It will cut deeply into our privacy. It was designed to do just that. We’re told technology will pick out the bad guy from a crowd, but if you’re in the crowd too, you’ll be observed. We’ll all be under the government’s watchful eye.
But the impact inevitably is going to fall most heavily on minorities and marginalized communities.
As Carpenter makes clear, looking to the courts won’t be helpful. With rare exception, the courts have waved a green flag at police surveillance. The Fourth Amendment prohibits “unreasonable searches and seizures,” but if a government action is not considered a search or seizure, there is no protection at all. The fight in Carpenter took place because the use of most of these new technologies isn’t considered a search. That’s because you have no “reasonable expectation of privacy” in public places. This makes you fair game for all kinds of surveillance, from facial recognition to CCTV cameras. And warrants and probable cause — the usual tools of courts — won’t work anyway when the goal is to keep us all under watch.
First, no policing technology should be used unless the public has a voice in the decision to authorize it.
Second, citizens can’t make intelligent decisions about policing technology unless they understand what the technology does and how it works. Police buy technology from private vendors that want to keep its details secret for proprietary reasons. That won’t fly when the technology is being used by our government on us.
Third, we need clear rules about deploying policing technology: when it can and can’t be used, how each use is authorized and by whom. Drones to map traffic accidents? Sure. To peer into windows of homes? No way. Surveillance devices to locate cellphones? Yes, but only with the appropriate court orders. Predictive policing to identify places where crime might occur next? Perhaps, but not if there’s a chance these algorithms will perpetuate the racially disparate impact of policing.
Officers using these technologies need proper training, and law enforcement agencies should not be allowed to use them unless they can show they understand what they are buying.
Fourth, if data is being collected, sharp, clear limits on its use must be defined. How long can this data be retained? Can it be shared with other agencies? Or combined with other data purchased from private vendors?
Finally, strong oversight is critical. The police must be closely monitored in their use of these technologies, and data on their performance must be disclosed regularly.
There are powerfully hard questions here. But courts aren’t going to answer them, and we can’t continue to duck them. We need to act now, because the technology is getting away from us, fast, and the unregulated harms could be devastating.