Anthony Kennedy’s retirement is “the most consequential event in American jurisprudence at least since Bush v. Gore in 2000 and probably since Roe v. Wade in 1973,” writes Jack Goldsmith, a legal scholar and former George W. Bush administration official, in The Washington Post.
Kennedy was quite conservative on many issues, including business regulation and campaign finance, and on those issues, his departure will have little immediate effect. Conservative positions will continue to win a lot of 5-4 decisions, as they did in the court term that ended this week.
But Kennedy was moderate to liberal on other issues, including several that particularly affect the rights of women and minorities. On these issues, his departure could quickly lead to big changes in American life.
In the simplest terms, the Supreme Court is likely to begin siding more often with those who already have power — and against those who don’t have much. After decades of rising economic inequality and consolidation, it is a profoundly worrisome development.
Can the Democrats prevent Kennedy’s replacement from being seated before the midterm election?
Democratic senators were right to call on the Republicans to wait to confirm a justice until after this year’s elections, given the Republicans’ unprecedented refusal to let President Barack Obama fill a court opening in 2016. But Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, has already made clear that he will ignore the Democrats. And a majority of senators can do just about anything it wants in the chamber. The Republicans currently have 51 of the 100 seats, as well as a tiebreaking vote, when needed, from the vice president.
Richard Hasen, writing in Slate, suggests that liberals have one hope, slim though it may be: Huge public protests to put pressure on Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski — two moderate, pro-choice Republican senators — not to confirm a nominee who threatens abortion rights.
Which issues are most likely to be affected in the near future?
What can you do if you’re alarmed about all of this?
Get more involved in politics, as The Times editorial board argues.
Big soda vs. your health. Lost amid all the attention on the Supreme Court is a deeply alarming story from California: The soda industry seems to be persuading state legislators there to prohibit local communities from passing soda taxes.
It’s a terrible idea. The evidence shows that soda taxes improve public health, without harming the poor — because people respond by drinking less soda. Just about the only people hurt by soda taxes are those who work for the soda industry. By trying to ban taxes, the industry is putting its profits above your health.
For more, read Daniel Borenstein in The Mercury News or Anahad O’Connor and Margot Sanger-Katz in The Times.