Illustrated. 311 pp. Bloomsbury Publishing. $28.
Hall is the subject of Mary Pilon’s second book, “The Kevin Show: An Olympic Athlete’s Battle With Mental Illness.” It follows her 2015 best seller, “The Monopolists: Obsession, Fury, and the Scandal Behind the World’s Favorite Board Game.” Before that, Pilon had been a prolific magazine journalist and a producer for NBC Sports.
Both the virtues and the defects of her immersion in the world of pop culture are on display here. The virtues offer satisfying recreational reading with moments of deep engagement. The defects tend to anesthetize the reader to the nature, provenance and consequences of chronic mental illness. Thus, while engrossing, thanks to its larger-than-life subject, the book misses an opportunity to consummate the promise of its subtitle.
When Pilon writes about Hall’s aspirations as an Olympic athlete, the book is absorbing and empathetic. Hall emerges as a kind of American/Athenian ideal, a man of superb intellectual and physical gifts. He is the son of two medical doctors and is a 1991 graduate of Brown University with honors degrees in mathematics and French literature. His powers of mind and body persist even as each is under attack. In the midst of his competitive sailing career, Hall manages to rebuild his elite athlete’s body after each of two separate and unrelated operations for testicular cancer: the first in 1990, when he was 21; the second in the Christmas season of 1992, after which his weight dropped.
Hall competed in the world’s most demanding nautical races, including the 2004 Olympics and three America’s Cup events, over a 29-year stretch. He left competitive sailing in 2013 after surviving the tragic capsizing of the high-speed catamaran Artemis on San Francisco Bay during a test run for the America’s Cup. A crewmate, Andrew Simpson, who was known as Bart, was killed. Hall now lives with his wife, Amanda, in Auckland, New Zealand. He never realized his dream of winning an Olympic gold medal.
Pilon is a paragon of dogged research. She’s best in reconstructing (via hundreds of hours of interviews) the intertwined life struggles of Hall, his steadfast sweetheart and eventual wife, his vexed parents and some denizens of the competitive sailing world. Her attempts to reach Hall’s “inner world” display levels of empathy that touch the heart, even though they are not always successful.
It is, oddly, in the sections of the book about mental illness — the book’s core, the passages that set Hall apart from a long line of star-crossed athletes, the Golden Fleece of Pilon’s own quest — that prove the least satisfying, and, occasionally, the most annoying.
This is “The Kevin Show” of the book’s title (a play on “The Truman Show,” the 1998 Peter Weir satire that starred Jim Carrey as Truman Burbank, the unsuspecting star of a lifetime reality show constructed by a television production company).
The Director’s fanciful demands propel Hall, the show’s “star,” into a series of delusional actions — leaping from a tree in Boston to land in front of a stranger whom he believed to be his “Ophelia,” crossing a busy street in Tokyo with his eyes closed “to manipulate the global economy for altruistic purposes.” He scribbled wildly brilliant thoughts into his journal, and suffered a psychotic break at a California theme park after coming across a Lego construction of Salvador Dalí, a favorite artist.
We accompany Hall on these recurring episodes throughout the book. Yet although the author strives at intervals to take us all the way inside her subject’s disordered brain, we remain mostly on the outside looking in, spectators at — well, a show. Granted, the mysteries of chronic mental illness do not yield easily to the common language, but certain bedrock truths have been ratified within the past generation and are important to understand. Determined though her research may be, Pilon seems to make a point of protecting the reader from the grind of engaging these truths.
The first part of this assertion masks a critical distinction, and the second part is fatuous. “Half of all Americans” conflates two radically distinct forms of mental illness: the emotionally based eruptions of depression, fear, anger and alienation reported by those whom psychiatrists describe as “the worried well,” and the incurable, biologically inherited, often catastrophic brain diseases: bipolarity, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorders.
Hall was given a diagnosis of bipolar disorder when he was in college. Pilon reports that the doctors told Hall that his affliction “wasn’t likely to go away anytime soon, if at all.” This is an infuriating elision of a valuable teachable moment. Pilon might have explained that “it wasn’t likely to go away anytime soon, if at all” because bipolar disorder, unlike most complaints lumped together as mental illness, is a pernicious disease of the brain. To the extent that people remain unaware of this distinction (and the extent is great), brain-diseased people suffer greatly.
Hall and his fellow sufferers make up less than 4 percent of the population. Yet they affect society, and are affected by it, in ways and numbers disproportionate to their population. One flagrant example: The respected Treatment Advocacy Center has found that some 20 percent of jail inmates and 15 percent of inmates in state prisons have a serious mental illness. In real numbers, that’s about 356,000 inmates (450,000 in some estimates) with serious mental illness in jails and state prisons, or 10 times more than the 35,000-odd sufferers in state hospitals. More than one expert has remarked that America criminalizes the mentally ill and uses jails as de facto mental health institutions. The economic toll is huge: Mentally ill inmates require twice the cost of maintenance as those who aren’t mentally ill. The emotional toll on these inmates’ families is incalculable.
Then there is the matter of suicide. More than 90 percent of suicide victims have a diagnosable mental disorder. Pilon reports that Hall has contemplated suicide more than once. At the end of the book, shortly before her upbeat closing assurance that “Kevin is needed, and loved, back on the shore,” Pilon informs us that in 2016, during a “down period,” her subject spent several days on a suicide watch.
