During a meeting in Singapore, Donald Trump presented Kim Jong-un with a short video depicting the prosperity that could come with peace. James Poniewozik, The Times’s chief television critic, tells us the video’s cartoonish, idealized aesthetic was no accident.
WASHINGTON — President Trump once told advisers to think of every day of his tenure as another episode in a television series. But with his landmark meeting with North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, he seems to be eyeing a move up to the big screen.
At least that was the impression from a faux movie trailer he had specially made for the occasion, depicting his first-of-its-kind encounter with Mr. Kim as a suspenseful, pulse-pounding thriller with nothing less than the future of the world on the line.
Featuring fast-flashing visuals, dramatic music and a baritone narrator, the four-minute video that debuted in Singapore during the summit meeting presented the two heroes of the tale — Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim, of course — confronting choices that would alter the course of history. Mr. Trump showed Mr. Kim the video on an iPad and later played it for reporters on a pair of jumbo screens.
The video was no more specific than the joint statement the leaders signed, but the White House said it was meant to motivate Mr. Kim to break out of the country’s long isolation and rejoin the world by giving up his nuclear weapons.
The choice is presented in images of a dystopian country with little electricity, missiles launching and warplanes taking off versus a futuristic version of North Korea with cranes building skyscrapers, a dark country suddenly lit up at night and missiles flying back into their silos.
Mark McKinnon, a seasoned political ad maker who ran media for President George W. Bush’s campaigns, said the video was “obviously quite shlocky” for a broader audience, but could be effective in influencing its intended target.
Sung-Yoon Lee, a Korean studies professor at Tufts University’s Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, was even less impressed, calling it “eerily reminiscent of second-rate South Korean government promotional videos.” In fact, although the White House said it was made by the National Security Council, he said he instinctively suspected the South Koreans might have created it and gave it to Mr. Trump.
One person who found it more perplexing than anything else was Mark Castaldo, the founder of the actual Destiny Pictures, a small independent film and television production company in Los Angeles. Starting around 5:30 a.m. his time on Tuesday, Mr. Castaldo found himself bombarded with telephone calls and emails from reporters and friends asking him about the video they assumed he had made.
Evidently whatever National Security Council staff members put together the video made up a “Destiny Pictures” as a metaphor, perhaps not realizing there was a real one.
Mr. Castaldo, who grew up in Queens just as Mr. Trump did and spent 10 years as a casino croupier in Atlantic City and Las Vegas (“I never worked at a Trump casino”), has worked in Hollywood for the past 15 years. His company’s website lists movies like “Psych: 9,” “The Perfect Nanny” and “The Rival.” He is currently working on “Pushing Life,” an inspired-by-a-true-story film about a single father who runs 75 marathons in 75 consecutive days after losing his wife to breast cancer.
