The British poet on her new lyrical memoir, “The Terrible,” and why she thinks Instagram poets are doing the genre a service.
On a rainy Wednesday in April, a crowd of 70 people squeezed into the Strand Bookstore at the Club Monaco on Fifth Avenue for a poetry reading by Yrsa Daley-Ward, the British model and writer. Attendees leaned against the well-curated bookshelves or sat cross legged on the floor as waiters maneuvered through the room, offering them a choice of red or white wine.
Minutes before the program began, Ms. Daley-Ward sauntered into the room and plopped herself onto a slate gray love seat at the front. She wore an all white ensemble — a blouse, loosefitting shorts and a vest she casually threw to the side.
“I think you need to hear a poem about mental health,” she said before launching into “mental health,” one of the most popular poems from her 2014 collection, “Bone.” When she finished, the room exploded in applause for Ms. Daley-Ward, who has comforted hundreds of thousands of fans with her cleareyed poetry on Instagram for the last five years.
Ms. Daley-Ward, whose memoir, “The Terrible,” was published this week by Penguin Books, is part of a new generation of writers using social media to share their work, build their brand and find an audience. According to a recent study from the Pew Research Center, 72 percent of teenagers in the United States report using Instagram, making it the second most popular online platform, after YouTube.
The millennials who post short, visually pleasing prose online are commonly referred to as “Instagram poets” and their recent popularity has been met with equal parts enthusiasm and skepticism. They use the platform in multiple ways: adding images to their poems, taking photos of printed text or, in the case of Ms. Daley-Ward, filming their laptop screens as they write.
Unlike some of her more famous and controversial peers, such as Rupi Kaur and Cleo Wade, Ms. Daley-Ward has also found critical success.
On a Saturday, several days after the Club Monaco event, I met Ms. Daley-Ward for brunch at a Mediterranean-Italian restaurant in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn. She has just moved to the neighborhood from Los Angeles after a New York City literary agent, who was impressed by “Bone,” asked her if she had other material to share.
“The Terrible” is a devastating and lyrical account that begins with Ms. Daley-Ward’s childhood in Chorley, a small town in northern England where she was shuffled between her single mother and her religious grandparents. Early chapters focus on her tense relationship with her mother (“I am angry with Mum a lot these days because we love her so much and we never see her”), struggling with her sexuality (“She is a petite girl and my T-shirt totally drowns her. My insides ache with longing”) and being raised as a Seventh-day Adventist (“We sing lots of hymns with words like, ‘Wash me and I shall be whiter than snow’”).
Most of the book focuses on her life after she turned 12, the age which marked the beginning of “the terrible” and “going under.” These are euphemisms for “depression, anxiety, suicidal thoughts, addiction,” Ms. Daley-Ward said.
At the end of the Club Monaco event, members of the audience lined up for autographs.
“She feels like a sister to me,” said Mimi Chiahemen, an editor and reiki practitioner. She found Ms. Daley-Ward’s poetry on Instagram through Nayyirah Waheed, another poet, and was immediately impressed by her ability to convey such emotional depth in few words.
“I actually think it’s very challenging to write evocative poetry with so much brevity,” she said, comparing Ms. Daley-Ward to poets like Mary Oliver and E.E. Cummings.
When I asked Ms. Daley-Ward if she had any feelings about being labeled an Instagram poet, she smiled.
