WASHINGTON — For more than two years, Democrats have struggled with how aggressively to confront Donald J. Trump, a political opponent unlike any other: Should they attack him over his hard-line policies; his inflammatory, norm-breaking conduct; or some combination of both?
In recent days, as institutional Democrats wring their hands, those deliberations have started to give way to furious liberal activists and citizens who have taken matters into their own hands beyond the corridors of power.
The secretary of homeland security was confronted by protesters while she was trying to have dinner in Washington on Tuesday.
Progressives have heckled the homeland security secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen, and the White House aide Stephen Miller at Washington restaurants. They have ejected the White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, from a Lexington, Va., eatery. And they have screamed at one of Mr. Trump’s leading cable news surrogates, Florida’s attorney general, Pam Bondi, at a Tampa movie theater.
The attempts at shaming have delighted many on the left, particularly following Mr. Trump’s policy of separating migrant children from their parents, and many progressives feel that the president’s incendiary messaging and actions must be met with something far stronger than another round of news releases from politicians.
But the social media-fueled confrontations have opened a rift in the party over whether stoking anti-Trump outrage is helping or undermining its prospects in the midterm elections. Many younger Democrats believe that conventional politics are insufficient to the threat posed by a would-be authoritarian — and that their millennial and nonwhite base must be assured that the party is doing all it can to halt Mr. Trump.
Older and more establishment-aligned party officials fear the attempts at public humiliation are a political gift to Republicans eager to portray the opposition as inflaming rather than cooling passions in the nation’s capital.
“Trump’s daily lack of civility has provoked responses that are predictable but unacceptable,” Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader, said Monday, rebuking Ms. Waters, a veteran flamethrower who is enjoying something of a renaissance in the Trump era.
This sort of talk infuriates the new guard of liberal leaders, who warn that Washington Democrats risk dampening enthusiasm among anti-Trump activists if they continue denouncing direct action.
Mr. Trump did appear to relish the decision by a Virginia restaurant owner to ask Ms. Sanders to leave her establishment, the Red Hen, over the weekend.
“The Red Hen Restaurant should focus more on cleaning its filthy canopies, doors and windows (badly needs a paint job) rather than refusing to serve a fine person like Sarah Huckabee Sanders,” he taunted on Twitter.
Nor did he let Ms. Waters’s broadside go unanswered, calling her an “extraordinarily low IQ person” in a tweet.
But it was not just the White House that was tut-tutting the public shaming.
Like much else in the Trump era, however, it is not clear whether the episodes of “disobedience” will continue or at least continue garnering attention when other controversies flare up.
Other prominent Democrats, however, are alarmed at those in their ranks who believe these public clashes should be encouraged.
The party has found its greatest electoral success by casting itself as the antidote to Republican excess and divisiveness, these Democrats say, not by emulating the most heated talk and behavior on the right. When Republicans have prospered, they warn, it has often been when they can ride a public backlash against Democrats.
Mr. Axelrod, who received an avalanche of criticism online over the weekend after tweeting about his unease with how Ms. Sanders was treated, bristled at the criticism and noted his success in winning a pair of presidential elections.
Yet a growing contingent of Democrats believes that up-for-grabs voters are scarcely paying attention to the Trump story du jour and that the president’s devotees are already roused.
There is little risk in speaking out about Mr. Trump’s demagogic conduct, these Democrats argue, and party elders should recognize how serious this moment is and not diminish the anger of activists.
Brian Fallon, a Democratic strategist and senior official on Hillary Clinton’s campaign, likened the past few days to the end of the Virginia governor’s race last year, when a liberal Hispanic group ran an incendiary ad against the Republican nominee, Ed Gillespie, after he accused his Democratic opponent, Ralph S. Northam, of not being sufficiently tough on MS-13, the heavily Latino gang that has become a Trump talking point.
