It’s fine if you disagree, but don’t @ us.
Credit...Barry Wetcher/Warner Bros.
The connection between costume and concept is obvious in “Ocean’s 8”: It’s a heist movie staged at the Met Gala, the biggest (and most expensive) night in fashion. But what most critics have seen is a dressed-up, watered-down version of the other films in the “Ocean’s” franchise.
To which we say: Why can’t clothes be the whole point?
When we talk about fashion films, certain loosely related titles and stars come to mind. Is anything starring Audrey Hepburn a fashion film? Or the ones directed by Tom Ford? Are movies about the fashion industry, like “Zoolander,” “The Devil Wears Prada” and “Phantom Thread,” too obvious? Do stylish action movies, like “Blade Runner” and “The Matrix,” count? Don’t even get us started on the documentaries — we know, we know, “The September Issue” is totally underrated.
If there’s a canon to be established, or added to, we’re not concerned with it. What’s more interesting, to us at least, is how certain items leap from the screen to our cerebral cortex, there to stay forever: a white pantsuit, wildly impractical platform shoes, a “Ver-sayce” dress. Sometimes a fashion film is just an O.K. movie with amazing clothes. Can’t that be enough?
I still couldn’t tell you whether I’d rather be Hallie Parker or Annie James. When I first saw “The Parent Trap,” starring Lindsay Lohan, I was in elementary school and both characters were the epitome of cool. Hallie embodied some distant idea of Northern California; she wore sunglasses over her side-swept bangs and her father owned a vineyard. Annie, with her British accent and tiny businesswoman outfits, seemed so posh and mature.
Historically, there have been films that influence designers because of their aesthetic values, and films that designers use as their subjects or backdrop because of their memorable characters. But to me, one of the most revealing films about fashion is not actually a fashion film at all. I am talking about, of course, “The Hunger Games,” a piercing satire of the early-21st-century fashion world masquerading as a dystopian teen blockbuster/Jennifer Lawrence vehicle.
Among the most powerful people in the ruling city, and the fight-to-the-death titular reality show that entertains them, are the stylists. Of which the only really good guy is the one who hasn’t disguised himself in absurd outfits. And the way said stylists dress the competitors is integral to their strategy and the effort to win.
On its face, “Three Days of the Condor,” which stars Robert Redford and Faye Dunaway, is an espionage thriller released post-Watergate. But for me and for many other men, “Condor” presents a master class in how to dress simply and handsomely. Mr. Redford plays a bookish C.I.A. researcher who leaves the office for lunch, returns and discovers that his colleagues have all been killed. He has to outpace the assassin and uncover the conspiracy, armed with only his wits, the help of Ms. Dunaway and a killer wardrobe of layered basics: a gray herringbone blazer; a navy wool sweater; a chambray dress shirt; and bluejeans.
There are many sartorial delights in “What’s Love Got to Do With It,” the harrowing biopic of Tina Turner’s life starring Angela Bassett with Laurence Fishburne as Ike Turner, her vicious Svengali and batterer. The film marches through three decades at a brisk clip, and the period costumes, deployed by Ruth E. Carter with the lushness that defines her work, are guilty pleasures amid the unfurling horror of the Turner marriage.
There are satiny sheathes and swanky suits in sherbet colors in the 1950s; the ’60s are bold and crisp — look at the Ikettes on the road, in sharp yellow Capri pants and black patent leather belts. 
It was Ms. Carter’s 10th film — her first was Spike Lee’s “School Daze” and she would go on to design the costumes for “Amistad,” “The Butler,” “Selma” and, gloriously, “Black Panther,” among many others. She assembled over 90 outfits for Ms. Bassett, with a little help from Ms. Turner herself.
Most comedies of manners use women’s clothing and appearance to emphasize, mock or sometimes even celebrate class transgressions. “Showgirls” (like “Working Girl” before it) does all of those things alternately and at once, which is part of what has made it so thorny and illegible all these years.
Our drifter-grifter hero, Nomi Malone, hitches into Las Vegas in a tied-off floral shirt, bad pale jeans and a black fringed leather jacket. She is a rube and a disaster. Consumed with burning drives for any amount of financial security and for fame, she spends a significant chunk of the film nearly naked but heavily caked in glitter, first stripping and lap dancing and then appearing in the big shows of girl.
Just as she begins to reach some measure of financial stability through her more legitimate dancing, she purchases a Versace black cocktail dress. It is the most conservative thing she wears in the film. She has finally stepped up to these chic heights only to give herself away with describing the dress as “Ver-sayce” to a room full of sophisticates, bringing a deep cringe from any viewer who has ever belly-crawled her way under the barbed-wire fence of the class divide.
The filmmaker Éric Rohmer’s influence can be seen across much of contemporary output: Maryam Nassir Zadeh collections, Alex Ross Perry movies, Noah Baumbach’s firstborn. Most of his films take place in beachy European villas — oft-cited originals in a whole genre of copycat movies currently having a bit of a moment.
“La Collectionneuse” is about vacationing French youngs at a seaside house in St. Tropez: two art bros and a woman named Haydée who shrugs them off.
Like most the movies in the art bro starter kit, “La Collectionneuse” is a look at the in-between: the time between adolescence and adulthood, the leisure between work, the desire between the first meeting and a relationship. For the entire film, the characters move about that thick stuff, and then … nothing happens.
The clothes complement the lazy story line: swimwear half-buttoned over for the short walk between the indoors and the water; open-foot, worn-in jeans, pilling knits; all comfy and colorful solids draped nonchalantly on lounging bodies, poppy and graphic against the Riviera behind in muted passé composé. Pats of brights in a Matisse.
Rian Johnson’s first feature film, “Brick,” is a mash-up, a murder mystery set at a high school in which the death of a girl named Emily sets a teenage gumshoe off on a surprisingly bloody search for answers. Michele Posch, the movie’s costume designer, worked with the director to provide clues through clothes. Vestiary overlap between discrete social groups — jocks, geeks, theater kids and burnout gangsters — hints at overarching conspiracy laden with drugs, deceit and a panoply of looks.
This much is clear about the 1997 movie “Spice World”: It was a movie starring the Spice Girls. It had a Rube Goldberg plot centered around the titular Girls preparing for a concert at the Royal Albert Hall (a venue of no particular significance to non-British fans) that incorporated aliens, boot camp, a woman going into labor at a nightclub, men in lilac thongs and a tour bus driven by the musician Meat Loaf (not playing himself).
The plot should have proven as difficult to recall as the exact midair locations of confetti particles years after they have been swept into the trash. And yet, the near-random collection of scenes that make up “Spice World” are easy to call to mind because of the outfits.
The singers are impractically dressed for every activity: Posh Spice (Victoria Beckham, then Victoria Adams) wears a camouflage minidress to complete a military obstacle course; Ginger Spice (Geri Horner, then Geri Halliwell) wears a sleeveless latex jumpsuit to urinate in the woods.
Probably not since Josef von Sternberg used costuming to transform Marlene Dietrich from a plump German starlet into a mesmerizing world-weary femme fatale in “Morocco” has a director deployed fashion in the service of atmosphere and character more astutely than Wong Kar-wai. “In the Mood For Love,” his complexly plotted and almost actionless tale of two strangers cuckolded by their respective spouses, was filmed over the course of a year, its dialogue largely improvised by the principal actors, Maggie Cheung and Tony Leung.
Words, in a certain sense, barely matter in a work like this. Using a series of interior frames within the larger one of the camera lens, and fashion as a tool for delineating character, it unspools like a silent film. Both of the movie’s principal characters are defined by their clothing, Mr. Leung his skinny ’60s ties and salaryman suits and Ms. Cheung her elegant qipao.
“Desperately Seeking Susan” is the best Madonna movie, perhaps because it serves as an allegory for the many women who styled themselves in Madonna’s image. Which is to say, the film is transparently about clothes: a glittery jacket, studded ankle boots, a pair of ancient Egyptian earrings.
In case you need refreshing, the story goes like this: Rosanna Arquette plays Roberta, a bored housewife in Fort Lee, N.J., who reads the personals for vicarious thrills. She becomes obsessed with a pair of strangers, Susan and Jim, who communicate through the ads, and begins spying on the couple. Through said espionage, Roberta discovers that the woman (Susan, played by Madonna) is everything she’s not. Cool, bohemian, carefree. After Susan trades her telltale jacket for the studded boots in a thrift store, Roberta picks up the coat and makes it her own.
My favorite movie-with-good-clothes is “Dick: The Unmaking of the President,” a retelling of the Watergate scandal that imagines Deep Throat, the Washington Post source, was the code name of two teenage girls.
Betsy and Arlene, played by Kirsten Dunst and Michelle Williams, have great 1970s outfits and a Forrest Gumpian way of always being in the right place at the right time. Early in the movie, they run into G. Gordon Liddy at the Watergate (where Arlene lives with her mother) on the night of the burglary. Later, on a school field trip to the White House, they come across a list of payoffs compiled by the administration. In order to keep them quiet, Nixon hires them (as dog walkers, natch).
Their outfits change from scene to scene in a reflection of the times. They also seem to evolve with the young ladies’ growing awareness of the world. Arlene trades in her cat-eye glasses, mod shift dresses and ’60s bouffant for straight hair and bell-bottoms. Both girls wear more peace-sign jewelry and other hippie accouterment as they learn of the president’s bad behavior and become more involved in the Post investigation.
The movie includes performances by Will Ferrell and Bruce McCulloch as those “radical muckraking bastards” Woodward and Bernstein; Ana Gasteyer as Nixon’s devoted secretary Rose Mary Woods; and Ryan Reynolds as the dopey college roommate of H.R. Haldeman’s son.
“You don’t understand, this is an Alaïa.” It’s not what most people would say while being told to lie on the ground at gunpoint. But then again, most people aren’t Cher Horowitz.
Her memorable looks are almost innumerable: the yellow schoolgirl outfit! The knee-highs! The white Calvin Klein dress that she wears on her first date with Christian! When I was growing up in Greece, the “Clueless” aesthetic was like a foreign import. Cher and Dionne Davenport were the chic California teenagers that I yearned to dress like and whose shopping habits I aspired to live out: Calvin Klein, Contempo Casual, Fred Segal, Boulmiche. Mona May, the costume designer, apparently outfitted the cast in more than 53 different types of plaid.
And how could we forget these lines?
No object has been so clear an emblem of toxic teenage femininity as the red scrunchie that Heather Chandler wraps around her curly blond hair in the 1988 film “Heathers.” It’s a tiara that signals her alphaness. It’s the color representation of her popularity blood lust. It’s a means of keeping her hair out of her eyes so she can focus on those she wishes to destroy.
“Heathers” is a great fashion film because the clothes and accessories are not mere accessories, they are integral to the characters’ identities. With shoulder-padded suit jackets, short pleated skirts and knee socks and tights, the Heathers dress as 1980s high school students may imagine a cutthroat businesswoman would.
It may seem strange to highlight the clothing from a film that was noted for skin. But when it comes to brazen fashion statements in film, “Beyond the Valley of the Dolls,” Russ Meyer’s sex-drenched sendup of the psychedelic era, is my happening and it freaks me out.
As a film, this kaleidoscopic sleaze fest, about a female rock trio trying to make it in free-love-era Los Angeles, is basically one big brown-acid trip. But the clothes! Thanks to the costume designer David Hayes, this was Austin Powers decades before Austin Powers, a runway show of Day-Glo minidresses, paisley ascots, patterned head scarves and proto-“Seinfeld” puffy shirts.
And while it’s safe to say that Mr. Meyer, the grindhouse king, had precisely zero artistic reasons for training his cameras on all those plunging necklines, the film does accidentally capture the unbridled sexuality that lurked beneath even the mainstream fashion of the day. Somehow, the clothed characters in the film look more louche than the naked ones.
