I am such a slow reader that once, while nursing twins, a thought arrived: I wished I could simultaneously read one book with my left eye, one with my right. Alas, my stereoscopic brain says no. In defiance I have seven or eight books going at once. Currently on my nightstand: “Freshwater,” by Akwaeke Emezi; “In the Distance,” by Hernán Diaz; the ghostly, wonderful “Riddance,” by Shelley Jackson; “Belly Up,” by Rita Bullwinkel; “There There,” by Tommy Orange; “The Deaths of Henry King,” by Jesse Ball and Brian Evenson, with illustrations by Lilli Carré; and “Severance,” the astonishing, rollicking office building/apocalypse debut by Ling Ma.
Octavia E. Butler’s “Parable of the Sower.” Butler possessed a crystal ball.
Is there a classic novel you return to as a touchstone?
Faulkner’s “As I Lay Dying.” Never the same river twice, even if that river sweeps your mom’s dead body and your brother’s tools downstream each time you cross it.
“Shallow Water Dictionary: A Grounding in Estuary English,” by John R. Stilgoe. It both is and isn’t a dictionary. Like many of my favorite things, this book muddles water with language. Also, “Hunting Buttons in Vermont,” by Minnie Staples Davis. My sister-in-law found this gem at the Cobleigh Public Library in Lyndonville, Vt. It hadn’t been checked out since 1981 which is a shame. I found it riveting. It is the 1948 nonfiction account of a woman obsessed with antique buttons. She drives around the state, stopping at homesteads and farms, asking the old-timers if they have any buttons. Turns out, they do. Turns out, there are entire cosmos inside our micro histories. But you already knew that.
I love reading about cold places and huge snow storms. Is that a genre? David Grann’s New Yorker piece, “The White Darkness” about the polar explorer and Shackleton-nut Henry Worsley is a great example. I don’t tend to read books I’ve heard too much about in the media or, oddly, books that come widely recommended. I like a flawed book better, one with chipped teeth.
The protagonist of “The Seas” believes she is a mermaid, and much of your work flirts with magic or fairy tale themes. What other writers do you recommend along those lines?
“Magic” is a tricky word. It separates the unexplainable from our daily experience. Yet eyeballs, snowflakes, quantum physics and birth (along with many other things) are magic and habitual. I prefer the word “science.” I like to write about wonder found in the ordinary. So the protagonist of “The Seas” believes she’s a mermaid because growing from a girl’s body into womanhood, in a small town where everyone is watching (and often drunk), is to know how it feels to be slimy, foreign, desired, detested, a deep sea bottom dweller. I love authors who point out mystery but don’t need to solve it, authors who dip their toes in the unexplainable. I teach a ghost story course at Pratt Institute and recommend all its readings: Maggie Nelson’s “Jane: A Murder,” Kelly Link’s “The Summer People”, Toni Morrison’s “Beloved,” Ryunosuke Akutagawa, Cristina Rivera Garza, Amparo Dávila, Mary Shelley, Mariana Enriquez, George Saunders and W. G. Sebald.
Poorly. Mostly on the floor, couches or table tops. I have one large bookcase that is alphabetized but really that shelf is for the books I’m done with. It’s more of a morgue. The active books I spread around the house for using. I do have one shelf that is organized, a section I hope will never be required reading. Soon after the last presidential election I assembled these books with my ladies book club. It is the Apocalypse Library. In it you’d find “A Woman’s Book of Herbs,” by Deb Soule, “Edible Wild Plants,” by John Kallas, “Woman Who Glows in the Dark,” by Elena Avila, “The Good Life,” by Helen and Scott Nearing, and “The Anarchist Cookbook,” by William Powell, among others. I enjoy all these books. I just hope I’ll never need them to survive.
“Beekeeping for Dummies,” because I’ve often said how much I hate the title of this series. Why would I purchase a book that calls me a dummy? I’m not a dummy. That said, “Beekeeping for Dummies,” is a very good read authored by a master, Howland Blackiston.
I used to fall in love with the dead boys and girls because I like silent characters: Michael Furey, Bertha Mason, Ophelia, especially as Millais saw her, floating with flowers. Now, I’m more fond of the living, particularly Lyra and Will from Philip Pullman’s “His Dark Materials” series.
I am one of six children from a small, noisy house that has lots of books. Reading made silence. I did it all the time even if it was just a cereal box/shield placed in front of me on the kitchen table. I loved stories of the early pioneers, the hardships, delights and disaster narratives of homesteaders. Tasha Tudor’s “A Time to Keep.” Laura Ingalls Wilder, Jean Craighead George’s “My Side of the Mountain.” My parents were friends with Jean George. I remember her talking about camping in the Arctic and how her pee froze in a line before it hit the ground. Perhaps she exaggerated. It didn’t matter to me. I realized the power in making images sharp enough to bite.
Describe one book that made you who you are today.
Joseph T. Shipley’s “Dictionary of Word Origins” is loaded with words’ secret histories. This book makes one feel like a detective, a code-breaker revealing curious truths about language, i.e., “ravishing,” “rapture” and “rape” share a root. Shipley makes poetry with his definitions. “Bloody, See bless;” and this doozy, “boy, See alas.” Also, “The Quilts of Gee’s Bend.” When I saw how these Alabama artists created their own modernism with little contact from the world beyond their isolated community, it gave me confidence to trust the largeness of my local observations of humans and nature.
Sometimes I believe the conspiracy that says our current president can’t read. How else could a human make it to 72 never having shown compassion? If he can read, I’d assign this president a long work of fiction, perhaps Christina Stead’s “The Man Who Loved Children.” Having to dwell inside another human’s shoes for a good long stretch would be a solid first step to his understanding how small one life, his life, is and the compassion required to be a public servant. Has he ever even prepared a meal for another human? A long read would also keep him from meddling with the world for a few days or weeks.
What author living or dead would you most like to meet, and what would you like to know?
I’m shy about meeting my literary heroes. Once I drove an hour through a blizzard to hear a poet I loved. Six people showed up. I fully intended to talk to him. It would have been so easy but, when he was done, I slipped out the back! Still, for the time travel appeal, for the chance to understand history, I’d love to meet and chat with Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz, Phillis Wheatley or Mercy Otis Warren, to learn about their lives in the 17th and 18th centuries.
It’s as if you are asking me to choose a favorite child! Impossible, though I’ll say, in writing “Mr. Splitfoot” I came to better understand some of my writing obsessions: bodies, the land of the dead, wonderment, the cold, mental illness, caring for others, mothering and decay.
My daughters have written some great books. One of my favorites is called “Pablo and the Lesbians,” a rousing tale of a dog named Pablo who goes to the cemetery to get his dead dad back. As authors, my girls find the absurd in both sorrow and joy. I like that.
“The Art of Flight,” by Sergio Pitol, and “Dead Girls,” by Alice Bolin.