The Learning Network|Summer Reading Contest, Week 3: What Interested You Most in The Times This Week?
Summer Reading Contest, Week 3: What Interested You Most in The Times This Week?
Update, July 17: Winners have been announced!
Welcome to Week Three of our Ninth Annual Summer Reading Contest.
What should you choose? Well, as you know from the rules we’ve posted, you can pick anything published on NYTimes.com in 2018, including articles, essays, Op-Eds, videos, photos, podcasts or infographics.
For example, this week you may have read front-page news articles like ...
Justice Anthony Kennedy announced his retirement, effective July 31. Justice Kennedy’s greatest judicial legacy was his championship of gay rights. He wrote every major gay rights decision, including one called Obergefell, which established a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, and it will be what he is most remembered for. Justice Kennedy was a moderate conservative; voted more often with the court’s conservative wing; was the author of Citizens United, which amplified the role of money in politics; cast a vote with the five-justice majority in Bush v. Gore in 2000, which handed the presidency to President George W. Bush — “I George Walker Bush, do solemnly swear.” — joined the five-justice majority in District of Columbia against Heller, which revolutionized Second Amendment law and established a personal right to keep and bear arms. He was often prepared to cut back on the death penalty, whether it involved people with intellectual disabilities, people who committed crimes when they were younger than 18 or people who committed crimes other than murder. He joined the controlling opinion and in a 1992 decision, Planned Parenthood against Casey, which re-established and saved Roe v. Wade, the decision that guarantees a constitutional right to abortion. And in recent years, he has joined the court’s liberals in cases on affirmative action and abortion. And those cases in which Justice Kennedy joined the court’s four more liberal members are almost certainly at risk if President Trump appoints a conservative to the court.
Migration to Europe Is DownSharply. So Is It Still a ‘Crisis’?
Or, maybe you discovered articles in the other sections like...
Confused About Blockchains? Here’s What You Need to Know.
If photos, videos or podcasts are more your style, maybe these got your attention...
Or, maybe you came across something interesting in the Opinion section, like...
• We’ll post this question each Friday from today through Aug. 17, and you’ll have until the next Friday morning to respond with your picks. Then we’ll close that post and open a new one with the same question.
• We’ll choose at least one favorite answer to feature on our site each week. Winners from this week will be announced on July 17.
• The contest is open to students ages 13 to 19 from anywhere in the world.
