D.A. King, the head of an Atlanta-area group that opposes illegal immigration, heard word of Justice Anthony M. Kennedy’s retirement while vacationing on St. Simons Island, off the Georgia coast. He was elated thinking of the conservative who might replace him.
Kristen Clarke, a civil rights lawyer, heard the news on the radio not far from the Supreme Court itself, as she was driving to a Capitol Hill hearing about the Voting Rights Act. She figured her job defending voting rights was about to become much more of a challenge.
It is not exactly shocking when an 81-year-old man decides to retire after 30 years on the job. And yet, Justice Kennedy’s announcement this week still managed to deliver a powerful jolt to the nation. His departure comes at a fragile time for the country, as a first-term president has vigorously assumed the role of disrupter-in-chief. President Trump said he wanted to pick a jurist who could serve at least 40 years on the court, potentially cementing the president’s impact on the country for generations.
Justice Kennedy, a centrist swing vote, is likely to be replaced by a reliable conservative, tipping the institution decidedly rightward. For many conservatives, this amounts to a kind of judicial grand prize, one that outweighs any concerns about Mr. Trump’s departures from conservative orthodoxy.
For many liberals, the departure was almost too much to bear, particularly after a month in which they were disappointed by Supreme Court rulings that, among other things, narrowly upheld Mr. Trump’s travel ban, curtailed union power, and let stand a plan to purge state voter rolls in Ohio.
“We are so much more screwed today than we were yesterday, and we were pretty screwed yesterday,” said Monica Russo, a 41-year-old stay at home mother on Long Island, who had just put her daughter down for a nap when she saw the news on Twitter.
Coming on the heels of Tuesday’s decision upholding the travel ban, Ms. Russo felt overwhelmed.
Americans of all political persuasions are now bracing for what is likely to be an incendiary confirmation battle, and pondering what effect a newly constituted court will have on longstanding issues, like abortion, and more recent controversies, like immigration, that Mr. Trump has stoked.
Mr. King, eagerly awaiting who will move into Mr. Kennedy’s office, is a well-known and influential activist in Georgia whose flavor of anti-illegal immigrant activism prefigured that of Mr. Trump: He is president of a group called The Dustin Inman Society, named for a teenage boy killed in 2000 in a wreck with an undocumented immigrant driver.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy’s last Supreme Court term contained hints of his retirement and foreshadowed a lasting rightward shift.
Ms. Nava, who now lives in Albuquerque and runs a nonprofit aimed at enhancing education opportunities for children, said the fear undocumented immigrants live in extends even to people who, like her, have recently become legal residents.
Mr. Trump may have once called himself “very pro-choice,” but in the lead-up to the 2016 general election, he promised to appoint justices who would overturn Roe v. Wade.
Still, the idea that the abortion rights case would ever fall had long seemed like a distant possibility to Ms. Mahle, 47, a program director at a North Carolina community college. A devoted Christian, she said that in 1998, she and her husband adopted a 12-year-old boy who she is thankful was not aborted when his biological mother became pregnant as a teenager.
Diane Derzis, the owner of the sole abortion clinic in Mississippi, anticipated the next court veering away from Roe. “There’s no question,” Ms. Derzis said, her voice full of frustration. Abortion would be severely restricted “within a year,” she predicted.
“And how many well-educated people have looked me in the eye and said that that cannot happen? Well, now our No. 5 is leaving,” she said, referring to Justice Kennedy, who earned a reputation as the court’s “firewall” for abortion rights.
Earlier this year, Gov. Phil Bryant of Mississippi, a Republican, signed into law a measure that would ban almost all abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy, but Ms. Derzis’s clinic sued in federal court and blocked the law’s implementation.
Justice Kennedy, who was appointed by President Ronald Reagan in 1988, has disappointed liberals over the years with his decisions as much as he has heartened them. But there is a sense on the left that things are about to change, and for the worse.
The swing vote in many decisions, Justice Anthony M. Kennedy shifted toward more conservative opinions in the final months of his 30-year justice tenure.
Though liberals see Mr. Kennedy’s record on protections for ethnic and religious minorities in a mixed light, they have almost universally applauded his legacy on gay rights. His official opinions on high-profile cases like Lawrence v. Texas in 2003 and Obergefell v. Hodges in 2015, to name just a few, are fundamental pillars in the framework of legal protections afforded to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people in the United States today.
But in the divided nation there was also extreme relief. Paul Donahue, 53, is a financial adviser and part-owner of the Centennial Gun Club outside of Denver. He is a former mayor of Castle Rock, Colo., and has been a vocal supporter of gun rights.
On Wednesday afternoon, Mr. Donahue said that he was thrilled to hear that the president would have a chance to appoint another justice, and that he was looking for “someone who is more of constitutionalist” to fill the slot.
But it wasn’t just gun rights he wanted the next justice to protect — it was everything he saw as under threat by justices appointed in the Obama administration who have ended up “ruling in accordance with their feelings or emotions.” Those rights, he said, include freedom of speech and freedom of religion.
