Stephanie Miner, the former mayor of Syracuse and a former top official in the New York Democratic Party, is kicking off an independent run for governor, the latest surprise twist in Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s bid for re-election.
Ms. Miner, once an ally of Mr. Cuomo’s, became something of an outlier in Democratic circles when she emerged as a vocal and persistent critic of the governor and his policies, beginning five years ago and culminating now in a direct challenge as he seeks a third term.
“I cannot be a silent witness to what I think is a corrupt political culture that is hurting real people every day,” Ms. Miner said in an interview announcing her run.
Her entry adds intrigue to a governor’s race already rife with it. Polls show Mr. Cuomo with comfortable leads over Cynthia Nixon, the actress and education activist, in the Democratic primary and Marcus J. Molinaro, the Dutchess County executive and the expected Republican nominee, in a general election matchup.
But the governor may now face a four-way race in November — an unruly and unpredictable scenario that could provide an opening for Republicans.
Ms. Miner, a registered Democrat, said she had been approached in recent months about running with the Democratic Party, the Reform Party, the Working Families Party and even the Republican Party. Ultimately, she said she decided to take advantage of New York election laws allowing candidates to create their own political party by gathering signatures of supporters.
“Our political process is broken and we need to change it from outside the system,” Ms. Miner declared.
She called her candidacy a “rebuke of Andrew Cuomo’s policies and a rebuke of where we are as a state,” ticking off in an interview the fact that the former speaker of the State Assembly, the former leaders of the State Senate and Mr. Cuomo’s “right-hand guy,” Joseph Percoco, have all been convicted in federal corruption trials in recent years.
Ms. Miner plans to run under the banner of an upstart new group, the Serve America Movement, which calls itself SAM, formed by people disaffected by the existing party structure after the 2016 elections. She will be the group’s first candidate.
“Stephanie is, from our perspective, the vanguard, the pioneer, the first one to go,” said Scott Muller, a leader of SAM and a former general counsel of the C.I.A. He said the plan is for Ms. Miner to petition to create a SAM Party in New York, with the eventual goal of a national party presence.
Mr. Molinaro issued a statement welcoming Ms. Miner into the race. “This is now a four-way contest,” he declared.
Ms. Nixon said that she and Ms. Miner were running different races. “She’s more of a moderate and I’m definitely a part of the progressive wing of the Democratic Party,” Ms. Nixon said. Mr. Cuomo’s campaign declined to comment.
For months, Ms. Miner has publicly flirted with running for governor, though few political insiders seemed to take her particularly seriously, given Mr. Cuomo’s strength as a two-term incumbent and Ms. Miner’s previous dalliance with a potential run for Congress.
Throughout, Ms. Miner has said that her decision would not be affected by Ms. Nixon’s run. But Ms. Nixon and Ms. Miner met privately this year, before Ms. Nixon announced her bid, when they and their spouses shared a meal in Syracuse, according to two people familiar with the meeting.
Ms. Miner acknowledged that she faces a steep path. Last August, a Siena College poll showed Mr. Cuomo beating her even in her hometown in a hypothetical Democratic primary, 47 percent to 38 percent.
She has a little more than $200,000 in leftover campaign cash from her eight years as mayor and, although she opened a state committee two months ago, she said she had not begun actively raising money for her bid for governor. Mr. Cuomo had more than $30 million in the bank as of January and has been aggressively fund-raising in recent months.
“If this were just about personal ambition, there would have been a lot easier ways for me to do that,” she said.
Ms. Miner dismissed the idea that she could play spoiler for Mr. Cuomo, possibly throwing the office to a Republican. “The status quo needs to be spoiled and ended,” she said.
Ms. Miner got her start in politics as a regional representative for Mr. Cuomo’s father, Mario M. Cuomo, the former governor. The younger Mr. Cuomo appointed her a chairwoman of the State Democratic Party in his first term, but by 2013 the two had begun to clash over the governor’s more austere approach to helping struggling municipalities: Instead of providing cash aid, the governor allowed for more borrowing.
Ms. Miner called it an “accounting gimmick” in a New York Times Op-Ed that rankled a governor known to value loyalty, especially among those, like Ms. Miner, whom he had elevated to a position of power.
In the current governor’s race, Ms. Miner is likely to amplify many of the same criticisms that Mr. Cuomo’s other rivals are airing. In the interview, Ms. Miner took particular aim at Mr. Cuomo’s ethics, his economic development record upstate and the worsening woes of New York City’s subway system. All are topics that Ms. Nixon has made central in her primary challenge.
She is being guided by a tight circle, including Sherman Jewett, who will serve as her campaign manager; a consultant, Stephanie Junger-Moat, who will serve as her campaign’s executive director; and a digital team.
Joe Rose, a former city planning official under former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York as well as a former aide to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, said he had been in touch with Ms. Miner as she has considered a run in recent months and had committed to help raise money for her.
Mr. Muller, a former partner in the Davis Polk & Wardwell law firm, said members of the Serve America Movement would help financially, as well. The group first met with Ms. Miner about six weeks ago.
“It’s going to be a ride,” he said of the race.