The United States Open is changing its approach to seeding players coming back from pregnancy after tennis officials were criticized for their handling of Serena Williams upon her return to the French Open last month.
Katrina Adams, the president and chairwoman of the United States Tennis Association, said players coming back from pregnancy should not be “penalized” for starting a family.
“It’s the right thing to do for these mothers that are coming back,” Adams said in a telephone interview on Friday.
The decision could have a ripple effect on other tennis tournaments. The French Open did not grant Williams a seed, but Wimbledon, which begins on July 2, has traditionally been the only Grand Slam tournament to consider factors beyond a player’s ranking in its seeding process.
Wimbledon will announce its seedings for this year’s tournament on Wednesday and could give Williams a seed, perhaps in the top eight. She is currently ranked No. 183 in the world, but has won the Wimbledon singles title seven times.
Under current Women’s Tennis Association rules, players who have lost ranking slots after missing time, because of injury, pregnancy or other reasons, do not get the benefit of a protected seeding at tour events, making it more difficult for them to negotiate their way through the draw.
In the wake of Williams’s return to tennis this year, the WTA received criticism for not making seeding allowances specifically for pregnancy. The organization said it would reconsider its position. But the U.S. Open will not wait and, like Wimbledon and the two other major events, it has the authority under Grand Slam rules to make such changes.
Seedings are intended to help the best players make it into the later rounds of a tournament by preventing them from facing one another in the first few rounds. But if one player is granted a seed outside of ranking order, then another will lose hers, and that is why there is some resistance to protected seedings.
Adams said she believed that forcing a player to come back from pregnancy at a lower position than when she left would be like asking a top executive to return from pregnancy leave at an entry level position in her company.
Citing Williams and another former No. 1 player, Victoria Azarenka, who had a son in 2016, Adams noted the challenges for women returning to the tour from pregnancy. But she said the U.S. Open had long made structural adjustments that reflected social change. She added that the tournament, which is owned by the U.S.T.A., has a history of leading, especially in gender equality.
Adams said that with the policy now in place, it will benefit all players who are considering starting a family.
But some disagree. Barbora Strycova of the Czech Republic, who is ranked No. 24, said a woman returning from pregnancy did not deserve special treatment.
When a player outside the rankings is granted a seed, it not only hurts the No. 32 player — who would theoretically be pushed out of the seedings — but also could force the No. 8 and No. 16 players to be bumped from those coveted slots, too.
The WTA does offer ranking protection to help players get into tournaments. Williams, who has six U.S. Open titles, was ranked No. 1 at the time she stopped playing, after winning the Australian Open in January 2017. Her ranking fell to No. 491 because of inactivity, but she is able to use a protected ranking to enter up to eight tournaments a year. She can also be invited to participate through wild cards, which are given out by individual tournaments.
Williams, 36, endured severe complications during labor and has not yet reached peak fitness and precision on the court. She has played three tournaments since returning to tour in March. But she had to drop out of the French Open with a pectoral injury after she won her first three matches there, two of them against seeded players (No. 17 Ash Barty in the second round and No. 11 Julia Görges in the third).
At the event in Indian Wells, Calif., in March, Williams lost in the third round to her sister Venus, who was seeded eighth. At the Miami Open later that month, Williams lost in the first round to Naomi Osaka, who was ranked No. 22 at the time. Had Williams been seeded, she most likely would have faced a less talented player that day.
