Judge Richard J. Leon of the Federal District Court of the District of Columbia ruled decisively in favor of AT&T on Tuesday, rejecting the Justice Department’s argument that the deal would hurt consumers.
But as in any fight, there are winners and losers — and not all of them were present in the courtroom. Here’s our tally of who’s affected by the ruling.
Time Warner shareholders, obviously. The value of AT&T’s cash-and-stock offer has fallen by about $5 billion since it was first announced in 2016, because of a drop in AT&T’s stock price (more on that below). But the deal going ahead is still a huge win for Time Warner shareholders.
Rupert Murdoch (and other Fox shareholders). With the court ruling that a pay-TV provider can legally buy a content producer, expect an emboldened Comcast to unveil a new takeover bid for most of 21st Century Fox. The offer will almost certainly be significantly higher than what the Walt Disney Company has offered, which could mean Mr. Murdoch and his fellow investors enjoy a bidding war over their holdings.
T-Mobile and Sprint. The decisive defeat of the Justice Department’s biggest antitrust case in years could make the government more gun-shy about challenging big mergers. That can only make the two wireless service providers feel more confident about their $26.5 billion deal to join forces.
Shari Redstone. She has (twice) unsuccessfully sought to merge CBS and Viacom, the two media companies that her family controls. Her hope is reported to be a sale of the combined business somewhere down the road. Tuesday’s ruling widens the pool of potential bidders for that speculative company.
M.&A. bankers and lawyers. As media and telecom companies begin to feel more confident about buying rivals based on Tuesday’s news, the deal makers who enable acquisitions will enjoy huge paydays. Financial advisory fees for AT&T’s bankers alone were estimated to be between $90 million and $120 million, according to the consulting firm Freeman & Company. Fees for Time Warner’s bankers were estimated to be between $110 million and $140 million.
The law. Many experts thought that the Justice Department’s AT&T case departed from how regulators traditionally analyzed the harmful effects of mergers. (Some have speculated that the lawsuit was rooted in political, not legal, reasoning.) Andrew Ross Sorkin called the effort “a case that never should have been brought.” The verdict is a victory for the established antitrust law — though our colleague Jim Stewart thinks we might need to rethink that.
The Justice Department. The AT&T case was the most significant challenge that the department had made against a merger in a long time. Its failure — Judge Leon brutally undercut the basis of the government’s case in his 172-page opinion — may make the antitrust team more cautious about picking fights in the future.
Disney shareholders: The media giant’s stock price fell 1.7 percent in after-hours trading on Tuesday. Why? Because the company will now almost certainly have to either get into a bidding war with Comcast over Fox’s assets — or else walk away from the table altogether. All signs at the moment point to a fight.
Comcast shareholders. The TV provider may be planning to beat Disney’s bid for Fox’s assets, but not everyone is happy about it. Brian Roberts, Comcast’s chief executive, thinks of the Fox businesses as must-haves, but his shareholders don’t necessarily agree — and there’s little that they can do to stop him. The cable titan’s shares fell 3 percent after the AT&T ruling came out.
AT&T. The company got the deal that it wanted. But its shares fell 4.5 percent in after-hours trading on Tuesday. Why? Investors are perhaps fearing that it may be overpaying to enter the media industry, while its core businesses are slowly shrinking. In a research note issued on Wednesday, the analyst Craig Moffett, of the research firm MoffettNathanson, downgraded AT&T’s shares to “sell.” He said that “Time Warner is but a small bucket with which one might bail out a sinking ship.” Ouch.
