PARIS — In December 1926, the young Alberto Giacometti moved into a small rented studio at 46, rue Hippolyte-Maindron, in the 14th Arrondissement of Paris. In that tiny ground-floor space, less than 300 square feet, poorly lit and for decades without running water, he produced masterpieces of modern art.
After Giacometti died at age 64 in 1966, his studio was repossessed by the landlord, but not before Annette, his wife, had removed all of its contents including the studio’s paint- and plaster-splattered walls.
Now, about 52 years after the death of the artist, that studio is getting a permanent new home.
When the Giacometti Institute opens its doors on June 21, the reconstituted atelier will be the centerpiece of the site’s exhibition space, which the Fondation Alberto et Annette Giacometti plans to use as a vitrine for its collection of the artist’s works.
This year is one of renewed interest in the artist’s talent and contributions, coming on the heels of a major Giacometti retrospective last summer at the Tate Modern in London. Through Sept. 2 at Fondation Beyeler in Basel, Switzerland, a major exhibition titled “Bacon-Giacometti” is drawing a parallel between the artist and the Irish painter Francis Bacon, two giants of the art market.
“The connection between the two artists is not stylistic; it is in their mutual obsession with the human form, the portrait, the pictorial space and their opposition to abstraction,” Sam Keller, the director of Fondation Beyeler, said at the show’s opening in April.
Another blockbuster show, through Sept. 12 at the Guggenheim in New York, explores the museum’s historical relationship with the artist. In 1955, the Guggenheim had been one of the first museums to present, in a temporary location, a show of Giacometti’s work, followed by another in 1974, nearly a decade after the artist’s death.
“Though Giacometti had lived in Paris for 30 years, recognition for his work first came from abroad, and particularly from the U.S., where most of his important collectors were,” Ms. Grenier wrote in “Alberto Giacometti,” her biography of the artist.
The foundation’s extraordinary collection of Giacometti’s work, the world’s largest, includes around 350 mostly plaster sculptures, 90 paintings, more than 2,000 drawings and etchings, about 2,000 photographs, and extensive archives, all of which Giacometti had managed to keep in his studio and in a small storage space nearby.
For the first time, the public will see many fragile or previously damaged pieces, including a painted plaster version of the delicate and stringy “Femme Assise” (“Seated Woman”), to be exhibited behind glass.
The institute will also make its archives available to researchers interested in exploring themes around what Ms. Grenier called “the School of Modernities,” namely the movements of the early 20th century that made Paris so attractive to foreign artists like Giacometti, who was Swiss, but also Picasso, Modigliani and Brancusi, many of whom lived in the same Montparnasse neighborhood.
About a mile from the original studio, the institute will occupy 3,770 square feet on the ground level and first floor of an Art Deco building at 5, rue Victor Schoelcher, in Montparnasse. Just down the street is the Fondation Cartier Pour l’Art Contemporain, a private art center owned by the famed Parisian jeweler. Over the opposite wall is the Montparnasse Cemetery, where a number of Giacometti’s friends, including de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre, who share a tomb, are buried.
Before the foundation acquired the site, the institute space was the showroom of the French decorator Paul Follot, a figure of the Art Deco movement. Unused and rundown since the end of World War II, it was renovated by the French architects Pascal Grasso and Pierre-Antoine Gatier.
The building’s facade and parts of its interior were protected by historic status, “which made it challenging to create public access without altering the original structure,” Mr. Grasso said.
To finance the 4.5 million euros (about $5.3 million) necessary to purchase and outfit the space, the foundation sold a 1954 Joan Miró painting titled “Peinture,” given by the artist to Giacometti. It sold for $12.2 million at a Sotheby’s auction in London in 2015.
In the fall, the institute will show new pieces by the French conceptual artist Annette Messager that reference Giacometti’s work, to be followed by a show of works by the German photographer Peter Lindbergh, shot in the storage areas of the foundation.
“We will continue to explore the echoes of Giacometti’s influence in the work of contemporary artists,” Ms. Grenier said.