A new version of the 1040 income tax form, set for release this week, omits some popular deductions and requires several worksheets for many taxpayers to complete.
The Trump administration’s new “postcard” tax form still must be mailed in an envelope, unless you want your neighbors to see your Social Security number. It will save a little bit of time for some taxpayers but could add pages more paperwork for millions of others.
A draft copy of the new version of the standard 1040 income tax form, obtained by The New York Times, shows the administration has succeeded in its goal of shrinking the form that most Americans send to the Internal Revenue Service every year. The new form eliminates more than half of the 78 line items from the previous form, reducing it from two full pages of text to one double-sided half page.
Smaller is not necessarily simpler. The new form omits a variety of popular deductions, including those for student loan interest and teaching supplies, forcing taxpayers to search for them — and tally them up — on one of six accompanying worksheets.
This line sends you to a worksheet with 11 possible deductions to tally, including student loans and teaching supplies.
It does the same for business income, capital gains and several other forms of income. It includes a dedicated line for the expanded child tax credit, but not one for child care expenses.
This line sends you to a work sheet that includes several other credits, such as child care expenses and a retirement savings contributions credit (which then requires you to attach another form).
The new form could make things more complicated for the I.R.S., which suffered a critical malfunction on the deadline day for filing tax returns this year. More than 90 percent of taxpayers currently file their taxes electronically, which is actually a boon to the agency, because paper returns are more difficult to process. If the new form reverses that trend and persuades more Americans to mail in their taxes, it could overwhelm an already stressed system.
An I.R.S. spokesman did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the draft 1040 form on Monday afternoon.
