 She was 90.
Her death was announced on her Twitter account. No other details were provided.
Ms. Gayson repeated the role in “From Russia With Love” (1963), but the character was cut from subsequent movies after filmmakers decided to introduce a new “Bond girl” in every film.
After appearing in the Bond films, she acted in television shows, among them two 1960s spy series, “The Saint” (which starred a future James Bond, Roger Moore) and “The Avengers.” She remained a fixture in London theater. Among other productions, she appeared in the comedy “The Grass Is Greener” in 1971 and, in the early ’90s, in Stephen Sondheim’s “Into the Woods” as the grandmother.
But it was as Sylvia Trench that she will no doubt be best remembered. In Ms. Gayson’s first scene with Mr. Connery, Bond sees her across the green felt-covered table clad in a crimson off-the-shoulder gown and asks her her name.
It would become the movie franchise’s signature line.
Movie viewers did not hear Ms. Gayson’s voice, however. Her lines were dubbed over by Nikki van der Zyl, a voice artist and dialogue coach who worked on several of the Bond films.
Ms. Gayson was a reality television star before reality television became its own genre of entertainment.
In 1953, she married the producer and journalist Leigh Vance on the CBS television show “Bride and Groom,” sponsored by Betty Crocker. The couple were flown to New York for the wedding, and it was chronicled in London’s newspapers. Critics, though, panned the show. The wedding was described in Billboard magazine as an example of bad taste that could “end the British way of life.” The couple divorced in 1959.
Ms. Gayson was born on March 17, 1928, in Surrey, England, the daughter of Maria and John Sargaison, a civil servant.
She married the actor Brian Jackson in 1968. That marriage also ended in divorce, a decade later. They had a daughter, Kate, who appeared in “GoldenEye” (1995), a James Bond movie starring Pierce Brosnan.
In the wake of the #MeToo movement, Danny Boyle, who will direct the latest installment of the Bond franchise, said the movie would reflect the changing attitudes toward women and sexual harassment.
 In March, Mr. Boyle said writers would acknowledge James Bond’s history and legacy. “But you also write in the modern world as well,” he said.