MYKONOS, Greece — The other day at the newly opened Lohan Beach House, families played on the beach alongside topless women alongside the religiously covered up, while a shirtless and ripped Romanian man with several teardrops tattooed on his face and the image of a person doing cocaine inked on his abs danced near the bar. None of these people who had paid dozens of euros to recline on a thick Lohan-branded towel harassed, or even seemed to notice, Lindsay Lohan herself, in a red swimsuit and her trusty red baseball hat with the word “RUSSIA,” who had just taken a seat directly oceanside.
Parked along a healthy stretch of the Kalo Livadi beach, the beach club, which includes a restaurant, a bar and a football field’s worth of sand, is a serene sprawl of wood decks, lush canopies and overstuffed chaise longues. On the lazy, winding ride there — all of the cabs in Mykonos seem to cost 35 euros and arrive no sooner than 30 minutes after they’re called — the driver described the club as a genuine island success.
Among his passengers, he said, the destination is approaching the popularity of even the vaunted Nammos beach club, despite having opened only a few weeks ago, with a marketing campaign apparently limited to a recycled clip from a 2011 film the artist Richard Phillips made of Ms. Lohan swimming in a pool.
Ms. Lohan’s assistant Nichola is a tall blond woman who wouldn’t be out of place on the set of “Westworld.” She had confused Ms. Lohan’s 6 p.m. interview with The New York Times with another interview, scheduled for the same day, with The Sunday Times, a British newspaper. And that appointment had already been postponed, Nichola said, because Ms. Lohan had a cold.
Still, Ms. Lohan eventually agreed to speak.
Ms. Lohan said this mix of a clientele is by design, in part because most of the island hot spots cater to the sunset crowd. That leaves her beachside club almost the entire day to entertain the diurnal, even if that’s the only trait some of her patrons have in common.
Ms. Lohan betrayed no trace of the European-tinged accent she has exhibited in past interviews, and she was excited to talk about the Lohan brand. After licensing her name last year to a club in Athens — she has since been bought out of that project, she said — she decided to strike again this summer, exercising the creative control she felt she lacked in Athens. This time, her partners are opting to remain silent.
So she designed the Mykonos club down to its playlists, she said, which skew toward Top 40 with a healthy serving of deep house, culled in part just to show she can compete with Scorpios, a club down the coast.
Another Lohan club is scheduled to open soon, in Rhodes.
She said she is also working on plans to design a Lohan island in Dubai.
She also has a lawyer.com sponsorship, plans for a “Vanderpump Rules”-style reality show for MTV centered around the club, and a general outlook that, at this point, if Ms. Lohan can believe it, she can achieve it.
That place turned out to be Dubai, where unmarried women can still be arrested or deported for the crime of becoming pregnant. It’s also a place where intruding on privacy via photography can often be illegal, and Ms. Lohan feels protected enough there to leave the doors of her penthouse apartment unlocked.
That’s part of the reason she doesn’t see herself moving from Dubai anytime soon.
That also means she hasn’t been following the last year in America closely, where Donald Trump’s presidency and the #MeToo movement have transformed the country’s culture into something unrecognizable from the days when Mr. Trump held a position of power over only the contestants on “The Apprentice” and photographers made sport of shooting pictures up Ms. Lohan’s skirt as she got in and out of cars.
Just now, turning 32 at the beginning of July, and for the first time in her life, she says she feels safe.
As she said this, she noticed a steady stream of tears pouring from my left eye, which was directly in the line of the bright sun hanging behind her. I assured her this happens all the time; she silently pulled out a cup and a glass bottle of mineral water from a large ice bucket beside her and slid them across the table to me.
“I know who I am as a person,” Ms. Lohan said. And that still includes being an actress, even if she has grown uncomfortable with the publicity side of it.
“I don’t want any judgment on me. You know? My acting is good, my work is good, and I love work,” Ms. Lohan said. To that end, she has been quietly picking up projects; she recently filmed the British series “Sick Note,” and says she has several more roles planned, scattered around the world.
She also agrees with the numerology proposition that life can be divided into approximately 30-year cycles, a theory that dovetails with a chain of events she said was set into motion in the summer of her 30th birthday, which she celebrated on a nearby beach.
Her 30th birthday was also the day she defied fate to option Tina Seskis’s “The Honeymoon,” a psychological thriller that Ms. Lohan declined to spoil for me, saying only that she saw herself in one of the characters.
At the time, Ms. Lohan was staying with a host family in a small church in Greece, “because I wanted to be, like, with a family, alone.” She got a call from Ms. Seskis, who had seen a paparazzi picture of the actress reading her book. Ms. Seskis was phoning to apologize because she had already sold the rights.
“I said, ‘No no no! Let me buy it! Please, let me buy it! Let’s write it together,’” Ms. Lohan said. “She goes, ‘No, they want somebody else to write it.’ I said, ‘No, we’re going to write it.’” A year and a half later, they’re writing the script together, and when Ms. Seskis visits Greece this summer, Lohan wants to work with her on the same beach where it all began.
Despite Ms. Lohan’s new and relaxed lease on life, there was one arena in which she was inflexible: photos of her.
Nichola said Ms. Lohan could do a shoot the next day, around the same time The Sunday Times would get its rescheduled interview. Ms. Lohan would have had her hair and makeup done, “and we’ll make something work,” Nichola said.
But the next day, as reporter and photographer waited under the sun dappling the stained wooden deck through the sand-colored canopy, Nichola delivered some news: There would be no photo shoot unless Ms. Lohan, who was currently in Athens anyway, was paid for it.
It was a flicker of classic Lohan terror from the tabloid era. But it was also in line with her new ethos as a sophisticated international businesswoman. That first day, after I left her sitting on her oceanfront chaise, I spotted her filming two young women in black bikinis and rubber unicorn masks frolicking in the waves. She posted the video of them, geotagged to the club, on her Instagram story, to millions of followers. A few minutes later, I watched as she put down her phone, stood and walked directly down the beach and into the ocean, her shoulders perfectly squared, her hair falling in neat waves down the middle of her back. From under the canopy at the restaurant bar, it really did look just like a frame from the Richard Phillips video. The beach was hers.
Ms. Lohan dove under the water, the unicorn women rejoined their friends, a waiter carried a tray of Aperol spritzes off the deck and onto the beach, and the man with teardrops tattooed on his face swayed in bliss to the music. Ms. Lohan swam in even strokes away from the shore, and no one took any pictures.