306 pp. Nation Books. $27.
It’s one of our great cultural paradoxes that people hate being told what to do but love reading advice columns. Order me to tidy my work space and I’ll bristle. Show me an advice column about a disheveled co-worker and I’ll read it eagerly, with zero compulsion to apply its lessons to myself. Advice columns are always directed at some other slob (or jerk or wing nut). They are stages where the humble dramas of personhood play out in letters edited and condensed for clarity. They promise utility while providing, at their best, a creamy scoop of entertainment with a scant sprinkling of moral education on top.
The man who invented the advice column as we know it was John Dunton, a 17th-century London bookseller and publisher who was nicknamed “the maggot” by his contemporaries, thanks to his talent for getting under people’s skin. Dunton came up with the genius idea for a magazine made up of questions submitted by readers. He believed the magazine would be popular with “lovers of novelty,” which is to say every human on earth. To generate questions, Dunton promised anonymity to submitters. To generate answers, he formed a committee of “experts” (some guys he knew). His magazine’s first issue was published in 1691 and considered questions about the ethics of wife-beating and why there are spots on the moon. The magazine lasted six years and answered nearly 6,000 questions, many of them dirty.
Take Ann Landers and Dear Abby. Those columns were written by a pair of twins whose parents named them Esther Pauline and Pauline Esther, which establishes off the bat that good judgment isn’t hereditary. Initially the twins answered letters together under the Ann Landers name before Pauline went rogue and pitched her own advice column to The San Francisco Chronicle. That column became Dear Abby. For decades the sisters competed viciously, tracking the number of newspapers syndicating their columns and sniping publicly about one sister’s nose job and the other’s writing abilities. Isn’t it funny to think that decades of Americans relied for behavioral guidance on a single pair of unsportsmanlike twins with inverse names?
No funnier, I guess, than Benjamin Franklin dispensing wisdom in the voice of a shiftless fellow named Poor Richard whose (fictional) wife’s prodding spurred him to publish “Poor Richard’s Almanack.” In 1732, Franklin started churning out annual editions of the book, borrowing a conventional form and stuffing it with a mixture of decree and divine silliness, all while staying in character — the “Colbert Report” of its day, maybe. Franklin told readers never to lie to their doctors or lawyers and issued the aphorism “A full Belly is the Mother of all Evil,” a poetic alternative to Michael Pollan’s “Eat food, mostly plants, not too much.” Franklin understood that readers gobbled up advice as entertainment first and education second. He was fine with that.
Over the span of advice history, one type of question appears without fail. It can be summarized like this: “I suspect that I am weird. What should I do about it?” An old-fashioned advice-giver like Dorothy Dix, who started writing for The New Orleans Picayune in 1895, would instruct readers on how best to conceal their weirdness. An Ann Landers might prescribe one of several paths toward normalcy. A contemporary self-help guru like Martha Beck would tell readers to quit judging themselves and embrace the weirdness. That’s progress, right?