In the world of health care, PillPack, an online pharmacy, is a pretty small player. Its work force of 1,000 or so people pales in comparison with the 235,000 who work for Walgreens.
But when Amazon announced on Thursday that it was buying PillPack, the deal immediately shook the industry. Shares of Walgreens and Rite Aid tumbled more than 9 percent, while CVS Health dropped 6.6 percent.
That’s because with one move, Amazon answered the question about when — and how — it would grab a piece of the $560 billion prescription drug industry.
It was precisely the sort of deal that the health care industry had feared.
Amazon has been hinting at its interest in selling drugs, but it faced the problem of securing pharmacy licenses in each state. PillPack will help overcome that hurdle, since the start-up is licensed to ship drugs in 50 states — clearing the way for the e-commerce giant to quickly become a major player in the business.
And it will be doing so without much financial stress. Amazon, which has a market value of over $840 billion, is paying about $1 billion for the start-up, according to one person briefed on the deal, who was not authorized to speak about it publicly. Amazon beat out Walmart for the company, the person said.
Anxiety over what Amazon might do in health care has unsettled the industry. The company’s interest in drugs has been considered a factor in a wave of recently proposed mergers, including CVS’s acquisition of Aetna and a union between the health insurer Cigna and Express Scripts, the pharmacy benefit manager. Amazon’s entry could make it easier for some of those deals to get approval from regulators, by adding a new competitor.
PillPack, which started in 2013, distributes pills in easy-to-use packages designed for consumers with chronic conditions and multiple prescriptions. The company sorts prescriptions by the dose and includes a label with a picture of each pill and directions on how it should be taken.
TJ Parker, a pharmacist, and Elliot Cohen, an engineer, founded the start-up after meeting through a health care innovation program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The company’s primary pharmacy is in Manchester, N.H., but it also has numerous other pharmacies, including in Miami, Brooklyn and Austin, Tex. While it has licenses to deliver drugs in all 50 states, it does not now ship to Hawaii.
It has raised $118 million in funding, with investors including Accel Partners, Atlas Venture, CRV, Founder Collective, Menlo Ventures, Sherpa Ventures and Techstars.
PillPack is an online pharmacy that sorts customers’ medication by the dose.
“It’s a turnkey mail pharmacy operation,” Mr. Fein said.
In a call with investors on Thursday, Stefano Pessina, chief executive officer of Walgreens Boots Alliance, said he was not concerned about Amazon’s acquisition. He said the physical pharmacy would remain important to customers in the future.
“We are not complacent, we know we have to change the level of our services to the customers, and we are working in that direction, but we are not worried,” he said.
Independent online pharmacies have had a tough time because consumers who do buy their prescriptions through mail order are often required to do so by their insurance plans. Pharmacy benefit managers have traditionally offered employers and insurers incentives requiring that long-term prescriptions be filled through the managers’ own mail-order pharmacies.
But Mr. Buck and others said Amazon might have a new opportunity. A growing number of Americans are without health insurance or have such high deductibles that they may be better off bargain shopping on their own. He estimated that 25 million Americans fell into that category.
Until now, he said, PillPack has not aggressively competed on price. With Amazon in charge, “how about they start posting prices that are really, really aggressive?” Mr. Buck said.
In January, Amazon, Berkshire Hathaway and JPMorgan Chase announced plans to form an independent health care company for their employees in the United States, in what could become an incubator for new ideas. Last week, the companies said Dr. Atul Gawande, a Harvard surgeon and staff writer for The New Yorker, would become chief executive of the business.
Amazon has also pushed to expand its medical supplies business, seeking to become a major supplier for hospitals and outpatient clinics. It received wholesale pharmacy licenses from several states this year that permit it to start selling medical equipment to businesses. Its products could be used to supply operating and emergency rooms, along with outpatient locations.
The company previously tried to enter the pharmaceutical world in 1999 by purchasing 40 percent of Drugstore.com. However, it ran into logistical and regulatory challenges that ultimately derailed the effort.
John Sculley, a former chief executive of Apple and the chief marketing officer of RxAdvance, a pharmacy benefit manager, said PillPack was a natural choice for Amazon.
