WASHINGTON — For nearly a year, President Trump has been relentlessly attacking his handpicked attorney general for recusing himself from the Russia investigation that has so nettled him. And so in that sense, his tweet on Tuesday morning was simply the latest in a long string.
But what made this tweet so striking was that it encapsulated the essential contradictions of Mr. Trump’s arguments. In fewer than 280 characters, he acknowledged perhaps as explicitly as he ever has that the reason he is mad at Mr. Sessions is that the attorney general did not shut down the investigation into Mr. Trump’s campaign. To critics, that is all but an admission of obstruction of justice, or at least the desire to obstruct justice.
And yet according to the expansive legal theory advanced by his lawyers, Mr. Trump is singularly empowered to end the investigation himself. As the head of the executive branch, his lawyers say, nothing constrains the president from exercising his authority to determine how the Justice Department uses its investigative resources. By this rendering, Mr. Trump cannot obstruct justice even if he orders himself exonerated in the Russia matter.
So then why lay responsibility on Mr. Sessions? Because, it seems, he has become the president’s favorite whipping boy for not doing what Mr. Trump himself has so far not dared to do.
The president has been furious with Mr. Sessions over the recusal since the moment the attorney general stepped aside in March 2017, citing his own role in Mr. Trump’s campaign. At one point, the president even tried to pressure Mr. Sessions to reverse himself, only to be rebuffed.
Mr. Trump first publicly expressed his anger with Mr. Sessions over the recusal in an interview last July in which he said it was “very unfair to the president.” He has followed up with periodic barrages on Twitter and in other public comments ever since.
The implication of his attacks has been that he wanted a loyalist in charge of the Justice Department. But Tuesday’s tweet went further by making clear that he was counting on Mr. Sessions not just to run a fair investigation but to halt it altogether. Instead, his deputy attorney general, Rod J. Rosenstein, took over and appointed the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.
Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic minority leader, went to the floor of the Senate on Tuesday to cite the latest tweet as proof that Mr. Trump thinks he is above the law.
Still, even some scholars who are not on Mr. Trump’s payroll argue that the legal situation is not that clear-cut, even if the intent of Tuesday’s tweet was. The president, in this view, does not need to browbeat Mr. Sessions about ending the investigation when he could simply order it scuttled on his own.
But Mr. Goldsmith, who has been a critic of Mr. Trump’s, nonetheless said that the president had “the constitutional authority to supervise criminal investigations” and could fire Mr. Sessions for recusing himself. An honest and innocent president could still conclude that an investigation like this was so without merit and so damaging to foreign policy that it should be ended, not out of self-interest.
The Justice Department said it had no comment on the president’s latest tweet on Tuesday, and the White House declined to elaborate. “Look, the president’s made his position on this extremely clear and I don’t have anything to add beyond on that,” said Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary.
Mr. Sessions’s defenders, including both liberals and conservatives, said that under Justice Department guidelines he had no alternative but to recuse himself given his history as an adviser in Mr. Trump’s campaign.
“Jeff Sessions had no choice but to recuse himself,” Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, told reporters on Tuesday. “I don’t think there’s any lawyer in the country that would advise Jeff Sessions” not to. If anything, Mr. Graham added, Mr. Rosenstein might have to consider stepping aside, too.
Mr. Trump has not followed through on his threats to fire Mr. Sessions in part because the attorney general retains strong support among fellow Republicans in the Senate, where he served for 20 years. “As a former colleague of ours, I think he is very popular with our members, and I hope he’ll remain in the job,” Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican majority leader, said on Tuesday.
But Mr. Smith, the former aide to Mr. Sessions who is now a vice president at the R Street Institute, a free-market-oriented research organization, said the president had also shied away from firing the attorney general because Mr. Sessions is popular with the same conservative supporters that Mr. Trump needs to survive his many travails.
