The American fashion designer was found dead in her Manhattan apartment on June 5, 2018. Ms. Spade was known for her bold, colorful and classy aesthetic. She was 55.
Buying a Kate Spade handbag was a coming-of-age ritual for a generation of American women. The designer created an accessories empire that helped define the look of an era. The purses she made became a status symbol and a token of adulthood.
Ms. Spade, who was found dead on Tuesday in what police characterized as a suicide by hanging, worked as an editor before making the leap to designing, constructing her first sketches from paper and Scotch tape. She would come to attach her name to a bounty of products, and ideas: home goods and china and towels and so much else, all of it poised atop the thin line between accessibility and luxury.
One of the first of a wave of American women to emerge as contemporary designers in the 1990s, Ms. Spade built a brand on the appeal of clothes and accessories that made shoppers smile. She embodied her own aesthetic, with her proto-1960s bouffant, nerd glasses and playful grin. Beneath that image was a business mind that understood the opportunities in building a lifestyle brand, almost before the term officially existed.
Her name became shorthand for the cute, clever bags that were an instant hit with cosmopolitan women in the early stages of their careers and, later, young girls — status symbols of a more attainable, all-American sort than a Fendi clutch or Chanel bag. Ms. Spade became the very visible face of her brand and paved the way for female lifestyle designers like Tory Burch or Jenna Lyons of J. Crew.
“Kate Spade had an enviable gift for understanding exactly what women the world over wanted to carry,” Anna Wintour, the editor in chief of Vogue and artistic director of Condé Nast, said in a statement.
A police official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that a note found at the scene addressed to Ms. Spade’s 13-year-old daughter indicated that what had happened was not the child’s fault.
Andy Spade, her husband, later said that Ms. Spade had sought treatment for depression, adding that it had been severe at times. The couple had been living apart for 10 months but remained close, he said.
Katherine Noel Brosnahan was born in Kansas City, Mo., on Dec. 24, 1962. Her father worked in construction while her mother took care of her and her five siblings. She did not grow up obsessed with fashion — though she enjoyed combing through her mother’s jewelry drawer — and early in life thought about being a television producer.
While a student at Arizona State University, where she studied journalism, she worked in a motorcycle bar and a men’s clothing store. There, she met her husband-to-be, the brother of the actor and comedian David Spade. She graduated in 1985.
After graduation, Ms. Spade moved to New York, where she became an assistant fashion editor at Mademoiselle magazine. Within five years she was the accessories editor. While in that role, she became frustrated by the handbags of the era, which she found to be gaudy and over-accessorized. What she wanted was “a functional bag that was sophisticated and had some style,” she later told The New York Times. She founded Kate Spade with Mr. Spade and a friend, Elyce Arons, in 1993.
Joe Zee, the former creative director of Elle and former fashion director of W, met Ms. Spade before she had started her company.
“And as a kid starting out in fashion, that was something you remember especially when everything was so serious and all about deadlines and the pressure of perfection,” he added.
Ms. Spade did not know what to call the company at first and decided to make it a combination of her and Andy’s names. (The couple married in 1994.) After the first show, she realized that the bags needed a little something extra to catch people’s eyes. She took the label, which had originally been on the inside of the bag, and sewed it to the outside. With that gesture she created a brand identity and sowed the seeds of her empire.
Julie Gilhart, then the fashion director of Barneys New York, picked up the label for the department store in the early 1990s. It was a great success. “It was so fast-growing,” she said.
Within a few years they had opened a SoHo shop and were collecting industry awards: Given a rising-talent award by the Council of Fashion Designers of America in 1995, Ms. Spade was named its accessory designer of the year in 1997. She was named best accessories designer at the Accessories Council’s ACE Awards in 1999, the same year the Spades sold their shares of the company to the Neiman Marcus Group. The year before, it had $28 million in sales.
Approachability was her calling card, whether she was making bags, clothes (which her company later expanded into) or books.
The series of books they worked on together — little gift items issued in 2004 as guides to “Style,” “Manners” and “Occasions” — were a hit, selling hundreds of thousands of copies.
She and Mr. Spade understood “how to reach an audience without alienating a consumer,” Mr. Silverberg said.
“Katie’s from Kansas City — a quintessential American look and values personified everything they did,” he added.
The company the Spades founded changed hands over the years. Neiman Marcus Group sold it to Liz Claiborne Inc. in 2006. By 2017, when Kate Spade & Company (as Liz Claiborne Inc. came to be known) was acquired by Coach Inc., Mr. and Ms. Spade had left more than a decade earlier to devote themselves to other projects.
Ms. Spade’s husband and daughter, Frances Beatrix, are her immediate survivors.
Ms. Spade dedicated herself to philanthropy through the Kate Spade & Company Foundation, which promotes economic equality for women. In 2016, with her husband, Ms. Arons and Paola Venturi, a Kate Spade alumna, Ms. Spade launched a new venture, an accessories label called Frances Valentine. She was so committed to the project that she added Valentine to her name.
Mr. Zee said he had always admired Ms. Spade for being ahead of her time.
