An article last Sunday about the suspension of the Knicks’ Joakim Noah for violating the N.B.A.’s antidoping policy misstated the rule in the coming collective bargaining agreement on appealing suspensions related to performance-enhancing drugs. An N.B.A. player may contest a penalty if he can argue that, despite due diligence, he could not have known that he was using a forbidden substance; the standard is not whether a player can prove that he did not “intentionally violate” the antidoping policy.
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the free gear that college basketball teams receive misidentified the U.C.L.A. player shown in Adidas gear. He is T.J. Leaf, not Gyorgy Goloman.
An article last Sunday about the artist Erwin Wurm misidentified his nationality. He is Austrian, not Australian.
An article last Sunday about the choreographer Anna Halprin included an outdated age for Stephen Petronio. After the article had gone to press, he turned 61.
An article last Sunday about the composer Tony Conrad misstated Henry Rollins’s participation at a recent screening of “Tony Conrad: Completely in the Present” in Los Angeles. He moderated a post-screening conversation; Mr. Rollins did not introduce the film. (Joanne Heyler introduced it.) The article also referred incorrectly to one of several coming concerts to honor the anniversary of Mr. Conrad’s death. The musician MV Carbon will perform at a concert on April 9 at Le Poisson Rouge; she did not organize that event. In addition, the article misstated part of the name of a website started by the artist Cory Arcangel. It is “Music and the Mind of the World,” not “Music and the Mind and the World.” And a caption with the article misidentified the artist shown in a 1965 photograph of the Primitives. He is Walter DeMaria, not Angus MacLise.
Because of an editing error, a picture credit with an article about the artist Eduardo Kac misspelled the name of the photo source. It is Henrique Faria Fine Art, not Kenrique.
The Big City column on the cover in some editions this weekend, about new business and community efforts in Brownsville, Brooklyn, misstates the ages of participants in Made in Brownsville, a nonprofit that gives young people exposure to creative careers. They are 14 to 24 years old, not 18 to 24 years old.
An obituary last Sunday about Robin O’Hara, a producer of independent films, referred incorrectly in some copies to the Harmony Korine film “Gummo.” While Ms. O’Hara and Scott Macaulay helped produce that film, it was not produced by their company, Forensic Films.
An article on March 26 about Hawaii misstated the location of Sea Life Park. It is 15 miles east- not west- of Waikiki on the Kalanianaole Highway. The article also incorrectly referred to lava as magma. Once magma emerges from the earth, it is properly called lava.
An article on March 19 about the beer scene in San Diego referred imprecisely to the military development of San Diego after the bombing of Pearl Harbor. Naval operations in the city were expanded; the military did not open the first naval base there after the bombing.
Because of an editing error, a review last Sunday about Victor Lodato’s “Edgar and Lucy” misstated which of the novel’s characters fears that “happy children...were watched and waited for by a ruinous vengefulness.” She is the grandmother, FLorence, not the mother, Lucy.
A Maureen Dowd column on March 19 misspelled the given name of the chief news anchor for Fox News. He is Shepard Smith, not Shepherd.
