A Dickensian fog encircled Citi Field before the first pitch of the Mets’ game against the Atlanta Braves on Wednesday. For the Mets, who have stumbled in the opening month of a season that carried great expectations, the hazy conditions could have been perceived as an ominous sign of troubles to come.
Within minutes of the first pitch, the feeling of gloom only thickened. The Braves tagged Robert Gsellman for five runs in the first inning, and the listless Mets went on to lose their fifth straight game, 8-2.
The Mets (8-12) are four games under .500 for the first time since Sept. 28, 2014, the last day of that season. They have also dropped nine of their last 10 games and are 4-9 at home.
But the Braves were the ones flexing their offensive might on Wednesday. With Atlanta ahead, 2-0, in the first inning, catcher Tyler Flowers smacked a bases-clearing double to right field. In the fifth inning, Flowers added an R.B.I. single that chased Gsellman after 100 pitches.
Flowers’s four R.B.I. tied a career high, and Gsellman allowed career highs in earned runs (five) and hits (10).
Gsellman’s velocity fell steeply as the game unfolded. In the first inning, Gsellman touched 94 miles per hour with his two-seam fastball, but it had fallen to 89 by the fifth inning.
A revelation as a late-season call-up last August, Gsellman has fizzled out of the gate this season. In his final four starts of 2016, in the thick of the race for a National League wild-card spot, Gsellman allowed three runs over 24 innings. This season, Gsellman has a 6.23 earned run average and is winless in four starts. He struck out only two batters, his lowest total in 11 career starts.
“I’m just flying open, and the ball is running side to side instead of up and down,” Gsellman said of his first-inning troubles.
That Gsellman was even on the mound was surprising. After Tuesday’s series opener was postponed by rain, the Mets announced that Gsellman would be skipped in the rotation and Noah Syndergaard would start on Wednesday. The idea was that Gsellman would be used out of the bullpen until his next scheduled turn.
But the Mets changed their minds late Tuesday, Gsellman said, and instead just pushed each starter back one day as a result of the rainout.
Gsellman ran into trouble immediately, walking the game’s leadoff batter, Ender Inciarte, and allowing a single to Brandon Phillips.
With runners on the corners, Gsellman appeared to catch a break when Phillips overslid second on a stolen-base attempt and was tagged out. But Gsellman walked Freddie Freeman, setting up Matt Kemp to drive in Inciarte for the first run of the game.
After Nick Markakis singled to bring in Freeman, Adonis Garcia grounded a ball softly back to the mound, but Gsellman threw wide of first. That loaded the bases for Flowers, who jumped on the first pitch, a two-seamer over the heart of the plate.
It took Gsellman 36 pitches to get through the first inning. After doing so, he slowly walked toward the dugout, pulling his hat brim tightly down on his forehead, as if trying to hide himself from the worst inning of his career.
While the precise and effective version of Gsellman has gone missing, Braves starter Julio Teheran continued to torment the Mets, giving up two runs on four hits over six and one-third innings. Teheran entered Wednesday 3-0 with a 0.63 E.R.A. in his last six starts against the Mets.
One of the four hits the Mets collected off Teheran came from Yoenis Cespedes, who returned to the lineup for the first time since tweaking his hamstring last Thursday. Cespedes finished 1 for 4.
Travis d’Arnaud also started for the first time since injuring his hand in a game against the Philadelphia Phillies on Apr. 19, the last game the Mets won. D’Arnaud went 0 for 2 before leaving the game with Gsellman in the fifth inning as part of a double switch.
The Mets surely would have liked to have seen Gsellman last longer because of the lack of depth in their rotation. Before Wednesday’s game, Collins said pitchers Seth Lugo and Steven Matz had advanced to long-tossing from 120 feet without discomfort in their pitching elbows and would begin to throw off a mound in the coming days. Their returns are not expected to be imminent though, and the Mets can only hope Gsellman can return to his 2016 form much quicker.
Brandon Nimmo began a rehabilitation assignment with Class A Port St. Lucie on Wednesday, going 1 for 3 with two R.B.I. and three runs scored.