In “Feud,” it is the individual moments that shimmer with possibility, depth and complexity. When considering the series as a whole, however, something essential dissipates. There’s a lecturing, feminism 101 tone to some of it, unnecessary to the story of two powerhouse women fighting to survive in a business that turned away from them. Neither woman fits into the neatly labeled containers the series has laid out for them. This is not a fatal flaw because the acting is so good, the individual moments so illuminating. These moments won’t be shaken off. They linger in the mind.
Last week’s episode ended with Crawford and Mamacita’s arrival in Baton Rouge for the shoot of “Hush ... Hush, Sweet Charlotte,” only to find no one had come to pick them up at the airport. What might have been a simple oversight was perceived as unforgivably disrespectful by the already paranoid Crawford. This week’s episode, titled “Abandoned,” watches in almost horrified awe at Crawford’s attempts to gain not just the upper hand, but any hand at all in the filming process. Feeling surrounded by enemies, she decides to fight back the only way she knows how: by throwing her star power around and, ultimately, by attempting to torch the entire production. Historically, this was a catastrophic miscalculation on Crawford’s part, and it helped end her already-flailing career.
Helen Hunt, who directed the episode, beautifully sets up Crawford’s feeling of isolation on that set. From her bungalow, Crawford can see across the yard to Davis’s bungalow, where cast and crew gather nightly to get drunk and let off steam. While it is impossible to imagine the stately Miss Crawford whooping it up with the rest of them, Jessica Lange’s look of sorrow reveals how much it hurt not to be invited. As Crawford peers across the yard, she sees what appears to be Davis imitating Crawford’s first scene in “Charlotte,” as everyone present howls with laughter.
But then Hunt cuts away from Joan and into Davis’s bungalow, where we see that Davis had been trying to replicate Crawford’s entrance — a complicated business involving two purses, sunglasses, glove removal and tipping a cabby — and she couldn’t do it without fumbling. “How did she do that in one take?” Davis cries. What Crawford witnessed, then, was actually a huge compliment. This is subtle filmmaking, touching and sad.
A late-night scene between Davis and Crawford is a perfect example of the forced-binary structure of the narrative. Davis asks Crawford what it was like to be “the most beautiful girl in the world” and Crawford responds by asking what it was like to be the “most talented girl in the world.” Davis might not have built her career on her looks, but her looks were nothing to sneeze at (read Farran Smith Nehme’s essay for Film Comment on the subject), and Crawford was hugely talented by any measuring stick. It’s too simple to say that each wanted what the other had. As sensitively as Lange and Susan Sarandon play that scene, the real story was much more complex. In reality, Crawford struggled to find her footing as she grew older and as the studio system collapsed, while Davis adjusted, rolled with the punches.
What “Abandoned” bears witness to, then, is the moment when that 40-year love affair came to an end.