In the beginning, it was personal. I woke up one day and was confronted by a mystery. In my closet.
Suddenly, after almost five decades of short skirts — and a firm belief that long skirts were a relic of female oppression (all that material inhibiting movement) — I opened my closet door and discovered that over the last 12 months I had acquired not one but three long skirts and dresses. To wear during the day. How had this happened?
Well, O.K., I know how it literally happened — I opened my wallet and paid — but how had it happened internally? What switch had been flipped in my head to alter the thinking of 48 years? Had I, after decades of fighting them, become a sucker for a trend?
After all, as someone who spends a large part of her professional life immersed in the world of fashion fads, I generally try to avoid them for myself. Wearing blue when there is blue all over the runways, or florals, or what have you makes me feel like I’ve drunk too much of the Kool-Aid handed out during my twice-yearly perambulations to the shows. I tend to think it’s good to keep a respectable distance between what I wear and what I write. Yet clearly something was going on.
And not just with me. Suddenly, everywhere I looked there were women wearing longer hemlines, longer sleeves and higher necklines: on the red carpet, in the White House, from the Upper East Side to Williamsburg to the SoHos in both London and New York.
I went back through slide shows from the Oscars and street-style pictures. When two public figures as seemingly diametrically opposed as Rihanna and Melania Trump ended up on the same continuum (one that began with them in full pinup mode and ended with both in full cover), my critical hackles went up and the little hairs on the back of my neck started tingling. It was time to get out of my own head.
I talked to retailers about what their customers were buying — and whether this idea was supported by cash. Then trend forecasters, Hollywood stylists (whose clients set the tone publicly for so many) and designers. A consensus began to emerge that women were definitely opting for garments that shielded their bodies rather than exposed them. But what was interesting was the many different explanations. The glut of exposure was a big theme. Some people brought up reality TV. Some people brought up celebs and all the bodies on display. Some people mentioned the Burkini and the Hijab and the rise of the modest movement, and the way it thrust women’s right to wear what they wanted into the center of the conversation. Some people brought up next wave feminism.
All those strands together — pop culture and technology and social movements — were linked by the theme of women choosing their clothes according to their own needs, and added up to what seemed to me a major and probably meaningful change in fashion.
In the three years I’ve been at The Times, I’ve tracked a few different fashion shifts — most notably the rise of the athleisure movement — but I’ve never gone so far as to identify one that could potentially define a time period. Until now.
When big shifts in fashion thinking come, they are usually the result of big shifts taking place elsewhere. We often talk about what “feels right” for a specific era when we are talking about why we opt for one kind of outfit over another, which is a kind of a flabby, indeterminate way of saying that an outfit communicates, more precisely than any another, our current sense of self, and our place in the world. I think that’s what is happening now.
It’s hard to have perspective when you are in the middle of a change, and there are clearly lots of short skirts still around (I still wear them), but I do believe the balance of power has shifted and will continue to shift, in a way that will end up shaping our perception of this decade.
In the meantime, I will probably end up buying more long dresses. So may you.