LOS ANGELES — A federal lawsuit filed Tuesday accused the government of deporting an undocumented immigrant who had been allowed to remain in the country under an Obama-era program that President Trump promised to maintain.
Lawyers for the immigrant, Juan Manuel Montes, 23, who had been living in the United States since age 9, said he was the first recipient of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA, to be removed from the country.
On Wednesday, the Department of Homeland Security disputed the lawsuit’s account of Mr. Montes’s deportation, saying Mr. Montes had originally left the country on his own.
According to the complaint, filed in Federal District Court in Southern California, agents with Customs and Border Protection “arrested, detained and physically removed” Mr. Montes after stopping him while he was walking in the border town of Calexico, Calif., on Feb. 17.
Ms.  They denied his request to have a relative retrieve them, she said.
Mr. Montes was taken across the border to Mexicali, Mexico, where he stayed with a friend. After being beaten and robbed while walking on the street, he tried to re-enter the United States around Feb. 19, but he was quickly detained and sent across the border again, the lawsuit said.
“I was forced out because I was nervous and didn’t know what to do or say, but my home is there,” Mr. Montes said in a statement released by the National Immigration Law Center.
But the Department of Homeland Security said Wednesday that it had no record of Mr. Montes being deported the first time. So when he was arrested on Feb. 19 trying to cross into the United States, it meant he had left the country without seeking advance permission to re-enter, as DACA rules require.
In March, Mr. Montes’s lawyers filed a Freedom of Information Act request with Customs and Border Protection asking for all records of his interaction with its agents. The agency acknowledged the request, but it has so far not provided the information, according to the lawsuit, which seeks the release of the records.
DACA recipients also can be stripped of that status for certain criminal activities. Ms. Hincapié said that Mr. Montes, who first received DACA protection in 2014, has a record of four misdemeanors: three for driving without a license and one for shoplifting.
The website for United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency that administers the DACA program, says that driving without a license will not disqualify someone from the program, but that a person’s “entire offense history” can be considered. Ms. Hincapié said Mr. Montes’s record would not have made him ineligible.
About 750,000 young immigrants who were brought to the United States illegally as children have benefited from DACA since it was introduced in 2012. During his campaign, Mr. Trump said he would rescind the program. But despite pursuing tougher measures toward illegal immigration, he has since suggested that he would seek a favorable solution for DACA recipients, known as Dreamers. That has dismayed some conservatives who believed that President Barack Obama had overstepped his authority in creating the program.
Representative Steve King, an Iowa Republican with a history of inflammatory statements about immigrants, applauded Mr. Montes’s deportation with a barbed message on Twitter on Tuesday.
Ms. Hincapié said it was “especially disconcerting” that Mr. Montes was deprived of a hearing before an immigration judge, in violation of his due process.
Several DACA beneficiaries have been detained in recent months. One, Daniela Vargas, was arrested after sharing her family’s story at a news conference protesting Mr. Trump in Mississippi. Ms. Vargas, who had failed to renew her DACA status, was detained for a week.
Another beneficiary, Daniel Ramirez Medina, was arrested outside Seattle and released last month after spending six weeks in detention. Immigration officials said he had confessed to gang affiliation, an accusation Mr. Medina denied.