AUGUSTA, Ga. — The wind was stinging their faces, but that was not why Jack Nicklaus and Gary Player had tears in their eyes as they prepared for their ceremonial tee shots at the Masters.
For the first time since 2006, Arnold Palmer was not alongside them on the first tee box. Last year, a weakened Palmer sat in a white deck chair and watched Nicklaus and Player hit their drives. Five months later, Palmer died at age 87.
The white chair was again on the tee box on Thursday, with the green jacket from one of Palmer’s four victories draped over it. In tribute to his foe turned friend, Nicklaus, 77, tipped his cap in the air and wiped tears from his eyes before placing his drive in the fairway. Player, 81, who also was rubbing tears from his eyes, found the fairway with his shot as well.
Before they hit, there was a moment of silence and a few remarks from Billy Payne, the chairman of Augusta National Golf Club. He talked about the “unbearable sadness” of having lost Palmer being offset by “the love and affection” everyone continues to feel for him.
Player demonstrated by lifting himself a few inches out of his chair using his arms.
“He gave a little wave, and that was very touching to me, and I could see him doing it in that chair today,” Player said.
O’MEARA CONSIDERS FUTURE This is Mark O’Meara’s 33rd Masters start, and it may be his last.
“There’s a chance,” O’Meara, the 1998 champion, said after posting a 78 that included one birdie and bogeys on three of the last five holes.
O’Meara, whose best finish in five starts on the Champions Tour this year is a tie for 32nd, shrugged.
“Knowing that I’m always a Masters champion is not a bad thing,” he said.
RELIEF FOR ELS AT FIRST HOLE Jordan Spieth, whose quadruple bogey at the par-3 12th hole in the final round cost him his second consecutive title at Augusta last year, was not the only player who returned to the Masters with a demon hole to slay.
On his opening hole last year, Ernie Els, a runner-up in 2000 and 2004, missed the green with his second shot, chipped to 3 feet and took six strokes to find the hole. His nine was the highest score on the par-4, by one stroke, in the tournament’s history. Els played the next 35 holes in four over par to miss the cut with an 80 and a 72.
Els laughed. “But then I bogeyed two,” he said.