He wore a large black brace around his left knee. He limped a bit through the second act, and he skipped a few moves.
But on Monday night, the actor Andy Karl triumphantly pulled off the kind of performance Broadway loves to celebrate: In a poignant demonstration of the show-must-go-on ethic, he led the opening night production of “Groundhog Day” just 72 hours after tearing his anterior cruciate ligament in full view of the audience at a Friday night preview.
The performance, with both Mr. Karl’s considerable talent and his obvious injury vividly on display, had been touch-and-go all weekend, as the actor wondered if he would even be able to walk. But with the draining of his knee, physical therapy, a shot of cortisone and hours of re-rehearsal Monday morning, he pushed through the emotional performance before a supportive crowd packed with actors, producers and other theater industry regulars. He said that the injury made some of the show’s songs, with titles like “Stuck” and “Hope,” resonate more strongly.
Mr. Karl, 42, said that the injury had been diagnosed as an acute, full A.C.L. tear — an injury that has sidelined many athletes — and that surgery had been described as an option, but not required. He said he had chosen instead to try to treat it with rest and physical therapy.
He said he did not yet know what his performance schedule would be going forward. That will depend on how his knee is feeling each day.
The injury occurred when Mr. Karl was leapfrogging over another actor toward the end of the Friday night show, during an antic scene in which his character, the weatherman Phil Connors, does a variety of good deeds for residents of Punxsutawney, Pa.
He dragged himself offstage. The show was stopped, and an announcer asked for a doctor. Mr. Karl was on the ground, in tears. But he wanted to finish the show, so he grabbed a walking stick, went back out and did.
The “Groundhog Day” musical, with a score by Tim Minchin and a book by Danny Rubin, is adapted from the 1993 film starring Bill Murray, about a narcissistic weatherman who relives the same day over and over again. The musical was presented last year at the Old Vic Theater in London, also with Mr. Karl in the lead role, and last week it won Olivier Awards for best new musical and for Mr. Karl’s performance.
The show, directed by Matthew Warchus and produced by Whistle Pig, Columbia Live Stage and the Dodgers, is one of the most expensive of the current theater season. It was capitalized for up to $17.5 million, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. It struggled throughout previews with mechanical malfunctions — the set has five turntables built into the stage floor, and they have periodically jammed. And thus far, the show has been doing only modest business at the box office, although positive reviews will probably help.
The performance on Monday night was crucial for the production, which needed to open before April 27 to maintain its eligibility for the Tony Awards, and for Mr. Karl, because actors must perform on opening night to be eligible for a nomination. (He has two already, including for the strenuous title role in a musical version of “Rocky.”) Mr. Karl must also continue to perform after the opening: The rules require that he appear enough times to allow the approximately 850 Tony voters to assess his performance.
The Monday night opening was also the first performance for Mr. Karl since his injury — the Saturday matinee had been canceled because of his knee damage; an understudy, Andrew Call, played the lead role Saturday night, and, in a bit of luck for the show, there were no performances scheduled Sunday.
Then on Monday morning, the cast gathered at the theater to help Mr. Karl work through the show, spending more than five hours figuring out which elements of his performance he might need to alter. He is onstage for most of the musical, and though his part requires minimal dancing, there is a lot of spinning, crawling in and out of spaces, getting in and out of bed and — especially complicated given the knee injury — taking off and putting on his pants as he relives the day that gives the show its title.
Mr. Karl made a number of small changes to his performance Monday night. He wore looser pants than usual, and the fourth time he got into bed, he left them on.  He turned a run into a slow-motion re-enactment of a run. And there were multiple moments when he could be seen using his arm to help get up off the floor, and even into a Tilt-a-Whirl. “This show is all about pivoting, and I can’t pivot on one leg,” he said.
Mr. Warchus also ordered the rest of the cast to take it easy with Mr. Karl. There are several instances in which he gets hit (his character is kind of a jerk at first), and those encounters were dialed back Monday night. “No one wants the responsibility of hurting him,” Mr. Warchus said.
At the curtain call, during an ovation from the crowd, Mr. Karl punched his hands in the air and shouted, “Champions adjust!” a maxim associated with Billie Jean King and often quoted by Mr. Warchus.
