The triple-double-heavy, upset-happy, injury-prone and largely unpredictable 2016-17 N.B.A. regular season comes to a close on Wednesday.
It has been a streaky season, one in which it has often been hard to decide whether a team had genuinely improved or was merely having an excellent month. The Los Angeles Clippers, the Washington Wizards, the Utah Jazz and the Toronto Raptors have all risen and fallen and risen again, while the traditionally dominant teams played possum, suffering through injuries (Kevin Durant, Kevin Love), fatigue and roster shake-ups. Even the inevitably consistent San Antonio Spurs looked a little shaky at home early in the season, and disappointed late, failing to grab the top seed in the West when they had a chance.
Now, after several scares apiece, the Golden State Warriors and the Cleveland Cavaliers are back on top of their respective conferences and will open the postseason as heavy favorites to return to the Finals for a third straight year. Other teams will see their first-round opponents determined by a final handful of games, still unsure of where they stand despite months of competition.
If the playoffs prove to be as unpredictable as the season, there’s plenty of fun still in store over the next couple of months. But there are still some regular-season threads to tie up.
For the last time this season, let’s get into some games. Here’s a look at this week’s complete schedule.
After rushing to grab the top seed in the West at the outset of the season, the Clippers fell off the radar. A combination of injuries and their usual depth issues consigned the blue-and-red to second-tier status in the Western conference.
That is no longer the case. The Clippers capped a five-game winning streak with a victory over the Spurs in San Antonio on Saturday. It was only the sixth time the Spurs had given up a game at home since the beginning of December and it marked a reintroduction to the Clippers for those who may have written them off.
Los Angeles, which has won nine of its last 11 games, now finds itself neck and neck with the Utah Jazz for the fourth spot in the West. Each team has two games left, and Utah has drawn the short straw of facing the Warriors and the Spurs to end its season. Chances are that the Clippers will clinch home-court advantage, and they could do so as early as Monday.
Los Angeles is unlikely to reach the conference finals. But with the Clippers’ experience, balanced starting lineup and defensive toughness, they could prove a tough matchup for the Warriors in the second round.
Less is at stake for the Rockets. They are locked into the third seed, and will face Oklahoma City in the first round, a fitting opponent for a season in which most of the talk about Houston has centered on James Harden’s competition with Russell Westbrook for most valuable player.
Though Westbrook has been at his best recently, Harden remains the safe choice for many experts. As Nick Wright, a contributor to Fox Sports, pointed out on Twitter over the weekend, it would be unprecedented to give the award to a player whose team did not crack 50 wins, or earn a top-four conference seed.
Harden will finish the season averaging about 29 points, 11 assists and 8 rebounds per game, one of the best individual seasons of all time. He is a better and more reliable shooter than Westbrook, and gets more assists a game. Most importantly, his team has a serious chance to compete for a title. The Thunder’s postseason — which will begin in Houston — is unlikely to last very long.
Most fans consider the Rockets to be the only dark horse contender, the only Western team capable of challenging the Spurs, Warriors and Cavaliers. But it is never smart to discount the Clippers. With a win Monday, Los Angeles could signal that, as the playoffs begin, its championship window has not yet closed for good.
Westbrook did it — he averaged a triple-double for an entire season, the only player to do so other than Oscar Robertson during the 1961-62 season.
In his last nine games, Westbrook let forth with a grand finale to cap off a season’s worth of basketball fireworks, averaging 37.2 points, 12.8 rebounds and 10.8 assists a game. He poured in 57 points against the Mavericks, 40 points against the Hornets and 45 against the Grizzlies during that span.
On Sunday, he sealed the deal with 50 points, 16 rebounds and 10 assists in Denver, breaking Robertson’s record for most triple-doubles in a season with his 42nd while scoring his team’s last 15 points and hitting a game-winning three to eliminate the Nuggets from playoff contention.
Atlanta shocked Cleveland on Sunday, coming back from more than 20 points down in the fourth quarter to send the game to overtime and eventually win. The Hawks are now a full game ahead of the Bucks, and will likely be playing the Wizards when the first round commences. For the Pacers, things are still up in the air — though they occupied the seventh spot Monday morning, they have yet to clinch a playoff berth.
League Pass Game of the Week: Toronto at Cleveland, Wednesday, 8 p.m.
The Raptors have won their last three games, and eight of their last 10, finishing the season in fine form. Their excellent play allowed them to grab the third seed from the Wizards and to duck a potential second-round meeting with the Cavaliers. If Toronto continues to excel, Wednesday’s matchup is a potential Eastern Conference Finals preview. You will just have to wait for the playoffs, which begin on April 15.