“A Tale of Two Schemes” would be a more apt title for this episode. One works perfectly, the other is a flop. Both promise to lift this show into a higher gear.
Let’s start with the flop, namely Mike’s efforts to unmask whoever placed a tracking device on his car. The quest begins promisingly enough, with Mike’s tailing a man who seems to have the job that, because of “Breaking Bad,” we know Mike will eventually inherit: errand man for the meth wholesaler and chicken retailer Gus Fring. Mike follows as this man makes his rounds, picking up something wrapped with aluminum foil in a hidey hole by a four-lane street.
I’m guessing it’s a tuna fish sandwich.
But project Track Down the Tracker begins to go awry when Mike enlists the help of Jimmy, whose job is to keep an eye on Mr. Errand when he makes his daily visit to Los Pollos Hermanos, the fast food restaurant chain owned by Gus. Jimmy, who rarely does subtle, ends up with his head in a garbage bin, rummaging for whatever Mr. Errand might have left behind as he exited the restaurant.
After getting a full report about what little happened in Los Pollos, Mike sends Jimmy away. Then we get the episode’s most memorable shot: Gus, staring balefully into the middle distance, evincing all the murderous intent behind his hospitality smile. The looks says that Gus knows something is amiss, that the guy he’s had followed has followed him.
The other scheme is a sting perpetrated by Chuck, who has found a way to turn Jimmy’s secretly taped confession into the sort of incriminating evidence that can be used in court. It isn’t clear what that way is until Chuck explains to his law partner — not for the first time, it seems — that he’s sure Jimmy will break and enter Chuck’s home to retrieve that tape.
He gets everything about the plan right, except his premonition that Jimmy will strike under cover of darkness. He comes during the day, and not stealthily. He kicks down Chuck’s door, spewing outrage as he searches for and then destroys what appears to be the tape in question.
There have been a lot of hard-to-watch moments in “Better Call Saul.” But few are as crushing as the one, at the end of this episode, when two eyewitnesses emerge from another room and Jimmy realizes that his older brother, whom he loves, has added a new layer of merciless conniving to the treachery that provoked the break-in. What makes Chuck’s long con so appalling is that it relies on the humanity of the people it cons. He knew that Jimmy would be moved to confess his own act of skulduggery at the end of Season 2, only because he correctly predicted that Jimmy would care enough to reassure Chuck about his mental faculties. And Chuck seemed to know that Ernesto (Brandon K. Hampton) would have enough compassion to alert Jimmy once he heard a snippet of Jimmy’s taped confession.
Chuck seems brilliant at exploiting all of the deeply human feelings that he doesn’t seem to have. This makes him both hateable and — let’s hand it to the man — very effective.
A highlight of this episode was the arrival of Francesca (Tina Parker), whom “Breaking Bad” viewers will remember as the jaded, sexually harassed secretary in the offices of Saul Goodman. She perpetually wore an expression of resigned exasperation in that role. We see her here interviewing for the receptionist job at Jimmy and Kim’s law firm, looking cheerful and uncrushed by all the misdeeds she has yet to witness and the miscreants she has yet to meet. She gets one of the episode’s best lines.
“You’re a little crooked,” she tells Jimmy, referring to the paint job he’s done in the office lobby.
She doesn’t know how right she is.
I also enjoyed the “Dead End” and “Speed Hump Ahead” signs along the road where Mike has staked out Los Pollos Hermanos. Foreshadowing doesn’t get more succinct. Even better was the reveal of Los Pollos, through an ominous slow pan that would not have been out of place in a Godzilla flick, when the full scale of the beast is first revealed on screen. I don’t think I’ve been as pleased to see a fast-food restaurant, ever.
If you’d never watched “Breaking Bad,” you would have found that shot a mystery. It is a reminder that “Better Call Saul” is a hybrid — a show with its own cast and plots, and prequel that will tell another story involving many of the same people. Part of the fun here is watching these two tales merge.
O.K., to the Because We Never Learn segment of the recap, let’s get some predictions: Is Jimmy about to get handcuffed and sent to jail? It sure seems like it. How quickly will Mike go from Gus’s quarry to Gus’s employee? When will Howard Hamlin give up those “Room With a View” shirt collars?
You know, I would never have thought to collect bottle caps.