Re “Choate Admits Sexual Abuse Over Decades” (front page, April 14): As a Choate Rosemary Hall alumna (class of 1999), I read your report detailing a history of adult sexual misconduct at Choate — some of it perpetrated by teachers I had, and on students who were my contemporaries — with a feeling of devastation and heartbreak.
I never suffered any such abuse, nor anything remotely approaching it. But some of what’s described happened while I was there, and some incidents in the longer investigation report circulated to alumni and others are reminiscent of rumors or insinuations I heard as a student. Of the 12 faculty members named, three were my teachers, and one I considered a special mentor and supporter.
Like Cheyenne Montgomery, I was an unusual student at Choate, having come from much lesser means than many of my classmates. In short: The report hits close to home, even for a student lucky enough to have avoided abuse, and I shudder to acknowledge that more brave survivors will undoubtedly come forward in the wake of this article and the investigation report.
I laud the courage and honesty of those who have shared painful and traumatic stories of abuse and misconduct. They shatter my very fond memories and my feelings of trust and respect for Choate and its faculty — feelings I was lucky not to have had trampled long ago as a teenager, as was the case for the 24 survivors cited in the report.
CAITLIN BOYLE, PORTLAND, ORE.
Choate deserves credit for hiring an outside law firm to investigate and then expose 12 former teachers who over several decades abused students at the school. But as made clear in that law firm’s report, Choate continues to shelter the leaders who bear ultimate responsibility for this legacy.
I was a student at Choate in the 1950s while it was an all-boys’ school. One of the teachers mentioned by name in your article was my sixth-form housemaster. Sadly, he is deceased, and this blot upon his memory will outlast his distinguished teaching career at Choate.
I cannot help but reflect on the difference between how sexual abuse has been dealt with (or not dealt with) by elite prep schools and by the New York City public schools. Going back to the mid-1980s all New York City schools were required to post warnings about “sexual harassment” and principals were required to investigate all reports of possible abuse.
Of course, in a system with over a million students some abuse was bound to occur. But it was not deliberately concealed by school authorities — and if it was, they lost their jobs. I know because I was one of many teacher coordinators assigned to help principals investigate complaints. Teachers and administrators who committed such acts were immediately removed from their classroom or office — and away from students.
I think that in the case of the elite private schools (Horace Mann, St. George’s, Choate etc.), the chief concern of the school community has been to protect the institution, with action only taken as a result of massive media exposure. The emphasis in our public schools was to protect the students.
