1. Call it the saga of the wayward warship.
A week ago, the White House declared that ordering an American aircraft carrier into the Sea of Japan would send a powerful deterrent signal to North Korea.
But the ship was actually sailing in the opposite direction — a fact that came to light only after the photograph above was posted online by the Navy.
White House officials said on Tuesday they were relying on guidance from the Defense Department.
The carrier is now heading to the Sea of Japan. It should arrive sometime next week.
2. It was everyone’s favorite day: Tax Day.
On a more serious note: It looks like President Trump’s efforts to overhaul the U.S. tax code are in serious jeopardy. The Democrats insist they won’t cooperate on it unless Mr. Trump releases his own.
If you’re wondering where your tax money goes, Steve Ballmer, the former chief executive of Microsoft, unveiled a new website to answer that question.
Above, a protest outside an I.R.S. office in Manhattan.
As he nears 100 days in office, President Trump spoke at a Wisconsin factory about an executive order authorizing studies and tweaks in government rules that could lead to restrictions on H-1B visas for foreign workers.
There are signs he’s drifting away from the populist, anti-establishment ideas that guided his campaign.
And here’s a selection of partisan writing you shouldn’t miss.
4. Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain announced that she was reversing course and calling an early election.
She’s making a risky bet that voters will give her a strong mandate as she negotiates the terms of Britain’s exit from the European Union. The vote will be held June 8.
And the first round of voting in France’s presidential election starts Sunday. Critics are worried that Russia may be meddling in the election to bolster favored candidates.
5. The man suspected of fatally shooting a Cleveland man and then posting video of the killing on Facebook is dead.
Steve Stephens shot himself as he was chased by the police near Erie, Pa., the authorities said.
The pursuit began when a McDonald’s worker stalled him by holding on to his fries — and calling the police.
6. Voters in a wealthy suburban district in Georgia are going to the polls to fill the seat vacated by former Representative Tom Price, who is now the health and human services secretary.
7. In Arkansas, two executions that were set to be carried out yesterday were delayed, one at the 11th hour. They were among eight executions scheduled over 10 days this month.
Others are scheduled for this Thursday and Monday. The legal challenges and protests continue, including over the lethal-injection cocktail the state plans to use.
8. We visited two heavily patrolled borders that have become hot spots in the global refugee crisis — between the U.S. and Mexico, and Hungary and Serbia.
In southern Texas, the Border Patrol agents monitor the banks of the Rio Grande on horseback for drug smugglers and migrants, many of whom are Central Americans seeking asylum.
Hungary, above, which heavily fortified its border over the last two years, is letting in just a handful of asylum seekers these days, and putting them in detention centers while their cases are decided.
9. In Hollywood, TV and movie writers begin voting tomorrow on whether to strike over raises and health benefits.
If no deal is reached between the Writers Guild of America and studios by May 1, they’ll stop work the next day, forcing the late-night comedy shows to immediately start running reruns.
Above, a scene from the last strike, in 2007-2008, which lasted 100 days.
10. Finally, it’s springtime in Transylvania. Take a peek at this Hungarian village in Romania where they still celebrate a centuries-old seasonal tradition.
On Easter Monday, young men “water” young women like flowers, dousing them with freshly drawn well water and patchouli to bring them health, beauty and love.
