Pro Basketball|Kelsey Plum Is a Lot Like James Harden. But Is It a Left-Handed Compliment?
Kelsey Plum Is a Lot Like James Harden. But Is It a Left-Handed Compliment?
As Kelsey Plum neared the N.C.A.A. women’s basketball career scoring record during her senior season at the University of Washington, her game became equated with that of another prolific left-handed shooter.
Type Plum’s name into Google, and the first result under “People also search for” will be James Harden, the Houston Rockets guard.
Several news outlets, including WNBA.com, advanced the comparison, which was framed as a compliment to Plum, placing her on a level with a leading candidate for the N.B.A.’s Most Valuable Player Award.
Plum, who was picked first over all in the W.N.B.A. draft by the San Antonio Stars on Thursday, has appreciated the analogy. But she also wondered whether it suggests that female players can be validated only through association with their male counterparts.
Last year’s No. 1 pick, Breanna Stewart of Connecticut, had one of college basketball’s most storied careers. As a star who could play any position on the floor and seemingly take over at a moment’s notice, Stewart was often discussed as the female equivalent of Kevin Durant, a member of the Golden State Warriors who was the N.B.A. most valuable player in 2014 for Oklahoma City.
Stewart said that she was flattered but that she preferred to be discussed in relation to the titans of women’s basketball.
Andrei Markovits, a professor of political science at the University of Michigan who has written books on women in sports, said female basketball players are often compared to N.B.A. players as a point of reference for a broader audience.
But Richard Lapchick, the director of the Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport at the University of Central Florida, said such analogies had become tiresome.
Former players and analysts of women’s basketball said that they understood how comparisons across gender lines could be seen as a slight but that they also thought of those analogies as signs of growth for the sport.
The ESPN analyst Rebecca Lobo, a former UConn player who will be inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame this summer, said there was no real point of reference for Plum in the W.N.B.A.
LaChina Robinson, a basketball analyst for ESPN, agreed that it was a positive development for the women’s game when fans and the news media noticed resemblances between the athleticism in the N.B.A. and the talents of players like Plum and Stewart.
Plum said she understood the Harden comparison and gave those who made it “the benefit of the doubt.” She also agreed that her game might not line up exactly with many left-handed W.N.B.A. guards of the past, whereas Harden is her contemporary. “That’s a person they can think of that’s left-handed, draws contact and things like that,” she said.
Like Hammon, who became the N.B.A.’s first full-time female assistant coach with the San Antonio Spurs, Plum has sought to redefine perceptions of women in sports.
By any measure, Harden or otherwise, Plum had a transcendent college career — starting even before she played her first game at Washington.
The coach, Mike Neighbors, in his first season with the Huskies, was looking for a captain and created a list of 27 qualities that would be valuable in that position. As the preseason wound down, he realized that Plum, a freshman, had 24 of the 27 traits; the next closest player had about nine.
But could he really bestow the honor on a newcomer?
Plum felt similar trepidation. Concerned about resentment from her elders, she called the opportunity “social suicide.” But she accepted.
“By midseason, everyone understood what we did,” said Neighbors, who recently left Washington to coach at Arkansas.
Plum averaged 20.9 points as a freshman. By her junior year, she led the Huskies to an unexpected Final Four appearance. In February, she became the N.C.A.A. women’s basketball career scoring leader, eventually finishing with 3,527 points.
For the future, Plum said she has found motivation in two players she idolized growing up — Sue Bird and Diana Taurasi — whom she met through Morgan Valley, an assistant coach at Washington who played at Connecticut.
She said that regularly consulting with Bird and Taurasi — two players who have been among the league’s most prominent faces over the last decade — had given her confidence that she might one day influence both girls and boys to want to play like Kelsey Plum.
