CHICAGO — As the stretcher carrying Tariq Hammond was wheeled away, members of the Denver University men’s hockey team stood on the ice nearby, determined, more than ever, to finish what they had started.
Hammond, the Pioneers’ most bruising defenseman, had collapsed Saturday night after his leg was pinned awkwardly against the boards early in the third period of the N.C.A.A. championship game.
Watching a teammate carted off with what Coach Jim Montgomery later said was most likely a broken ankle could have curtailed Denver’s season-long mission for an eighth national title.
Instead, Denver held off a late Minnesota-Duluth rally for a 3-2 victory that moved the Pioneers closer to Michigan’s record nine N.C.A.A. Division I men’s hockey championships.
As the Pioneers celebrated on a rink covered with discarded helmets, gloves and sticks, Hammond, still in full uniform, hobbled on crutches in Denver’s dressing room, eager to be reunited with his teammates.
Hammond was injured with 16 minutes 50 seconds remaining in the third period, when Denver led by 3-1. The sophomore Jarid Lukosevicius had scored three goals, including two in 16 seconds, in the second period.
As medical personnel attended to Hammond, wrapping his lower right leg in a towel and lifting him onto the stretcher, the Pioneers used the long delay to prepare for what they knew was coming.
Minnesota-Duluth, seeking its second national championship, had become accustomed to playing in tight games, winning four straight one-goal contests during its N.C.A.A. tournament run. None of Denver’s tournament games had been decided by fewer than three goals.
The Bulldogs cut the margin to a goal when Riley Tufte scored with about five minutes remaining, and Minnesota-Duluth Coach Scott Sandelin pulled goalie Hunter Miska to gain an extra attacker for the final 1:44.
But Denver, playing without a key defender, withstood the late charge. Tanner Jaillet preserved the victory with 38 saves, including 16 in the third period.
As the final seconds ticked away and players poured from the Denver bench, Hammond prepared to travel from the Pioneers’ dressing room through the narrow passageway that leads back to the ice.
Montgomery, Denver’s coach, had won an N.C.A.A. title as a player with Maine in 1993, when he scored a hat trick against Lake Superior State. Now in his fourth year at Denver, Montgomery found himself in the midst of ecstasy as players embraced one another.
When he saw Hammond, a junior who will be considered for the team’s captaincy next season, making his way back toward the ice, he was overwhelmed with emotion.
Montgomery said it was a major effort to repair Hammond’s ankle enough for him to join the postgame celebration.
A year ago, Denver’s season ended with a crushing national semifinal loss to North Dakota. On Saturday night, Denver celebrated its first N.C.A.A. title since 2005.
In the middle of it all was Hammond, ready to participate in a moment that Lukosevicius, Hammond’s best friend, could not fully put into words.
Hammond refused to allow an ankle that had absorbed so much pain keep him from the on-ice celebration he longed to be part of.
