CULTURE SHOCK on the High Line (April 22, 1-6 p.m.). This elevated expanse in Chelsea is primarily a public park, but on Saturday it will acquire sprawling buildings and vehicles, courtesy of very small architects. That’s when Culture Shock, a free annual festival, will welcome young visitors to the Construction Zone, at 23rd Street, where they can use the park’s Children’s Workyard Kit — connectable planks, bolts, wheels and pulleys — to engineer their own designs. The event will offer appropriate live music: Natalía Paruz, a.k.a. the Saw Lady, will play a carpenter’s saw. More traditional instruments can be enjoyed, too, in performances by the Brazilian folk trio Forró da Terra. Registration is recommended.
‘GRUFF!’ at the Peoples Improv Theater (April 23, 2 p.m.; through May 28). Goats have a certain affinity for garbage, so perhaps it’s no surprise that they should be chewing their way through a musical about the environment. Playing Sunday afternoons, this show from the Doppelskope theater troupe draws inspiration from “The Three Billy Goats Gruff,” but adds female characters and a few sly twists: Instead of menacing, monstrous bridgekeepers, the trolls here are tenderhearted vegetarians, guarding the only green place left on earth. Ora Fruchter, who’s designed them as fuzzy puppets, wrote the book and lyrics with Christopher Scheer; Toby Singer composed the score. No one should be astonished that the bad guys are grizzled old goats, but the younger generation of the species — led by the production’s heroine, Gruf — soon learns that preservation of the planet isn’t a bridge too far.
‘IN A PICKLE’ at BAM Fisher (April 22-30). Ever thought of introducing your preschooler to Shakespeare? Probably not, but the Royal Shakespeare Company and the British theater troupe Oily Cart have. The result is this show, inspired by “The Winter’s Tale.” A shepherdess and her flock stumble upon a lost infant — remember Perdita? — and everyone, including little theatergoers, has to help get her home. Presented in New York by the Brooklyn Academy of Music and Lincoln Center’s LC Kids series, this hourlong adventure will travel to the Clark Studio Theater at Lincoln Center in May.
‘THE LITTLE MERMAID’ at the Players Theater (through April 23). This musical revival, from Literally Alive Children’s Theater, preserves Hans Christian Andersen’s distinctly not happily-ever-after ending, but it is far from a somber affair. With music by Michael Sgouros and book and lyrics by Brenda Bell, the production includes a dancing chorus, black light effects and rousing numbers like a rafter-rattling blues turn by the Fish Witch. A preshow workshop includes a discussion of how the story was transformed into theater and a chance for audience members to make a sea creature to take home.
READING INTO HISTORY FAMILY BOOK CLUB: ‘WHEELS OF CHANGE’ at the New-York Historical Society (April 23, 2-4 p.m.). Yes, women marched toward voting rights and other forms of equality, but they bicycled there, too. In this edition of the society’s monthly book program for readers 9 through 12, the author Sue Macy will talk about her “Wheels of Change: How Women Rode the Bicycle to Freedom (With a Few Flat Tires Along the Way).” The work underscores how the invention of the bicycle led to more mobility, less social isolation, less confining dress and more personal independence for American women. After the discussion, participating families can observe related museum artifacts.
‘SCIENCE FICTION, SCIENCE FUTURE’ at the New York Hall of Science (through April 30). What is now an author or filmmaker’s wild fantasy may one day become a reality, and this exhibition in Queens encourages young visitors to explore that possibility. The subjects include robotics, teleportation, holograms and invisibility. Children can also design and draw their own visions of the shape of things to come: homes, vehicles and, yes, cyborgs.
TRIBECA/ESPN FAMILY FILM FIELD DAY at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center (April 22, 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.). Whether young people prefer to experience sports sitting down or out on the courts or the field, they’ll find good games at this free indoor-outdoor event from the Tribeca Film Festival. Inside, the festival offers screenings: at 9:30 a.m., William Dear’s “Angels in the Outfield” (1994), in which a boy’s baseball dreams benefit from divine intervention, and at 11:30 a.m., Joe Pytka’s “Space Jam” (1996), with an athletic star and an animated one: Michael Jordan and Bugs Bunny. (Screenings are first come first served, with lines forming 30 minutes in advance.) Outside, the activities will include sports clinics and chances to meet players from local teams.
