When Idi Diallo shared his story with New York Times readers in December, he was staying in a shelter in Harlem and weighing whether to pursue college or chase his lifelong dream of playing professional soccer. He was working part time at a bar to pay for plane tickets for tryouts across the country. He had several tryouts but could not afford to get to them all.
Since then, he has had three professional tryouts, gotten an apartment and gained the chance to play collegiate soccer in Long Beach, Calif. — opportunities that Mr. Diallo, now 21, might never have imagined.
Just a month after leaving his war-afflicted village in Ivory Coast in 2011, Mr. Diallo, a Muslim, kept shelter inside a mosque in the Bronx. He had come to New York for a chance to sign with an agent and eventually join a league. Instead, homeless and alone, he played pickup games, eventually joining the Boca Juniors Academy-USA team in Long Island as a midfielder.
After The Times published his account as part of its Neediest Cases Fund series, a number of readers contacted Mr. Diallo to help him pursue his dream.
Dan Rothman of Fountain Valley, Calif., gave Mr. Diallo plane tickets for a tryout in Los Angeles and created a GoFundMe page that raised $250 to help with expenses.
“I was mad — for lack of a better word — that a guy could travel so far in physical distance, and in his life, and overcome so many obstacles, and then not be able to make that final leg of the journey,” Mr. Rothman said.
Before the tryout, Mr. Rothman connected Mr. Diallo with a friend, Alice Yoo, who lives in Long Beach. Ms. Yoo shared his story with her housemates, Celia Ramos and her sons, Michael and Anthony Torres, 13 and 15, who are avid soccer fans. They invited Mr. Diallo to stay with them, assisting him with warm-ups and trekking to the stadium to cheer him on.
When his return flight was delayed by a protest over President Trump’s ban on immigration from several predominantly Muslim countries, Mr. Diallo stayed on their couch a while longer. While there, Mr. Diallo toured Long Beach City College, which has a soccer program, meeting with the athletic director and visiting the stadium.
“I saw it, and I said to myself, ‘This could change my life,’” he recalled with a smile.
In the small village where he grew up, Mr. Diallo’s formal education ended when he was 8. After moving to New York, he caught up and graduated from high school in 2016. Until then, college had seemed a remote possibility.
Cameron Beaulac, the Long Beach soccer coach, said he expected Mr. Diallo to join the program in the fall. Mr. Diallo plans to move in with Ms. Yoo before starting school.
In total, readers paid for three plane tickets and a tryout registration fee, while opening up their homes.
But joy came with challenges. Despite the tryouts, which mostly went well, Mr. Diallo did not make a professional team. At first, he almost lost faith in his dream, wondering if pursuing it was a mistake.
Last month, the Seattle Sounders U-23, a junior team associated with the Major League Soccer club that Mr. Diallo tried out for in March, invited him to practice with them in May.
The coach, Darren Sawatzky, praised Mr. Diallo’s technical ability. “I like good stories, and this young man has fought hard for every opportunity,” he said.
He said Mr. Diallo had shown a drive to succeed. “In the end, if he is good enough through the training process, we will find him an opportunity,” he said.
Meanwhile, seeking to provide Mr. Diallo with a home in New York, a reader from PWB Management Corporation in the Bronx reached out to help. In March, Mr. Diallo moved his clothes and soccer medals into a one-bedroom apartment in the Bronx, where he will live until going off to college.
Now, he practices at a field in Yonkers, twice a day.
Mr. Diallo said he had been blessed by the readers who supported him. They join the mentors, teachers and social workers who have guided him.
