CAIRO — Pope Francis delivered his most blunt and powerful message to the Muslim world on Friday when he began a papal mission to Egypt by warning against wrapping violence and terror in the language of religion.
The papal visit came at a critical time for Egypt, a country caught up in intensifying terrorist attacks, particularly against Christians, and a deepening crackdown by an authoritarian government.
On Friday, Pope Francis seemed to put on different hats during the day’s three stops, reflecting his interreligious, ecumenical and political roles.
Pope Francis then turned to matters of state, seeking to encourage progress on human rights from his host, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. Mr. Sisi ousted the Muslim Brotherhood in a military takeover in 2013, and has since crushed dissent even as a recent report by the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom found he has incrementally improved security and religious freedoms for Egypt’s small Christian minority, which mostly supported his coup.
If Mr. Sisi, fresh off a White House visit with President Trump, felt unfairly reprimanded, he didn’t show it. He smiled broadly after the pope’s speech, and clasped his hands warmly — fueling concern from some in Egypt that the pope’s visit, while well intentioned, is serving to lend an authoritarian another layer of credibility.
The pope’s supporters have repeatedly made the case that he will meet anyone, anywhere, to establish dialogue and deliver his inclusive message. And after years of lamenting the widespread murder of Christians — more so now, he has argued, than in ancient times — he wanted to meet with and show support for persecuted and suffering Christians.
And so Pope Francis ended his day in his role as protector and booster of an Egyptian Christian community that has been bloodied by repeated attacks by suicide bombers and Islamist extremists, including this past Palm Sunday, when bombs killed nearly 50 Coptic Orthodox Christians celebrating the holiday.
The Coptic Orthodox Church, which, according to tradition, was founded by the Apostle Mark in Alexandria a decade or so after the death of Jesus, split from Rome in 451 A.D. But a burst of dialogue in recent decades has drawn the two churches closer.
That solidarity was visible Friday night, in an emotional moment as the pope, along with chanting clerics and Orthodox patriarchs, prayed at the site of a December suicide bombing that killed 28 and marked the start of the Islamic State’s campaign against Christian churches here. At one point, Francis put his hand on a glass pane covering a bloodstained wall.
This is his 18th trip outside Italy since his election as pope in 2013, and only the second visit by a modern pope to Egypt, after Pope John Paul II came here in 2000. Unlike that visit, security measures here seemed to separate the pope from the people of Cairo, as officials, already skeptical of public assemblies, cordoned off and essentially shut down the city in the areas he visited.
The pope’s remarks at the conference hosted by Al Azhar are likely to be remembered as Francis’ definitive effort to improve relations with Islam and mitigate the violence roiling the region.
He argued that education, which Al Azhar has large influence over in the Sunni world beyond Egypt’s borders, was crucial to preventing new generations of radicals. The center, which trains many of the Sunni world’s imams and oversees the education of millions of Egyptian children and college students and is funded by Mr. Sisi’s government, has made progress in removing extremist language from textbooks.
During his speech, Francis made a reference to St. Francis of Assisi and his visiting of Sultan al-Kamil of Egypt to promote civility even as crusaders sought to gain control of the Nile.
Alberto Melloni, the director of a liberal Catholic research institution, the John XXIII Foundation for Religious Studies in Bologna, said that in the days leading up to the speech, Francis repeatedly made reference to the saint’s visit centuries ago and saw his own mission in a similar vein. “Saint Francis asked for his brothers nothing but the possibility to live amongst them,” said Mr. Melloni, saying that the pope was essentially asking the same of Sheikh Tayeb.
But Francis, while aware of the historical aspect of his visit, seemed to be pointing his message at the world powers today.
