MANCHESTER, England — The formula remains the same after all these years, its familiarity a comfort, its consistency its charm.
Every Saturday night, about 10:20 p.m., Kate Silverton, the anchor for the BBC’s 10 o’clock news — the marquee news program of Britain’s national broadcaster, watched by more than four million people — hands over from the corporation’s home in London to a studio in Salford, where the BBC’s sports arm is based.
One of four sports presenters sits waiting. A cheery welcome and short introduction follow. And then, every week, without fail, comes that warning. It is such an intrinsic part of the broadcast, and has been for so long, that it is not far short of a national ritual, one of those few sentences a whole country knows by heart.
The reason is that every Saturday for eight months of the year, “Match of the Day,” the BBC highlights program and a British institution, follows the 10 ’clock news.
And somehow, even in an age of wall-to-wall soccer coverage on television, internet streams of varying legality and the constant buzz of social media, there are still British soccer fans who settle in blissfully for “Match of the Day,” willfully ignorant of all that transpired on the nation’s soccer fields that day.
On those rare occasions when mistakes are made, viewers make sure Royall and his team are left in no doubt that they have done just that. And so that warning — or updated variants of it — remains, even now, a gentle echo of a past otherwise left behind long ago.
It does not survive in its original form, of course. Each presenter now has the freedom to extemporize on the warning — a nonnegotiable requirement of the program’s opening — but not by much.
The subtle shift can be explained by the fact that, where once the BBC would simply show a set of results in silence, now the presenter reads the scores as video from the most important games — of players celebrating; never of the action itself — is displayed. “It is ridiculous to say, ‘Look away now,’ if you’re then going to talk about it,” Gnanasegaram said.
Consideration — in the form of a short pause and a purposefully vague start to the script — is then afforded to those who might not react as quickly to the warning as they once did. “We try to give people a fighting chance,” Royall said in a phone interview.
Only when enough time has elapsed for the ritual to be respected will the results of a set of games played several hours earlier be revealed to the British public, many of whom, by that stage, will have been fully informed of precisely what happened for some time. It is like NBC’s careful husbandry of what has happened every day at the Olympics, only performed almost every week of every year.
It is hard to tell definitively, but the warning itself — “if you don’t want to know the scores, please look away now” — is thought to date to the days of David Davies, a BBC broadcaster from the early 1970s to 1994 who went on to work in a number of senior roles for the Football Association.
It came about, he said, because the producers of “Match of the Day” in those days did not want “the news giving away the results,” fearing it would dissuade viewers from tuning in.
Davies regarded it as “naïve” even then to assume that fans would not want to find out their team’s result long before the evening news, but it should be noted that “avoiding the scores” was common enough that in 1973 an entire episode of “Whatever Happened to the Likely Lads?,” a wildly popular sitcom, was devoted to the concept.
Naïve or not, the practice stuck. More remarkable, given how the media environment has shifted in the intervening years, it continues. Fans not able to attend matches can now follow their team on their phones and on goal-update shows broadcast by Sky Sports, BT Sport and even the BBC on Saturday afternoons. The day’s results are regularly featured on the home page of the BBC’s website for much of Saturday evening.
And yet still, at 10:20 p.m., the warning comes.
Out of deference to them, the program’s pundits are reminded frequently — by the host, Gary Lineker, no less — that they must not let slip the outcomes of matches that have not yet been shown on that day’s program. “You’re told to avoid giving away what’s happened on the games that are coming up,” said Jermaine Jenas, a regular guest.
Clearly, the producers feel there is enough demand to maintain the mystery. Hughes points out that while there are no figures available to confirm how many people watch the highlights without knowing what happened, “Match of the Day” is still the only way about two-thirds of the United Kingdom’s soccer audience consumes the Premier League, since only 20 percent of the national population is on Twitter and only 55 percent is on Facebook.
“There is a big focus in TV on younger audiences, but we shouldn’t forget there’s an awful lot of older viewers who perhaps aren’t so glued to smartphones and social media,” he said.
Yet anecdotal evidence suggests resisting the temptation to find out the scores is not solely a function of age. Each week, complaints are directed at Lineker on Twitter — a demographic hardly filled with older adults — when he puts out the show’s running order, infuriating dedicated fans who believe doing so offers unnecessary clues to the day’s events.
Royall knows, of course, that the whole tradition is something of an anachronism, in an era defined by immediate information and impatient consumption. And there is a sense that it runs, to some extent, against both his and Gnanasegaram’s journalistic instincts to indulge it.
But far from dying out, it seems to be catching. The BBC received 700 complaints in 2013 for naming the winner of a Formula One Grand Prix race before the highlights had been broadcast. And that was dwarfed by the torrent of criticism received after the news headlines revealed who had won the Great British Bake Off. Sometimes, even now, people still do not want to know the scores.