Starting this week, a new era for prime-time cable news begins.
Tucker Carlson will assume Fox News’s 8 p.m. time slot on Monday, the first time in nearly two decades that Bill O’Reilly will not be kicking off Fox News’s prime-time lineup.
And Fox’s competitors are taking notice.
Mr. O’Reilly’s dismissal amounts to an enormous shift in cable news, and the TV industry was ablaze with talk late last week whether the move has the potential to open up a cable news war that for more than a decade has been dominated by Fox News.
It was already expected to be a big week for cable news. Though the 100-day mark for Donald J. Trump’s presidency is mostly symbolic, the cable networks were preparing to cover it the way only they can: as a TV spectacle. MSNBC was preparing a big week of programming, CNN invited its daytime anchor Jake Tapper to take over its 9 p.m. hour all week, and Mr. O’Reilly was supposed to return from a vacation to resume his role as the top-rated host in cable news.
It will be even bigger now. In addition to Mr. Carlson moving to 8 p.m., Fox’s afternoon opinion round-table show, “The Five” will move into the 9 p.m. slot, followed by Sean Hannity. It is an untested lineup, and some TV executives argued that Fox could be the most vulnerable it has been in years, particularly with MSNBC and CNN surging.
It remains an open question whether Mr. Carlson can effectively kick off Fox’s prime-time lineup — something Mr. O’Reilly has done since the late 1990s — and provide a strong lead-in to the other shows, or whether “The Five,’’ with co-hosts who lack the star power of Fox’s other prime-time personalities, can draw a big audience.
Others contend that Fox’s viewers are loyal. Even if it takes a small ratings hit, the network’s lead is daunting, and its viewers certainly will not be switching over to CNN or MSNBC.
So far, there are mixed signals. On the day Mr. O’Reilly was dismissed, his show — its title shortened from “The O’Reilly Factor’’ to just “The Factor” — was hosted by Dana Perino. About 3.3 million viewers tuned in, twice the audience of “All In with Chris Hayes” on MSNBC. But by Thursday of last week, viewership fell to 2.7 million viewers. Mr. O’Reilly’s last episode as host on April 11 brought in 3.6 million viewers.
Not long ago, cable news was a fading genre; viewership and ratings were dropping and the viewers it did have were aging as digital platforms took away the younger audience that is more attractive to advertisers.
That all changed after Mr. Trump announced he was running for president 22 months ago. Last year’s election helped produce record ratings for the cable news networks.
Mr. Trump’s presidency has not guaranteed rating gains across the board: Ratings have declined for all of the evening news and morning shows on the broadcast networks this year, suggesting that general-interest viewers may be growing fatigued by a news cycle dominated by Mr. Trump and politics.
But cable news viewers, flocking to programming that aligns with their political views, cannot get enough of it. Fox’s ratings are enormous, and MSNBC and CNN are in their strongest competitive positions in years.
MSNBC’s prime-time left-leaning lineup was tailor-made for those seeking oppositional programming to the current administration. Rachel Maddow, MSNBC’s 9 p.m. host, is on a hot streak, and in recent weeks started beating Mr. Carlson among the coveted 25- to 54-year-olds vital to advertisers.
CNN is likewise gaining in the ratings — up 14 percent in total viewers and 25 percent in the demographic compared with this time last year — despite competing against itself in a year when it hosted numerous debates and town halls. CNN executives have been reluctant to describe Mr. Tapper’s prime-time move next week as a trial run, but if he does well, it could be an opening for him to make a move.
Still, Fox is well out in front of both CNN and MSNBC. In prime time, the network averages more than 2.8 million viewers, while MSNBC draws half of that at 1.4 million and CNN averages 1.2 million.
In the 25- to 54-year-old demographic, Fox News also commands a large lead — 576,000 viewers a night, compared with 405,000 for CNN and 337,000 for MSNBC.
If there’s been one weakness to Fox’s dominance, it is the age of its audience. The median age of the Fox News prime-time viewer is 66, a few years older than for MSNBC (64) and CNN (59), according to Nielsen.
Some TV executives said on Wednesday that with such a sizable lead, Fox’s biggest threat will not come from rival networks but from challenges to the monopoly it has held on conservative commentary on nightly television.
What could keep Fox inoculated from any kind of significant defection is the lack of choice on the dial. MSNBC’s prime-time lineup is now defiantly positioned against the Trump administration, and CNN, though it has plenty of pro-Trump voices, has drawn withering criticism from the president.
