At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.78 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.92 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.72 percent.
Florida, $187.8 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.
Florida Management Services Department, $187.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.
Hayward Unified School District, Calif., $134 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Plymouth, Mass., $81.5 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Rhode Island and Providence, R.I., $68 million of unlimited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Competitive.
Rhode Island and Providence, R.I., $91 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Delaware Transportation Authority, $103.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.
Maryland Department of Transportation, $285 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.
Metropolitan Council, Minn., $105 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Atlanta, $226.8 million of water and wastewater revenue refinancing bonds. Siebert Cisneros Shank.
Beaverton School District No. 48J, Ore., $155.4 million of convertible development impact bonds. Piper Jaffray.
Beaverton School District No. 48J, Ore., $77.1 million of general obligation development impact bonds. Piper Jaffray.
California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $1.9 billion of Kaiser Permanente bonds. Goldman Sachs.
Chino Valley Unified School District, Calif., $208 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.
Chino Valley Unified School District, Calif., $54 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.
Connecticut Housing Finance Authority, $125 million of Housing Mortgage Finance Program bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.
J. Sterling Morton High School District No. 201, Ill., $50 million of taxable general obligation limited tax school bonds. Fifth Third Securities.
Kaiser Permanente, $2 billion of taxable bonds. Goldman Sachs.
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, $530 million of water system revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Million Air Two L.L.C., $153 million of General Aviation Facilities Project special facilities revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
Minnesota Higher Education Facilities Authority, $123.1 million of revenue and refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.
Mount Pleasant, S.C., $111 million of waterworks and sewer system revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.
New Hampshire Housing Finance Authority, $56 million of family mortgage acquisition revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.
New York Housing Finance Agency, $65.7 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Ramirez.
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, $994.7 million of consolidated bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.
Public Finance Authority, Wis., $81.4 million of West Maui Hospital Foundation Inc. revenue bonds. Ziegler.
Rossford Village School District, Ohio, $50.9 million of school facilities construction and improvement bonds, certificates of participation and tax-exempt bonds. PNC Capital Markets.
Texas Woman’s University Board of Regents, $69.6 million of revenue financing system bonds. HilltopSecurities.
University of Cincinnati, $89.1 million of general receipts bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.
Western Maricopa Education District No. 402, Ariz., $80 million of school improvement bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.
Winton Woods City School District Board of Education, Ohio, $51.7 million of classroom facilities unlimited tax general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.
Wyoming Community Development Authority, $65 million of housing revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.