What is the best way to provide equal opportunities for male and female athletes at the Olympic Games — to add more events for women or offer fewer for men?
The question has caused an uproar in the sport of racewalking.
The International Association of Athletics Federations, track and field’s governing body, said it would review its proposed schedule for the 2020 Tokyo Olympics on Wednesday and Thursday. And while details of the discussions have not been revealed, racewalkers have expressed fear that the 50-kilometer event — which is contested by men only and is the longest footrace in the Summer Games, at about 31 miles — will be discontinued.
The controversy has erupted as the International Olympic Committee seeks to increase gender equity at the Summer and Winter Games and to appeal to a younger audience.
The current Olympic format includes the 50K racewalk for men and separate 20K races for men and women.
An I.A.A.F. proposal under discussion for the Tokyo Games, according to athletes, is to eliminate the 50K event, which is considered by some observers to take too much time (about 3 hours 40 minutes for first place) and to be unappealing to many younger spectators and television viewers.
The two 20K race walks would be extended to 21.1 kilometers, the more recognizable distance of a half-marathon, athletes said of the I.A.A.F. proposal.
A petition by a number of elite racewalkers to keep the 50K race through the Tokyo Olympics has been circulated on Change.org. By Tuesday afternoon, it had more than 8,600 signatures.
“The 50km racewalk embodies many of the Olympic values, most notably how to endure,” the petition said.
Although it would not comment on the 50K race specifically, the I.A.A.F. said in an email that it was reviewing its competition schedule as requested of all international sports federations by the I.O.C. during each Olympic cycle.
With skateboarding, climbing and surfing having been approved for the Tokyo Olympics, racewalkers understand that their sport “must continually evolve to remain relevant,” the petition said. It acknowledges that having two Olympic racewalks for men and only one for women is “based on an outdated and heinously wrong assumption” about female endurance.
Still, a number of athletes, male and female, said it would be unfair to discontinue the 50K event without more advance warning, given that aspiring competitors have already begun training for the Tokyo Games and that some have turned down jobs or postponed educational opportunities.
Maria Michta-Coffey, a racewalker from Long Island who has competed in two Olympics, said athletes had little say in the I.A.A.F.’s proposals.
Providing more Olympic opportunities for female athletes “makes sense,” but dropping the men’s 50K event is not the way to provide equality, Michta-Coffey said.
