The bad news is that President Trump is fickle and quite clearly learning on the job when it comes to foreign policy.
• NATO, far from being “obsolete,” is the bedrock of our defense alliance with Western nations.
• Russian support for President Bashar al-Assad of Syria does not serve the long-term interests of the United States and its allies in the Middle East.
• China is no longer a currency manipulator, and this has not been an issue for the past several years.
Now, let’s hope Mr. Trump realizes his folly on some of his stances closer to home, such as the wall along the border with Mexico, the immigration ban, the border tax and repealing Obamacare.
It shouldn’t be too difficult for Mr. Trump to revert to being the pragmatic person that he has been for most of his life. If it helped him succeed in business, then it should help him succeed in governing.
It is important to remember the character of President Trump when judging his words and actions. What appears as a geopolitical shift from accommodation to opposition may or may not be reflective of his real intent.
As the cordon tightens around the possibility of his campaign’s collusion with Moscow to win the 2016 election, he would want to cast doubt on arguments of a special relationship with President Vladimir Putin.
FORT MYERS, FLA.
How convenient, then, that the world does our president the favor of changing so that he is spared the injury of having to admit he was wrong and is fallible.
Re “A Giant U.S. Bomb Strikes ISIS Caves in Afghanistan” (front page, April 14): President Trump says, “What I do is I authorize my military.” That’s Mr. Trump in a nutshell. It isn’t his military. It’s the military of the United States of America. I deplore the dropping of the bomb described as the “mother of all bombs.” And I deplore even more the suggestion that it is Donald Trump’s personal military that dropped it.
And, by the way, it is mostly men who wage war. Why not call it the “father of all bombs”? Is calling it the mother supposed to soften its impact when it hits innocent people?
TERRY SHAMES, BERKELEY, CALIF.
I have a question for the president: You have shown us that you are supremely capable of escalating tensions, both at home and abroad, from Congress to Korea. Are you equally capable of de-escalating tensions, or are you just a one-trick pony?
