For the first 45 minutes of their second-round series opener, the Edmonton Oilers showed they can match the Anaheim Ducks in a tight-checking, low-scoring grind of a playoff hockey game.
When things got wild and frantic in the final minutes, the upstart Oilers showed they can hang with the best in the West in that sort of game, too.
Adam Larsson scored his second goal of the third period with 4 minutes 40 seconds to play, and the visiting Oilers blew a two-goal lead in a wild third period before beating the Anaheim Ducks, 5-3, on Wednesday night in their second-round playoff series opener.
Mark Letestu scored two power-play goals and Cam Talbot made 33 saves for the Oilers, who seized home-ice advantage from the Ducks with a four-goal final period.
Larsson, acquired by Edmonton in the trade of the former No. 1 draft pick Taylor Hall to the Devils, scored just four goals in his first 85 games this season, but he improbably got two goals in seven and a half minutes.
The Ducks lost in regulation for the first time in 19 games since March 10. Game 2 is Friday night in Anaheim.
A sold-out Honda Center could barely keep up when a tense 1-1 game morphed into a free-for-all as each team scored two goals apiece in a 4:24 span midway through the third.
Larsson put the Oilers ahead by 3-1 with 11:57 left, but the Ducks promptly sprung to life and attacked the net, with Patrick Eaves flipping home a rebound 85 seconds before Jakob Silfverberg tied the score with 9:13 to play.
Larsson scored the winning goal when he skated behind the net and cleverly threw it in front. The puck banked off Anaheim defenseman Josh Manson’s skate and pinballed underneath John Gibson, who stopped 27 shots.
PREDATORS 4, BLUES 3 P.K. Subban had a goal and two assists and Vernon Fiddler scored with 5:05 left, sending Nashville to the road win in Game 1 of its second-round playoff series.
The Predators lost Kevin Fiala to an ugly leg injury in the second period and blew a 3-1 lead before Fiddler poked a loose puck by Jake Allen in the third. It was the fifth career playoff goal for the 36-year-old Fiddler, who did not play in Nashville’s first-round sweep of Chicago.
Colton Parayko, Jaden Schwartz and Vladimir Sobotka scored for St. Louis. Allen finished with 28 stops, but lamented the one he did not make. He tried to poke check the puck away from Fiddler and instead it ended up getting past him.
