OTTAWA — A city in northern Ontario abandoned a plan on Tuesday night to ship the birthplace of the Dionne quintuplets, the miracle babies of the Great Depression, to another community with no direct connection to their story.
In its reversal, the City Council of North Bay voted, 7-3, to instead move the tiny log house from its current site on the Trans-Canada Highway to a relatively new downtown park on the shore of Lake Nipissing.
The future of the house, however, is not entirely settled. The Council voted only to cover the cost of moving the home, which became world famous after the birth of the five Dionne sisters on May 28, 1934, as well as its future exterior maintenance. Covering the cost of continuing to run it as a museum rests with the group of citizens who banded together to oppose the plan to send it to a fairground about 45 minutes down the highway.
“This is in no way the end of this process,” said Chris Mayne, the Council member who championed keeping the house in North Bay.
The museum has been closed since October 2015, after the local chamber of commerce said it would no longer operate it or an adjacent tourism center. The city recently sold the land under it for 1.6 million Canadian dollars, prompting its initial decision to ship the house out of town.
The two surviving quintuplets, Annette and Cécile, reluctantly returned to the public spotlight to challenge the original plan of the city — which hosted about three million tourists, including many celebrities of the era, who came to see the quintuplets.
The girls’ fame brought little good to their lives. Shortly after their birth, the province of Ontario took them away from their parents, making them “wards of the king,” saying it was necessary to prevent their exploitation. The province soon built a human zoo in which they were exhibited to about 6,000 sightseers a day until the age of 9.
They became estranged from the rest of their family, and a trust fund for their benefit evaporated before they could draw on it.
The two surviving sisters said they wanted to see the house preserved as a reminder of the exploitation of children.
Miles Peters, one of the North Bay residents who challenged the move, said he expected that higher levels of government would contribute grants for the museum.
