WASHINGTON — Four outs into his worst start of the season, Mets pitcher Noah Syndergaard threw a changeup to the Nationals slugger Bryce Harper, winced, pulled off his glove and grabbed his right armpit.
Syndergaard’s injury cast a pall over the Mets on Sunday, and things only got worse. The Mets had a chance to complete a sweep of the Nationals in Washington, where they have struggled. Instead, they sustained one of their most embarrassing defeats in team history, a 23-5 drubbing, giving up the second-most runs they have allowed in a game.
An M.R.I. on Monday revealed that he had a torn muscle, and he will be placed on the disabled list.
The Nationals collected 23 hits and smashed seven home runs. Anthony Rendon went 6 for 6, with three home runs and 10 runs batted in, becoming the 13th major leaguer to drive in at least 10 runs in a game. He missed a fourth home run by a few feet.
After the defeat, the Mets’ clubhouse was quiet. Collins normally speaks to reporters soon after the game, but Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager, was waiting in the visiting manager’s office so he could address Syndergaard’s injury.
After the injuries that the Mets have had in the first month of the season, including a problem Syndergaard had a few days ago, his exit prompted questions about the team’s handling of them.
Syndergaard, 24, was already en route to New York for a magnetic resonance imaging examination on Monday morning, Alderson said, which is why he was not available to explain his latest ailment. A few days ago, Syndergaard refused an M.R.I. for the biceps soreness that had delayed his start from Thursday to Sunday.
Collins said the injury had nothing to do with Syndergaard’s arm.
“It’s not even close to the same area,” he said.
Syndergaard initially had refused the M.R.I. for his biceps and shoulder soreness because he had said anti-inflammatory medication helped alleviate it. He also had called it “a little hiccup” and had insisted he could have started on Thursday.
The Mets did not force Syndergaard to take the exam, but they cleared him to start on Sunday only after he successfully threw a bullpen session on Friday in front of coaches, during which he reported no problems.
Alderson said that the original M.R.I. was a precautionary recommendation by a doctor.
But Syndergaard “felt strongly that he was fine,” Alderson said.
Syndergaard’s velocity showed no cause for concern in the first inning. He fired 100-mile-per-hour fastballs. The velocity, however, was not the problem — it was his command and the Nationals’ hitting.
Everything Syndergaard threw, the Nationals hit — even the opposing starting pitcher, Joe Ross, notched an R.B.I. single on a 99-m.p.h. sinker. Syndergaard’s walk of Harper was his first this season. The five earned runs Syndergaard allowed in the first inning matched the total of his four previous starts this season.
Rivera said he saw nothing wrong with Syndergaard beyond perhaps throwing too hard after his extra time off in between starts. But two batters into the second inning, Syndergaard was in visible pain.
Syndergaard fidgeted after firing a 98-m.p.h. fastball to Harper. He then threw a 90-m.p.h. changeup, clutched his side and was replaced by Sean Gilmartin.
“It was certainty something we didn’t need to see,” an agitated Collins said after the game.
Collins, a fiery personality, raised his voice when asked about how upset he was.
Syndergaard’s early exit not only put a strain on Collins but on the Mets’ bullpen, which struggled so badly against the Nationals’ powerful lineup that the third-string catcher Kevin Plawecki pitched the final two innings.
The Mets were already without several key players such as Lucas Duda (who sustained a minor setback with his elbow this weekend), Wilmer Flores, David Wright, Steven Matz and Seth Lugo. Their most talented hitter, Yoenis Cespedes, landed on the disabled list on Friday with a hamstring strain. Now they await a prognosis on Syndergaard.
