Let’s turn it over to Brooks Barnes, our Hollywood reporter based in Los Angeles, for today’s introduction.
LOS ANGELES — For the first time in a decade, Hollywood is facing the threat of a major strike. Writers, who power almost everything the movie and television factories make, want better pay and the shoring up of a faltering health care plan. Studios, while open to some raises, have so far proposed health care changes that many writers consider rollbacks.
Should a walkout happen — with its contract expiring on May 1, the Writers Guild of America last week asked members to give it the authority to call a strike — Howard A. Rodman will be among those leading the charge. While not prone to public grandstanding, Mr. Rodman, president of the Writers Guild, West, is a behind-the-scenes firebrand.
He was elected in 2015 after vowing to get tough with studios. Labor conflict is in his blood; his father, also a writer, was a combative guild figure.
Speaking by phone, Mr. Rodman insisted that writers, despite a Netflix-fueled boom in television, were being left behind by the industry. TV seasons are shorter. Networks are showing fewer reruns, limiting residuals. Studios are also making fewer movies and cutting back on paying to polish scripts.
Mr. Rodman, a former journalist known for indie films like “Savage Grace,” declined to discuss the negotiations, which will resume on Monday after breaking off late last month. Asked about the economic impact of a strike — the 100-day writers walkout in 2007-2008 cost the Los Angeles economy about $2.5 billion — Mr. Rodman chose his words carefully.
“The leadership of the guild is experienced and deeply aware of the concerns of its members,” he said. “None of us takes any of this casually.” Voting for a strike authorization will conclude on April 24. It will most likely pass. After that, Mr. Rodman and his cohorts will have to decide what to do next.
To escape the concrete and clamor of San Francisco, you might drive 45 minutes to the other side of the Golden Gate Bridge and slip into a redwood forest.
Or you could go the center of the city.
There rises Mount Sutro, an 80-acre hill forested by blue gum eucalyptus trees. Nourished by the enveloping San Francisco fog, many are more than 100 feet tall.
Among the reserve’s inhabitants are coyotes, red foxes, hoary bats and ringneck snakes. At least 80 species of bird have been spotted, including great horned owls.
Sarah Gustafson, a reader in San Francisco, said she walks regularly with her dog along Mount Sutro’s meandering five miles of trails. She shared a picture she took in December.
Entering the forest is almost immediately transporting, she said. After a few minutes of walking, the clatter of the city fades to silence.
Mount Sutro has not been immune to the tree death sweeping California’s drought-stricken forests. A survey last year found that roughly a quarter of its trees were dead. A revitalization plan calls in part for clearing out the dead trees and introducing more native species (the eucalyptus are from Australia).
If you want to pitch in, they’re looking for volunteers.
Sutro Stewards, a nonprofit conservation group, invites people to help with trail and habitat restoration on the first and third Saturdays of each month. Get the details here.
