PITTSBURGH — When Austin Romine returned from the Triple-A All-Star Game two years ago, it was with a bounce in his step, certain that he had rejuvenated his career. Just a few months before, Romine had been the final cut by the Yankees after playing poorly in spring training. Free to sign with any club, he returned to the Yankees’ top minor league affiliate, Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, because no other team was interested in him.
But as Romine walked into the visitors’ clubhouse in Louisville, Ky., he caught sight of a newcomer in the room, Gary Sanchez, the organization’s top catching prospect.
Immediately, Romine’s heart sank.
He knew what that meant: Sanchez, four years younger, was there to take his job.
If it is a catcher’s duty to soak up punishment and cajole the best out of others, Romine has applied those lessons to himself, setting aside the game’s frustrations and enduring long enough so that he, a formerly bright prospect, might have one more chance to blossom.
Having surprised even himself by making the Yankees last season, Romine has surprised others in the way he has played since Sanchez, a budding star, went out with a biceps injury two weeks ago.
In his place, Romine has hit .324, with an .840 on-base-plus-slugging percentage, while also earning plaudits for managing the pitchers, who have a 3.13 earned run average when he is behind the plate. The Yankees have won eight of the 10 games Romine has started.
On Saturday, he broke up Jameson Taillon’s no-hitter with two outs in the fifth, the first of his two hits, and scored a run in the Yankees’ 11-5 victory over the Pirates.
Though his stint as a major league regular may not be long — Sanchez has begun to throw and swing a bat and is expected to return in two weeks — Romine is relishing an opportunity that took so long to arrive.
A second-round draft pick in 2007, Romine, at one point, looked like the heir apparent to Jorge Posada. He was the Yankees’ minor league player of the year in 2009 and 2011, and twice he played in M.L.B.’s Futures Game, delivering the game-winning hit in 2011 off Kansas City’s All-Star reliever Kelvin Herrera.
Among Romine’s teammates that day were the future All-Stars Bryce Harper, Matt Harvey, Jason Kipnis, Nolan Arenado, Paul Goldschmidt and Wil Myers.
But Romine plateaued and watched the Yankees’ confidence in him wane as they signed free agents (Russell Martin and Brian McCann), made trades (Chris Stewart) and promoted catchers in the organization (Francisco Cervelli, Jesus Montero and John Ryan Murphy).
Over the weekend, Romine shared home plate with Cervelli, who was traded in 2014 to Pittsburgh, where he has flourished, receiving a three-year, $31 million extension after last season.
Cervelli said before the series began that Romine had never expressed any antipathy toward him.
The players were cordial Friday night, acknowledging each other but doing little more.
The unforgiving nature of the baseball business is something that Romine has long been versed in. His older brother, Andrew, is a utility infielder with the Detroit Tigers. Their father, Kevin Romine, was an outfielder for the Boston Red Sox in the late 1980s and early ’90s, when he was a teammate of Austin’s position coach with the Yankees, Tony Pena.
“I remember when he was born,” Pena said of Austin Romine.
Kevin Romine got his shot with the Red Sox when center fielder Ellis Burks was hurt in 1989. He filled in capably and found himself as the opening day right fielder in 1990, hitting two doubles off Detroit’s Jack Morris to help Roger Clemens win at Fenway Park. Less than a month later, the Red Sox traded for Tom Brunansky, who had the power that Romine lacked. Two years later, he returned home to Southern California and became a police officer.
In Austin Romine’s mind, there is little mystery about why he is ready now for the opportunity his father told his sons would always come, whether it was four at-bats, four games or four weeks.
No longer is he “an out at the plate,” as he says he was in 2013, when he hit .207 while serving as a backup most of the season after Cervelli broke his hand. He no longer is trying to pull every pitch, and he is using the whole field. His home run and both of his doubles have been to right field, and he has pulled only five of the 33 balls he has put in play.
The pitching coach Larry Rothschild, who is typically measured in his praise, lauded Romine’s work with the Yankees’ staff. The team’s E.R.A. was lower with Romine behind the plate last season (3.88 compared with McCann’s 4.18 and Sanchez’s 4.41), and Rothschild said Romine had excellent nonverbal communication techniques, such as using his glove to emphasize that he wants a pitch out of the strike zone.
Romine also absorbs the detailed scouting reports — and knows when to discard them.
All of it, the more modest approach at the plate, and the canny mind behind it, has dovetailed nicely for Romine and at just the right time. Before long, Sanchez will be returning, and the current backup, Kyle Higashioka, hit 21 homers in the minor leagues last season.
Still, Romine’s circuitous journey has not dulled his ambition.
