SETTING This two-story house is in Observatory Park, a leafy neighborhood bordering the University of Denver campus and home to the Chamberlin Observatory, owned and operated by the university. Nearby is the 14-acre Prairie Park, with trails for hiking and biking. Downtown Denver is about 6.5 miles away.
INDOORS The house opens to a turreted hallway with a staircase. High ceilings, hardwood floors, ornate moldings and leaded-glass windows can be found throughout. There have been updates to the electrical system and plumbing, along with a sewer-line replacement.
The heart of the home is the beamed great room with a grand fireplace and two sets of doors connecting to backyard patios. Down the hall is a large, well-lit formal dining room that adjoins an eat-in kitchen with granite counters and stainless-steel appliances. Also on the main level are a sunroom and a paneled library.
Most of the bedrooms and a laundry are upstairs; the spacious master suite has two walk-in closets, a seating area and a large tiled bathroom with separate shower stall and tub. There is also a lower level with another bedroom and laundry, a game room with a dining space and a home theater.
OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 0.53-acre corner lot surrounded by a brick wall. The landscaped backyard has a large, open stone patio with room for lounging and dining; a covered patio with a porch swing; and an ornate fountain. In front is a circular brick drive; in back, a three-car garage.
SETTING This stately stone house is in Chestnut Hill, an affluent enclave of historic homes in the northwest corner of Philadelphia; the neighborhood is about 12 miles from Center City. Chestnut Hill’s main street, the cobblestone-lined Germantown Avenue, has a villagelike vibe with lots of shops, galleries and restaurants — all within walking distance of this house. Known as Philadelphia’s garden district, Chestnut Hill is surrounded by public parks and gardens. It is home to the Morris Arboretum, part of the University of Pennsylvania, and near the 1,800-acre Wissahickon Valley Park.
INDOORS The three-level house, designed by the local architects McGoodwin and Hawley just after the turn of the last century, was fully renovated and restored over the past five years. Much of its architectural character has been preserved — including high ceilings, oak floors (which have been refinished) and several fireplaces — while upgrades like a new security system and central air-conditioning have been added.
The home’s large central foyer leads to a formal living room anchored by a fireplace and connected to a sunroom; nearby is a family room with built-ins. On the other side of the foyer is a formal dining room with another fireplace.
A large eat-in kitchen is also on the main level, with an adjacent butler’s pantry and a new mudroom with a heated floor. The kitchen has custom cabinets, quartz counters, a Wolf six-burner stove and other stainless-steel appliances.
The bedrooms are on the second and third floors. The large master suite has a fireplace and a sitting room with a spalike marble-and-tile bathroom; an office with yet another fireplace is adjacent. A playroom and a laundry room are on the third level.
OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on 0.56 acre. The landscaped backyard has a new bluestone patio and rear entrance with stone steps and landing. There is also a children’s playground area. Flower and vegetable garden beds are tucked behind a detached three-car garage.
SETTING This home, which has views of the Minneapolis skyline, is in Lowry Hill, an upscale neighborhood of older houses about a mile and a half west of central Minneapolis, in the Calhoun-Isles community. Nearby are recreational amenities like the Chain of Lakes bike and pedestrian paths; the Kenwood, Loring and Thomas Lowry parks; and the Parade Ice Garden. Lowry Hill is also home to the 11-acre Minneapolis Sculpture Garden and the Dunwoody College of Technology.
INDOORS The house, designed by the architect William Kenyon in 1931, has many of its original architectural flourishes. There are vaulted wood-beamed ceilings, wide-plank wood flooring, decorative moldings and paneling and leaded-glass windows, in addition to six fireplaces.
On the main level, a large foyer opens to a spacious formal living room and dining room, each with an abundance of windows. The kitchen, off the dining room, features a large stone fireplace, stainless-steel appliances, wooden cabinetry and an informal eating area.
Most of the bedrooms are on the second level, including the large master suite, which has a fireplace, two bathrooms and a sitting room. On the third level is a recreation room. There is also a finished basement with a billiards room.
OUTDOOR SPACE The property is 0.37 acre with a stone patio looking out over mature trees, shrubs and gardens. There is a detached two-car garage.
