Opinion|Was the Pope Wrong to Compare Refugee Centers to Concentration Camps?
Was the Pope Wrong to Compare Refugee Centers to Concentration Camps?
Until last weekend, Pope Francis earned nothing but praise from the American Jewish Committee. But when the pope, speaking off the cuff, likened European migrant and refugee holding centers to concentration camps, the advocacy group’s response was swift and sharp.
As a Jewish convert to Catholicism, I sympathize with the committee’s desire to guard against comparisons that would risk minimizing the Nazis’ appalling crimes. Even so, it seems to me that Mr. Harris, in urging the pope to use “precision of language,” could use some precision himself.
The situation today is no less distressing. In January, Moria saw a spate of deaths as tents collapsed under heavy snowfall at the overcrowded camp.
To be fair, it’s not as though Mr. Harris is unaware of the plight of refugees. The American Jewish Committee is among the leading supporters of IsraAID, which brings together Israeli Jews and Arabs to provide volunteers and medical help to migrants and refugees, including those at Moria. And when President Trump signed executive orders in January authorizing construction of the wall on the Mexican border and blocking the admission of refugees from countries of terror concern, Mr. Harris joined other leaders of faith groups — including the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops — in condemning the move.
No serious observer can question Pope Francis’ sensitivity to Jewish concerns. Indeed, in the words of Rabbi David Rosen, the committee’s international director of religious affairs, “There has never been a pope with as deep an understanding of Jews as Pope Francis.” Certainly the pope is not above criticism, and the committee has the duty to defend Jewish values. But the context of Francis’ remarks make it clear that the pope — who last year met with Holocaust survivors at Auschwitz — had no intention of minimizing Nazi atrocities. He was simply doing what he has been doing for as long as we have known him: urging not only Catholics but the world at large to open their eyes to the needs of the suffering.
Francis’ remarks on refugee camps are indeed shocking, but they are shocking for a purpose: to challenge the world, and every one of us personally, to take action for the good of souls and bodies. The American Jewish Committee, and all people of good will, should rise to the pope’s challenge with collaboration, not condemnation.