The N.C.A.A. on Tuesday included several cities in North Carolina among numerous future sites of its championship events through 2022, in sports from basketball to field hockey and in all three competitive divisions, solidifying the association’s decision this month to return to the state after its government repealed a law many viewed as anti-gay.
The Division I men’s basketball tournament will return to Greensboro, a stalwart for March play, in 2020. This year, early-round games that turned out to feature teams like North Carolina and Duke were moved to Greenville, S.C. Other future host cities in the Tar Heel State include Raleigh (Division I men’s basketball games in 2021), Winston-Salem (Division I field hockey games in 2019) and Cary (the next five Division II baseball championships and the men’s soccer final fours in 2019 and 2021).
The N.C.A.A., college sports’ national governing body, also restored first- and second-round games in next year’s men’s basketball tournament to Charlotte.
“The site selections follow the N.C.A.A. Board of Governors’ vote to allow consideration of championship bids in North Carolina,” the association said in a statement.
The N.C.A.A. made waves last year when it followed the N.B.A., which had withdrawn its All-Star Game from Charlotte, and canceled championship events in North Carolina after the passage of the law. Known as House Bill 2, or H.B. 2, the so-called bathroom bill eliminated local anti-discrimination protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people and mandated that transgender people use bathrooms in public facilities that corresponded with their sex at birth.
That law was repealed last month, on the eve of what was widely seen as a deadline imposed by the N.C.A.A. in a state in which college sports are culturally vital and economically powerful. A week later, the N.C.A.A. “reluctantly” announced that it would again consider placing events in the state.
The tortured language in the N.C.A.A.’s announcement (and some of the criticism that ensued) stemmed from the ambiguous nature of the repeal, which barred local ordinances on the topic for several years and left decisions about bathrooms up to the state legislature.
The N.C.A.A. still requires host sites to fill out a questionnaire detailing any obstacles to nondiscrimination that might affect athletes or fans.
The Atlantic Coast Conference, which has several member colleges in the state and is itself based there, and which moved its neutral-site championships this academic year out of the state in response to the law, announced days after the repeal that it would again consider the state for events.