By the time I reached 50, I’d accumulated many unresolved fears and desires. Each successive month, I’d promised to conquer or cross another one off my bucket list before the end of my midcentury mark. There were writing goals — the unwritten novel, which had an excellent title but no accompanying words; the physical goals, like the vexing inverted backbend that everybody except me could execute in hot yoga class; and the emotional goals, such as freeing myself from a fiendish need to consume cold pizza for breakfast.
But nothing loomed quite as large as my failure to get a driver’s license. It was the Grand Canyon of disappointments, shaming and taunting me. I’d spent a lifetime in the passenger seat, daydreaming and sleeping through scenic drives to the tip of Long Island and the backwoods of Maine. I had become comfortable with my role as the map-quester and snack distributor on long journeys, making peace with the possibility that I’d never get behind the wheel.
Understand, over the years, I’d made significant career decisions and sacrifices based on my inability to drive. I’d accept work at theaters in cities that had superior rapid transit systems, like London and Chicago, and avoid jobs in places like Los Angeles and Dallas. Growing up in New York City, I’d flirted with the idea of driving, but between the subway and the sidewalks, I’d never needed to learn. My sister-in-law once attempted to teach me, but during our first lesson, I sideswiped a parked car and knocked off her side-view mirror. It would be nearly 15 years before I would try again.
Then, just after turning 50 in November 2014, I completed a new play called “Sweat” for the Oregon Shakespeare Festival’s American Revolutions history cycle, and much to my delight they decided to produce it. This was great news; however, it filled me with an equal measure of excitement and anxiety, because I knew that it would require spending almost three months rehearsing in a state that was near impossible to navigate without a driver’s license.
The production schedule was further complicated by the fact that it fell smack in the middle of my children’s summer vacation, and they would have to join me in remote Ashland, Ore. My teenage daughter, Ruby, found an internship at the festival a few minutes’ walk from where we’d stay, and for my son, Melkamu, I located a wonderful and inexpensive Y.M.C.A. day camp. The only caveat: I’d need transportation to get him there and back each day.
I studied the map, weighed my options, examined the bus schedule, but I knew the solution was simple — I’d have to Evel Knievel it, jump the canyon and learn to drive at 50. I had eight months to fight the dread and get the task done.
I procrastinated for half a year, finding a multitude of reasons not to take lessons. The calendar days ticked off, yet I remained paralyzed. It was irrational, yes, but nothing scared me more than the notion of driving. There would be natural wonders to lure me out of complacency, like the redwood forest, Crater Lake and the Pacific Crest Trail, all within driving distance of Ashland. I weighed the regret against the fear; the self-flagellation grew. Rewriting my play was my only refuge; if nothing else, the script would be ready to go into rehearsal.
Then I reached the do-or-die point, and six weeks before leaving for Oregon, I finally got the courage to walk to the D.M.V. at the Atlantic Center in Brooklyn and get my learner’s permit. Two weeks later, I took the five-hour driver’s ed course in a grimy auto school that seemed frozen in time, perhaps 1975.
I watched a series of safety videos, one of which was narrated by Bruce Jenner. Some of the tapes were so antiquated that they featured people puffing on cigarettes while cruising in convertibles without seatbelts. I then booked a handful of driving lessons with a professional instructor, occasionally leaning on my husband, Tony, for pep talks. I paid the rush fee to take the test and received a time and a date to meet my fate.
On May 21, 2015, I took my driving test in the Bronx; it was the only available opening, and I had been told that the road test was easier than in Brooklyn. The report called my parallel parking “deficient,” but nevertheless the examiner, a fellow middle-aged woman, took pity and relented. Eight days later, armed with a flimsy temporary license, I flew to Oregon, and the next day I picked up a rental car and for the first time in my life drove by myself on a highway. It was harrowing and thrilling. I glanced at the speedometer and realized I was only doing 35 miles an hour. It felt like 90.
We had a memorable and magical summer. I mounted the new play and worked with an inspired group of collaborators. I drove my nature-deprived city kids through the redwood forest to the Pacific Ocean, where they danced on the beach. I experienced my first road kill, a suicidal chipmunk that dashed under my tire, much to the chagrin of my screaming children. I even learned how to pump gas.
A week after returning home from Oregon, I received a call from my manager about a TV writing gig in Los Angeles. Generally, I’d create excuses and ailments to avoid such a trip. This time I said yes.
Los Angeles freeways are a bit different from the bucolic roads of Oregon wine country where I cut my teeth. I landed at LAX and picked up the rental car, only to be told that there were no GPS devices left. Someone suggested that I use my cellphone.
It took 15 minutes to figure out how to start the keyless car. And then I drove to my meeting, taking the 105 to the 405 to the 10.
At some point on the highway, my cell slipped to the floor just out of reach. Like a Jedi knight, I fought back panic and used the Force to guide me through midday traffic. Upon arriving, my hands were drained of blood from clutching the steering wheel.
I got the job. As dawn was breaking, I drove back to the airport, more relaxed and less tense. It felt as if I had summited Mount Everest, without oxygen, at night.