Among the many silly ideas floating around Washington these days about how to re-regulate Wall Street is that old chestnut about separating investment banking from commercial banking.
It’s getting a fresh look after Gary Cohn, the powerful head of President Trump’s National Economic Council, supposedly told a private gathering of the Senate Banking Committee recently that the Trump administration would be open to the idea. The president has yet to confirm publicly that he would support such legislation.
Then in 2013, a bipartisan group of United States senators — led by Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona — proposed what they called the 21st-Century Glass-Steagall Act with the goal of breaking up banks with assets greater than $50 billion. They argued — incorrectly — that what caused the 2008 financial crisis was big banks again using their customers’ deposits to take big risks.
Their bill went nowhere. They reintroduced it in 2015. It went nowhere again, in large part because it was a bad idea.
And yet Ms. Warren persists. During a recent meeting, the senator pushed Mr. Cohn on how he felt about separating commercial banking from investment banking, prompting him, reportedly, to muster a modicum of support for it.
But here’s the thing: In 1933, separating investment banking from commercial banking was akin to separating a yolk from the white; today, it would be like unscrambling an egg, and about as useful an exercise.
The truth is that the most acute problems in the years leading up to the financial crisis occurred in what we would traditionally think of as pure investment banks — Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch and Morgan Stanley. Those had generally gone hog wild in the manufacture and sale of squirrelly mortgage-backed securities, billions of dollars of which they allowed to build up on their balance sheets.
When the banks’ short-term lenders no longer wanted these assets as collateral for overnight loans, the investment banks could not finance their daily operations and sent up the white flags of surrender. As we all remember, JPMorgan Chase rescued Bear Stearns and Bank of America rescued Merrill Lynch. Both JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America were already in the investment banking and commercial banking businesses when the federal government encouraged them to save the two failing investment banks.
If Ms. Warren had had her way, JPMorgan Chase’s rescue of Bear Stearns and Bank of America’s rescue of Merrill Lynch would have been prohibited. Ironically, if she has her way in the future and investment banking is once again separated from commercial banking, the biggest beneficiary of a new Glass-Steagall law would be the Wall Street firm she surely hates the most: Goldman Sachs, which just happens to be Mr. Cohn’s old firm (and which paid him hundreds of millions of dollars during his 26-year tenure).
Unlike JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America, Goldman Sachs has no physical retail bank branches and only a sliver of its rivals’ trillions of dollars in deposits. What better way for Mr. Cohn to repay his former colleagues than by endorsing a plan that would virtually eliminate Goldman’s remaining competitors and cause them to spend years, and billions of dollars, going down the rabbit hole of separating their commercial and investment banking businesses? Goldman Sachs would love nothing more than a return to a form of Glass-Steagall.
Let’s be clear: The problem on Wall Street is not the size of the banks, their concentration of assets or the businesses they choose to be in. In fact, the big Wall Street banks are global leaders and the envy of competitors — especially in Western Europe and in Asia — that are struggling to figure out how to survive in a world of higher capital requirements, less leverage and more rules and regulations.
The problem on Wall Street remains one of improper incentives. When people are rewarded for taking big risks with other people’s money, that’s exactly what they will do. It’s a problem made worse when top bankers, traders and executives on Wall Street collectively no longer have enough of their own skin in the game to make a difference to them when the things that they do go awry. They get rich either way.
That is what needs to change on Wall Street, not some outdated, cockamamie notion of having the government dictate what businesses Wall Street can be in or how big a bank can be. Chances are that Ms. Warren leaked the news that Mr. Cohn might be willing to support one of her pet projects. That is what savvy politicians do, I guess.
What’s unfortunate is that she has yet to figure out that not only is the idea of separating investment banking from commercial banking not the panacea she is hoping it will be, but it is also not something banks’ clients, customers and counterparties want to have happen.
The crafty Mr. Cohn is playing the senior senator from Massachusetts for the fool.