Robert Bentley resigned Monday as Alabama’s governor in the face of an impeachment and a series of criminal investigations.
In a plea agreement, Mr. Bentley pleaded guilty on to two misdemeanor charges: failing to file a major contribution report and knowingly converting campaign contributions to personal use.
It was a stunning downfall for the governor, who acknowledged in March 2016 that he had made sexually charged remarks to his senior political adviser, Rebekah Caldwell Mason.
Mr. Bentley is not alone in having legal problems while in office. Here are other governors who left office under a cloud in recent years.
JOHN KITZHABER|Oregon Resigned in 2015 amid a spiraling crisis that included a criminal investigation into the role his fiancée played in his administration. Mr. Kitzhaber had been plagued by questions about whether his fiancée, Cylvia Hayes, had violated ethics laws in advising him about clean energy issues while serving as a consultant on the topic.
ROD BLAGOJEVICH|Illinois Was impeached in 2009 and later convicted on federal charges for a web of corruption, including efforts to make money off the Senate seat vacated by President-elect Barack Obama.
ELIOT SPITZER|New York Stepped down in 2008 after he was caught on a federal wiretap confirming plans to meet an escort from a high-priced prostitution service in Washington.
GEORGE RYAN|Illinois Accused of corruption and misuse of his office (he served from January 1999 to January 2003) while governor, he was not indicted until after his term ended. He was convicted in 2006 and sentenced to six and a half years.
JAMES E. MCGREEVEY|New Jersey Resigned in 2004 after he disclosed that he had an affair with a man he had put on the state payroll as a special adviser. 
JOHN G. ROWLAND|Connecticut Facing impeachment, Mr. Rowland resigned in 2004 amid a federal investigation for accepting gifts from friends and business executives. He was later convicted and sent to prison.
EDWIN W. EDWARDS|Louisiana The longest-serving governor in Louisiana history (1972 to 1980 and 1984 to 1996), he was indicted on racketeering and bribery charges while in office, but was not convicted. He was, however, convicted in 2000 of extorting businesses that were applying for casino licenses and was sentenced to 10 years.
J. FIFE SYMINGTON|Arizona Forced to resign in 1997 after being convicted on federal charges of fraudulent dealings as a developer. The conviction was later reversed, and he was pardoned by President Bill Clinton in 2001.
JIM GUY TUCKER JR.|Arkansas Resigned in 1996 after he was convicted of making false statements to obtain a federally backed loan and conspiring to defraud the Internal Revenue Service.
GUY HUNT|Alabama Left office in 1993 after he was found guilty of converting $200,000 to personal use from a nonprofit fund set up for his inauguration. Pardoned by the state parole board in 1997.
EVAN MECHAM|Arizona Impeached after he was convicted in 1988 for obstructing justice by trying to thwart an investigation into charges that an aide had made a death threat against a grand jury witness.
RAY BLANTON|Tennessee His term as governor ended three days early in 1979. In a backlash over his decision to pardon or commute the sentences of 52 inmates, leaders of both parties joined forces and moved up the date of the inauguration of the next governor, Lamar Alexander. Though Mr. Blanton was never charged in that episode, he was convicted of conspiracy in 1981 for selling liquor licenses while in office.