David Boies founded the Boies, Schiller & Flexner law firm with Jonathan D. Schiller in 1997.
Adding to this year’s flurry of law firm combinations, Boies Schiller Flexner said on Monday it would take the West Coast litigation firm Caldwell Leslie & Proctor under its wing starting next week.
The combination of the firms bolsters the New York-based Boies — co-founded by the prominent litigator David Boies — in the California market, where Caldwell Leslie & Proctor is known for its entertainment, environment and investigative practices.
The move comes on the heels of the departure of Boies Schiller’s corporate practice, which moved to the Paul Hastings firm last month. That move, Mr. Boies said at the time, was made so that Boies Schiller could focus on its core litigation practice.
This shifting of practices is becoming more common as law firms seek to deepen their expertise with the aim of carving out a singular profile in the increasingly competitive legal market. Corporate clients have shown that they are willing to spend their legal budgets on acknowledged legal expertise, but not more loosely on general legal services.
Boies Schiller last year took another step to strengthen its litigation services when it merged with litigation boutique O’Shea Partners, based in New York.
Its new combination, with Caldwell Leslie, is intended to provide clients with “strategic, creative representation in complex, high-stakes litigation,” Mr. Boies said.
Caldwell Leslie’s practice includes commercial, environmental, employment, internal investigations, and white-collar crime practices. The firm is keen to expand its entertainment and media practice, which advises some of the world’s leading entertainment companies with their most complex disputes.
Such law firm combinations have accelerated this year, with 28 mergers and acquisitions announced in the first three months of 2017, according to Altman Weil MergerLine, which tracks the field. The first three months saw the merger of two global firms, Norton Rose Fulbright with Chadbourne & Parke, as well as five cross-border combinations and a number of acquisitions of small United States firms.