AUGUSTA, Ga. — Jordan Spieth may have wadded up the quadruple-bogey 7 he made on the 12th hole in the final round of last year’s Masters and pulverized it in his mental trash compactor. But the crowd that blanketed the hill beside Nos. 11 and 12 as Spieth’s group came into view Thursday afternoon had tucked away the memory and carried it through the gates with them.
As soon as Spieth salvaged par after flirting with the water hazard on his approach on the par-4 11th, the patrons grew restive. Spieth made his way to the tee box to a round of applause that seemed louder than the greeting he received on the first tee. There were cries of “Come on, Jordan” and “Let’s go, Jordan” as Spieth prepared to forge a détente with the mercurial, 155-yard, par-3 12th.
The last time he played the hole in competition, Spieth hit two balls in the water to lose his lead, and eventually the championship, to Danny Willett. With a gusting wind in his face on Thursday, Spieth hit a shot that landed on the green, a long way from the pin. The next burst of air was the crowd’s collective exhale, followed by a roar.
“I was a bit surprised at how loud the cheer was when my ball landed about 35 feet away from the hole,” said Spieth, who two-putted for par.
John Kostis, whose father, Peter, is a CBS golf analyst, was among those watching Spieth make his way around Amen Corner. He said he — probably like many others in the throng — was there hoping to see him do well. It was all about redemption, Kostis said.
Spieth was bemused by the reaction. “I guess everybody else felt maybe more than I did on it,” he said.
The exorcism was complete. At that point, Spieth was even par for the day. He figured the worst was behind him, which of course is when Augusta National is at its most menacing.
On the 530-yard, par-5 15th, Spieth took an aggressive line for his third shot. His ball spun off the green and rolled into the water hazard. His next shot landed over the green. After a tricky chip, he three-putted for a quadruple-bogey 9, and all the work he had done to get into red numbers was undone.
After signing for a three-over 75, his worst score in 13 tournament rounds at Augusta National, Spieth did not blame the wind or the cold or the golf gods. He chastised himself.
But other than that, Mr. Spieth, how did you enjoy the round?
“I think I learned a lot about the golf course today and the expectation for where to take advantage and where not to,” said Spieth, who was 10 shots behind Charley Hoffman, who posted a 65.
Spieth is nothing if not resilient. He birdied the par-3 16th and made a 20-foot putt to save par at 18. One of the players with whom Spieth was grouped, Matthew Fitzpatrick, spent most of the round near the early lead before struggling to a double-bogey 6 on the final hole to finish with a 71. Fitzpatrick, 22, was decked out in the same blue sweater and white pants as Spieth, he looked like his mini-me.
The past two years, Spieth, the 2015 champion, has been leading after the first round. If he is going to win a second green jacket this year, he will have to come from behind. Which is fine, he said, noting that he just needs to stay patient for one more windswept round to get to the weekend, which is expected to deliver perfect conditions.
In the lead-up to this week, Spieth spoke wearily of how he would be glad to have this year’s tournament behind him so he no longer has to answer questions about his 12th hole implosion in the final round in 2016. By parring the hole on a day when 27 of the 94 golfers in the field recorded bogey or worse, Spieth signaled that he has moved on.