Why didn’t defenseman Brendan Smith see more ice time in the third period? Why wasn’t the checking line out there in overtime? Why, oh why, do the Rangers keep throwing away almost certain victories in the final minutes of playoff games?
Coach Alain Vigneault faced considerable second-guessing on Sunday, the day after his Rangers blew a two-goal lead late in Game 2 of their playoff series with the Ottawa Senators — and then lost, 6-5, in double overtime.
Vigneault understood that this sort of micro-inspection would be only the beginning if the Rangers persisted in their self-sabotage. He was doing some of it himself, along with members of his staff.
The Rangers, now down by two games to none in the Eastern Conference semifinal series, head back to Madison Square Garden for Game 3 on Tuesday knowing not only that they are skating to keep this series alive, but also that many on the roster are playing to stay on this team.
Major changes are certain to be forthcoming if the Rangers drop two more games in such panicky fashion to Ottawa — a club that gave up more goals than it scored during the regular season, that earned fewer points in the standings than the Rangers, and that lacks experience deep in the postseason.
Losing to the Penguins in the conference finals might be an acceptable conclusion to this season for the Rangers. Elimination by the Senators in the second round would not qualify as a success, by anybody’s standard. The team has advanced to the second round or further in five of the last six seasons, an admirable record. But the biological clock is ticking on the extraordinary career of Henrik Lundqvist, the 35-year-old star goaltender.
Despite some very visible mistakes by the Rangers down the stretch on Saturday, Vigneault said he was likely to keep his defensive pairings the same. That did not stop him from blaming defenseman Nick Holden for the 2-on-1 opportunity that led to the Senators’ winning goal by Jean-Gabriel Pageau. Holden overcommitted in the offensive zone, going for a puck he failed to reach.
The Rangers’ current predicament clearly isn’t just Holden’s fault. Other players have been too willing to settle for icing the puck while protecting fragile leads, creating dangerous face-offs in their own zone. In addition, Vigneault has seemed at times to lose faith in his younger players, juggling lines and shortening his bench in almost random fashion.
Even the coach admitted there was no particular reason for the brevity of Smith’s appearance in the third period — only 2 minutes 34 seconds.
Lundqvist was off his usual form in Game 2, allowing a couple of soft goals on shots he normally handles with relative ease. There has also been some luck involved, good and bad. Each of the Senators’ six playoff victories in April has come by exactly one goal. Pageau scored a grand total of 12 goals this season, yet he managed four goals in Game 2 with the help of a couple of seeing-eye deflections in front of the crease.
All this leaves the Rangers in a grave situation. They badly need to win the next two games at home, where they have enjoyed little success this season. If they lose on Tuesday, falling into a 3-0 hole, their chances are next to impossible.
Before this postseason began, according to NHL.com, only four teams out of 184 had ever climbed out of such a dire situation. That amounted to 2.2 percent, or about a 1-in-45 chance.
Vigneault agreed that he and the team could use the extra day off to figure out exactly what they have been doing wrong.
The N.H.L., too, has much at stake. The league may be headed for a perfect storm of small-market playoff matchups. It is not unlikely that the conference finals will involve teams from Ottawa, Edmonton, Pittsburgh and Nashville. Good for Canada. Not so good for TV ratings in the United States.
This is not a direct concern for the Rangers, of course. They just want to bring another series back to New York, regardless of population size.