RIO DE JANEIRO — It could have been the plot of one of Brazil’s hugely popular nighttime soap operas.
A young woman achieves her show business dreams by getting hired as a wardrobe assistant on a television program, only to become the target of repeated and unrelenting sexual harassment by one of the stars.
Actually, this occurred on the set of a soap opera, or telenovela, called “The Law of Love” on Brazil’s omnipresent Globo network. The woman, Susllem Tonani, eventually complained, and the actor, José Mayer, was suspended and made an abject public apology.
While that was not exactly the sort of happy ending that neatly ties up the overlapping subplots of Globo melodramas, it was applauded by an increasingly active feminist movement that has long denounced the deep-seated sexism in Brazilian culture.
“Viva the Women’s Spring,” Monica Iozzi, a Globo presenter and actress, wrote on Twitter.
Juliana de Faria, an activist and founder of the nonprofit Think Olga, said Globo’s response showed that women no longer had to endure mistreatment and could fight back. “It proves we have matured in terms of harassment,” she said.
Giulia Gomes, 16, a public school student in Rio de Janeiro, said the internet was helping to fuel a rise in feminism among young women like her. “People are increasingly connected and seeing why feminism exists and why there is no reason to accept sexism in our society,” she said.
Ms. Tonani wrote that Mr. Mayer had harangued her for months with inappropriate comments on her appearance, and that in February, he put his hand on her genitals in front of two female colleagues, who laughed. She went to the network and published her account on the website of the newspaper Folha de S.Paulo.
“I saw myself alone, unprotected, cornered, ridiculed, made inferior, invisible,” Ms. Tonani wrote.
Initially, Mr. Mayer denied the accusations and said the words and attitudes belonged to his character, not to him. But a campaign began to grow online, adopting the feminist slogan “Mexeu com uma, mexeu com todas,” or “mess with one, mess with all.” By the beginning of this month, within days, some of Globo’s most famous actresses had joined in, wearing T-shirts with the slogan in photographs posted on social media, as featured on the website for the Brazilian edition of Vogue — which happens to be partly owned by another arm of Globo.
Sérgio Valente, a Globo spokesman, said the company had investigated the accusations against Mr. Mayer for three weeks. “Demonstrations of support generate an impact, but they can’t conduct the response,” he said.
As Mr. Valente noted, the network and its soap operas have highlighted painful subjects like discrimination and drug abuse.
“We are aware that from content, we can create better behavior in society, and we do this with responsibility,” he said.
As the treatment of Ms. Tonani resonated this week, Mr. Valente and the network had to deal with a second uproar over inappropriate behavior by a Globo performer. On Sunday night, Marcos Harter, 37, a plastic surgeon competing on “Big Brother Brasil,” cornered a fellow contestant, Emilly Araújo, 20, a student with whom he was in a relationship; shouted at her; and grabbed her arm.
Appalled Brazilians quickly began sharing the hashtag #EuViviUmRelacionamentoAbusivo, meaning “I lived an abusive relationship,” and on Monday, Globo dropped Mr. Harter from the program. On Tuesday, he took to Instagram to apologize. “I never meant to injure or hurt her,” he wrote.
Despite the heightened awareness of sexual harassment and laws against domestic violence, many Brazilian women still suffer in silence. Ms. de Faria, however, expressed optimism.
