A pilot program for police officers to begin wearing body cameras this month cleared a major hurdle when it was approved last week by the federal monitor overseeing changes to the New York Police Department’s stop-and-frisk program.
But the court-ordered pilot, the test for a rollout to all 23,000 city patrol officers by 2019, could be stalled this week by legal challenges from civil liberties lawyers and police labor unions. The lawyers said there were serious flaws in the draft policy that spells out when officers must use the cameras and how the resulting footage should be handled.
Darius Charney, who represents the plaintiffs in Floyd v. City of New York, the case that prompted the court order, said the case lawyers would challenge the program in federal court in Manhattan this week. He said they would seek to broaden the circumstances in which officers must record and limit when officers may review footage.
“These are issues that get at the heart of what the policy is supposed to do,” Mr. Charney said.
In addition, police unions representing captains, lieutenants and detectives plan to ask the court to block the program temporarily and force the Police Department to negotiate over the additional responsibilities the program will impose on supervisors.
The legal challenges are the latest roadblocks for the program since it was ordered by the judge who declared the Police Department’s stop-and-frisk tactics unconstitutional in 2013. Even as body cameras have become a mainstay of policing in much of the country, they have not yet been issued in New York, with various parties — the Police Department, the court, civil rights lawyers and the public — trying to craft a careful set of rules to govern their use.
The goal has been to make sure that the cameras would promote police accountability and transparency, instead of merely increasing public surveillance, especially in the black and Latino communities that were harmed by racial profiling and aggressive stop-and-frisk tactics. But civil rights groups said that despite the lengthy process, the camera policy ignored critical feedback and fell short of its purpose.
Harlan Yu, a principal at Upturn, a consulting firm that evaluates police body-camera policies on a range of measures, agreed.
Finding the right balance is crucial for Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat who is seeking re-election in November and needs the support of voters who say he has reneged on promises to increase transparency and accountability for the police. Advocates of police reform have criticized his position that state law prohibits the release of officers’ disciplinary records, although it was buttressed by a recent state appeals court ruling.
Mr. de Blasio has pledged, if re-elected, to put body cameras on the entire patrol force in two years, a move that would dwarf some of the largest body-camera programs in the nation. For instance, all 800 patrol officers in Denver and more than 2,600 in Washington wear cameras. Denver plans to equip 500 other officers with cameras this year.
In a letter to the court on Tuesday, the federal monitor, Peter Zimroth, urged Judge Analisa Torres to allow the yearlong pilot to proceed without further input from the court. If she agrees, roughly 1,200 officers on the evening shift in 20 precincts across the city will be wearing the cameras by the fall, starting with Manhattan’s 34th Precinct, which covers the Washington Heights and Inwood neighborhoods.
But Mr. Charney, a lawyer for the Center for Constitutional Rights, said the lawyers in the Floyd case “vehemently disagree” with the monitor’s letter. “Saying that the court that ordered the pilot should not weigh in on its implementation seems completely contradictory to us,” he said.
The proposed policy would require officers to turn their cameras on when responding to a crime in progress; making arrests; issuing summonses; and conducting most searches, traffic stops and pedestrian stops. They would also be required to record housing patrols, the transportation of prisoners and interactions with emotionally disturbed people.
Officers would be able to choose to record other encounters with the public, except things like interviews with victims and strip-searches.
The Police Executive Research Forum, a law-enforcement policy nonprofit, recommends giving officers some discretion over when to record, but the Denver Police Department’s pilot program in 2014 offers a cautionary tale. More than half of the 45 episodes in which on-duty officers used force were not recorded because their cameras were off or the resulting footage was not usable, according to a monitor’s report. The most common reason, the report said, was that “the encounters progressed or deteriorated too quickly” for officers to safely activate their cameras.
Mr. Charney hopes to prevent that in New York.
The New York Police Department sought comments on the policy from officers and the public through surveys administered last summer by the New York University School of Law’s Policing Project and the Marron Institute of Urban Management. More than 5,400 officers and 25,000 people who lived, worked or went to school in the city participated in the surveys.
In response to the comments from the public, the Police Department tightened the policy to require officers to tell people when they are recording as soon as they believe it is practical and safe to do so.
Barry Friedman, the director of the N.Y.U. Policing Project, said the feedback showed that the public wants to have a say in how police officers do their jobs.
But public opinion did not sway the department on other guidelines. Only 27 percent of public respondents agreed that officers should be allowed to view footage before writing a report, compared with 86 percent of officers.
For civilians who are filmed, the footage will be difficult to view. People charged with a crime will have to go through the legal discovery process. Those who are not charged will have to request the footage under the state Freedom of Information Law, a process that the Police Department acknowledges is cumbersome. Transparency advocates said that would unfairly deter people from filing complaints against officers and leave criminal defendants to bargain blind with prosecutors.
In Washington and Las Vegas, gaining access to footage is sometimes as easy as filling out a request form and scheduling a viewing. In North Carolina, it requires a court order.
New York police officials, defending the policy ahead of its release, said there was nothing left to do but to try it.
