For Debra Dixon, a principal with TwinLogic Strategies, a boutique lobbying firm in Washington, staying on top of her career has required flexibility and fine-tuning.
Ms. Dixon, 52, worked for former Representative Xavier Becerra, Democrat of California, for nearly 17 years, first as his legislative director and trade counsel, and then as his chief of staff, until she was appointed chief of staff for the United States Department of Education’s Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development in 2014.
Two years later, Ms. Dixon started her own consulting business, Dixon Avecilla.
For women like Ms. Dixon who have been in the work force for decades, it is increasingly important to stay relevant and on top of their professional game to remain marketable to employers and clients. Many women need to keep working past traditional retirement age given their longer life spans and often lower earnings than their male counterparts, which often mean less retirement savings. The Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that by 2022 about 28 percent of women ages 65 to 74 will be in the labor force, up from 12.5 percent in 1992.
To keep her career moving ahead, Ms. Dixon said she had to make a “big adjustment” from being a leader of teams to being an individual contributor, but she is happy she did it.
Women need to take an inventory of their strengths and accomplishments, Ms. Hewlett said, and make sure people know about them.
For most professions, having an up-to-date social media presence and LinkedIn profile show that someone is not a Luddite when it comes to navigating the internet. Ms. Dixon is convinced that although she and Ms. Frazee has been in touch periodically, it was when she brushed up her LinkedIn page that she came across Ms. Frazee’s radar again.
Career experts widely acknowledge that continuing education and skill building are important to keeping a career viable. “Take an online coding class,” advised Sallie Krawcheck, the author of “Own It: The Power of Women at Work;” a co-founder and chief executive of Ellevest, a digital investment platform for women; and the chairwoman of Ellevate Network, a professional women’s network.
“Master some new technology,” she said. “Freelance on the side to boost your talents; spend time with people who are innovating in your industry and even starting companies.
