The Hulu series, which stars Elisabeth Moss and is based on Margaret Atwood’s dystopian novel, arrives with an unexpected resonance in Trump’s America.
TORONTO — This is how a war on women ramps up: First, their bank accounts are frozen, and then they’re forbidden to work. Protesters gather, waving signs and chanting. Then, in this flashback scene from the first episode of the new Hulu series “The Handmaid’s Tale,” the police open fire on the demonstrators. Bloodied bodies fall, and the camera holds tight on the story’s heroine, Offred, played by Elisabeth Moss, whose disbelieving face seems to ask, What world is this?
Based on Margaret Atwood’s 1985 dystopian novel, the series tells the story of a country reinvented: A violent religious coup has turned the United States into Gilead, a theocracy where women have been stripped of their rights and the more fertile conscripted into “handmaids,” forced to bear children for the elite. Though the protest scene was filmed last fall, and, like the series itself, conceived long before a dizzying election season and aftermath that have catapulted Ms. Atwood’s book up the Amazon best-seller list, the television adaptation arrives with a newfound and unexpected resonance in Trump’s America.
Before the series even debuts on Wednesday, April 26, references to “The Handmaid’s Tale” — shorthand for repressive patriarchy — seem ubiquitous. A photo of a group of male Republicans at the White House debating maternity services with nary a woman in sight earned the social media hashtag #Gilead. Last month, women in Handmaids’ red dresses and bonnets sat side-by-side in the Texas State Capitol to protest anti-abortion measures under consideration.
The tonal dread and brutality of Ms. Atwood’s novel are omnipresent in the series, but there are potential pitfalls to adapting a feminist touchstone so faithfully while also having to speak to a political moment the creators did not anticipate. Will fans of the novel want to subject themselves to 10 hours of immersion into their deep fears?
It was still the Obama era when Hulu pursued the property two years ago, as part of a strategy to broaden its identity from a glorified video recorder to a producer of original programming. The showrunner Bruce Miller threw his hat in the ring when Ilene Chaiken, who had been developing the adaptation at MGM, departed for “Empire.” A veteran writer-producer on shows including “E.R.” and “Eureka,” Mr. Miller had been obsessed with the novel since reading it as an undergraduate at Brown, even having his agent continually check to see if the film or TV rights were available.
But Mr. Miller wasn’t a shoo-in for showrunner because producers were looking for a woman, he recalled. “The Handmaid’s Tale” has been a seminal rite-of-passage novel for many young women for over three decades; a feminist sacred text.
MGM and Hulu selected Mr. Miller after he pitched what he described as an adaptation grounded in a recognizable reality, and hewing closely to the book’s first-person point of view through close-ups and Offred’s Atwoodian voice-over. Structured like a thriller where no one can be trusted, the tense adaptation doesn’t sanitize the book’s cruelty either. Offred’s daughter has been taken by the state, and she has become a possession “Of-Fred,” the Commander (Joseph Fiennes). The depths of his control and the horrific absence of hers are unflinchingly displayed when Offred lies impassively between the legs of the Commander’s wife while enduring government-sactioned rape. Close-ups amplify the claustrophobia; Ms. Moss said that the camera sometimes came so near to her face that she would bump up against it.
To that end, when Mr. Miller finished writing the first two episodes, he sent them to Ms. Atwood; she approved. He made sure his writing staff was almost entirely female, and hired women to direct all but two of the 10 episodes.
Ms. Moss (“Mad Men”) agreed to the part if she could be an active producer, weighing in on scripts and cuts. She pushed to hire the director Reed Morano (Beyoncé’s “Lemonade” movie) for the first three episodes.
According to Ms. Moss, there was no effort to rewrite the series in light of the new national mood because there was no need. As filming progressed here last fall and campaign-season reports of a boast about genital grabbing and “Lock her up” rhetoric filled the news, any necessary critique was already there.
On a suburban soundstage in January, Ms. Moss sat by the window in Offred’s tiny room-cum-prison. To Atwood fans, the monastic set will be instantly recognizable as an early line from the novel: “A chair, a table, a lamp.”  (“That’s where the voice-over will go,” Mr. Miller whispered, watching on a monitor.) Carved in the closet was the phrase left by the handmaid who preceded Offred, the one who hanged herself: “Nolite te bastardes carborundorum.” Don’t let the bastards grind you down.
The edict was scrawled on signs at women’s marches around the world in January, as were other nods to the book. Meanwhile, the debate over legislation to defund Planned Parenthood included frequent references to the measures as Handmaid-ian, and the executive vice president of Planned Parenthood said: “We’re living ‘The Handmaid’s Tale.’” It’s all publicity, true, a kind of pop-up grass-roots marketing that a new series on a streaming service trying to compete with Netflix and Amazon can only dream of. But these associations aren’t exactly positive.
Bleakness is a hurdle for any dystopia, an imaginary society of the worst kind that articulates anxieties about the world we’re in now. Hulu’s version of “The Handmaid’s Tale” enters a cultural landscape crowded with the genre: A new film of “Blade Runner” will be released in the fall, and George Orwell’s “1984” is another retro best-seller, and scheduled for a run on Broadway this summer.
Television is a mass market, so perhaps it’s not surprising that widespread social disquiet would play out in that medium. Viewers can choose from post-apocalyptic dystopias (“The 100”) or corporate ones (“Mr. Robot”), technological (“Black Mirror”), or ones where survivors fend off zombies (“The Walking Dead”). But the graveyard of canceled TV dystopias is also crowded — “The Aftermath,” “Incorporated” — as if, perhaps, there’s a limit to an audience’s appetite for misery.
Gilead is not technically a futuristic society, but a backward (or sideways) glance. Ms. Atwood is something of a scholar of Puritanism, and she said every horrific episode in the story happened somewhere in history already, whether stonings or enslavement, reproductive restrictions or forbidding women to read.
“The theory being that if human beings have done it once they can do it again,” said Ms. Atwood, who recently received the National Book Critics Circle lifetime achievement award, and at 77, seems more current than ever. She has 1.54 million followers on Twitter, and a Netflix-CBC adaptation of her novel “Alias Grace” was also filming in Toronto this fall, by the writer-director Sarah Polley. In a curly-haired cameo in the premiere episode of “The Handmaid’s Tale,” she whacks an out-of-line Ms. Moss over the head.
“That will be my image forever,” she deadpanned.
The tweak locates the story in the now, flicking at those who rail against collegiate feminist “snowflakes” with their “safe spaces” and “trigger warnings” — viewers are invited to recognize a new iteration of ’80s Moral Majority scorn.
“The Handmaid’s Tale” has been a film, a play, an opera, a ballet, and — soon — a graphic novel. The book has never been out of print, but Ms. Atwood said that she noticed a drop in interest in the early 1990s, around the time a film adaptation by Harold Pinter, starring Natasha Richardson, was released to a tepid reception.
“Right after the Iron Curtain came down, people were saying: It’s the end of history — tra la la! All is well! At those times, dystopia is less chord striking because it seems less possible,” Ms. Atwood said.
So perhaps our hunger for the genre serves as catharsis for those in difficult times, which may bode well for Hulu, at least.
Almost accidentally, the new “Handmaid’s Tale” enters the culture as its own kind of Offred-like resistance, pushing back against a reality that somehow got ahead of the show’s own imagination. On set in January, several people were wearing a uniform of sorts, as if enlisted: baseball hats that Ms. Moss had bought and distributed. Inscribed on them: Nolite te bastardes carborundorum.