The tale of the lease buyout is almost mythical in New York.
It goes something like this: A tenant with the good fortune of a rent-regulated apartment in a hot neighborhood negotiates a six- or even seven-figure payout in exchange for the keys. On the surface, a buyout may look like a sweetheart deal for a tenant. But tenant advocates say the reality is often dark, with landlords preying on vulnerable tenants and bullying people into leaving their homes for paltry sums.
Even under the darkest circumstances, though, plenty of landlords still cut the checks. But what happens if they don’t?
On Jan. 31 of this year, Machiveni Tigrai moved out of his rent-regulated, $1,720-a-month one-bedroom apartment in the East Village, expecting to receive a $260,000 buyout. He piled his belongings into a U-Haul and handed in the keys. But his landlord did not give him the money. Instead, when he called, he just got voice mail and silence.
So Mr. Tigrai, 37, who works in technology, slept in his U-Haul in the middle of winter, afraid to leave his belongings unattended. As the days wore on, he became increasingly anxious. He did not want to sign a lease on a new apartment until he had the check in hand, and he did not want to pay for storage. So he stayed with the truck, some nights sleeping on friends’ couches. “You’re always kind of anxious with a deal of this magnitude,” he said.
As it turned out, Mr. Tigrai had good reason to worry. His landlord, Raphael Toledano, failed to pay 15 tenants their promised buyouts as his fledgling real estate empire, Brookhill Properties, faltered.
“He pulled the rug out from under them,” said SaMi Chester, a housing organizer at Cooper Square Committee, an advocacy group that represents tenants in properties Mr. Toledano owns in the East Village.
Over the last three years, Mr. Toledano, 27, acquired around 30 Manhattan rental properties and a notorious reputation. He bought a portfolio of 15 buildings, including Mr. Tigrai’s building on East 12th Street, from the Tabak family for $97 million in 2015. He financed the deal with a $124 million loan from Madison Realty Capital, a real estate investor, planning to use the extra money for buyouts and renovations.
What followed was a familiar playbook: Coerce tenants to give up their valuable rent-regulated apartments with threats of eviction or offers of cash payouts, or both. Once the tenants leave, renovate the empty spaces and lease them for considerably more money. “At the end of the day, it’s a part of the business plan,” Mr. Toledano said in a telephone interview.
But that business plan became a nightmare for some of his tenants. Last year, tenants in a building Mr. Toledano owns on East 13th Street settled a harassment suit against him after they secretly recorded his agent making threatening statements. Mr. Tigrai said that to persuade him, Mr. Toledano called him six or seven times a day, from different numbers, a violation of a city tenant harassment law.
The clock was ticking for Mr. Toledano. His deal with Madison Realty Capital gave him a year to clear out apartments, then renovate and rent them.
“He really came in with the idea that he was going to be able to empty out that whole portfolio and people were going to roll over,” Mr. Chester, the housing advocate, said.
As time went on, the buyout offers grew. In June 2016, Ms. Bekman, who had lived in her $1,900-a-month one-bedroom apartment for 25 years, signed a deal for $600,000, the largest payout any of the tenants were offered. In all, 140 of the 300 tenants who lived in the 15 buildings signed buyout agreements, totaling $7 million in payouts, Mr. Toledano said.
But by the time Mr. Tigrai and Ms. Bekman signed agreements to give up their apartments, Mr. Toledano was unable to pay his debts. To shield himself from personal liability, Mr. Toledano had purchased each of his properties using limited liability companies. Last summer, the L.L.C.s that owned the buildings in the Madison Realty portfolio went into default and Madison stopped funding the buyouts.
In early February of this year, just days after Mr. Tigrai moved out, Madison Realty filed for foreclosure on the properties. About two weeks later, Mr. Tigrai received an email from Brookhill Properties: The company did not have the money to pay him.
Realizing that he had lost his home and anticipated nest egg, Mr. Tigrai hired a lawyer, James B. Fishman. “I think what happened here is pretty outrageous,” Mr. Fishman said.
On March 6, a judge ordered Mr. Tigrai back into his apartment, restoring his lease until the case is resolved. He came back to an apartment that still had stains on the ceiling from years of water damage. A few days after he moved back in, he discovered large holes that had been cut in the wood floors without warning. The management told him it had needed to access pipes to repair leaks in another apartment, he said.
In late March, the L.L.C.s that owned the properties filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, halting the foreclosure. At an April 14 hearing, a judge gave Madison Realty’s management company, Silverstone Property Group, the temporary authority to operate the properties, to collect rent and make repairs. “Now the tenants will have some clarity about who their management is,” said Mr. Shatz of Madison Realty.
Mr. Toledano, meanwhile, has been selling off other East Village properties and said he was in contract with an investor to buy a $200 million portfolio of properties in the West Village, a neighborhood where he said tenants were less organized.
