Eggs Kejriwal.Credit...Gentl and Hyers for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Amy Wilson.
Good morning, and happy Passover to those who tonight will retell the story of the Jewish exodus from Egypt, and the arrival of freedom. It is a night different from all others. If you need any last-minute food ideas for the Seder, peruse our extensive collection of recipes for the Passover table and hop to it. Daylight’s burning.
As for those for whom it’s just another manic Monday: Did you see Tejal Rao’s glittery “Eat” column in The Times Magazine on Sunday? It’s a pure pleasure to read and, when you’re done, you’ll want to make her new recipe for spicy grilled cheese with egg.
You’ll probably want, too, to make Melissa Clark’s new recipe for ambrosia cake: towering, pillowy and sweet. It might be a challenge for a weeknight, but increasingly I’m of the opinion that project cooking ought not to be relegated solely to weekends and vacations. The Nielsen Company recently issued its audience report for the last quarter of 2016: Americans over 18 spent a collective 72.5 billion minutes consuming news in an average week last year, up 18 percent from the year before, and a lot of that time was devoted to cable news. Which often isn’t news so much as opinion (amirite?). Take a night off from all that. Go on. Bake a cake. Read the newspaper in the morning.
Aren’t you virtuous! Keep it up later in the week, with Florence Fabricant’s new recipe for a quinoa salad with Swiss chard, mushrooms and goat cheese — a fine light lunch or dinner, to be sure, or a substantial accompaniment, served hot or cold, to a meal of sweet and spicy grilled chicken breasts.
Meanwhile, those planning an Easter feast this coming weekend ought to be, well, planning. We’ve got you covered with a big guide to the essentials of an Easter feast, from homemade saffron honey Peeps to all that you need to know about cooking a ham. (Or, for that matter, lamb!) One thing is for certain in my house: We’ll be starting with Mark Bittman’s recipe for deviled eggs with shrimp.
Thousands more recipes you could cook this week are on Cooking. (Have you made my recipe for patty melts yet?) Save the ones you like to your recipe box, so you can find them later — you might create a separate folder for your Easter menu, or your best midweek meals. Rate the recipes you love. And, please, leave notes on the ones you’ve tweaked. We learn from each other, every day.
Finally, if you run into trouble, reach out directly |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| We can help if you run into problems with the technology, and often with the cooking as well.
Now, nothing to do with the kitchen, but in case you missed it, here’s Bill Reader in The Seattle Times, with a history of Pearl Jam that both says a lot about old Seattle and provides some explanation of why people hate that band so much.
Also: Jenna Wortham in our own Times, on why Silicon Valley can’t fix online harassment.
And, just because the images are beautiful, take a look at the slide show for “Adiós Utopia” at the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston, an exhibition that plumbs the dreams and deceptions of Cuban art since 1950. (My colleague Holland Cotter wrote about it here.) I’ll be back on Wednesday.