In a move that promises to bring a more diverse mix of voices to Broadway, a nonprofit theater company announced on Thursday that it had commissioned work from nine critically acclaimed playwrights, part of its pledge to present living American writers on New York’s most prestigious stages.
“No Brits. No Chekhov translations. No classics,” vowed Carole Rothman, the artistic director of Second Stage Theater, which acquired Broadway’s smallest theater in 2015, and is now renovating the building for reuse starting next spring.
Ms. Rothman said her theater is supporting new works by the nine playwrights — seven of them women, three of them African-American, and one of them Asian-American — with the intention of bringing the shows to Broadway. Six of the works will have initial productions in Los Angeles, at the Center Theater Group, under an unusual collaboration intended to smooth the developmental journey for American playwrights.
Broadway has become a difficult landscape for American writers creating new plays, chiefly because of the high cost of producing shows there. The heavy percentage of tourists in the overall audience means that theater owners and producers lean toward razzle-dazzle musicals and classic revivals with a better shot at becoming profitable. Even nonprofit theaters on Broadway — and six of the 41 houses are now run by nonprofits — often, although not exclusively, mount large musicals and starry revivals.
But Second Stage has a rare opportunity to try something different because the theater it bought — the Helen Hayes — has only 585 seats, which is quite small for Broadway, and which can be partly filled with the nonprofit’s subscribers rather than relying heavily on tourists. The $22 million theater renovation, by the architect David Rockwell, is being financed as part of a $64 million fund-raising drive by the theater, which has raised 76 percent of that goal thus far.
Broadway productions matter to playwrights not just because of the prestige — only Broadway shows are eligible for Tony Awards — but also because work presented there is often staged around the country and the world. Lynn Nottage, who has won two Pulitzer Prizes, for “Sweat” and for “Ruined,” and is one of the writers commissioned by Second Stage, said the endeavor will open doors to female and minority playwrights, who are underrepresented on Broadway.
“Lobby Hero,” which will begin next March, will be followed by a production in July 2018 of “Straight White Men,” written by Young Jean Lee and directed by Anna D. Shapiro. Ms. Lee would be the first Asian-American woman to have a play produced on Broadway.
“On the one hand, that’s great, but it’s also like, ‘Oh, why hasn’t there been another Asian-American female on Broadway?’” Ms. Lee said.
But the most potentially game-changing aspect of the Second Stage plan is its effort to create a pipeline to Broadway for living American writers. Other nonprofits routinely commission plays by many of the same people, and only sometimes those works transfer to Broadway. The Second Stage initiative is unusual in creating an explicit pathway to Broadway, with a preliminary production elsewhere and then, if all goes well, a transfer to the Helen Hayes.
The theater has not only underwritten work from nine well-regarded writers (six of whom have previously worked on Broadway), but it has negotiated partnerships with three other entities to jointly commission and help develop those works before Broadway.
The most significant partnership is with Center Theater Group, one of the largest nonprofit theaters in the country, which has commissioned, with Second Stage, six of the writers, including Ms. Nottage and another Pulitzer winner, Paula Vogel (“Indecent”); the Tony winner Lisa Kron (“Fun Home”); as well as Jon Robin Baitz (“Other Desert Cities”), Will Eno (“The Realistic Joneses”) and Ms. Lee. All but Ms. Lee have had work on Broadway, Ms. Nottage and Ms. Vogel only this year, after long careers.
Center Theater Group also announced Thursday separate partnerships with the Goodman Theater in Chicago, and the National and Royal Court theaters in London, to commission new works that would have multiple productions.
“I will get a wider variety and a greater quality and quantity of good plays for my audience,” said Michael Ritchie, the artistic director of the Los Angeles theater.
Second Stage said it has also agreed to commission with True Colors Theater (founded by the director Kenny Leon) new Broadway-bound works by the playwrights Lydia R. Diamond (“Stick Fly”) and Dominique Morrisseau (“Skeleton Crew”), and with Williamstown Theater Festival a new play by Bess Wohl (“Small Mouth Sounds”).
Second Stage also announced Thursday that it would present a production of “Mary Page Marlowe,” by Tracy Letts, in its existing Off Broadway theater next June.
