286 pp. Henry Holt & Company. $28.
If he insists.
But for fans of the musician, his death at 57 in 2016 felt, even more than other departures, like a jarring disruption in the workings of the universe. How could all of that energy and brilliance and eccentricity exist one moment and not the next? Where did it go?
“Dig if You Will the Picture” isn’t a biography. It isn’t an annotated discography. It isn’t a memoir of fandom. It’s a bit of all these things. To this collage-like task, Greenman, a former editor at The New Yorker and the author of several previous books, brings both broad and specific bona fides.
Broadly, he’s often written about music, and collaborated on books with Questlove, George Clinton and Brian Wilson. Specifically, he’s a Prince obsessive. He recounts buying the lascivious early records when he was just a kid in Miami. When “The Black Album” was being famously not released in 1987, Greenman, then a college student at Yale, traveled to New York and paid $100 for a poorly made samizdat copy. Most important, he’s clearly listened to every track, from the classics to the swollen output of the aughts, which is more than one might fairly ask even of Prince’s biggest fans.
Greenman writes in an introduction that his book is not just an “investigation” and “celebration,” but “a frustration as well.” He means the frustration of trying to capture the experience of Prince’s music in words. But it’s also difficult to piece together the details of his life. Prince left home when he was a teenager to live with a friend’s family, but the events and tenor of his early years mostly elude capture. Since his death, more about his adult life has become known, though often through anecdotes so quirky that they sound like urban legends.
What we do know for sure is that Prince was “gifted, restless, virtuosic, relentless, airborne,” as Greenman puts it, but that he could also be “dropsical,” “fussy” and “incoherent.” There was, first and foremost, the “recurring self-indulgence” (“not an uncommon problem among geniuses”) and lax quality control as time went on. Greenman looks at those flaws with clear eyes, but he’s such an admirer that he can be touchingly over-praiseful as well, particularly when it comes to lyrics. He can make all the comparisons to William Blake he wants (and he does), but many of the lyrics he approvingly quotes just don’t scan. Is “I’ve got to have your face / all up in the place” really a “marvelously compressed” couplet? And if “When two are in love, the falling leaves appear to them like slow-motion rain” is “some of his loveliest natural imagery,” then maybe natural imagery wasn’t his strongest suit.
Prince made a dizzying number of aesthetic decisions that the less flighty among his fans would have found unforgivably cheesy in anyone else. Perfectly typical was the list of images he sent to guide the cover-art designer for the album “Around the World in a Day.” They included “a tearful old woman, a clown juggling the earth, and a ladder ascending to heaven.” When he changed his name to an unpronounceable symbol for a time, newspapers were at a loss to reproduce it in print. So Prince mailed out hundreds of floppy disks containing the symbol in “multiple resolutions and variations.” During his contractual struggles with Warner Brothers, he wrote the word “slave” on his face. The reason he could remain so respected and beloved despite all his goofiness and more serious distractions is a pure tautology: because he was Prince.
The stingy Prince that Greenman recounts in a chapter titled “Call the Law” — the stern copyright enforcer who targeted YouTube clips and other unauthorized uses of his work, to “no real effect other than to alienate fans” — was difficult to square with the performer who gave of himself so generously in concert and could even be self-deprecatingly funny. (In the 2010 song “Laydown,” the diminutive star referred to himself as “the purple Yoda.”) Perhaps his attempts to control the internet were a way of overcompensating for having felt powerless against Warner Brothers.
Greenman’s book is not a straight path, but it doesn’t aspire to be. It mostly succeeds on its own terms, as an overview of the talent, the excesses, the adoration. But with the loss of Prince still fresh, the compelling question lingers as to whether he can be written about in a way that’s fully and traditionally satisfying; whether anyone — 20, 30 or 40 years from now — will be able to look back and write a life of him that some review might call “magisterial.” Certainly he’s worthy of one. But the mystery of him — the prodigious one given to him seemingly at birth, and the coy one manufactured by him — might be too profound a barrier. For now we have discerning, still-grieving fans like Greenman, shining light where they can.