Sunday’s episode of “The Good Fight” could have been the one that really developed the show’s black characters. It had all the makings of a truly moving piece of television. But unfortunately, after starting with a sucker punch, it ended with all the commitment of a shrug.
The firm’s founding partner, Carl Reddick (Louis Gossett Jr.), returns with a dual purpose: to aid what seems to be a minor case on behalf of Rev. Jeremiah Easton (Frankie Faison) and to wrestle back control of his firm. Reddick argues that Boseman has chosen profit over the civil rights ethics the firm was built on. Taking on a client like Chumhum, one of “the whitest companies in Silicon Valley,” is directly counter to the reasons Reddick created the firm in the first place. Boseman contends that without the considerable money that companies like Chumhum bring in, the firm’s idealism would have no impact because they’d all be out of work.
The battle between Boseman and Reddick involves more than mere egotism. Looked at from a certain angle, it is a proxy for current conversations within the black community on the shifting nature of activism and on capitalism as a disease directly tied to racism — not a means to break free from that bigotry. It’s a compelling idea. Unfortunately, the story only puts a harsh spotlight on the faults of the series. Part of the problem is the Rev. Jeremiah case, which Diane takes the lead on.
Rev. Jeremiah is trying to evict a tenant, Paul Johnson (Chris Myers), from the halfway home he runs after Paul breaks the “no drugs” rule. When Diane, Jay and Maia visit Paul in order to deliver the eviction notice, things hit a snag. Paul says that Rev. Jeremiah has been assaulting him and that the only reason he’s being evicted is because he is no longer performing sexual acts. Once Gabriel Kovac (Fisher Stevens), his underhanded lawyer, is introduced, Paul’s claims start to seem dubious. Kovac openly talks about blackmailing Rev. Jeremiah, crudely discusses the particulars of the case, hits on Marissa and acts as if he’s being persecuted. Kovac insists he has proof of Rev. Jeremiah’s misdeeds, but the surveillance tape offered is missing an hour of footage.
After Marissa notices the Fitbit Paul wears in the tape, they’re able to track his movements. And once Jay does a bit of sleuthing, it’s revealed that the accusations are a fiction, the entire case funded by an alt-right group hoping to tarnish Rev. Jeremiah. It’s a somewhat disconcerting story line given the way it frames a false rape allegation (which are exceedingly rare). But what’s more troubling in this episode involves the other characters.
At this point, it’s a downright miracle that actress Cush Jumbo is able to keep me so engaged with Lucca. Despite being marketed as one of the three leads of this series, her arc thus far has been uninspiring. Her relationship with Colin is most interesting when the two tussle in various court cases. But as Lucca’s story line has become defined by this romantic entanglement, she has become less and less interesting. Their relationship hits a new low when Francesca (Andrea Martin), Colin’s mother, spots them kissing at an art opening. When Lucca attends Colin’s 32nd birthday party, she learns more about her paramour and his family than she would like.
It is a tour through some of the worst liberal racism I’ve seen on television in a while. Lucca is forced to become a spokeswoman for black people everywhere after she’s asked a series of laughable and demeaning questions. At one point, a guest even asks Lucca if she knows Jay-Z. “Please don’t judge me by this evening,” Colin says. But it’s hard not to. Lucca is forced to reassess the relationship after she learns that Colin may be running for senator and that she is a “demographic dream” as his “hot black girlfriend.” “I’m not an accessory, I’m not a trophy,” she says upon deciding to break up with him. It all has very little impact considering their relationship was murkily defined at best. It’s also a bit rich that Lucca tells Colin she’s not an accessory when the writers behind “The Good Fight” treat her as such.
“The Good Wife” was able to deftly construct inter-firm feuds as a way to develop characters and push the plot in interesting directions. But the fight over Reddick, Boseman & Kolstad feels forgettable. Barbara ends up casting the vote that ties Boseman and Reddick. And instead of fighting further to push Boseman out, Reddick leaves with just a few harsh words. It’s hard to be invested in this story when the characters remain paper thin. It’s also quite damning that Barbara is treated as a footnote when she’s a name partner of the firm. “The Good Fight” is a good show. It is fun, well acted, slickly produced and politically relevant in ways no other show is currently. But until the writers realize that its characters need development in order for its politics to be emotionally impactful, this show will never be great.
• I don’t know if I believe Henry really meant to commit suicide. By falling off the ledge instead of hanging himself, he’s gotten everything he wanted. Maia is back at his side and even went so far as to hide any evidence of the suicide attempt so his bail wouldn’t be revoked. Lenore leaves Jax. Henry’s family is back together. He has proved to be very manipulative, and he hasn’t shown much care for anyone beside himself given how willing he was to torpedo Diane’s career to save himself.
• Julius’s being allowed to vote in the partner meeting was a particularly clumsy plot development.
• At one point Marissa laughingly tells Jay, “I’m pretty good at your job.” I find it interesting that the writers are developing Marissa as a plucky potential detective to the point that Jay is routinely getting sidelined.