BOSTON — The Cleveland Cavaliers had not been playing terrific basketball since the N.B.A. All-Star break. Teammates were squabbling on the bench. Their rebounding was atrocious. Their defense? Pass the Pepto. The entire package was enough to create some concern among the basketball-watching intelligentsia that the Cavaliers might be in some trouble.
And then they showed up here to play the Boston Celtics on Wednesday night, less than two weeks from the start of the postseason, and reminded everyone that they are good at their chosen field. Kyrie Irving said he could sense at the morning shootaround that his teammates were “locked in.” No kidding.
LeBron James brushed aside the suggestion that the Cavaliers’ 114-91 victory was anything other than a solid effort as the team rounds into playoff form. But the Cavaliers and the Celtics came into the game tied atop the Eastern Conference standings with identical records. They have history between them, and they could see each other again in the conference finals several weeks from now.
So the game meant something, no matter how much James tried to paint it as business as usual. It meant that the Cavaliers (51-27), after so many ups and downs this season, are still fearsome, a threat to repeat as N.B.A. champions. It meant that they had put themselves a game ahead of Boston in the race for the top seed in the East. And it meant that the Celtics still have homework before the playoffs, especially if they meet up with James again and he decides that he wants to pick-and-roll smaller defenders to smithereens.
James collected 36 points, 10 rebounds and 6 assists while shooting 14 of 22 from the field — which, in its own way, was just another night at the office. He just happens to make brilliance feel familiar.
The Celtics trailed by as many as 29. Coach Brad Stevens said he felt fortunate because it could have been even worse. His team got drubbed.
The win was even more impressive considering that it was the second of back-to-back games for Cleveland, coming on the heels of a victory against the Orlando Magic in Cleveland on Tuesday night. In addition, Tristan Thompson, the Cavaliers’ starting center, did not make the trip to Boston because of a sprained thumb.
Coach Tyronn Lue could have rested some of his other starters. It would not have been atypical for him to do. Instead, he let them loose.
“We’re going to go out to play to win,” he said about an hour before the game.
It was another indication, as if anyone needed one, that the Cavaliers set out Wednesday with the clear goal of taking another step toward securing home court advantage in the playoffs. And if they could inflict some psychological damage on the Celtics in the process, so be it. The Cavaliers, of course, have had their own issues.
In March, they went 7-10. One popular theory was that they were bored. The regular season is a slog, especially for teams that are coming off extended playoff runs. The Cavaliers were also missing important members of their rotation, including Kevin Love (knee surgery) and J. R. Smith (thumb surgery). Both have returned. The Cavaliers have won four straight.
James, in particular, was up to his usual tricks on the same night when the Oklahoma City Thunder’s Russell Westbrook (45 points, 10 assists, 9 rebounds), the Golden State Warriors’ Stephen Curry (42 points, 11 assists) and the Toronto Raptors’ Kyle Lowry (27 points, 10 assists) were engineering their own pyrotechnics in victories for their teams.
Lowry was playing in his first game for the Raptors since he injured his wrist in February. His team’s playoff hopes are almost wholly dependent on his health. On Wednesday, after a prolonged absence, he looked fearless. But much like the Celtics, the Raptors know that the road to the finals is likely to lead through Cleveland.
The Cavaliers are not perfect. One game does not tidy up all their rough edges or erase their infighting and occasional spats with dysfunction. But James, a master of the long haul, having towed his teammates through the grind of another regular season, his 14th in all, seems ready. Enjoy the show.