Art & Design|Art Goes Political, but Will That Fly on the London Market?
LONDON — This will be remembered as a year when art got seriously political. The Whitney Biennial in New York and the inaugural Athens edition of Documenta are just two of the high-profile exhibitions trying to convey and confront the tumult of our times.
Institutional exhibitions and the art market can be very different worlds. The updated wall label next to Ms. Schutz’s divisive painting states that it will not be sold, and Mr. Zmijewski’s disturbing documentaries are not the stuff of Sotheby’s or Christie’s auctions. Yet a rt with a political edge, or at least a heightened awareness of this moment, has made an impact at commercial galleries in London over the last couple of weeks.
Jordan Wolfson’s 2017 virtual reality work “Real Violence,” which comes with a “trigger warning” and an age restriction, was one of the most talked-of, and written-about, pieces at the Whitney Biennial. This two-minute-and-25-second digital animation, to be viewed through a virtual reality headset, seems to show the artist using a baseball bat to beat a stranger to death on a Los Angeles street.
Mr. Wolfson’s “act of unexplained violence” (as the Whitney put it) can also be experienced in London at Sadie Coles HQ’s first exhibition devoted to this New York artist, which opened on Thursday night. The work was made in an edition of 10, with two additional versions reserved for the artist, and it is being offered at an undisclosed price by Ms. Coles and the New York dealer David Zwirner. More than half of the edition has been sold, according to Julia Joern, a partner at Zwirner.
“Real Violence” was inspired by a YouTube clip of men fighting that is included in the longer 2017 video “Riverboat Song,” in which Mr. Wolfson’s cartoonish, Huckleberry Finn-like alter ego sings, dances and soliloquizes in a surreal, web-based alternate reality.
Both works are on view at Ms. Coles’s HQ gallery, together with two new mixed-media sculptures: “House With Face” and “Black Sculpture,” each made in editions of three, along with one for the artist. They further develop Mr. Wolfson’s theme of an American fairy tale turned nightmare. Though prices were not released in London, Ms. Joern said that Mr. Wolfson’s work ranges from $85,000 to $3 million in New York.
Far more overt in its political intent is the latest work of the Los Angeles-based artist Awol Erizku, who has questioned Mr. Trump’s suitability to be the 45th president of the United States. The result has been the ironically titled solo show “Make America Great Again,” at Ben Brown Fine Arts in Mayfair, which runs through June 2.
“As Trump rose to power, he got more and more powerful for my work,” said Mr. Erizku, 28, who was born in Ethiopia and is best known for taking the portrait with which Beyoncé chose to announce her pregnancy, drawing almost 11 million “likes” on Instagram. “We can always make work that’s beautiful, but the point of art is to change the world a little bit,” he added.
The London show, his first in Europe, consists of 15 works in a range of media. They include an American flag overprinted with a black panther, and corrugated iron paintings, daubed in one case with the number 12 (street slang for the police), and in another with numbers representing the past four American presidents, but with those of George W. Bush and Mr. Trump crossed out. That last piece was bought by an American collector based in London for $27,000, and all of the works have sold, for prices going up to about $50,000.
Mr. Brown said that collectors had primarily reacted to the visual qualities of Mr. Erizku’s works, rather than to their political content.
Buyers were also aware that the unique works, by an artist who has been validated by a singer with more than 100 million Instagram followers, were less expensive than his recent auction high of $52,500. That was the bid at a Phillips auction in New York on April 4 for the 2009 limited-edition photograph “Girl With a Bamboo Earring,” inspired by Vermeer.
By comparison, Thaddaeus Ropac’s elegantly refurbished 16,000-foot gallery in a Georgian townhouse in Mayfair, which opened on Wednesday, appears to be a more apolitical operation.
Mr. Ropac, who also has spaces in Paris and Salzburg, Austria, debuted at 37 Dover Street in London with four presentations, two of which combine works on loan and for sale: Early-1970s Gilbert & George videos and photographic “Drinking Pieces,” one of which is available for 145,000 pounds, or about $185,000, and another at 150,000; Conceptual and Minimal works from the collection of Egidio Marzona (prices yet to be disclosed); new works by the British sound sculptor Oliver Beer, priced at £10,000 to £100,000; and early drawings by Joseph Beuys, shown alongside the enigmatic cast-iron sculpture “Backrest of a Fine-Limbed Person (Hare-Type) of the 20th Century A.D.,” dating from 1972 to 1982 and on sale for 2.5 million euros.
This might look like business as usual at the top end of the commercial art world. It’s worth remembering, however, the extent to which Joseph Beuys was revered as a political artist-cum-activist in the 1960s, ’70s and ’80s. Perhaps that is the very reason his auction high is $1.2 million, according to Artnet, a figure that seems almost derisory for an artist of his importance and influence.
He left the company in February, without comment from either party, and he has returned to curating nonprofit exhibitions.
