It was the chance of a lifetime. It was a terror like no other.
Five promising filmmakers, most young and all hungry, were competing for a $1 million grant to make a feature that would have its premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival next year. The money came from AT&T, and the setup was very “Shark Tank”: They would have 10 minutes to pitch their movie to a jury whose members included Lee Daniels, Jeffrey Wright and Anthony Mackie.
The idea was hatched earlier this year when Fiona Carter, AT&T’s chief brand officer, asked Jane Rosenthal, the executive chair of Tribeca Enterprises, how to get more women and minorities making films.
Giving someone $1 million, Ms. Rosenthal replied, would certainly help; most indie filmmakers have to scramble for a hodgepodge of funds and grants.
So Ms. Carter made it happen. The winning film will stream on AT&T platforms, including DirecTV Now, and the four runners-up will each pocket $10,000.
Staffers at the festival and the Tribeca Film Institute sifted through hundreds of entries, looking for strong projects that were ready to go, and the final five were chosen.
All the filmmakers had to do was win over Mr. Daniels and company.
On Monday each team arrived at the Tribeca Film Center to run their spiels by institute staff members and get tips (among them, “Relay a sense of urgency”). Next, they practiced on set, walking from backstage into a blaze of lights, and facing a stand-in jury. The reality-show feel of it left them all, to a one, unnerved.
On Tuesday the teams showed up at the Film Center, wearing their Sunday best, racked by nerves and sleep deprived.
Mr. Okoro had spent the previous night and predawn hours rehearsing every 30 minutes. Derek Nguyen, who, with A. Sayeeda Moreno, was pitching “I’m Not Down,” about a fight against gentrification in the East Village, paced the block outside.
Things went pretty smoothly. Pitching her film, “The Hand of God,” about a child refugee who goes on to soccer superstardom, Lissette Feliciano found herself impassioned to the point of tears.
“Well, I love it!” Mr. Daniels declared after she wrapped.
Shortly before 11 a.m., the jurors repaired to deliberate behind closed doors. Minutes ticked by. They were scheduled to appear on the red carpet for a noon luncheon, but noon ticked by, too. Someone stuck a head in to say time was up but was shooed away.
The jurors headed around the corner to the restaurant Thalassa, where glamorous pre-luncheon cocktails were in full swing. Robert De Niro was milling about, and so were the actors Emily Mortimer, Alessandro Nivola, Cynthia Erivo and Malik Yoba.
