The Trump administration is worried that Chinese investors might try to buy Westinghouse Electric, the troubled American nuclear power company that the Japanese conglomerate Toshiba has offered for sale. It is not clear if Chinese buyers might be interested in the business, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection last week. But the worries highlight the new administration’s stance on China’s global acquisition strategy, and its plans to build up American industries.
Why would China want Westinghouse?
China is a rapidly expanding nuclear-energy power. It has more than 20 reactors under construction and is aiming to double the amount of electricity it can produce at its plants in the next three to four years.
But it lags behind the West in technology. Advanced reactors in China are being built by foreign groups, including Westinghouse, which is installing its next-generation AP1000 units at two facilities in the country.
Westinghouse is believed to have been targeted by Chinese spies. If a Chinese entity were to buy the company, China could obtain secrets without the cloak and dagger.
What’s alarming about that?
The Trump administration has not explained why it does not want China to own Westinghouse. Part of its concern could be economic: A widely predicted “nuclear renaissance” has stalled across most of the developed world — few plants are being built or planned in Western countries — but it is possible Washington does not want China to dominate a future revival. China is an increasingly wealthy and ambitious rival, and an advanced nuclear energy program could help it catch up to the United States faster.
Security is most likely a bigger concern. Although Westinghouse does not make nuclear weapons, the Trump administration may fear that China could find ways to use the company’s technology to improve its nuclear arsenal, another pillar of its growing power.
How might Washington block a sale?
It has options. The most direct involves the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, or Cfius, a government body that reviews acquisitions with possible national security implications. Its members include the secretaries of defense, state, energy, commerce and the Treasury. While only the American president has the power to block a cross-border acquisition on national security grounds, a recommendation by the committee to squelch a deal is widely considered a death sentence.
Alternatively, the administration could encourage a rival bid from a business based in the United States or in a friendly country — though that could be a challenge, given the small number of nuclear-plant builders and Westinghouse’s history of losing large amounts of money.
Does Japan have a say?
If anything, Japan is more wary of China than the United States is, and the government in Tokyo has no wish to see China get its hands on Westinghouse’s technology. That means that Japan would most likely welcome moves by the Trump administration to block a Chinese bid.
In any case, since Westinghouse is based in the United States, Cfius has jurisdiction, regardless of what the Japanese might want.
Yet Japan does need someone to buy Westinghouse, whose problems have caused billions of dollars in losses at Toshiba, one of Japan’s largest and proudest conglomerates, pushing it perilously close to collapse. Eliminating Chinese groups from the pool of potential buyers would come at an economic cost.
So of all the ways Washington might block a Chinese bid, simply saying “no” through Cfius, but without arranging a “yes” elsewhere, would be the least appealing to Japan.