Dr. Aakriti Garg was married April 15 to Hirsh Shukla. Pandit Yogeendra U. Bhat, a Hindu priest, led the ceremony at the JW Marriott Phoenix Desert Ridge Resort & Spa in Phoenix.
The bride, 29, is a third-year resident in ophthalmology at the Columbia University Medical Center Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute in New York. She graduated cum laude from the University of Southern California, and received a medical degree from Columbia.
She is the daughter of Dr. Shipra Garg and Dr. Ashok Garg of Paradise Valley, Ariz. The bride’s father, a cardiac electrophysiologist, is the owner of the Arizona Heart and Arrhythmia Clinic in Phoenix. He is also the founder and president of Phoenix Institute of CPR and Defibrillation, a nonprofit that generates awareness and training in India. Her mother is a pediatric pathologist at Phoenix Children’s Hospital. She is the author of a recently published review textbook on pediatric pathology. The bride’s parents are on the board of the Phoenix chapter of Pratham USA, a nonprofit providing educational opportunities to poor children mainly in the villages of India. The bride’s mother is the secretary of the chapter.
The groom, 29, is pursuing an M.B.A. at N.Y.U. In July he is to begin working as an associate in the investment banking division at Goldman Sachs Group in New York. He graduated cum laude from Cornell. Until 2015 he was a senior financial analyst in the pharmaceutical research and development division at Johnson & Johnson in Spring House, Pa.
He is a son of Prabha Shukla and Umesh A. Shukla of Belle Mead, N.J. The groom’s mother oversees the Hopewell, N.J., branch of the Federal Credit Union of Bristol-Myers Squibb. His father is a senior director in Janssen Research and Development in Titusville, N.J., a division of Johnson & Johnson. He is also the executive vice chairman of the Houston chapter of Health Foundation for Rural India, which helps provide health management for people living in villages of India.
The couple met in Philadelphia through a mutual friend in 2014.