As with other foreign policy issues, the Trump administration’s approach to Iran has been full of mixed messages. Yet amid the confusion, there has been an ominous tendency to demonize Iran and misrepresent the threat it presents. This could lead to an unnecessary and risky confrontation.
The administration’s various and conflicting responses to the 2015 Iran nuclear deal are a case in point. The deal, one of the Obama administration’s major triumphs, requires Iran to curb its nuclear activities in return for a lifting of economic sanctions. During the campaign, President Trump called it “one of the worst deals I’ve ever seen” and promised to tear it up or renegotiate it if he won the election. Last week, however, a letter from Secretary of State Rex Tillerson to the House speaker, Paul Ryan, signaled Mr. Trump’s intention to stick to the deal.
The letter certified that Iran was complying with the agreement, negotiated by five world powers in addition to the United States and Iran. The International Atomic Energy Agency, which monitors the agreement with on-site inspectors and advanced technology, reached the same conclusion in its most recent report.
However, in the letter, Mr. Tillerson also stressed that “Iran remains a leading state sponsor of terror” and said the administration was reviewing whether suspending sanctions continues to advance American interests. Further jumbling the administration’s views, Mr. Tillerson told reporters on Wednesday that the deal “fails to achieve the objective of a non-nuclear Iran” and “only delays their goal of becoming a nuclear state.” On Thursday, Mr. Trump accused Iran of not fulfilling “the spirit” of the deal. Yet on Friday, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis insisted during a visit to Israel that the deal “stills stands” and that Iran “appears to be living up to their part.” That same day, Mr Trump told The Associated Press that “it’s possible that we won’t” stay in the nuclear deal, The A.P. reported on Sunday.
Such sequential confusions are nothing new for Mr. Trump’s headspinning positions on important national security issues. Among those heads spinning are those belonging to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel and Republicans and Democrats who opposed the deal and thought they had a firm friend in Mr. Trump.
One possible reason Mr. Trump has muted his criticism is that the deal has clearly curtailed Iran’s nuclear program. It sharply limits the amount of uranium Iran is permitted to enrich and imposes checks that will allow the international community to know if there is cheating. Further, if America reneges on the deal, it will rightly bear the blame for its collapse and other world powers will be furious.
What may concern Mr. Trump when he says that Iran is not fulfilling the “spirit” of the deal is Tehran’s destabilizing role in the Mideast. The agreement was intended to resolve the most dangerous threat — preventing Iran from getting a bomb. But it did not and probably could not contain Iran’s meddling in Syria, Lebanon and Yemen, its support for extremists and its capacity to fan regional tensions.
These are legitimate concerns. But Iran is not the only nation roiling the region. And unlike his predecessor, Mr. Obama, who argued that Iran, a Shiite Muslim country, and the Sunni Arab states led by Saudi Arabia must find a way to co-exist, Mr. Trump seems to embrace the Saudi view that Iran should be portrayed in the harshest terms possible. For instance, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, pushed the Security Council on Thursday to focus on the “illegal and dangerous behavior” by the “chief culprit” of regional turmoil, Iran, and its ally Hezbollah.
Where exactly is Mr. Trump going with this? His comments echo statements used by past presidents when they tried to build a case for military action, as, for instance, against Iraq. This is not the time for such action. Mr. Trump would better serve himself and global stability by developing a strategy that seeks to counter Iran’s destabilizing behavior, but also seeks cooperation where possible.
For that, the administration will have to regularly converse with the Iranian government, something that appears not to have happened, even to try to win the release of the businessman Siamak Namazi, and his father, Baquer Namazi, two Iranian-Americans who were sentenced to 10 years in prison by Iran on trumped-up spying charges. To get them out, reduce regional tensions and keep the nuclear deal on track, working with the Iranians is a much more logical choice than bullying them.