Illustrated. 344 pages. Ballantine Books. $8.99.
Eugene Bondurant Sledge (1923-2001) was born in Mobile, Ala. A year after Pearl Harbor, while Sledge was a freshman at a two-year military college, he dropped out to join the Marines.
His experiences in the Pacific Theater, during grueling fighting on the islands of Peleliu and Okinawa, rattled his body and mind, and changed the arc of his life. Decades after he returned home, he began to collect his memories (he’d kept notes during the war on slips of paper he tucked into a pocket-size Bible) for his family.
“With the Old Breed” is, in other words, hardly unknown. But I am regularly surprised at the otherwise literate people of my acquaintance who not only have not read it but have not heard of it.
It’s time to move this book to a higher shelf, to that of nonfiction that is literature. “With the Old Breed” is a deep pleasure. At this mad juncture in American history, it’s an honor to meet this decent, humble, loyal, courageous and truth-obsessed man.
Sledge’s book is a stinging reminder of the sacrifices others have made to allow us to live the life that we do. If you can make it through without welling up at half a dozen spots, you are a stronger person than I.
“With the Old Breed” delivers up-close accounts of two very different battles. On Peleliu, men fought in the irradiating heat and on coral, which made finding shelter well-nigh impossible.
On Okinawa, Sledge and his fellow Marines fought in mud — mud that gave them trench foot and was often thick with maggots, rotting bodies, flies and feces. Each battle was an ordeal, a fight against a fanatical enemy that was dug in and determined to fight to the last man.
One of the themes of “With the Old Breed,” regardless of which battle Sledge is recounting, is the near impossibility of communicating the experience of combat to those who have not experienced it.
“To the noncombatants and those on the periphery of action, the war meant only boredom or occasional excitement; but to those who entered the meat grinder itself, the war was a nether world of horror from which escape seemed less and less likely as casualties mounted and the fighting dragged on and on,” he writes.
Sledge (his buddies called him Sledgehammer) takes us as close as we are likely to get. He describes countless scenes of terror, disgust, insanity and stupidity in prose that is lucid and unadorned.
What puts “With the Old Breed” across is, oddly enough, Sledge’s sensitivity. He offers many small, artful portraits of men he admires. (And a few he despises.) He chronicles small kindnesses and profound acts of friendship.
There is not much time for him to take in the larger world. But when he can, he notes birds, and sunsets that remind him of those back home over Mobile Bay. When he discovers that Okinawans use a type of halter on their horses he’s never seen, he pauses to explain how it works.
About a friend who wished to take home the shriveled hand of a dead Japanese soldier, Sledge writes, “He was a 20th-century savage now, mild-mannered though he still was.” Sledge fights not to become a savage himself, but he does not always succeed.
As an adventure story, “With the Old Breed” has a momentum that might put some modern readers in mind of Jon Krakauer’s “Into Thin Air.” As a portrait of camaraderie in the face of terrible danger, it resembles the third section of Hemingway’s “A Farewell to Arms.” It will make a lot of feeling slide around in you.
It’s difficult to write an ending to this essay without dabbling in Greatest Generation clichés. But it’s no stretch to suggest that this book will make you grateful that Sledge, and men like him, were here before us — and that Sledge left this unsparing chronicle.
American Beauties is a column by Dwight Garner, appearing every other week, about undersung American books of the past 75 years.