Love|After 25 Years Together, Why Marry? Why Not?
After 25 Years Together, Why Marry? Why Not?
Odds are far better than even that the relationship of Dianne Cox and Michael Cammer of New Rochelle, N.Y., is not the fleeting kind. Still, some eyebrows were raised last summer when they announced that they had decided to marry.
Not because anyone feared they were making a mistake — but because most everyone thought: Why now?
After all, the couple have been together for 25 years and have two college-age daughters.
When the news spread, a former student seemed disappointed with Dr. Cox: He told her he had viewed her as a standard-bearer for the legions of unmarried partners.
Even the couple’s daughters, Natasha, 19, and Rachel, 21, sensed the atmosphere of anticlimax that surrounded their parents’ wedding, though they did look forward to being bridesmaids.
So why did Dr. Cox, 58, and Mr. Cammer, 50, replace their unofficial theme song — Joni Mitchell’s “My Old Man,” about lovers who needed “no piece of paper from the City Hall keeping us tied and true” — with the wedding classic “At Last,” sung by Etta James?
Some anxious hours in a foreign hospital did the trick, prompting both of them to start thinking of marriage as more practical than pointless.
It was January 1992 when Dr. Cox, now a professor of anatomy and structural biology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, met Mr. Cammer, now a microscopy specialist at NYU Langone Medical Center. She was a graduate student at Einstein then, and he had been newly hired as the training director of microscopy there.
“He knew about microscopes, but he had no biology background,” Dr. Cox said. She was enlisted to bring him up to speed.
They began dating, and Mr. Cammer soon became a regular at the potluck dinners she hosted for graduate students at her on-campus apartment.
Dr. Cox wasn’t without her light side either. A few months into their relationship, she enlisted her cat, believing him to be a good judge of character, to evaluate Mr. Cammer’s suitability as a live-in partner.
In he was, but perhaps not in the way that most suitors would have imagined.
Before they moved in together, in an apartment near Einstein, Dr. Cox made it clear she wanted to have children but no wedding ceremony.
“I had just never envisioned myself being married,” Dr. Cox said. “But I always knew I wanted children. When I met Michael, I was 34, and there was the fact of my age.
As the years passed and no marriage materialized, there was little pushback from either set of the couple’s parents, though her father said that her mother, Olive Ann Cox, who died in 2008 and was an administrator in the department of geosciences at Stony Brook University, would have preferred a wedding before the girls were born. “But we figured our children were old enough to make up their own minds,” Mr. Cox said.
Mr. Cammer’s father, a lawyer who died in 2014, had no problem with the setup, and if his mother, Wendy Cammer, a retired professor of neurology who also taught at Einstein College and lives in Larchmont, N.Y., wanted him married, it was only for practical reasons.
“My only concern was if they split up, would he have custody rights like any legal husband.” Dr. Cammer said.
No one ever had to find out.
In 2009, Dr. Cox wrote an opinion piece for The New York Post in which she memorialized the couple’s nonmarriage.
Being unmarried had its negatives, too, with things like separate health insurance policies and 1040 tax forms. But they could manage all that. It was a trip the couple took to Cyprus in June 2016 for a former student’s wedding that changed everything.
Mr. Cammer was hospitalized the first night of their trip with a case of septic shock, the result of a mysterious infection run rampant. Dr. Cox sat at his bedside through the night as a monitor showed his blood pressure falling precipitously. “The reality that I could really lose him struck me, and it was pretty scary,” she said.
As one might have expected after nearly 25 years of nonmarriage, the proposal that eventually did surface was a measured one.
In bed one night that July, Dr. Cox said, “We have to talk about something serious.” Then a pause.
Mr. Cammer recalls saying something to the effect of, “But I love you so much.” Dr. Cox doesn’t recall hearing that.
Not all of the guests who attended the March 18 wedding at the Glen Island Harbour Club in New Rochelle knew that an illness in Cyprus had led the couple toward marriage. To most of them, the event was just a reason to celebrate 25 years of unbroken love.
“I wrapped their gift in silver, with a silver bow on top, because it’s more like this is their anniversary party than a wedding,” said one guest, Joan G. Jones. Dr. Jones’s husband, John S. Condeelis, is now Dr. Cox’s department chairman and was the one who had asked her to help Mr. Cammer get acclimated all those years ago.
The vows written by the bride and groom were heartfelt and polished, unsurprising considering they had had a quarter-century to compose them.
The officiant, Margaret Cammer, a retired acting State Supreme Court justice and Mr. Cammer’s aunt, said her initial reaction had been absolute joy when she learned the couple would finally wed.
