I look for signs. Little facts that I find comforting, like markers on a path telling me I’m headed in the right direction. During college, I was approached to work in retail, something I knew wouldn’t help my future writing career, but the hours were flexible enough that I saw its appeal. Still, I debated whether to take the job, until I learned that the designer’s sister was named Gianna, and his son Gianni.
Marker No. 1: You, Gian, are meant to sell clothing.
The building was cavernous, with a floor made from the walls of an old barn, everything painted in serene green and gray. And though the location was ideal, in the midst of the bustling Old Town of Pasadena, Calif., the regulations were such that the original storefront couldn’t be altered, and as a result our door looked like a freight entrance.
People walked right past us. Sometimes they’d call on the phone, lost, and we’d race to find them, but often they simply gave up and got a burger next door. This did not translate well into sales, and I was no retail queen. But the pay was decent, and I loved my co-workers, a random mix of people who, like me, cared minimally for retail but needed the steady check.
For great chunks of the day, we had not even one customer. So we played cards. We tried watching movies on the TV monitors. We hid magazines by the registers and played inappropriate music when no one was around.
It’s not that we didn’t care about our work; it’s just that there were only so many sweaters to fold, and glass cases can only be so streak-free. So, while the cat was away, the mice played uncensored rap music and perhaps smoked too close to the entry.
Though I loved my job, every day was edged in guilt. I was not only working at something unrelated to writing, but I was barely working. The degree I was about to get would be wasted. How would retail help me as a writer? Then again, did my day job need to help me as a writer? As a future novelist, my writing would always happen during those odd, barely missed hours. What did it matter how I paid my rent?
I suppose here is where I should mention that I believe I’ve always been a bit psychic. My mother loves to tell the story of 5-year-old me standing in the living room, suddenly asking her what an “earthquake” was. The television wasn’t on, there was no radio playing softly. It was as if suddenly the word came to me and I just didn’t know what it meant. So she explained. And while she did, the earth started to shake.
I once dreamed that a friend stapled her finger, and the next day it happened. Another time I dreamed that a cat was stuck up a 50-foot eucalyptus tree, and then two days later I was on the phone with my brother as a cat was stuck up a 50-foot tree just outside his window. “What kind of tree?” I asked. “Eucalyptus,” he told me.
Was anyone helped by this? I didn’t take the dream about my friend seriously enough to warn her in time. Could I have been able to locate that particular tree so the cat couldn’t climb it? Not a chance. Nevertheless, I learned to trust my instincts and to suspect that now and then my dreams might have meaning.
So when I had a very dark dream about the manager at the store where I worked and something bad happened at the store later, it stuck with me. The very next day, my colleagues and I discovered that our manager was stealing money, and the dream made sense.
Of course, we had no choice but to go to our district manager, who came in right away for a confrontation. Our manager confessed, claiming that he had simply borrowed the money. But the excuse made no difference. And just like that, we needed someone for the job.
So, move to New York and get into publishing? Stay in Los Angeles and work at one of the few magazines in town? Those were the shoulds, my sensible, long-term options. But when you’re young, it always feels as if there’s time.
It’s only in hindsight that you see that what had been before you was a giant, momentum-gathering slope. “Later,” I’d think to myself. “Later, I can do those things.” And then, at my core, was the feeling why. Why would I have had the dream — one that actually applied to my life — if I wasn’t meant to take the job?
Marker No. 2: You were meant to manage this store.
I took the job. For well over a year, I was the manager, and the whole time I was tormented, feeling those looming shoulds, worried that days steaming suits and becoming ruthless at the card game Big Two was a waste.
Then one night while closing the store, I started craving a burrito. I got in the car and was debating where to get this burrito, when suddenly my car felt wrong. The left side seemed to drag, as if both driver’s side tires were flat. I was crushed by a feeling of impending danger.
There was no way I could get on the freeway, because something was very off. So I pulled into a grocery store, one I normally wouldn’t have gone to, right into a spot below the bright, safe lights, and I got out to inspect my car. All was fine. Tires full. Not a dent to be found. Still, I stood there, so convinced that something had been wrong, so strongly had I felt the threat. At last I gave up and walked inside the store.
I was in the bread aisle, the very first aisle past the front door, when I heard the sounds of a giant clapping his hands three times. That was what my mind told me. It was a giant clapping, because, of course, that makes much more sense than gunshots. Eventually, my mind let plausibility back in, and I continued my shopping, over the sound of sirens, somehow unfazed.
When I walked outside, there, under those nice, safe, bright lights, was my car, surrounded by police tape.  Another behind it had gone straight through the back-seat windows. The third bullet, they found on the ground nearby, not having hit a thing.
After taking my statement, the police told me I had missed being shot by under a minute. A gang member, I would learn, had fired at a car driving by, but had terrible aim. Simply put, my car had been in the wrong place at the wrong time. And yet, I was convinced, it was the impending danger I had felt that had led me to park it right there. My trying to avoid something had actually created it. Or had it? Was that how strong fate was, that in trying to steer clear of something you could actually swerve right into its course?
I didn’t know. I still don’t.
Similarly, I thought I’d taken that job because I was supposed to. And maybe, in a way, that’s true, just as I was meant to escape a danger that instead put me in harm’s way. All I know is after that, I was no longer tormented. Perhaps missing a bullet had put life into perspective. But I felt a sense of trust I had never experienced before.
Not long after that night, our corporate office came to terms with our horrible numbers, and it opted to close the store. It was terrifying. Not only was I out of work, but I had years on my résumé that wouldn’t help me get the job I wanted. Strangely though, I was able to breathe. I didn’t feel the guilt of wasted years or wrong choices.
Something in me had changed.
Marker No. 3: You are meant to be right here.
And despite my worries or protests, I always knew I would end up where I needed to be.