ISTANBUL — Throughout the campaign in Turkey over a referendum to bolster the powers of the president, which concludes with a vote on Sunday, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s government has been locked in a bitter row with a number of foreign countries.
Germany, he said, had employed “Nazi measures” by blocking some of his surrogates from visiting the country to encourage Turks there to vote in favor of the expansion of presidential powers.
Mr. Erdogan called the Dutch “Nazi remnants” after two of his ministers were also banned from campaigning in the Netherlands. Westerners in general, Mr. Erdogan later warned, would no longer walk safely in the streets as a result.
The intent of this rhetoric, most analysts said, was to rally wavering voters back in Turkey. If Turks in Turkey felt their country was being disparaged or under attack, the argument went, perhaps they would be more likely to vote in favor of the referendum question. Several polls indicate the vote will be close.
Lost in this debate was the response of the Turkish diaspora in Europe, which numbers about 4.6 million, according to the Turkish government, and in the world beyond. Were they persuaded by Mr. Erdogan’s remarks, or did it make them more likely to vote against him? And how did it affect their sense of Turkish identity?
A recent online request by The New York Times for comment from Turkish expatriates yielded more than 300 responses, but revealed no single trend. Some expressed ambivalence about Mr. Erdogan’s anger. Others said it made them feel proud; still others were embarrassed and alienated.
“After those events I was traveling on a train and talking to this nice couple — about life, politics, et cetera, et cetera — and as soon as I told them I am Turkish, they stopped talking to me,” Mr. Kucukkaya said in a telephone interview.
Other Turkish expatriates were frightened of using their full names when they criticized the “yes” campaign’s activities in Europe.
Fatih K., 35, said he was even too scared to vote at his nearest Turkish consulate. He feared that his passport would be confiscated if he voted against the referendum and that the Turkish government would reveal his vote to its supporters living in the country where he has sought refuge.
In a telephone interview, Fatih K. said that he had opposed the constitutional changes since long before Mr. Erdogan lashed out at Europe, but that he was nevertheless embarrassed by the episode.
However, other Turkish expatriates in Europe disagreed strongly.
Melissa Bulut, a 20-year-old law student born and raised in France, was among those who argued that the spat would encourage people to vote with the Turkish government.
Few who responded to the online request for comment or agreed to a follow-up interview said that European opposition to Mr. Erdogan’s campaign had changed their own minds about how to vote on Sunday. A 25-year-old businessman, Osman, who asked that his surname be withheld for fear of a negative reaction from business partners, was one of a handful who did.
Appalled by Europe’s treatment of Mr. Erdogan, Osman, who divides his time between Germany and Turkey, decided to vote “yes,” even though he voted against the president in recent elections. He was also angered by the greater freedom that rallies staged by the “no” campaign seemed to get and by “no” supporters who are sympathetic to a Kurdish movement that the European Union has proscribed as a terrorist group.
“I can’t be on the side of people who openly support terrorists,” Osman said by telephone.
“When the ministers came to visit the Netherlands, the reaction from the Dutch authorities was very unprofessional,” he said. “If a certain side acts in a way that you should be 100 percent against, the obvious choice is to go to the opponent’s side, even if there are some things you don’t agree with” in their platform.