Chris Soules, who rose to fame as a star on the reality television series “The Bachelor,” was arrested by the authorities in Iowa after they said he fled the scene of a crash that killed one person.
Around 8:20 p.m. Monday, the Buchanan County Sheriff’s Office received a report of an accident near the northeastern city of Aurora, the sheriff’s office said in a statement. Investigators said Mr. Soules, 35, was driving a 2008 Chevrolet Silverado southbound when he rear-ended a John Deere tractor that Kenneth Eugene Mosher, 66, was driving.
The collision caused the tractor to go into a ditch, and the authorities said Mr. Mosher was taken to a hospital, where he was pronounced dead.
Mr. Soules’s truck went into a different ditch, but the sheriff’s office said he was not injured in the accident and left the scene before deputies arrived.
On Wednesday, the Buchanan County Sheriff’s Office released an audio recording of the 9-1-1 call that led the authorities to the scene of the crash. In it, Mr. Soules tells a dispatcher that he “rear-ended a guy in a tractor,” and can be heard asking “Is he O.K.?” in an apparent reference to Mr. Mosher.
“They’re coming, they’re coming,” he says of medical personnel, which prompts the dispatcher to ask if the man Mr. Soules is speaking to is conscious. Mr. Soules acknowledges that the man is not.
The dispatcher then asks Mr. Soules whether he can conduct C.P.R., and he repliese he does not know how. Later, Mr. Soules indicates that the man is bleeding from the mouth.
Near the end of the call, the dispatcher says she will stay on the line until help arrives.  The dispatcher says yes, and he ends the call.
The authorities found Mr. Soules at his home shortly afterward, and the sheriff’s office said he was arrested and taken to the Buchanan County Jail, where he was charged with leaving the scene of a fatal motor vehicle accident — a felony.
Mr. Soules was released from jail on Tuesday morning after posting $10,000 bail, the authorities said.
Mr. Soules, a farmer, starred on season 19 of “The Bachelor” in 2015. The show ended with his engagement to Whitney Bischoff. The pair broke up after the show ended.
