Soupe au pistou (vegetable soup with pesto).Credit...Gentl and Hyers for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Amy Wilson.
Jessica B. Harris stepped out of her pink cottage in New Orleans and into the sun. She took the stairs carefully, in gold boat shoes, her shoulders draped in flowing fabric, a Zuni necklace of tiny multicolored animals swaying around her neck.
“Being a little old lady is less than advertised,” she said. But Harris, who is 69, is not really a little old lady. She’s a professor of English at Queens College who spring-breaks in New Orleans; a culinary historian and a witty, in-demand lecturer; and the author of a dozen cookbooks on the foods of the African diaspora. For years, her work has shaped my understanding of American cuisine, and I was so nervous to meet her that I practiced introducing myself just before I pulled up to her home. Good morning, Dr. Harris? Oh-my-God-hi!
That week, Harris ate lamb and baked tomatoes, ratatouille and boeuf en daube. Outside, by the cypress trees in Baldwin’s garden, under clear blue skies, she ate soupe au pistou. The Provençal soup was simple: vegetables cut bite-size, simmered in broth, cheered up with plenty of garlicky pesto, dropped directly into each bowl.
“You should know, I’m pretty much incapable of following a recipe, including my own,” Harris said as we leaned over her recipe for her book. She wrote the recipe for the memoir using a mix of research and memory, but she’d cook it the way she liked to cook, in the moment, following her own senses, not a list.
Soupe au pistou is well suited to Harris’s spontaneous, unfussy approach to cooking. It’s country food, adjusted endlessly to make use of whatever’s around, easily doubled to feed a crowd. Traditionally it was a summer dish. You made it when the basil came up. Now basil is everywhere, all the time. Make soupe au pistou in the spring, go on through the summer and week to week your pot can still show you how time passes, from fresh favas and summer squash to corn and green beans.
At the Crescent City Farmers Market, Harris took her time, looping the stalls before settling on what to buy, then reaching for pretty much everything that looked good. This included fat white turnips (which she referred to all day as “the turnips that devoured Cleveland”), snap peas, yellow summer squash and tiny, thin-skinned red potatoes. She picked up a few pints of local blueberries to have for dessert with whipped cream sweetened with cane syrup, and a loaf of bread for the platter of cheese she planned to put out before dessert. “I never met a stinky, runny cheese I didn’t love,” she said.
By 7, friends were at her door, with gifts of homemade lemon curd and cold wine and a handful of gardenias. Harris added pasta and squash to the pot and let it bubble while she caught up with them. Off the heat, she stirred in a big spoonful of pesto, and the broth turned a beautiful bright green. Harris took a seat at the head of the table, surrounded by friends, and raised a glass.
