“Who” is the first of the five “W” questions drilled into the head of every aspiring reporter. But in a range of situations, Times reporters and editors wrestle with whether to include that basic fact in a story — the name of the person we’re writing about.
Our instinct is always to tell readers as much as we know. But the question can raise tangled issues of privacy, fairness and compassion. And it takes on even greater weight in the age of Google, when a single mention in The Times may follow someone digitally forever.
Nowhere is the calculation more sensitive than in reporting on allegations of sexual assault, abuse or misconduct, as several recent articles showed.
It has long been standard practice in journalism not to name victims or possible victims in such cases, since fear of a public stigma can discourage survivors from reporting attacks or abuse. But this week’s story about a report on sexual abuse and misconduct by teachers at Choate Rosemary Hall, a boarding school in Connecticut, illustrated an exception. One woman who the report said had been victimized by two different teachers at the school chose to talk openly about the ordeal, as she had last year for an article in The Boston Globe. A decision like that makes it easier for us to recount details and put a human face on the story.
Similarly, last month we reported on a settlement reached by Fox News with an on-air contributor who said she had been sexually assaulted by a network executive. She, too, was willing to be publicly identified, and issued a joint statement with Fox News about the settlement.
In that case, Times editors had another question: Would we name the man she accused? Was that fair? Was it newsworthy? The incident was not reported to the police. There was no criminal case. And only the two people involved knew exactly what had occurred in the executive’s office. But based on multiple sources, we knew who the executive was, that he had been terminated after the incident and that Fox had agreed to a big settlement. His identity and role at the network seemed crucial to the story: Fox has faced a series of allegations of sexual harassment involving top executives, including Roger Ailes, the former network boss, and Bill O’Reilly.
Editors decided to name the man, but only after ensuring that we had made extensive efforts to reach him for comment (eventually his lawyer made a brief statement). We also consulted a Times lawyer, who supported the decision.
An article in December about sexual-assault allegations at Stanford presented a different calculation. Sexual assault on college campuses has been a big story, and cases can raise difficult journalistic issues. Some accusations involve famous athletes, whose identity may be central to the story; other stories focus more on the adjudication process. Often the details are murky or fiercely disputed. In many cases, there is no police involvement or criminal charge.
In the Stanford case, the woman who said she was assaulted did not publicly identify herself, so we followed our usual practice and withheld her name. But what about the man she accused? A majority on two different university panels had ruled against him, but under Stanford’s rules that was not enough to find him responsible for sexual misconduct, so he faced no official sanctions. In the end, given the tangled outcome, editors decided not to identify him by name — but we did note that he was a football player, a fact that seemed potentially germane.
Besides sexual assault cases, many other stories present tough decisions — reporting about children, for instance, or people worried about their safety, or others who may be naïve about the impact publicity could have on them. Few weeks go by without at least one story that gives us pause. And since no set of guidelines can cover every situation, the best we can do is to try to balance those questions of fairness and privacy with our chief goal: to tell readers what we know.