HAMBURG, Germany — The stage of the Elbphilharmonie here on Wednesday was filled with an assembly of instruments so diverse that it looked more like a social experiment than a musical ensemble.
In the back row, Baroque recorders nestled up to an Afro-Brazilian percussion section. In front of them, a United Nations of string instruments congregated with violas da gamba, vihuelas, a harp and a potbellied kora from Mali, alongside an oud and a violin. The instrument’s masters — and the performances were uniformly masterly — were just as diverse, with singers from Brazil and Mexico, an early-music chorus from Spain, and Malian vocalists weaving their voices together into a scintillating musical tapestry.
The subject of the concert — the opening act in a festival dedicated to trans-Atlantic musical connections — was as harrowing as the sounds were joyful: “The Routes of Slavery” was the title of this evening of music, dance and recited texts designed to illuminate the history of the trans-Atlantic slave trade and the musical cross-pollination it caused. At the center of it, though in typically self-effacing manner, was the Spanish gambist and early-music specialist Jordi Savall.
The Elbphilharmonie’s Transatlantik festival, which runs through Monday and includes presentations of blues, fado and Afro-Cuban jazz, is just one of several themed program clusters that have focused attention on musical experiences of and in the Americas.
Beginning in late March, “New York Stories” brought together performers including the avant-jazz maverick John Zorn, the singer-songwriter Anohni, the electronic-music wizard Tyondai Braxton, the JACK Quartet (presenting works by members of the Bang on a Can collective) and the New York Philharmonic (playing an evening entirely devoted to the music of John Adams). Last fall, when this Herzog & de Meuron-designed waterfront hall had not yet opened its doors and concerts were presented in the storied Laeiszhalle, a group of performances shed light on the experimental school around John Cage. Up ahead in May: a “Maximal Minimal” festival, with generous helpings of Steve Reich.
The concentration of American music comes at a time when the new administration in Washington has many Germans scanning the news from the other side of the ocean with a fresh sense of urgency. And the influx of refugees — Hamburg, a city of roughly 1.8 million, currently shelters some 33,000 — lends a politically charged resonance to themes of migration, exile and cultural exchange.
Not all of this was by design, of course. Speaking in his office inside the Elbphilharmonie, the hall’s artistic director, Christoph Lieben-Seutter, said that planning for the opening season began long before current events lent the trans-Atlantic focus contemporary relevance. If anything, that focus was inspired by Hamburg’s past as one of Europe’s principal ports of emigration.
For example, he points out that on the New York Philharmonic’s recent tour to Europe, Hamburg was the only stop at which the orchestra felt able to offer its all-Adams program, which it had conceived for its home hall at Lincoln Center.
But perhaps the biggest story to come out of the recent American-themed events was the marathon concert devoted to Mr. Zorn’s “Bagatelles.” As the five-hour performance lurched into its final stretch and the city’s public transport system prepared to shut down for the night, listeners finally walked out and local critics reported the sight of something hitherto unknown at the Elbphilharmonie: Empty seats.