When the comedian Maz Jobrani was asked to deliver the 2017 commencement address at U.C. Berkeley, he immediately said yes.
Later, it sank in — this is a big deal. Past speakers have included scholars, innovators and statesmen.
Mr. Jobrani himself graduated from Berkeley in 1993, then started a doctoral program in political science at U.C.L.A. before walking away for comedy.
In a news release, a student leader suggested the appearance by Mr. Jobrani, who fled Iran as a child with his family in 1978, would resonate in a time of discord over immigration and Islam.
Q. Have you been thinking about what you’ll say?
A. Oh my God, Mike, I’m losing sleep over it. I’m serious. I wake up at, like, 5 in the morning with ideas and I jot them on my iPhone.
Q. You’ve become more political on stage. What worries you right now?
A. Trump doesn’t go a day without worrying me. It seems like everyday there’s something new. And then as a comedian I’ve been also saying, ‘It’s hard to keep up with the guy,’ because he just does something outrageous every day.
Q. Tell me about your experience at Berkeley.
A. It was four of the best years of my life. I really loved it. I remember being taught to think critically at Berkeley.
Q. If you could go back and talk to Maz in 1993, what advice would you give?
A. Follow your heart. Do what you love. Because I was constantly struggling with that. If it’s in your heart go for it. Don’t listen to other people.
Q. Any smaller advice?
A. Be kind. It feels good.
The Pulitzer Prizes were announced Monday.
Among the honorees was the East Bay Times, which took the breaking news prize for its “relentless coverage” of the Ghost Ship fire last year.
You can see the reporting here.
In an editorial, the newspaper said its work on the tragedy has just begun.
Some of most stunning imagery of our bountiful spring has been from the Carrizo Plain.
Situated east of San Luis Obispo, the 50-mile long grassland has been lit up by rain-fed wildflowers. Among the blooms are baby blue eyes, orange poppies, purple bush lupine and goldfields — all set against rare green canvas.
Matthew O’Brien, a Bay Area reader, shared a photo he took in late March facing the normally dry Soda Lake and the Temblor Range, which forms the eastern border of the Carrizo Plain.
The area is vast, open, and usually desolate.
But word of the so-called superbloom has been drawing thousands of camera-toting visitors, said Gabe Garcia, a field manager at the Bureau of Land Management.
“It’s something that’s kind of a once-every-30-year type of event,” Mr. Garcia said.
The show won’t go on forever. Mr. Garcia predicted the flowers would start to wither within a few weeks as the weather turns warmer and drier.
“Once that happens, everything kind of goes back to the way it was,” he said.
Here are a few more pictures by Bob Wick, a Bureau of Land Management photographer.
California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Davis.