Where to begin to plumb the mind of Johann Sebastian Bach, which, musically at least, seems limitless in capacity? Two radically disparate presentations in recent days struck glancing blows at the matter and suggested fascinating if not always comfortable glimpses into Bach’s thought processes.
The Sebastians — a namesake group of young period instrumentalists, mostly alumni of the historical-performance curriculum of the Juilliard School — made the quest explicit, the program noting that their “installation piece,” “The Complete J. S. Bach for Solo Violin,” at the vast Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine on Monday, would offer up “the mind of the master” as a sort of gallery to explore. But a listener fresh from the Bach Festival & Symposium at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, over the weekend, felt already caught up in deep recesses of that mentality.
Each event centered on performances of a supreme, compendious Bach masterpiece. The festival offered the Mass in B minor, in two outings at the intimate Grace Episcopal Church on the Amherst Common; the Sebastians, overlapping performances of the three sonatas and three partitas for unaccompanied violin, spaced throughout the cathedral and side chapels.
St. John the Divine is much too large and reverberant to allow for clear projection of individual melodies or harmonies, and that was the idea: that lines would partly vanish in a mysterious void and partly mingle to form a distant fabric of sound as a backdrop to whichever performance was close at hand as listeners roamed freely.
Daniel S. Lee led off, playing the Partita No. 3 from a central spot in the nave, imparting animation and spirit with free tempos and an improvisatory air. He held full attention for five minutes, until two players struck up different works from chapels on either side of the altar. Five minutes later came another fiddler in another piece, and the performances ran continuously, four at a time, for 90 minutes.
I managed to hear Nicholas DiEugenio’s second performance of the hugely challenging Chaconne of the Partita No. 2 complete and in relative isolation, and it was excellent. The other violinists, all clearly gifted, were Chloe Fedor, Francis Liu, Edson Scheid and Beth Wenstrom.
At evening’s end, with Mr. Liu finishing the Sonata No. 1 in a chapel, the performers converged at the main altar and started to pluck notes purposefully out of the muddle that still hung in the air, as if embodying Bach’s mind at work, and gradually came together in the beloved Air from the Orchestral Suite No. 3. Mr. Liu finally joined the unanimity, which afforded blessed satisfaction and release after an evening of compositional struggle, as it were, from performers and listeners alike.
The Mass performance in Amherst, with the UMass Bach Festival Chorus and Orchestra conducted by Simon Carrington, was somewhat incidental to the symposium, “Bach in the Age on Modernism, Postmodernism and Globalization.” Topics ranged from the Mass itself and Bach’s life, time and surroundings to his influence — real or claimed — on rock, heavy metal and funk.
But it was Michael Marissen’s keynote address, “Bach Against Modernity,” that really explored the workings of that master’s mind. It also opened a path of controversy that will undoubtedly widen, since Mr. Marissen’s notion of Bach’s mentality and temperament runs counter to much current thought, which sees the master as a creature of the Enlightenment.
Hmm. So all we are left with are those astounding violin works, that sublime Mass and their Bachian ilk.