I was fascinated by Lesley Stahl’s reference (By the Book, April 16), while discussing Robert Caro’s books about Lyndon Johnson, to “the loneliness of the isolated hill country of central Texas” and to “those lonely Texas hills.” I’m curious as to whether these were Caro’s representations or Stahl’s interpretation of Caro’s prose. The Hill Country is, for most of its residents, a state of mind, and its inhabitants relish its solitude and silence, finding the area to be not only enchanting but spiritually nourishing. Non-Texans are too often possessed of a romantic notion of our state as a desolate and lonely territory, forlorn in its isolation, but the Hill Country is no more lonely or forlorn than the Adirondacks or the Atlantic shoreline of New England.
My father, like L.B.J., grew up there and longed to return after his sojourns in the capitals of the world. He died there and was buried in its rocky shallow soil, at rest in a region that fit him like a custom boot. I suspect Johnson, a proximate contemporary of my father’s, felt the same way about “those lonely Texas hills.” The Johnson family buried him there after all, not in Washington, which is a huge tell.
I share Mnookin’s “compulsive need to know why writers are confident their conclusions are correct” and bemoan the increasing number of nonfiction works that do not have adequate footnote or endnote citations or bibliographies. The first step on this slippery slope was when footnotes became endnotes. The decline continued when footnotes were no longer numbered, and instead the reader, if she was lucky, would find in the back of the book a page number and a shortened quotation — too often not the controversial or incomplete assertion she hoped to trace. Now even nonfiction history is published without any notes (because it is “popular”?). When educators are attempting to teach students to “go to the source,” writers, reviewers, editors and publishers need to be sure that these sources can be located. It is their duty to the reader. Readers have a responsibility to demand this.
I have read before that Dave, home from elementary school for lunch, watched this show with his mother. Steve Allen and Jack Paar, and probably Arthur Godfrey, all played in his boy’s brain as he developed his brand. But my money for the strongest influence is likely to have been Ruth Lyons, a grilled cheese sandwich and some chicken noodle soup. That combo, while sitting by his mother in front of the TV in the 1950s, set him on his successful path.
The distinction between elitist and popular art (Bookends, April 16) is another academic polarity like classical versus romantic and modern versus postmodern. All of the arts were originally forms of popular culture. In ancient Greece the theater was for everyone. Later, the novel was leisure reading for the middle class. Then the arts were co-opted by intellectual elites who further distinguished between high and low culture, resulting in such dichotomies as cinema versus film, ballet versus dance, literary versus popular fiction, poetry versus verse and theater versus Broadway.
The writer is a professor emeritus of communication and English at Fairleigh Dickinson University.
In the continuing discussion of “1984” and “Brave New World” (April 2), no one has mentioned Yevgeny Zamyatin’s ”We” (1921), set in a future police state where people are identified by numbers but have no names. Zamyatin (1884-1937) was arrested under the czarist regime and exiled by the Communists, and the book was published in translations but not in the Soviet Union until 1988. Orwell speculated that it was a model for Huxley’s work.
Another incredibly prescient dystopian work was E. M. Forster’s story “The Machine Stops” (1909), which depicts a world where people can communicate only via screens and are uncomfortable with interpersonal interactions.
The Book Review wants to hear from readers. Letters for publication should include the writer’s name, address and telephone number. Please address them to books@nytimes or to The Editor, The New York Times Book Review, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. Comments may also be posted on the Book Review’s Facebook page.
Letters may be edited for length and clarity. We regret that we are unable to acknowledge letters.
Information about subscriptions and submitting books for review may be found here.