1. The political forecast calls for a frenetic week in Washington.
The White House, eager to project progress ahead of President Trump’s 100th day in office on Saturday, has packed his schedule. He said he would reveal a proposal for a “massive” tax cut on Wednesday.
And lawmakers must fund the government by Friday or let it go into shutdown. Mr. Trump’s insistence that a spending bill include money for his proposed border wall is the major sticking point — for Republicans.
Former President Barack Obama held his first public event since leaving office, mentioning Mr. Trump just once.
That’s how one of the losing candidates described France’s presidential race after the far-right leader Marine Le Pen advanced to a runoff, set for May 7, against the centrist upstart Emmanuel Macron.
The major parties, rebuked by the vote, are uniting against Ms. Le Pen, who has tried to distance the party from its openly racist roots, our correspondent in Paris writes.
We look at the European mainstream’s relief, the exuberant reaction in global markets and the euro’s surge.
3. The new era at Fox News begins tonight.
For the first time in nearly two decades, Bill O’Reilly will not kick off the prime-time lineup. He’ll be replaced by Tucker Carlson. Check back for updates on his debut.
The TV industry is scrambling to capitalize on the turmoil, seeing a rare opportunity to dislodge Fox from its No. 1 spot.
4. Arkansas executed two convicted murderers after a flurry of failed, last-ditch appeals, as the state attempts to carry out a series of capital punishments before one of its lethal injection drugs expires.
Jack Jones, left, and Marcel Williams, right, died from three-drug injections, administered in the same chamber.
Earlier, we spoke to people who have witnessed executions.
5. Our national security correspondent reports that expert studies and classified intelligence findings have concluded that North Korea can now produce a nuclear bomb every six or seven weeks.
In a phone call with President Trump, President Xi Jinping of China appealed for restraint in dealings with North Korea. Above, the two leaders at Mar-a-Lago this month.
In other diplomatic moves, the U.S. announced new sanctions against employees of Syria’s chemical weapons program.
6. There was a security shake-up in Afghanistan just before Defense Secretary Jim Mattis arrived in Kabul.
The defense minister and army chief of staff stepped down because of widespread anger over Friday’s attack on an army base.
The government lost 160 soldiers, making it the deadliest Taliban attack of the long Afghan war. The U.S. is weighing whether to send thousands more American troops.
7. One of the best-read articles on our site today was this deep dive on Travis Kalanick, the hard-charging CEO of Uber, who has led his company to the brink of implosion.
In other travel news, start-ups and big aerospace firms are working to address that frequent complaint of sci-fi fans: Where’s my flying car already?
8. The astronaut Peggy Whitson set a record for most time in space by an American: 535 days.
She got a congratulatory call from President Trump, who added — perhaps jokingly — that he would like to send an American to Mars.
9. Is this the world’s coolest kindergarten?
The German soccer team F.C. St. Pauli hosts a day care in its Hamburg stadium. Parents can sign up to come watch matches, too. And the kids fit right in.
“They’re quite good at screaming,” one mom said.
In New York City, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced a plan to offer free pre-K to all 3-year-olds by 2021.
10. Workers in New Orleans dismantled an obelisk commemorating the Confederacy.
Because of security threats, they worked under police guard, wearing flak jackets and scarves to conceal their identities. Three more monuments are scheduled for removal.
11. Finally, a cactus in bloom is pure poetry, a startling juxtaposition in Technicolor.
And the California desert is full of them. A wet winter has brought a wild superbloom to parts of California and the Southwest.
Want to look back? Here’s Friday night’s briefing.
