Beating its national competitors to the punch, AMC Feature Fare will include cheeseburger sliders, four types of stone-fired pizza, chili dogs, salami bites, chicken tenders, three new popcorn flavors and — for the health-conscious — seven gluten-free snacks.
“And, yes, we now have a curly fry in the portfolio,” said Nels Storm, AMC’s senior culinary director, sounding like a proud papa. “We wanted to think more like a restaurant company.” Mr. Storm promoted the offerings as the most important advancement in multiplex concessions since the invention of the armrest cup holder.
AMC’s new menu, while including higher-grade ingredients (all-beef hot dogs, for instance) and some healthier options, leans away from low-fat, froufrou choices and hard into indulgence, which could provoke the obesity police. AMC has also been installing “freestyle” Coke machines that offer more than 100 flavors.
But Mr. Aron, who took over AMC in 2015 after serving as chief executive of Starwood Hotels & Resorts, has made giving the masses what they want a hallmark of his early tenure. In many ways, food is the last component. AMC has already been aggressively installing advanced Dolby sound and projection systems, extra-wide screens, and La-Z-Boy-style seats. AMC now serves alcohol in roughly 200 of its 660 domestic theaters, with plans to add 100 more this year.
Even so, AMC cannot stand pat. Over all, domestic attendance was flat last year at 1.32 billion. Under pressure to increase profits, multiplex chains can increase ticket prices only so much before driving attendance down. That means the concession counter must work harder. Analysts say tens of millions of patrons buy tickets but never snacks.
Mr. Aron, who was in Las Vegas for the annual CinemaCon movie-theater owners convention, noted that AMC’s culinary staff had spent a year testing ideas for menu items at the company’s headquarters in Leawood, Kan.
It’s trickier than you might imagine, said Mr. Storm, the culinary director.
“You have to be able eat in the dark while still paying attention to Hugh Jackman doing something crazy,” Mr. Storm said.
The AMC Feature Fare team also thought about smell. In some cases, Mr. Storm said, the goal — as with popping popcorn — is actually to create an I’ll-have-what-they’re-having waft.
