Blackstone earnings — and revenue — more than doubled in the first quarter. The firm also said it would make a quarterly distribution of 87 cents per common share. All that good news had $BX shares up early.
Verizon said it lost 307,000 monthly wireless subscribers in the first three months of the year, sending shares down.
Verizon, the largest cellphone carrier in the United States, appears less and less interested in being a phone company. It is closing in on its acquisition of Yahoo, which it hopes will help it compete against Facebook and Google in digital advertising. And the Verizon chief executive Lowell McAdam this week stoked further M. & A. speculation by saying he was open to deals with media giants from Comcast to Disney.
On the heels of fending off a takeover offer from Kraft Heinz, Unilever reported better-than-expected first-quarter earnings. The company has said it would review its dual British-Dutch registration, sell or spin off its margarine business and combine its other food businesses into one unit. It also acquired Sir Kensington’s, a maker of fancy condiments.
Shares of Virtu Financial rose more than 9 percent in morning trading on Thursday after it agreed to acquire a high-frequency trading rival, KCG Holdings, in a deal worth about $1.4 billion.
The transaction would expand the size of Virtu Financial’s business as low trading volatility and increasing costs have eaten into profits at market-making and trading firms.
Vice President Mike Pence said on Thursday in Jakarta that the Trump administration planned to examine trade with Indonesia because of the country’s trade surplus with the United States.
Data show $23.44 billion in trade between the two countries last year and a United States trade deficit with Indonesia of $8.84 billion. It’s not the first country whose trade policies Mr. Pence has criticized on his swing through Asia: This week, he said South Korea’s free trade agreement with the United States needed to be reviewed.
Don’t forget to read the DealBook newsletter.