The success of a first-round N.F.L. draft pick will eventually be known; it just might take a few years.
But who wants to wait? Less than 24 hours after the first round was completed, everyone with a keyboard and an opinion was already grading the picks, sometimes pretty harshly.
We took a look at six of the more reputable assessors — Sports Illustrated, CBS, Fox, SBNation, Bleacher Report and the draft site Walter Football — to see which teams “won” or “lost” the draft, before any of the picks has even put on pro shoulder pads.
Concerns about injuries and big-play ability, and criticism by Warren Sapp, do not seem to have altered the consensus. The Browns got it right for once.
The selection of the quarterback from North Carolina was met with an extended Bronx cheer. The Chicago Bears picked up a C and three D’s. Walter Football did not give the pick a grade, but wrote, “This is one of the worst draft moves ever made” and called it a “franchise-ruining selection.” Let’s call that an F.
There was dismay that the Bears had sent picks to the San Francisco 49ers just to move up one notch in the draft. There was puzzlement over why the team had just paid Mike Glennon a lot of money to be its quarterback. There was concern over Trubisky’s brief career — just one full season — as a starter in college.
“Ten years from now, every Bears fan will still be talking about Thursday night and that jaw-dropping moment this football-crazed city will never forget, ” The Chicago Tribune wrote.
There was one exception. Dieter Kurtenbach of Fox rated the pick an A-minus. Combined with the less positive grades, the G.P.A. is 1.45. Now Trubisky has to prove almost everyone wrong.
Now here was a pick everyone could get behind. Four A-pluses and two A’s for the choice of the defensive lineman from Stanford. Average: 4.20, the highest of the round. “It’s an easy pick and the right one,” Fox said.
Several graders gave bonus points to the 49ers for fleecing the Bears out of those extra picks.
Sometimes the consensus is good. Sometimes it’s bad. Sometimes there is no consensus.
But do you really take an old-school running back this high? And is any Jags running back going to succeed with the team’s poor offensive line?
The grades for the pick ranged from A-minus to D, with an average of 2.72.
The wide receiver from Western Michigan was greeted with a respectful, if not gushing, thumbs up. “The most pro-ready receiver in this class,” Sports Illustrated said. But some felt the Tennessee Titans had more pressing needs. Grade average: 2.90.
Marshon Lattimore, New Orleans Saints: “A coup,” SBNation said.
Malik Hooker, Indianapolis Colts: “Could be one of the top safeties in the N.F.L.,” Walter Football said.
Jonathan Allen, Washington Redskins: “A steal,” The Times said.
O.J. Howard, Tampa Bay Buccaneers: “Perfect for the modern N.F.L.,” Sports Illustrated said.
Nobody got as bad a score as Trubisky, but two were close: Some spoke highly of quarterback Patrick Mahomes, but felt the Kansas City Chiefs should not have given up a package that included a first rounder next year to get him. The last pick of the round, Ryan Ramczyk by the Saints, puzzled graders, who noted that the Saints were not in need of a tackle. Both graded at 2.15.
Perhaps the highest-profile player in the draft was Clemson quarterback Deshaun Watson, who went at No. 12 to the Houston Texans. The pick was divisive. Fox gave it an A — “Watson fills a massive need” — but CBS went with a C-minus, faulting how much Houston gave up to move up in the draft.
Perhaps the hardest pick to assess was cornerback Gareon Conley by the Oakland Raiders. Conley faces a sexual-assault allegation, though he has yet to be charged and has denied the accusation. Two graders rated the pick incomplete, another gave it both an A and an F. Even for veteran draft-watchers, it’s hard to say what Conley’s future will hold.