New York|New York Today: When Will It Be Consistently Warm?
New York Today: When Will It Be Consistently Warm?
Updated, 11:38 a.m.
Good morning on this wishy-washy Wednesday.
The erratic weather of the past few days has left us clothing-confused.
Just when it seemed as though it was time for short sleeves and linen, we’re back to commuting in coats and fleece.
Once again, it’s going to be chilly in the morning — in the 40s and breezy as you leave for work — and while the sun will peek out here and there, today’s high won’t top 57.
So when can we expect it to be routinely warm in New York again?
Meteorologists in New York generally consider May 1 as the warm-weather turning point, Mr. Homenuk said.
“It’s the unofficial start to thunderstorm season around here,” he said — a type of weather that requires, typically, a warmer air mass.
But we’re still a few nippy commutes away from a consistently cozy climate. The precise day — on average — that the average high hits 70 degrees in Central Park is May 11, according to the National Weather Service.
Even so, there’s no National Weather Service protocol for calling a day “warm.” It’s based on daily averages.
So a chilly temperature in April would be considered a mild reading for January.
This time of year, just getting the forecast right can be extraordinarily challenging.
“It’s a nightmare, writing a forecast for the month of April,” said John Davitt, the chief meteorologist for the cable television channel Spectrum News NY1. Because the water temperature of the surrounding ocean is still cold, he said, “there are days where La Guardia Airport is 15 degrees warmer” than Kennedy Airport.
“Weather models choke this time of year, just like the meteorologists,” he added.
But there are adjectives that weather people tend to use to describe this uncertainty, he said.
“Bright skies,” “a mix of sun and clouds” and “a gray day” are all part of the forecasters’ vocabulary.
• Scoreboard: Rangers catch Canadiens, 2-1. White Sox wear out Yankees, 4-1. Phillies spare Mets the brotherly love, 6-2.
• Mets host Phillies, 7:10 p.m. (SNY). Yankees host White Sox, 7:05 p.m. (WPIX).
On April 17, 1907, more immigrants passed through Ellis Island than on any other day.
To mark the anniversary, the city is hosting dozens of events and outreach programs during its annual Immigrant Heritage Week, through Friday.
Friday: Learn about resources available to immigrants at New York public libraries, during afternoon hours.
For the newcomers among us, the New-York Historical Society recently began its Citizenship Project, which offers free civics lessons and workshops on American history to prepare immigrants for the naturalization test.
You can also join a scavenger hunt at the historical society, which uses objects from its collection to illustrate answers from the test’s 100 possible questions.
Think you could pass the U.S. naturalization test?
The idea of self-government is in the first three words of the Constitution. What are these three words?
