“You’re always waiting for the day when what we do isn’t necessary anymore,” Jeffrey Kalinsky said aboard the Intrepid on Monday night, during the cocktail hour at the 14th Jeffrey Fashion Cares, his annual fund-raiser and runway show.
Mr. Kalinsky, of Jeffrey Atlanta and New York, founded the event to benefit organizations that focus on gay and transgender issues and H.I.V./AIDS — this year, raising over $800,000 for the Elton John AIDS Foundation, Lambda Legal and Hetrick-Martin Institute — which are finding themselves newly vulnerable under the current presidential administration.
Climbing aboard a battle-ready ship for the evening felt unnervingly appropriate.
“I think of Stonewall, I think of Act Up, I think of all of the great heroic people that came before us, and now it’s our time to stand up,” said Brad Goreski, the stylist and television personality who was the evening’s host.
Roughly 750 great heads of hair (among them, Anna Wintour’s signature bob) boarded the ship, first for a silent auction mingled with the Intrepid’s exhibitions: a Bottega Veneta duffel beckoned in front of a Grumman Avenger torpedo bomber, L.A. Eyeworks sunglasses sparkled beside a North American FJ-3 Fury, and a set of Jo Malone candles with a wool and alpaca throw promised comfort beneath a giant propeller.
There were quesadilla stations and Mexican chopped salads in Chinese takeout containers for a crowd that included the designers Brandon Maxwell and Joseph Altuzarra, the actor Gilles Marini, the reality TV star Fredrik Eklund, and Chris Salgardo, the president of Kiehl’s and one of the evening’s honorees. At the logjammed bars, attendees reached again and again for palomas over bountiful crudité platters offering strips of jicama, spears of asparagus and cumulonimbus piles of purple cauliflower.
The hangars echoed with kisses, drink clinks and Sade. A mural by the artist MOMO provided a vibrant photo-booth backdrop. Members of the activist group Gays Against Guns handed out fliers. The crowd parted for Sean O’Pry, the model whose car Taylor Swift took a golf club to in a music video, in an all-white suit.
The runway show started, and 42 male models strode out bravely, like the marine iguana hatchlings from “Planet Earth,” narrowly avoiding capture by the assembled racer snakes. Some were fully clothed, with swinging belts you could trip on and jaunty zippers that could catch on a bramble, while others wore far less, garnering applause.
As the model Chad White breezed by, a crowd favorite in red swim trunks, one woman made the sign of the cross. The last model carried a surfboard and, as he spun around at the end of the runway, nearly took out a few partygoers.
