AUGUSTA, Ga. — It was so much easier for Rory McIlroy eight years ago when he first came to the Masters tournament as nothing more than a winsome 19-year-old, curly-headed wunderkind. Back then, it would have been almost inconceivable that his choice of golfing partners would ignite an international political firestorm.
But earlier this year, McIlroy, now a four-time major champion and an internationally recognized athlete, accepted an invitation to play golf in Florida with President Trump. The repercussions, which included social media criticism aimed at McIlroy from around the world, were swift and largely hostile.
McIlroy was responding to a question about how he reconciled his harsh criticism of Scotland’s Muirfield Golf Club, which until March had not admitted women as members, with the divisive comments about women made by President Trump during the 2016 presidential campaign.
McIlroy, for the most part, said he had accepted the golf invitation out of respect for the office of the president.
“Whenever an invitation or a request comes my way, I don’t want to say I jump at the chance,” McIlroy said, “but at the same time, you know, to see the Secret Service, to see the scene, I mean, that’s really what I was going for. I mean, there was not one bit of politics discussed in that round of golf. He was more interested talking about the grass that he just put on the greens.
And to think that McIlroy came into Tuesday’s meeting with reporters hoping he would not have to talk too much about his eight failed attempts to win the Masters.
He also made unflattering comments about golf’s inclusion in the Olympics. Both his decision and his remarks were met with some criticism.
And Tuesday, here was McIlroy, amiable, thoughtful and forthcoming, trying to explain himself yet again. He is an unlikely lightning rod: opinionated, perhaps, but far from confrontational.
He laughed repeatedly in what was mostly a lighthearted news conference. He joked about inviting the amateurs Toto Gana and Curtis Luck for a practice round — “had myself a little pro-am there,” he said. He mused about the Augusta National Golf Club holes he has butchered in recent years.
And he shared advice he had recently received about playing at Augusta National from Jack Nicklaus, the six-time Masters champion.
“Jack said to me, ‘I took on too much a couple times, and it cost me a couple of green jackets,’” McIlroy said.
McIlroy did not go on to clarify whether that counsel had more than one meaning.
What is known is that McIlroy’s career appears to be advancing toward a critical juncture. He is still just 27, but a host of much younger talent is rising to challenge and overtake him. And even some of his elders, whom he vanquished in the past, like 32-year-old Dustin Johnson, seem to be finally gaining their footing.
Six years ago at the Masters, when McIlroy collapsed with a final-round 80 to lose a four-stroke lead, he was given a free pass. At the time, McIlroy was considered golf’s future. It appeared to be nothing more than a hiccup on the way to two or three Masters titles by the time he was 30.
But it has not played out that way. And increasingly, Augusta National has seemed to be the kryptonite to McIlroy’s putting.
He needs a Masters championship for the career Grand Slam, and he acknowledged Tuesday how much that rare achievement would mean to him. He also said it was a blessing of sorts not to be among the primary favorites to win this year.
