The first image we ever see in “Girls” is Hannah Horvath being fed by her mother. Well, not literally. She’s slurping up pasta at a restaurant her parents have taken her to, to announce that they’re no longer going to support her financially.
The last image we ever see in “Girls” is Hannah feeding her son, Grover. It’s as intimate as any sex scene, and all the action takes place on Lena Dunham’s face. We hear Grover fussing, laboring — and then it happens. As per the finale’s title, “Latching,” he attaches to Hannah’s breast. They’ve made a connection.
This may or may not be the closing statement you wanted from “Girls.” From the beginning, the series has been framed by Hannah’s pronouncement that she might be the voice of her generation. That “Girls” immediately deflated the line — “or at least a voice of a generation” — didn’t keep it from carrying the burden of representation, the expectation that it speak for a collective we of millions.
But consider another definition of “generation” — the span of time between someone being born and having their own children — and the term becomes personal rather than sociological, individual rather than mass.
This has always been a tension in “Girls”: that this vast demographic lens was trained on what was, in the end, a very specific story.
“Latching,” written by Ms. Dunham and her fellow executive producers on the show, Jenni Konner and Judd Apatow, may not have been your story, or mine. But I laugh-cried through it, and I suspect it will stick with me for a long time.
For starters, it was straight-up funny, an aspect of “Girls” that tends to get lost in all the big-picture conversation around it. Hannah’s riffing off the uncooperative Grover is comedy gold, even with the undertones of anxiety. (“You think you’re the first man who’s rejected this? Well, think again!”) Beginning to end, “Latching” worked in the “Girls” sweet spot of poignant hilarity.
Finales are often burdened by unfinished business. “Girls” smartly wrapped up stories over several episodes: Elijah landed “White Men Can’t Jump”; Shoshanna said goodbye to the “boring” narcissism of her circle of friends; Adam returned to Jessa; Jessa made peace with Hannah.
And Hannah entered the next phase of her career, landing a teaching job at a college upstate. In a series so closely identified with Brooklyn, the most shocking final breakup was between Hannah and New York City. But “Girls” has done much of its best work when it’s escaped the five boroughs.
Hannah is down to the loving irritants whom she can’t escape. The first is Marnie, who’s using Hannah for a sense of purpose as much as she’s helping. Marnie becomes an external voice of parenting-magazine guilt, all “sacred time” and “tough but miraculous transition” as Hannah endures the physical and emotional pain of trying to get her “liquid gold” breastmilk into a reluctant infant.
The second key player is Hannah’s mother, Loreen, and Becky Ann Baker turns in one last fantastic, tough-love performance. On one level, she’s still addressing her daughter as a child — “Your son is not a temp job” — but their relationship has also changed its tone, become more peer-like.
There is a debate to be had over whether pregnancy was the right story to leave Hannah with — whether motherhood is too often used on TV as the device through which female characters grow up, the last dragon to slay, the biological bar exam for admission to true womanhood.
But whether or not Hannah should have become a mother, “Latching” has a vision, true to her character, about how she would have become a mother.
Hannah is still Hannah: complaining, blaming others for her problems, going AWOL when the going gets tough. On her nighttime walk, she has a chance to assert maturity in the time-honored way: by yelling at a younger person to grow up.
Is it a little too easy? A little too perfect an epiphany? Maybe in the hands of another show. But we’ve spent too much time with Hannah to expect that she’s wholly changed with the flick of a switch, that there is any realization that she is not capable, at some point, of un-realizing.
“Girls” is a story of becoming. Hannah has become an author, become a teacher, become a parent. But she also — like all of us — will never stop becoming. Nothing stops being a struggle. No one stops growing up.  You walk on, pantless and unbowed.
It all builds to the final scene, as Hannah sits down with the waking, hungry baby, and the episode’s director, Ms. Konner, pushes in on Ms. Dunham’s face.
Ms. Dunham has grown remarkably as an actress over six seasons, and it shows here. She’s a writer, telling the story of a writer, and yet she says nearly everything in these last moments wordlessly, through the shift of her eyes, the reaction in her body, the catharsis in her expression.
Then the credits roll, and we hear Hannah bluffing her way through the lyrics of Tracy Chapman’s “Fast Car,” the song she made Marnie stifle when she sang it behind the wheel. This is how “Girls” leaves us: with a voice, and with another generation.