274 pp. Henry Holt & Company. $26.
At the center of Julie Buntin’s debut novel is the kind of coming-of-age friendship that goes beyond camaraderie, into a deeper bond that forges identity; it’s friendship as a creative act, a collaborative work of imagination, and what happens when that collaboration — terribly, inevitably — falls apart.
The story of this particular friendship is told retrospectively by Cat, now 30-something in Brooklyn, drawn back to her youth in rural northern Michigan, where she found Marlena and her life, effectively, began. We know from the outset that within a year of their meeting, Marlena will drown. What we discover is just how haunted it will leave Cat, how full of questions.
Watchful, bookish Cat and reckless, alluring Marlena have plenty of literary and pop cultural antecedents, but Buntin, through closely observed detail, makes these two her own. Their attachment is full of lovely teenage-girl things — cherry lip gloss, cut-up T-shirts, hearts drawn on the back of a hand, Joni Mitchell and Stevie Nicks songs, tossed-off but unforgotten intimacies: “She scrapes a set of fingernails against my kneecap, a small circle that opens outward, shivering through me.” They share sarcasm, but they also share a simmering rage at being poor and female and cornered in a world with few options for them — where escape appears mostly in the form of another trap: addiction. Alcohol for Cat, pills for Marlena. The prevalence of opioids, along with meth, is more than a timely backdrop here; it figures inextricably into the novel’s plot — the unraveling of Marlena’s life and the lasting consequences for Cat. “We were basically statistics,” Cat tells us, but one of Buntin’s achievements is in acknowledging that reality while constructing characters that are anything but.
The strength Cat and Marlena derive from their connection offers an alternative escape. “Together, we had power.… Nothing could hurt us, as long as we weren’t alone.” The effects are abiding for Cat, who later describes her friend as “the bit of steel at my center,” but it’s not enough to save Marlena. Days “so big and electric that they swallowed the future and the past” are fleeting, and the girls’ closeness is threatened by growing resentments and, more sadly, a certain human impenetrability. “Sometimes I feel like she is my invention. Like the more I say, the further from the truth of her I get,” Cat concedes, and this novel wrestles with the notion that the truth — the truth of our private, inner lives — is not only subjective but contradictory and often unknowable. Still, Marlena is Cat’s invention, and Cat is Marlena’s — they invent each other.
What gives this narrative its force is the accumulation of so much potential and the absolute crushing of it. Part of that is circumstantial, the specific conditions Cat and Marlena are up against, and part is more broadly existential. Cat’s safe but lackluster adulthood can’t compare with her adolescence, which was at once not enough and too much. She’s motivated to leave for New York, but in the sections set in the present, her grief has generated a numbness so blanketing it renders even the city flat and generic. Drinking seems to be the one thing that brings her to life as it paradoxically deadens her.
There’s a risk in writing straightforward, first-person prose about muted passivity, namely that such prose can begin to exemplify it, especially next to the more beautifully descriptive sentences here. And a few moments might have been more powerful with a little less of Cat’s somewhat redundant commentary on the nature of memory, time and loss. This generous, sensitive novel of true feeling is at its most moving when it sweeps you up without too much explication, becoming both a painful exorcism and a devoted memorial to friends and selves who are gone.