Coaxing dry, coarse semolina into soft, fluffy couscous is a marathon, not a sprint. This explains why so many cooks use the instant variety; making fresh couscous from scratch requires a patience for repetition — hand-rolling, sifting, steaming — and attention to the minute changes in the flour’s temperament.
As in any race, the start is crucial. Too much water, introduced too quickly, and the grains will stick together, turning to mush instead of tender clusters. Some cooks spritz the flour as they would a rare and delicate orchid, but the chef Einat Admony, who owns several restaurants in New York, doesn’t bother with all that.
“I like to have the feel of it in my hands,” she said in the kitchen of her NoLIta restaurant, Balaboosta.
Ms. Admony poured a cup of water over her fist and let it run into a large bowl of flour. She spread her fingers apart and expertly combed through the damp semolina, rubbing the flour in her hands to encourage gritty clumps, spinning her palms around the sides of the bowl and winding her way to the center.
In September, Ms. Admony plans to open Kish-Kash, a West Village restaurant that will specialize in fresh couscous.
There will be a communal table, and counter service at lunchtime. The couscous will be served with a variety of dishes inspired by the foods of Algeria, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia. “I want it to feel like Shabbat at my house,” said Ms. Admony, 45, who grew up just outside Tel Aviv with her Iranian mother and Yemeni father.
For now, every Tuesday is couscous night at Balaboosta, one of the few places in New York serving couscous made from scratch.
It comes in a pile, pale and airy, with pickles and condiments, next to Tripoli-style fish shimmering with preserved lemon and harissa, or tender mafroum. Ms. Admony makes mafroum, a North African specialty, by stuffing potatoes with beef and herbs, frying the packages and braising them in a rich tomato sauce, tingling with cinnamon.
Unlike both Israeli couscous, a small pasta that Ms. Admony does not consider to be couscous at all, and Moroccan couscous, which is traditionally steamed over a meaty broth, Ms. Admony’s couscous is steamed with plain water.
“When it’s perfect, it’s so delicious you can even eat it plain,” she said.
When Ms. Admony was 8, she helped with kitchen tasks at home: picking small stones from an aluminum tray of nigella seeds, or white pith from pomegranate seeds. And she learned the basics of making fresh couscous from a Moroccan neighbor in her three-story apartment building.
Even in homes where couscous is hand-rolled, the dish is still considered a rare treat, Ms. Admony said, and because of the labor-intensive process, it is hardly ever made from scratch in restaurants.
What she packed into the steamer did look like couscous, but it was not there yet. The grains were still small and they needed to swell with more moisture. She steamed her first round for a half-hour, before tipping the hot semolina back into a large bowl so the starch could cool and rest.
Then she mixed in more water, passed the mass through the sieve and steamed it a second time. Couscous-making techniques vary from home to home, and while some cooks may pass the semolina through the strainer only once, others repeat the process three times for an airy, even grain.
But after two rounds of steaming, Ms. Admony ran her hands through the warm, tender couscous and declared it ready.
