Cellphone videos of an unidentified man being dragged off a United Airlines flight on Sunday elicited outrage after passengers posted the videos on Twitter. The footage shows the man screaming as he was forced out of his seat by a security officer and dragged down the aisle by his arms. There was blood visible on his mouth, and his glasses and shirt were askew.
Readers were swift to reply to a New York Times article about the episode. In thousands of comments received on the website and The Times’s Facebook page, most expressed outrage over the airline’s treatment of the customer, while others shared their own stories of being bumped from a flight.
Below is a selection of those comments, which have been edited for length and clarity.
I’m a retired United pilot. While I agree this was unnecessary roughness, there are several points to clarify.
This was not mainline United Airlines. This was on a United Express flight, meaning the flight crew and agents work for a totally separate air carrier that flies smaller planes under contract by United Airlines.
Just an educated hunch, not knowing the facts here, but it sounds like the four employees who were “must rides” were going to Louisville to crew another aircraft, and this was a last-minute reassignment.
But none of this supports throwing a passenger off a plane physically. I am speechless.
Not an impressive move by United, and in the city of their headquarters. I used to be a United Global Services member, which (oddly) meant that they would remove someone from a flight if the flight was sold out and I wanted a seat on that flight. Apparently, this now extends to employees who want to hop from city to city. 
— Compassion & Resilience, San Clemente, Calif.
Same thing happened to me on a United flight some years ago. While I didn’t get dragged down the aisle like him, I was “escorted” from the door of the aircraft back to the gate. When a few us reached the door to the aircraft, the flight attendants stopped me and said I couldn’t board at the last minute because the flight was overbooked.
When I protested, two female flight attendants on either side took both my arms and escorted me back to the gate. I was furious. After much wrangling, I was able to get back on the plane because I had a 9 a.m. job interview and it was the last plane out of Chicago to L.A. and someone was kind enough to let me have her seat. I have never taken another United flight again. For this “assault,” they gave me a $150 voucher which I tore up and threw away. They are reprehensible. By the way, I’m Asian too.
The man was disorderly and refusing to obey airline staff and police instructions. What were the cops supposed to do? Meekly tell him to have a nice day and walk off the plane? When the police are called in most cases like this they take some kind of action. This gentleman bears the responsibility for how this scene played out.
I’m trying to understand why airlines aren’t required to simply keep upping their offer until they get volunteers. We supposedly live in a free market society and everyone has a price.
Yes, they’ll probably get into scenarios where they are losing money. Tough. They’re breaking a contract with their customer; they should have to pay the price for that.
I was once on a JetBlue flight that was overbooked. They offered a hotel room to whoever wanted to leave. When no one volunteered they upped the offer until someone did. They didn’t drag someone out of their seat. This is no way to conduct a business.
I was bumped off a flight once and was replaced by the airline’s captain (or a first officer). I was on my way to my aunt’s funeral, and before I departed the cabin I turned and pleaded with the other passengers if anyone could go off the plane so I could fly. No one offered. I was really [bummed] because I knew I might miss the funeral and family gathering.
Of course I got a free round-trip ticket to use within the continental United States and luckily got on a flight one hour later. The first plane from which I was bumped ended up having landing gear issues! It had to dump all of its fuel and circle the airport while my plane landed just ahead of it.
I saw those first plane passengers in baggage claim and they were all stressed and shook up. The guy who was seated next to me on the first plane saw me and acted like he had seen a ghost. That made my day. It is strange how sometimes getting bumped isn’t all bad.
I hope this ends up being the most expensive passenger “bump” in the history of United.
They could have just offered more cash for willing volunteers. Instead, I hope this man sues. And the other three people who were made to leave should sue also.
I am a cardiologist who has been asked to provide emergency care on two separate flights. I never received, or expected, anything in return. But is it too much to expect that they won’t beat you?
— Alan Zelcer, M.D., Delray Beach, Fla.
In what other industry can you pay hundreds of dollars for a service (that is often essential personally or professionally) and then have that service randomly revoked? So the airlines make a bit less money — they are already raking it in. Ending overbooking practices would not cost airlines anything except immoral profits at the expense of desperate travelers!
I served on the board of a Chinese-American civil rights organization for 30 years. The organization routinely monitored dozens of incidents every year involving law enforcement and Asian-Americans due to racist perceptions that we’re passive, docile, and never litigate or protest official misconduct or mistreatment.
It’s likely that this particular passenger wasn’t randomly chosen but consciously selected because United thought he’d be easy pickings, as a bespectacled Asian follows orders and goes quietly.
I still am asked if I speak English or told that my English is pretty good for a “Chinaman.” When I used to travel to Chapel Hill for work, I’m asked if dogs are part of my diet.
Older Chinese speak of the “bitter tea” we must drink in America, even if we’re American. I wasn’t aware it was a featured beverage on United. It’s a taste the doctor will never get over.
All the other passengers on the plane saw this going on and not one of them volunteered to take his place. Surely, there was at least one person on that plane who could show some flexibility in their travel arrangements? The whole situation is just appalling, for all involved.
I’m happy other passengers documented this violence.
I’d like to imagine that I would have stood in the aisle and blocked the officer. Imagine the aisle filled with other passengers blocking the exit.
I don’t think I am brave enough to have done that, but I need to think about what my actions should be in responding to all police violence. Are we just a society of video makers? Am I willing to step in before they shoot someone?
— Lynne Jahnke, Santa Barbara, Calif.