WASHINGTON — Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. tried to test the limits of the government’s position at a Supreme Court argument on Wednesday by confessing to a criminal offense.
The exchange was among several moments of indignation and incredulity during the argument in Maslenjak v. United States, No. 16-309. Several justices seemed taken aback by Mr. Parker’s unyielding position that the government may revoke the citizenship of Americans who made even trivial misstatements in their naturalization proceedings.
The Trump administration has sought to strip the citizenship of a convicted terrorist, and President Trump has said that loss of citizenship may be a fit punishment for burning the American flag.
Wednesday’s case concerned Divna Maslenjak, an ethnic Serb who said she had faced persecution in Bosnia. She was granted refugee status at least partly on that basis in 1999 and became a United States citizen in 2007.
Along the way, she apparently lied about her husband, saying she and her family had also feared retributions because he had avoided conscription by the Bosnian Serb military. In fact, he had served in a Bosnian Serb military unit, one that had been implicated in war crimes.
When this came to light, Ms. Maslenjak was charged with obtaining her citizenship illegally. She sought to argue that her lie was immaterial, but the trial judge told the jury that any lie, significant or not, was enough. Ms. Maslenjak was convicted, her citizenship was ordered revoked, and she and her husband were deported to Serbia.
Christopher Landau, a lawyer for Ms. Maslenjak said that the trial judge had applied the wrong standard and that she was entitled to be tried under the right one.
Much of the argument was concerned with what sort of causal relationship the government had to prove between the lie and the grant of citizenship.
Justice Kagan asked Mr. Parker, the government lawyer, subtle questions to tease out his position. Then Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg offered her own approach.
