It will take many more games, weeks and months to determine what Matt Harvey is capable of this year. Before Thursday, he had not pitched in a regular-season game since July, when one of his ribs was removed to alleviate pressure on a nerve that was causing numbness in his fingers.
The condition Harvey was experiencing is called thoracic outlet syndrome. By name alone, it sounds ominous. Even though he was in the hands of one of the nation’s best doctors for the ailment, Harvey admitted that his recovery involved more unknowns than his recuperation from the elbow operation that he had in 2013 — Tommy John surgery, which has a more established track record in the sport.
But one game into Harvey’s 2017 season, a 6-2 win over the Atlanta Braves on Thursday night, there is much promise. The Mets have counseled patience regarding Harvey, knowing that his old stamina and velocity may not return until later this season.
Yet Harvey, firing 94-mile-per-hour fastballs, threw deep into the game thanks to an aggressive approach, a full arsenal of pitches and strong command. He threw first-pitch strikes to the first 11 batters he faced and needed only 77 pitches to get through six and two-thirds innings.
Harvey induced flyouts and groundouts while striking out four. He limited Atlanta to three hits, two of them solo home runs by Matt Kemp. He left the game in the seventh inning to a standing ovation from a sparse Citi Field crowd that had braved cold and a pregame downpour.
Over the past month, Harvey has worked hard to reach this point. Early in spring training, he pitched very much like a player who had undergone a significant operation. His velocity hovered in the low 90s. His command was inconsistent.
But as he built up arm strength, both his velocity and his command improved with each start. The numbness and tingling in his throwing hand were gone, but he was slowly breaking the habits of last season, the first in which he truly struggled.
“As spring went on, I felt more confident,” Harvey said.
The Harvey of old, circa 2013 and 2015, was a gunslinging cowboy. He attacked opposing lineups with his entire arsenal and a sneer. Although he missed the 2014 season because of his elbow injury, his fastball averaged 96 miles per hour the seasons before and after. He piled up strikeouts and was one of the best starters in baseball.
Yet after Harvey conquered one major surgery, 2016 brought another. He posted a 4.86 E.R.A. before finally admitting that something was wrong with his body after a July 4 start that would be his final one of the season. Collins has said often that Harvey was humbled by his experience in 2016.
This version of Harvey will probably have to continue adapting, perhaps to allow more contact and record fewer strikeouts as his arm strength builds. He has already adapted with his conditioning. Mets officials noticed that he reported to spring training in better shape than in previous years. Harvey talked often about taking care of his body, from stretching to treatment.
Collins said he had Harvey capped for a modest 85 pitches on Thursday. Harvey said what he missed most during his rehabilitation was pitching deep into a game, which he did against the Braves.
Harvey earned the win against the Braves with some help from a sleepy Mets offense. Facing the Braves’ left-handed starter Jaime Garcia, who has also had Tommy John surgery and an operation for thoracic outlet syndrome, Collins reshuffled the lineup to insert Wilmer Flores, who last season was among baseball’s best at crushing left-handed pitching.
Collins gave Lucas Duda the night off and put Flores at first base and in the cleanup spot. Flores delivered a two-run homer in the sixth inning that gave the Mets breathing room, increasing their lead to 4-1.
In the fifth, the Mets had gone ahead by 2-1 thanks to d’Arnaud, who, like Harvey, hopes to bounce back from a rough 2016. He drilled a two-run double into the gap in left field to give the Mets the lead.
After leaving the game in the seventh, Harvey watched from the dugout as the bullpen completed the victory. His future was still full of questions, but there was reason for renewed hope.