Updated, 9:22 a.m.
Good morning on this moody-to-merry Wednesday.
But today, the city’s Transportation Department plans to announce several projects to make New York feel more like the people’s Earth — where pedestrians have priority over cars.
One proposal would transform a block of Broadway between 24th and 25th Streets, near Madison Square Park, into the city’s first “shared street,” where pedestrians, cyclists and motorists share the road.
This may sound like a far-fetched idea in a high-traffic place like New York City. But shared spaces are already popular not only in parts of Europe, where it’s not unusual to see shopping areas with passers-by and vehicles moving around in the same space, but also in Pittsburgh and Seattle.
So on this block — where pedestrians outnumber motor vehicles 18 to one, Mr. Quinn said — the direction of traffic would reverse from southbound to northbound. Two driving lanes would shrink to one, and the speed limit would drop to five miles an hour from 25. The block would be accessible for vehicles from Fifth Avenue only, reducing traffic.
If it’s approved by Community Board 5 tomorrow evening, the shared street would be completed over the summer, the department said, and would be accompanied by a campaign to explain how it works.
The sky is also sharing space today, with two weather patterns.
First up: a moody morning, an overcast afternoon and a chance of rain and thunderstorms through lunch.
The clouds should part by your late-afternoon coffee run, when you can enjoy sunshine and temperatures in the high 60s.
• Scoreboard: Mets mangle Phillies, 14-4.
• Looking ahead: In May and June, you can spend the night at a museum in a “sleepover for grown-ups” at the American Museum of Natural History.
• Yankees host Rays, 1:05 p.m. (YES). Rangers at Canadiens in the playoff opener, 7 p.m. (NBCS). Mets at Phillies, 7:05 p.m. (SNY). Knicks host 76ers in the season finale, 8 p.m. (MSG). Nets at Bulls, 8 p.m. (YES).
• Alternate-side parking: suspended for Passover.
There’s a contest to design New York City’s next “I Voted” sticker. The deadline is Friday.
Call them a fashion statement, a declaration of civic pride, or both: The stickers are a way for us to show that we care about the future of our city, state and country. They are distributed at polling locations for local elections, including the mayoral race this November, and beyond.
Last year’s design, created in 2013 by a 10-year-old on the Upper East Side, featured red, white and blue lettering across an image of Lady Liberty.
Judges are looking for something eye-catching and original with a strong message pertaining to voting in New York City. At minimum, the design must include the text “I Voted” and fit within a circle two inches in diameter.
Read the full list of rules and guidelines here.
