Go for thrills with “The Blackcoat’s Daughter,” directed by Osgood Perkins, with his father’s “Psycho” portrayal in its DNA. Or steam things up with “The Handmaiden,” new to Amazon Prime.
THE HANDMAIDEN (2016) on Amazon. A devious maid, Sookee (Kim Tae-ri), worms her way into the employment of a beautiful young heiress, Lady Hideko (Kim Min-hee), held hostage in a mansion by her uncle (Cho Jin-woong), an erotic-book collector who intends to marry her for her fortune. But a con man (Ha Jung-woo) masquerading as a count has plans of his own — a scheme that seems doomed when things between the women turn steamy. The director, Park Chan-wook, spun this voluptuous fantasy from Sarah Waters’s lesbian romance “Fingersmith,” and transplanted it to 1930s Korea during the Japanese occupation. “A rebus, a romance, a gothic thriller and a woozy comedy, ‘The Handmaiden’ is finally and most significantly a liberation story,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times.
GOMORRAH on Sundance.tv, Amazon and iTunes. Season 2 of Italy’s most popular television series begins here on April 26. Brush up now on this operatically violent tale about the Camorra, a Neapolitan crime organization, from the perspective of Ciro Di Marzio (Marco D’Amore), who sits at the right hand of the clan’s godfather, Pietro Savastano (Fortunato Cerlino).
SACRED COD 9 p.m. on Discovery. For centuries, cod was a commodity like gold in the waters off New England, and so abundant that fishermen claimed they could walk across the Atlantic on these fish’s backs. But the local cod have dwindled to as little as 3 percent of what it would take to sustain a healthy population; there is a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ban on almost all cod fishing in the region. This documentary chronicles the collapse of America’s oldest fishery, giving voice to scientists (who blame overfishing, the government and climate change) and to fishermen (who claim, as they lose their livelihoods, that science is wrong).
SCANDAL 9 p.m. on ABC. In this 100th episode, Olivia ponders what might have been, had she not helped rig Fitz’s election.