But someone has, and the fact that it was a member of a coalition led by a radical left-wing party, Syriza — whose members have traditionally opposed United States policy — underlines the contradictions of a government comprising members of the extreme left and extreme right. It shows also how the past seven years of austerity and reforms have reshaped politics and attitudes. And it suggests that anti-Americanism in Greece has faded over the past few years, as the Obama administration supported Athens’s efforts to remain in the common European currency and preached against creditors’ harsh treatment.
Above all, it suggests that in difficult times, old alliances become more precious.
Suspicion and sometimes vilification of the United States by the left has been a standard feature of Greek politics since 1947, when the Truman Doctrine and later the Marshall Plan helped stave off a Communist victory in the civil war that followed World War II and the German occupation. Then, a right-wing military dictatorship from 1967 to 1974 had at least tacit support from Washington. Each year, a march commemorating the student revolt that triggered the end of the junta culminates at the United States Embassy, a constant reminder of a complicated past.
Yet Defense Minister Panos Kammenos, leader of the junior coalition partner, recently sang the praises of the United States — and the sky did not fall on his head.
The point was telling but his memory was selective: There were plenty of strings attached to United States aid, and Greece was under American tutelage; the European Stability Mechanism that loans money to Greece says that at the end of 2015, it charged below 1 percent interest for all beneficiary countries.
A pro-American position from Mr. Kammenos’s right-wing Independent Greeks party in the time of “America First” Mr. Trump might not be so surprising. But in a recent meeting with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson in Washington, Foreign Minister Nikos Kotzias, a former member of the Communist Party, presented the role Greece can play as a pillar of stability. Also, the fact that other members of Greece’s government did not protest the defense minister’s enthusiasm for American assistance reflects the paradoxical nature of a coalition that was initially united by joint opposition to the bailout agreements but is now devoted to staying in power. It also fits the government’s arguments that Greece’s creditors — its European partners and the International Monetary Fund — are more culpable than the United States (or the Greek government) for the country’s woes.
The defense minister’s enthusiasm was heightened by a White House celebration of Greek Independence Day last month, at which President Trump declared: “I love the Greeks. Oh, do I love the Greeks. Don’t forget, I come from New York. That’s all I see is Greeks. They are all over the place.” He noted that his “really terrific and hardworking chief of staff” Reince Priebus is “one of the top Greeks in the country” and mentioned other members of his staff with Greek roots.
Television footage showed Mr. Kammenos beaming and stretching out a hand to greet the president. He also met with Defense Secretary Jim Mattis to discuss the two countries’ alliance and common challenges, including migration, terrorism and instability in the Balkans, Northern Africa and the Middle East.
The United States and Greece have been friends since the founding of the modern Greek state (when a combined British-French-Russian fleet defeated an Ottoman-Egyptian fleet at the Battle of Navarino in 1827). Αfter World War II, American support kept the Greek economy functioning and prevented a Communist victory. But United States officials were far more worried about supporting the dysfunctional Greek state than Mr. Kammenos’s recent comments would suggest. In February 1947, the chief of the American Economic Mission to Greece, Ambassador Paul A. Porter, in a dispatch to the under secretary of state for economic affairs, William L. Clayton, expressed fear that unless the Greek government took necessary measures, it would face financial collapse.
Greece’s partners in the European Union, which have provided 226.4 billion euros of the 258.2 billion disbursed so far in the bailout programs, would see the irony in Mr. Porter’s observations. They would also note that this time around, the United States has contributed only through its participation in the International Monetary Fund, which has lent Greece 31.8 billion euros. Whereas European officials have tried to keep Greece in the eurozone and have pressed successive governments to implement reforms, Mr. Trump, unlike Mr. Obama, has said Greece would be better off leaving the euro.
