Stephanie Elaine Davidson and Dov Lucien Morris Waxman are to be married April 2 at Alden Castle, an event space in Brookline, Mass. Rabbi Leonard Gordon is to lead the ceremony.
Ms. Davidson, 31, is a clinical lawyer at the Legal Services Center of Harvard Law School in the Jamaica Plain section of Boston, where she teaches antidomestic violence law in a clinical setting, and represents survivors in family and district courts. She graduated magna cum laude from Columbia, and received a law degree from Harvard.
She is a daughter of Karen B. Davidson and Dr. Brent N. Davidson, of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
Dr. Waxman, 42, is a professor of political science, international affairs and Israel studies and the Stotsky Professor of Jewish Historical and Cultural Studies at Northeastern University in Boston. He is the author of several books on Israel and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, most recently “Trouble in the Tribe: The American Jewish Conflict over Israel.” He graduated with second-class honors from Oxford and received a master’s degree in international relations from Johns Hopkins, from which he also received a Ph.D in the subject focusing on Middle East studies.
He is the son of Carole A. Waxman and Denis R. Waxman of London.
The couple met through OkCupid in June 2015 and got together a couple of weeks later, after Dr. Waxman persuaded her to take a break from her strict study schedule for the Massachusetts bar.
They met at Caffé Nero in Jamaica Plain, where she sat at a table with two or three study prep books. As they waited in line for coffee, they decided to take a quick stroll nearby around Jamaica Pond.
“Taking a walk outside is a much more natural environment,” he said, and the walk turned into four hours as they spoke about their families and formative experiences. But the books could not wait any longer.
Ten days later, she took time off studying to see him again, but this time with a definite time limit.
They went on a tour, in an amphibious vehicle, around Boston, which lasted about 80 minutes.
Like clockwork, she hit the books again in the middle of the afternoon, and about a week after the bar exam they went on another date, to a tapas restaurant, this time without time constraints, and they shared their first kiss.
They began dating seriously, and by the end of the summer, after Dr. Waxman returned from visiting his parents in London, he suggested turning their walk around the pond into a weekly ritual.
“I thought it was the best idea,” she said. They chose Sundays, rain or shine, but definitely not snow.
Last April, as a prop and pretext, he brought along a copy of the New York Times article “13 Questions to Ask Before Getting Married,” topics well covered on previous walks. After breezing through them, he led her to a nearby rock by the edge of the pond.
“The second we sat down, the skies opened,” she said. “It was very cinematic. He pulled out his tiny umbrella. We huddled, because it was tiny. I said, ‘Oh my God, this is romantic.’” And she recalled he said as if on cue, “‘Well in that case,’ and got down on one knee.” She accepted — with so much enthusiasm that she almost knocked him into the water.