WASHINGTON — As a Friday night deadline approaches to prevent a government shutdown, one hot-button spending issue is a down payment to build a wall on the southern border, one of President Trump’s signature national security goals.
In the run-up to this divisive debate, John F. Kelly, the homeland security secretary, has escalated his rhetoric about threats facing the United States.
“The risk is as threatening today as it was that September morning almost 16 years ago,” Mr. Kelly, a retired four-star Marine Corps general, said in a speech last week at George Washington University. Mr. Kelly suggested that undocumented immigrants may not be the only threat coming across the border with Mexico, pointing to the possibility of terrorists using the same smuggling routes to infiltrate the United States.
“We have tremendous threats, whether it’s drugs, people, potential terrorists coming up from the south,” Mr. Kelly told CBS’s “Face the Nation” last Sunday.
Is there a threat of ISIS or Qaeda terrorists entering through the southern border?
Not much, according to many terrorism specialists. Seamus Hughes, deputy director of George Washington University’s program on extremism, said there had been few instances of would-be terrorists using the southern border to enter the United States.
In some cases, he said, the opposite had occurred: Homegrown American jihadis have crossed the southern border to get out of the United States and catch a plane from Mexico, in an effort to avoid being detected on no-fly lists.
Mr. Hughes pointed to the case of Cabdulaahi Ahmed Faarax, who is wanted by the F.B.I. for conspiring to support a terrorist organization in Somalia. A naturalized American citizen who lived in Minneapolis and worked as a taxi driver, Mr. Faarax went to Somalia to fight with the Shabab, a Qaeda affiliate, in 2007. He returned to the United States to try to recruit other fighters, and was last seen in October 2009 at a United States-Mexico border crossing. He is believed to be in Somalia.
Terrorism experts say the Mexican drug cartels have been loath to allow terrorists to cross the border through their territories into the United States, fearing that any American military and law enforcement response to that threat would significantly disrupt their lucrative businesses.
Are drugs smuggled across the border responsible for the surge in overdoses?
This is exaggerated. Cartels do smuggle in vast quantities of illicit drugs, and Mr. Kelly accurately said that 52,404 deaths were caused by a drug overdose in 2015, “the highest number of drug-related deaths our country has ever seen.” But it’s misleading to attribute all of these to Mexican cartels.
Prescription drugs can be obtained in the United States, but a border wall would not necessarily stop the flow of illicit opioids. Fentanyl, for example, typically originates from China and is sometimes trafficked directly into the United States or through Canada, according to the Drug Enforcement Administration.
The most common way of transporting drugs like heroin into the United States, the D.E.A. reported in 2015, is stowing them in concealed compartments in vehicles through ports of entry. Other methods include using tunnels, drones, cargo trains and passenger buses — none of which would be prevented by a wall.
Mr. Kelly characterized marijuana as “potentially dangerous gateway drug” but there is no scientific consensus on this question. Some studies have found that people who use marijuana are more likely to take other illicit drugs compared with those who do not, but that doesn’t mean cannabis causes users to seek other drugs.
The main active component in marijuana, THC, dulls the brain’s dopamine system, which can “prime” the brain and lead users to other drugs. But this is no different from those who smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol.
The National Institute on Drug Abuse notes that a majority of marijuana users do not use “harder” drugs. And poverty, social environments, trauma, mental illness and individual characteristics are also critical factors for drug abuse and addiction.