It’s hard to remember a House race that has earned more national attention than the one to replace Secretary Tom Price in Georgia’s Sixth Congressional District. Republicans have dominated the district for a generation, but the leading Democratic candidate, Jon Ossoff, has an outside shot to win outright on Tuesday by winning more than 50 percent of the vote.
It’s not clear what to expect Tuesday night, however. It’s hard to estimate how many people will vote, and the public polls are of fairly low quality. One prediction: It’s likely that the first votes counted will be misleadingly good for Mr. Ossoff.
But special election polling tends to be fairly inaccurate. FiveThirtyEight’s Harry Enten found that such polls differ from the results by a wide amount on average — a true margin of error of plus or minus 8.5 to 9 points.
The surveys ahead of this particular special election did not call voters on their cellphones. And several contacted only likely special election voters, thus missing the young, irregular and seemingly unlikely voters who might to choose to vote this time.
Most important, it’s hard to know what the electorate is going to look like. There is no “model” for a special electorate, let alone one with more than $13 million in spending so far. Historically, turnout in special elections is pretty unpredictable.
In special elections decided by less than 10 percentage points since 2006, turnout has averaged around 44 percent of the vote of the prior presidential election and 70 percent of the previous midterm vote. That would mean around 145,000 voters in this race.
But the margin of error is around plus or minus 40,000 votes.
That’s a huge spread with the potential for a large effect on the polls, depending on which voters are likelier to stay home or turn out. It’s a spread reflected in the polling as well: One survey has voters over age 65 at more than half of likely voters, while another poll has it at a quarter or so.
The huge spending and attention ahead of the contest suggest that turnout might be on the higher side. Around 55,000 people have already voted, which would put the race on track for nearly 175,000 votes if early and absentee voters represent one-third of the final electorate, as they did in 2014. But that relationship has also been inconsistent.
There is really only one thing that’s clear about the electorate: Mr. Ossoff will probably fare very well in the early and absentee vote, which will most likely be counted first on Tuesday night.
Over all, early and absentee voters were split evenly between the two parties, each at 41 percent, based on whether voters had last participated in a Democratic or Republican primary. That’s impressive for the Democrats, since Republican primary voters in the district outnumber Democratic primary voters by a margin of two to one.
A significant share of Republicans in the district didn’t vote for President Trump in November. It is possible, even likely, that Mr. Ossoff has won well over 50 percent of the early vote — maybe even more than 60 percent of the early vote, as a few polls have shown. By our estimates, Hillary Clinton would have won around 57 percent of those early voters in the district in 2016, based on a combination of voter file data, pre-election polling and the actual results. Voters who hadn’t voted in a primary probably backed her by a big margin.
The low turnout among Republicans in the early vote is easy to excuse: They have a difficult choice between many candidates. And Republican voters started showing up the polls in far greater numbers over the last week. It’s a pattern consistent with the argument that Republican voters were slower to make up their minds than Democrats.
But Democratic turnout was impressive by any measure. It’s much higher than it was in the early voting in the 2014 midterm election. If Democrats vote as if it’s a midterm election and Republicans vote as if it’s a primary, Mr. Ossoff will have a real shot to win.
No matter what, Mr. Ossoff will do much better in the early vote than the final result. It might be misleading in the first couple of hours after the polls close, before the Election Day vote gets counted.
Whatever the outcome, political pundits and operatives will haggle about what the result means for a possible runoff or even next year’s midterm elections.
This is a tougher question than it is for most elections, since the expectations for this race have never been especially clear. That’s in part because President Trump won the district by only 1.5 points, even though it’s traditionally quite Republican, with Republicans outnumbering Democrats by 20 points in that race. Mitt Romney won by 23 points in 2012.
If Mr. Ossoff doesn’t do well, many will recall that this district was not expected to be competitive when Mr. Price was nominated in November to be the new secretary of health and human services. There would be a fine argument that the district’s traditional Republican-lean was too strong for a liberal Democratic challenger to prevail, especially against a diverse Republican field.
If Mr. Ossoff does well, there will be an equally fine argument that a competitive race should have been expected given Mr. Trump’s performance in November, Mr. Ossoff’s huge fund-raising haul and the split Republican field. And Georgia’s sixth district isn’t just well educated: It’s the best-educated House district held by a Republican in the country. (Nearly 60 percent of the district’s voters have college degrees, which is almost twice the national average.) An anti-Trump rebellion here might not mean much elsewhere, given that he relied so much on voters without degrees.
Even if Mr. Ossoff falls short, a strong showing — over 45 percent of the vote — would suggest that he would be very competitive in the June runoff. A weaker performance wouldn’t rule out a June victory, but it would be considered underwhelming given Mr. Ossoff’s many advantages in the race so far.
All of these outcomes remain possible heading into Tuesday’s contest. There is no reasonable way to look at the polls and conclude that Mr. Ossoff is likely to get to 50 percent. But it would not take an especially unusual polling error, at least for a special election, for him to pull it off.