When Amir Garrett played basketball for St. John’s University, he was the classic prototype: loved by his teammates and loathed by his opponents.
Garrett played two seasons for the Red Storm, but he was already a professional baseball player when he arrived on campus. He reached the majors this month as a starting pitcher for the Cincinnati Reds, and has a 1.83 earned run average in three quality starts. Garrett, who will turn 25 next month, works with style, beginning each inning by scratching a large letter A on the mound with his spikes.
For the rebuilding Reds, who have made a respectable start to the season, he has been a wise investment. They drafted Garrett in the 22nd round out of a high school near Las Vegas in 2011, gave him a $1 million bonus and let him follow his other passion in the off-seasons. Garrett chose St. John’s.
Garrett, a 6-foot-5 guard, played 55 games over the 2011-12 and 2012-13 seasons for St. John’s, averaging 6.2 points and 22.8 minutes per game. He was a valuable contributor at a major college program, impressive for someone who had not played basketball until high school. Garrett tried the sport after he quit baseball following the death of his grandfather Mack Wysinger.
Encouraged to pitch again by his father, Darryl, Garrett showed enough skill as a senior to earn his professional chance. But he did not turn full time to baseball until the summer of 2014, after he had transferred to California State University, Northridge, and sat out of basketball for a season. He never played for the Matadors because his baseball career bloomed.
Garrett made 27 starts for Class A Dayton in 2014, with a 3.65 E.R.A. In eight starts there the year before, his E.R.A. had been 6.88. He could feel himself making progress and did not want to stop.
Those pitches now include a fastball, a slider and a changeup he throws about 20 percent of the time — all let loose from an imposing frame. Garrett said his favorite pitcher has always been the Hall of Fame left-hander Randy Johnson, who is 6-10. Johnson might be an impossibly high standard for Garrett, but Lavin said he knew he was destined for baseball success.
Dusty Baker, a friend who was then the Reds’ manager, told Lavin that Garrett was not just an ordinary prospect, but the best in Cincinnati’s farm system.
Bryan Price, the Reds’ manager, has cited Garrett’s competitive streak as a major attribute, and Garrett said he honed it at St. John’s.
Garrett has won twice already, and in his one loss, he fanned 12 Baltimore Orioles in seven innings on Wednesday. He has left basketball behind, but is still no fun for opponents.
The unmistakable trend in front offices is that top jobs in baseball operations go to graduates of prestigious colleges in the Northeast. Competition is fierce for these positions, and almost invariably, the people who get them are bright, articulate and passionate for their work and often have college playing backgrounds. And they tend to be white men.
“A lot of clubs are in the same position: You don’t have to recruit,” said Dan Halem, the chief legal officer for Major League Baseball. “You just get all these résumés flowing into you through different sources, and each one’s better than the next. You end up hiring from that pool, because they’re all extraordinarily qualified.
In the latest report on racial and gender hiring practices in Major League Baseball, the University of Central Florida gave the league an overall grade of C-plus last week. The report, from the school’s Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport, cited the fact that the league has just three minority managers — Dusty Baker of the Washington Nationals, Rick Renteria of the Chicago White Sox and Dave Roberts of the Los Angeles Dodgers — and only four minorities with the title of president of baseball operations or general manager: Al Avila of the Detroit Tigers; Michael Hill of the Miami Marlins; Kenny Williams of the White Sox; and Farhan Zaidi of the Dodgers.
Baseball’s diversity pipeline program, to identify minority and female job candidates within the game, is in its second year. But one new wrinkle, in time, could be especially significant in finding more diverse candidates for baseball operations jobs.
The problem, baseball believes, is not in the colleges that typically funnel young executives to the game. Those colleges tend to have diverse student bodies, and M.L.B. wants to make sure it is finding the qualified candidates within them. To that end, Halem said, M.L.B. is creating a full-time position that will essentially be a scout for front-office talent.
As for prospective managerial candidates, Halem said he was encouraged by the growing pool of minority coaches in the game. The U.C.F. report did give baseball an A-plus for diversity in those jobs, with coaches of color at 41 percent in the major leagues and at 45 percent in the minor leagues.
Since the retirements of Derek Jeter, David Ortiz and Alex Rodriguez, baseball has lacked superstars who cross over to mainstream pop culture. One who did last week was rather unlikely: pitcher Jose Quintana, who made his first All-Star team last year and who plays for the rebuilding Chicago White Sox.
But Quintana appeared Tuesday in a segment on “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon,” teaching Spanish to the host on the plaza outside Rockefeller Center. Quintana, who is from Colombia, was a natural guest star, since he learned English by watching Fallon’s show.
Quintana said he was nervous and excited to be on the show, but Fallon helped calm him down. The White Sox have fielded trade offers for Quintana, but for now they are happy to see him raise his profile.
