At first blush, it looks like a crisis for CBS: broadcasting an episode of its hit reality show “Survivor” on Wednesday in which one contestant outs a rival as transgender during an elimination round — a violation of privacy as well as a cultural flash point.
But in fact, CBS and the producers of “Survivor” have been preparing for months for just the kind of uproar that ensued Thursday over the outing of Zeke Smith.
From the moment the episode was filmed nearly 10 months ago, the “Survivor” producers had been consulting with Mr. Smith about how best to handle airing the incident, which included a strategic media rollout and working with Glaad, the gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender rights group, before the episode’s broadcast.
Still, Mr. Probst said that no one was expecting it to be deployed as a bombshell at a tribal council — a portion of a “Survivor” episode in which dramatic reveals are more likely to make it to broadcast because they may affect who is eliminated in the vote.
“I was as shocked as anybody else,” said Mr. Probst, who added that Mr. Varner had not indicated to a producer that he was going to bring the issue up during the vote.
Several opinion columns on the matter were even written in advance, in effect highlighting the outing and stoking the reactions.
Mr. Smith himself wrote a column for The Hollywood Reporter published on Wednesday night, timed to the broadcast of the episode.
After the episode was broadcast, reactions poured in.
“Zeke Smith, and transgender people like him, are not deceiving anyone by being their authentic selves, and it is dangerous and unacceptable to out a transgender person,” Nick Adams, an official with Glaad, said in a statement.
Some viewers, supportive of Mr. Smith, were roundly unforgiving of his being outed.
“The worst, cruelest moment ever on Survivor,” one wrote on Twitter.
Some on social media noted that CBS could have chosen not to air the segment. “No Probst, YOU told millions of people. #Survivor,” the recent contestant Max Dawson posted on Twitter. But another former contestant, Eliza Orlins, wrote that it was “unavoidable” to include the outing moment in the show.
“No way to edit around it. Yikes,” she wrote.
In a statement Thursday, CBS said of Mr. Smith, “From his first season through the current edition, we have always been guided by the principle that this is his story to tell, and it remains so.
Mr. Varner, a real estate agent from High Point, N.C., apologized on his Facebook and Twitter accounts shortly after the episode aired.
During the tribal council, Mr. Probst decided to forgo a usual “Survivor” tradition. Instead of inviting cast members to write down the person they wished to vote off the island, Mr. Probst asked them all aloud if they agreed that Mr. Varner was the one to go.
“What happened at tribal transcended ‘Survivor,’” he said.