This interview with Mike O’Neill, chief executive of BMI, a music-rights management company, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.
A. I grew up in Oceanport, N.J. It’s the same town I live in now. I have three brothers and a sister. We all live there still, except for my younger brother, who moved 20 minutes south. He was a little bit of a rebel.
Being the middle child allowed me some freedom, because I was building bridges between the younger two and the older two. I got to play in that vacuum a little bit, which allowed me to be somewhat independent and creative.
If I needed attention, I had to work to get it, whether it was through athletics, doing well in school or having conversations with my parents about the events of the day.
My parents had a few rules that allowed us to be independent as kids. We had to watch each other’s backs and trust each other, and we also had to respect everybody else and be accountable. They gave us a lot of room. They were the opposite of helicopter parents.
I was captain of the basketball team. We grew up a mile from the ocean, so for many summers, until I graduated from college, I was a lifeguard. I also bartended at night. With those jobs, you always had to be aware of your surroundings and to stop anything bad from happening. It’s hard work to have that sustained focus.
What are some key leadership lessons you’ve learned?
You can’t treat everybody the same. People are different. You can have a tendency to think everyone’s going to receive information or react to it like you would, and they’re not. That was a key insight for me.
There was also a learning curve around the idea that I might get information at a point in time and start acting on that. But there’s a whole group of people who don’t have that information, so you have to distill it for them, and get them on the same page in order to move forward.
What are some specifics about your culture?
Have you always done that?
Any other pet peeves?
Entitlement. Sometimes people have a title and they assume authority. That bothers me. You have to earn that title every day. You have to do more than everybody else to keep that title, and not to be seen as living off somebody else’s work.
When I interview people, I want to know if they have those same qualities that my parents expected from us: trust, respect, accountability and watching others’ backs. And I learn more by asking them about the people they surround themselves with than I do by asking them direct questions.
So I’ll ask about their last job. Who was the person you really wanted to work for? Who was the person you wanted to run from? Why? What were the traits of those people?
And when I interview people, I usually do one in the office and then I try to do one outside the office, and I make the person pick the restaurant.
I want to see if they’re trying to impress me, or if they make me go to them or they come to me. What do they order? What are they thinking? Are they trying to please the C.E.O.? One of my first questions when I sit down is: “This is a great place. Why did you pick it?” Some people will say, “I was nervous when you asked me to pick it.” I love that answer because they’re being very candid with me at that point.
If you only had five minutes to interview someone, what would you ask them?
Tell me about the current environment you’re in or the current position you hold. What don’t you like about the culture of the place or the person you’re working with? Why are you looking to leave?
There are right and wrong flavors of answers. And they might have the absolute correct answer, but I might not have the solution for them. So I know even if I offer them a job, it’s not going to satisfy what they need.
Advice for new college grads?
The first would be to treat everybody with respect. The second thing is that it’s not a race. I didn’t become chief executive when I graduated college. It took me a long time, and part of that journey is fun. You’ve got to enjoy the ride.
So don’t be so aggressive. You can be assertive, but if you’re overly aggressive, you’re going to ruin your opportunities. Sometimes you have to let the organization pull you.
Some of the best jobs were given to me that I didn’t even realize were coming. Some of the worst jobs I’ve had were when I pushed for them, and I discovered that I wasn’t ready for the job.