The Southern Poverty Law Center filed a lawsuit on Tuesday against the publisher of a popular alt-right website, claiming that he orchestrated a “terror campaign” against a Jewish woman in Montana.
The lawsuit, filed on behalf of the woman, Tanya Gersh, accuses the publisher of The Daily Stormer, Andrew Anglin, of unleashing a “troll storm” by publishing an article in December that listed Ms. Gersh’s contact information and exhorted readers to “take action” against her.
In the weeks and months that followed, the lawsuit contends, Mr. Anglin continued to publish pieces about Ms. Gersh. Along with her family, she received more than 700 harassing messages, including death threats, and a message on Twitter to her son suggesting that he pursue a free Xbox located inside an oven, the suit says.
Mr. Anglin did not immediately respond to an email requesting comment.
Tuesday’s 64-page complaint is the latest salvo in a story that has engulfed the small city of Whitefish, Mont., a town nestled in the northwestern part of the state that, until recently, was known mostly for its mountains and other stunning slices of nature.
In fall 2016, Ms. Gersh heard rumors of a possible protest in connection with the downtown building. At the request of a tenant, Ms. Gersh, who worked in real estate at the time, spoke with Ms. Spencer by telephone. Ms. Spencer worried about how to handle the situation, and, according to the documents, initially asked Ms. Gersh to help her sell the property before later reconsidering.
The pair stopped communicating in early December, and by the middle of the month, “Ms. Spencer published a blog post on the website Medium in which she accused Ms. Gersh of threatening and harassing her into agreeing to sell the Lupfer Avenue property,” according to the lawsuit.
Mr. Anglin, who the law center describes in its filing as “a well-known neo-Nazi operating out of Ohio,” then published the first in a series of articles attacking Ms. Gersh. A Dec. 16 article suggested that readers target Ms. Gersh, members of her family and a few others for what he said was harassing and extorting Ms. Spencer.
The article included an address, phone number and other ways to contact Ms. Gersh.
Ms. Gersh subsequently received a flood of phone calls, text messages, emails, social media messages, and even malicious Christmas cards and tourist pamphlets from other states, according to the lawsuit.
“You will be driven to the brink of suicide. & We will be there to take pleasure in your pain & eventual end,” one message said, according to court documents.
The lawsuit asserts that Mr. Anglin is liable to Ms. Gersh for invading her privacy, for inflicting emotional distress upon her and for violating the Montana Anti-Intimidation Act, in an amount of more than $75,000 for each count.