For decades, hundreds of boys suffered abuse and neglect at the Arthur G. Dozier School for Boys, a reform school in the Florida panhandle that closed in 2011.
On Tuesday, the victims and their families received an apology from one Florida lawmaker as the state’s legislature discussed a bill that would express official regret.
“I cannot say with enough heartfelt remorse that it’s taken this long for a legislature, with all the evidence that is before us, to come forth and apologize for what has to be one of the blackest moments on our history,” Richard Corcoran, a Republican and Florida’s speaker of the house, said in a news conference.
The House heard from men who had endured abuses at the school on the same day the Senate Judiciary Committee approved a resolution for the official apology. A vote is expected later this month, and the measure is expected to pass.
The state-run school, in Marianna, Fla., opened in 1900. It was meant to be an institution for wayward and troubled youth. Over the years, former students, many of whom were black, have reported suffering physical abuse, sexual abuse, neglect and forced labor at the hands of the school’s staff.
Bill Price, 69, who lived at Dozier as a teenager in the 1960s, is the vice president of the White House Boys, a victims’ group of about 450 members. It is named for the building at the school in which beatings reportedly took place in the 1940s, ’50s and ’60s.
“We’ve been waiting on this for 10 years,” he said. “It’s something we have fought for 10 years.
“We do deserve an apology, and we will accept it,” he added.
In 2012, a team of forensic anthropologists from the University of South Florida began fieldwork on the property, where they uncovered 55 unmarked graves, said Dr. Erin Kimmerle, who led the team. More than 100 people are thought to have died there, she said.
“One thing you see with Dozier through its hundred years: It’s not that there weren’t investigations and people who knew what was happening, but the main institutional systems that were there that perpetuated the violence, that culture, were always left intact,” Dr. Kimmerle said on Tuesday.
Mr. Price wrote candidly on the White House Boys website about the beatings he experienced at the hands of Dozier staff.
In March, State Senator Darryl E. Rouson sponsored a bill requesting the official apology, hoping to provide the hundreds of victims, many of whom were black, and their families some peace.
“It’s time that the state stand up, express sincere regret that it happened, and declare a commitment that under our watch, it should never happen again,” Mr. Rouson said on Tuesday, “It was just time.
“We could envision them as children living through these atrocities, seeing others get killed, being brutally beat themselves, all while in custody of the state of Florida,” he said of the victims.
Dr. Kimmerle also hopes that the information learned from the Dozier investigation can inform the present and future.
“There are children in great need throughout this state, and I think whatever state leaders and policy makers can do to ensure that, not just that it doesn’t happen again, but that everything is done — systems and mechanisms are in place — to protect them,” she said.
And while the apology will provide closure for many of the victims, Mr. Price said, the victory is somewhat bittersweet.
