The Upshot|The G.O.P. Health Bill Is Alive Again. Here’s a Quick Way to Catch Up.
The G.O.P. Health Bill Is Alive Again. Here’s a Quick Way to Catch Up.
The Republican plan to repeal Obamacare and replace it with something quite different is heading for a House vote Thursday, after an embarrassing false start in March. The bill, the American Health Care Act, has changed considerably since it was first introduced. Here’s a refresher course to our coverage of what’s inside it. Click the links for fuller stories on each subject.
A set of proposed changes has won over most members of the conservative Freedom Caucus, which opposed the original G.O.P. bill.
The compromise would allow states to waive three big Obamacare rules.
■ The law’s “essential health benefits” provision was devised to keep insurance to a minimum standard and make it useful for people who need it.
■ Obamacare’s “community rating” provision helps protect people with pre-existing conditions from being charged more than healthy customers.
Technically, the deal would still prevent insurers from denying coverage to people with a history of illness. But without community rating, health plans would be free to charge those patients as much as they wanted.
■ Obamacare’s “age rating” rule lowers premiums for older Americans, who tend to use more health care services — though it raises prices for younger customers.
By discouraging older people from buying insurance, the plan would lower the average sticker price of care. But that doesn’t mean prices would get lower for everyone.
■ States that pursue waivers of these three rules would be required to set up special programs for high-cost patients. States have tried high-risk pools before, with mixed results.
Breakdown of how much people gain or lose under the plan.
■ States with waivers could also tap a special $8 billion fund to help lower insurance prices or deductibles. How far the money will go depends on how many states pursue waivers.
Based on the cost of health care at the time, James Capretta and Thomas Miller, now both at the American Enterprise Institute, estimated that such a program would cost $15 billion to $20 billion a year.
All of these changes would be added to the basic structure of the American Health Care Act, which reshapes the health insurance system.
■ The bill would change the federal-state Medicaid program for all its 74 million beneficiaries, not just those who joined because of Obamacare.
“This is potentially more major than repealing the Affordable Care Act,” said Joan Alker, the executive director of the Center for Children and Families at Georgetown University.
■ It would rearrange the subsidy system that helps middle-income Americans buy their own insurance coverage, creating new winners and losers.
The winners are likely to be younger, earn higher incomes and live in areas where the cost of health insurance is low.
We don’t have an estimate of effects of the bill with the new changes, but we have some sense of the original bill’s impact.
■ The Congressional Budget Office says an older version of the bill would mean that 24 million more Americans would lack health insurance in a decade.
The Republican bill would actually result in more people being uninsured than if Obamacare were simply repealed.
■ In addition to the insurance changes, the bill would also make big tax cuts, particularly on income from investments. Taken together, the bill would redistribute resources from the poor to the rich.
It would offer new financial benefits for the upper-middle class and the rich.
Those shifts can be summarized in a simple chart.
An average family making more than $200,000 a year would gain $5,640 while a family making less than $10,000 a year would lose $1,420.
The articles summarized above come from me, Reed Abelson, Haeyoun Park and Kevin Quealy.