AUGUSTA, Ga. — The 81st Masters began with a look back at the life and legacy of Arnold Palmer, a four-time champion whose death last September hung over Augusta National like the dark rain clouds that burst and wiped out the par-3 contest. It ended with the sun shining luminously on Europe.
During Sunday’s concluding round, the final twosome of Sergio Garcia of Spain and Justin Rose of England lived up to its marquee billing, with the pair wielding their putters like daggers until Garcia delivered the fatal blow on the first playoff hole. Led by Garcia, players from Europe, which will try to take back the Ryder Cup in France next year, occupied five of the first eight places. Thomas Pieters of Belgium was tied for fourth, the Englishman Paul Casey was sixth and the Northern Irishman Rory McIlroy was tied for seventh.
The top American finisher was Matt Kuchar, who tied for fourth. The only other American player in the top eight was Kevin Chappell. Conspicuous by their absences from the first page of the leader board were Rickie Fowler and Jordan Spieth, who teed off Sunday directly ahead of Garcia and Rose in a pairing that failed to live up to its advance billing.
Fowler, who began the day one stroke off the lead, carded a four-over 76; Spieth, on his way to a 75, hit his third water ball in his last two Sunday visits to No. 12. They finished in a group at 11th, eight strokes out of the playoff.
Spieth’s Sunday round called to mind the final straightaway of a horse that got spooked out of the gate and had to exert so much energy catching up to the field that it had nothing left for the final push. There’s a reason no man has won a major with a quadruple bogey, the score posted by Spieth on the par-5 15th in the first round. Imagine needing four birdies at Augusta National to erase one mistake.
Spieth, the 2015 champion, did well to catch up to the pacesetters by the end of Saturday. The surest sign that Spieth was spent came on the 12th hole, when he didn’t yell at himself or the ball as it headed for its bath. It was as if he didn’t have the energy to wind himself up.
The stage might have not been too big, but Fowler putted as if the hole had shrunk two sizes. On Saturday, he made all six of his attempts between 5 and 10 feet. On Sunday he lost his feel with his putter, making 2 of 5 from that distance.
The reason it took Garcia 74 starts to win his first major was because when the pressure was cranked to high, his putts fell short. Now that Garcia has a green jacket, the label of “best player not to have won a major” has been passed like a favorite self-help affirmation to Fowler. There’s no reason to believe he will hang on to the title for long.