It would be easy to quote T.S. Eliot here when talking about the sheer number of new and returning series arriving in April. But there’s nothing cruel about the offerings listed below, which we are very excited about.
Any baseball fan still bummed out over the retirements last fall of announcers Vin Scully and Dick Enberg should tune into this sitcom starring the veteran comic and voice actor Hank Azaria (“The Simpsons,” “Mad About You”) as a disgraced play-by-play announcer mounting a comeback in the minor leagues. Expect broadcaster cameos, jokes about the olden days, and lots of literal “inside baseball” chatter.
The stellar second season of this “Breaking Bad” prequel series helped confirm that it’s a uniquely involving TV drama, with fewer nifty plot twists than its predecessor but more moments of humor and bittersweet emotion. The third season will reportedly move closer to the “Breaking Bad” timeline (and will bring back Giancarlo Esposito as Gus Fring, the super-cautious drug kingpin), but the core of the show should remain Bob Odenkirk’s multifaceted performance as a scrappy lawyer, perpetually torn between his good heart and his evil instincts.
Comedian Joel Hodgson returns to his most popular invention, serving as the head writer for a new iteration of “Mystery Science Theater 3000,” with a new cast — and surprise guest stars aplenty — helping him make fun of cheesy old movies. The huge Kickstarter campaign to bring this old cult TV favorite back has already been a feel-good story, but the real happy ending is that the show remains as clever and funny as ever.
When last we left “The Leftovers,” HBO’s darkest drama had just dealt its characters another crushing blow by sending in an apocalyptic cult to rip up the placid small Texas town where the heroes had relocated. The third and final season will pick up some time later in Australia, and it will bring the story to a close with more intensely intimate episodes that explore how ordinary people cope with the aftermath of a catastrophe.
The TV take on the Coen brothers’ Oscar-winning film continues to follow its own weird, slippery path, with a third season that will be set in 2010 and will feature Ewan McGregor as two very different twin brothers. The writer and creator Noah Hawley has brought together another of his stellar casts (including Carrie Coon, Mary Elizabeth Winstead, Michael Stuhlbarg and David Thewlis) for more bloody, wryly funny criminal high jinks, dotted with surprising pop culture references.
Renée Elise Goldsberry, who won a Tony award for her role in “Hamilton,” plays a working-class Baltimore woman whose cancerous cells became the foundation for decades of scientific research — initially without her family’s knowledge or consent. Based on the 2010 nonfiction best seller by Rebecca Skloot, this feature film, starring Oprah Winfrey as Lacks’s daughter, looks to address the ethical quandaries, impressive medical innovations and complicated racial and family legacies described so well in the book.
Margaret Atwood’s 1985 dystopian novel — about life under a misogynistic theocracy — has been a staple of feminist literature classes for decades and has recently surged back up the best-seller lists amid current events. Hulu’s TV adaptation, starring Elisabeth Moss (Peggy on “Mad Men”) as a government-controlled sex slave, couldn’t be more timely … or more terrifying.
Justin Simien adapts his own acclaimed 2014 indie film into a TV series, with a new cast playing the same characters from the movie: a diverse assortment of black and white Ivy League students, coping with the complexities of race-relations in the 2010s. If it’s anything like the original, the Netflix version will be witty and bold.
The long struggle to adapt Neil Gaiman’s award-winning 2001 fantasy novel to the small screen finally bears fruit, as writer-producer Bryan Fuller (“Pushing Daisies,” “Hannibal”) gathers a cast that includes Ian McShane, Gillian Anderson, Crispin Glover, and Emily Browning to tell the story of ancient gods rising up against their newest rivals. In Gaiman’s conception, “new gods” are concepts like “the media,” “technology” and “guns,” which should lead to some lively action-adventure television, with heavy doses of commentary about what we really value.