HARTFORD — Gov. Dannel P. Malloy of Connecticut, known nationally for seeking stronger gun laws after the school shooting in Newtown and for welcoming a Syrian refugee family rebuffed by Mike Pence when he was governor of Indiana, announced on Thursday that he would not seek a third term.
Mr. Malloy, 61, appeared with his wife, Cathy, and their eldest son, Dannel, at an unexpected news conference at the State Capitol. He said that his decision had nothing to do with low public approval ratings, and that he and his family had been in politics for years and had decided they were “ready for another stage” in their lives.
Mr. Malloy, who is also chairman of the Democratic Governors Association, said he would complete his second term as governor, which ends in January 2019. The list of Republicans and Democrats interested in the position has been growing in recent months.
Much of Mr. Malloy’s tenure has been marked by fiscal struggles, caused primarily by Connecticut’s slow recovery from the economic recession of the late 2000s. He has signed budgets that included the state’s two largest tax increases, large government layoffs and spending cuts in popular programs.
Mr. Malloy has yet to reach an agreement with the legislature on a budget that will cover a projected $1.7 billion deficit in the fiscal year that begins July 1. Connecticut’s main spending account is typically about $18 billion.
Immediately after Mr. Malloy’s announcement, the Republican Governors Association said his “toxic legacy” of “destructive anti-jobs, high-tax policies,” coupled with his decision not to seek re-election, had created a “top pickup opportunity” for the Republican Party in 2018.
Mr. Malloy, who took office in 2011, said he was proud of his record but understood that not everyone recognized his administration’s accomplishments.
“Throughout our work, we’ve tried to play the long game for Connecticut, not doing what is politically expedient, but rather what we believe is in the best interests of the people we serve today, and for generations still to come,” he said.
Last year, he received the John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award for supporting resettlement of Syrian refugees after the Paris attacks.
Mr. Malloy personally welcomed to Connecticut a couple and their 5-year-old son, who had fled Syria in 2011 and planned to resettle in Indiana. The family was turned away when Mr. Pence, now the vice president, ordered state agencies to halt resettlement activities.
After the Dec. 14, 2012, shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School, Mr. Malloy signed sweeping restrictions on weapons and ammunition magazines similar to those used by the man who fatally shot 20 children and six educators at the school.