Illustrated. 272 pages. HarperCollins. $28.99.
Whenever I think unhappily about Alec Baldwin, the way you do when you feel ashamed of knowing too much about a celebrity — whenever I think about his nasty divorce; the horrible voice mail message he left for his daughter Ireland in 2007; the time he fought with a photographer in New York — I remember his performance in one of my favorite old “Saturday Night Live” skits.
The year is 1993, and Baldwin is at the peak of his dreamy youthful handsomeness. He plays a soap opera actor who claims to have done extensive research to prepare for his part as Dr. Dirk Johanson in the ludicrously over-the-top show “Doctors, Nurses and Patients,” but is unable to pronounce even the simplest medical term correctly.
You can forgive an actor an awful lot when he can produce something so sublimely deadpan, and then, in Baldwin’s particular case, eventually go on to play the great Jack Donaghy on “30 Rock,” his dark eyes glinting with anarchic, Machiavellian intelligence; and then to out-dumb President Donald J. Trump on the current season of “Saturday Night Live.” So how are we meant to think about this person, whom we know but of course do not know?
After that start, you feel the needle on your Baldwin-appreciation meter trending downward. But to his surprise (and ours) he pulls himself together and delivers a thorough and sophisticated effort to answer an interesting question: How did an indifferently raised, self-flagellating kid from a just-making-ends-meet, desultorily functioning Long Island family, in Massapequa, turn into Alec Baldwin, gifted actor, familiar public figure, impressively thoughtful person, notorious pugilist?
The passages about his childhood — his mother overwhelmed, depressed, lying in bed surrounded by laundry; his father working at a school; six siblings fighting for space and resources in a two-bedroom house, their parents unable to afford even a washing machine — are beautifully written and unexpectedly moving.
He never intended to be an actor but fell into the job when, as a student at George Washington University, he spontaneously decided to audition for the New York University theater program while visiting the city. He got a spot despite having no experience, transferred out of George Washington and then had an existential crisis.
But then he spent two years on an actual soap opera, moved to Hollywood, moved back to New York, and saw his career rise and then fall and then rise again. His current film, “The Boss Baby,” in which he voices the character of a tyrannical infant, is currently No. 1 at the box office. People cannot get enough of his portrayal of Trump, with its perfectly pitched vapidity laced with self-regard.
“Nevertheless,” whose title comes from a dirty joke that Baldwin heard from the British actor Michael Gambon, is full of unexpectedly sharp descriptions.
Baldwin writes with great knowledge about old films, the art of acting, what he has learned from other actors, and about the differences among television, film and theater. He also takes the opportunity to settle old scores. It appears that the book itself has given rise to some new ones. “The editors at HarperCollins were, I imagine, too busy to do a proper and forensic edit of the material,” he wrote recently in a Facebook update devoted to postpublication corrections and amendments.
He says that he had no ghostwriter or collaborator for this book. That is impressive, because he’s a highly literate and fluent writer, but it also means that his authorial discipline can abandon him. He has a bit of trouble with transitions.
In the worst example, he’s talking admiringly about the actor Christopher Reeve, who was president of the Creative Coalition, an organization for politically involved actors like Baldwin. One moment Baldwin is standing next to Reeve at the group’s 1995 retreat and all is well.
Baldwin expresses love for his second wife, Hilaria, and his four children, and seems to have found a new peace after a lifetime of battling his demons. “I want to end this book contemplating happiness and renewal,” he says.
The most recent time he hosted “Saturday Night Live,” in February (it was his 17th time, a record), showed that he had weathered one of the hardest things anyone can face: how to square who you are now with who you used to be. During the opening monologue, the camera panned to a photograph of Baldwin in 1990, when he first hosted the show. The contrast was so breathtaking that the audience gasped.
