The Learning Network|What Should Be the Fate of ‘Fearless Girl’ Versus ‘Charging Bull’?
What Should Be the Fate of ‘Fearless Girl’ Versus ‘Charging Bull’?
What do you think about the two sculptures, “Fearless Girl” and “Charging Bull”? What is your reaction to the interpretations of the two sculptures expressed by the people interviewed in the video?
Let’s consider “Fearless Girl,” a now-famous statue that popped up near Wall Street last month, standing in front of the iconic “Charging Bull.” It was great.
The bull has been around since the 1980s, large and formidable. He’s part of the financial district vibe, and when the little girl suddenly appeared in his path, looking less like a toreador than a four-foot-tall immovable force, it created a sensation.
... “Fearless Girl” was originally supposed to be on display for a few days. But her stay was extended, and now there are calls to keep her forever. Meanwhile, the bull’s creator is going nuts. “It’s really bad,” said an emotional Arturo Di Modica, 76, at a press conference.
Di Modica began working on the bull in 1987, when the markets had a terrible crash and were desperately in need of some bullishness. He spent his own money on the project and hauled his 7,000-pound creation to the front of the New York Stock Exchange, where he deposited it in the middle of the night.
Exchange officials, unmoved, had it carted away. But Mayor Ed Koch and his parks commissioner liked “Charging Bull,” and placed in a nearby park, where it’s been ever since.
... “Men who don’t like women taking up space are exactly why we need the Fearless Girl,” twittered Mayor de Blasio.
Her stay has now been extended to a year. The wounded Di Modica says he’ll sue.
We ought to be able to make this an extremely rare example of amicable compromise in the Trump era. Next February, “Fearless Girl” should move on. There are plenty of places that can use her.
— What are the opposing viewpoints expressed in the essay? What are your reactions to them?
— What meaning, if any, do you find in each sculpture?
— Would “Fearless Girl” have the same meaning if it were not positioned facing “Charging Bull”? Explain.
— Does knowing that Arturo Di Modica spent his own money in the creation of “Charging Bull” change how you interpret the current situation? What about the way he deposited the sculpture in the night, or the then-mayor’s decision to move “Charging Bull” to its current home?
— What do you think should happen next, in fairness to the public, each sculptor and all other involved parties?
— Are there other pieces of public art that you can you imagine being positioned in conversation or opposition with one another? Explain.
