Warren Buffett, chairman and chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway, in January. He appeared with Jorge Paulo Lemann in Cambridge, Mass., on Saturday.
The billionaire investors Warren Buffett and Jorge Paulo Lemann have teamed up to engineer some of the biggest and boldest mergers and acquisitions in recent years, but they have rarely appeared in public together.
On Saturday night, however, the two appeared on a stage in Cambridge, Mass., to be interviewed by the dean of the Harvard Business School, Nitin Nohria. They were speaking at the Brazil Conference 2017, an annual event that Mr. Lemann formed and is organized by Brazilian students at Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
In their comments, the two investors offered a strong defense of open markets, free trade and the United States as a great place to do business.
“I’m all in favor of free trade and globalization,” said Mr. Lemann, who was one of the founders of the Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital, which owns such well-known brands as Burger King, Anheuser-Busch and Heinz.
“I think if you look back in history, countries that have engaged in commerce have benefited enormously,” he said.
Mr. Lemann and Mr. Buffett got to know each other when both were on the board of Gillette.
Around that time, Mr. Lemann was selling Banco de Investimentos Garantia, an investment bank of which he was a founder in Brazil. Mr. Buffett asked him if he was happy to sell his bank and why.
Mr. Lemann told him he was and that he did not want to end up being somebody running a Goldman Sachs-type operation. He said he would rather be like Mr. Buffett.
But it was not until 2013 that they first did a deal together.
Then, Mr. Lemann’s 3G Capital and Mr. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway teamed up to acquire H.J. Heinz for $23 billion. Two years later, 3G Capital, again together with Mr. Buffett, merged Heinz with Kraft Foods.
“And a little later, he sent one page of financial terms and one page of governance terms, and just as would have been the case if I was doing something with my partner Charlie Munger, basically I did not have to change a word,” Mr. Buffett said.
For Mr. Lemann’s part, he was initially taken aback by how quickly things progressed with Berkshire Hathaway.
“So that sort of shook me up, and then I said, ‘How about governance?’ and he said, ‘Well, send me a memo and if it’s O.K., it’s O.K.,’ and so that’s it. We got an answer from him right away,” Mr. Lemann said.
They also have in common what they look for in companies, like large, well-known consumer brands that are attractive over the long term.
“In the end, we’re running things for the long run and building companies that will last forever if possible,” Mr. Lemann said.