1. It’s been a whirlwind week in Washington, as the administration rolls out initiatives ahead of President Trump’s 100-day mark.
On the tax plan: It was remarkably short on details (“all ponies and no manure,” one expert said).
Economists say it would vastly expand the country’s budget deficit and national debt — and offer the greatest benefits to the wealthiest Americans.
Above, President Mauricio Macri and the first lady, Juliana Awada, of Argentina visited the White House.
2. From Capitol Hill came news that the Defense Department is investigating Michael Flynn, the president’s former national security adviser, over payments from Russia.
House Democrats threatened to withhold their support for a stopgap spending plan if Republicans press for a vote on their health care bill. But our best guess is that a government shutdown this weekend will be averted.
And Speaker Paul Ryan invited reporters’ children to his press briefing for Take Our Daughters and Sons to Work Day.
3. President Trump said he yielded to pleas from the leaders of Canada and Mexico and agreed not to withdraw immediately from the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Many Mexicans are starting to see Mr. Trump’s anti-trade rhetoric as mere stagecraft. Above, trucks wait to cross into El Paso, Tex., from Mexico.
“It seems like he’s sitting at a poker table bluffing rather than making serious decisions,” a Mexican legislator said.
4. China reacted harshly to news that the antimissile system the U.S. set up in South Korea is nearly operational.
The Pentagon’s Pacific commander said the crisis over North Korea was “the worst” he’d seen, but experts say war is not imminent.
Our reporter found a good deal of nonchalance in Seoul, though children still learn how to use gas masks in case of an attack.
5. The fourth prisoner in seven days is set to be executed tonight at a prison in southeast Arkansas. This case has resonated the most in the surrounding rural community.
The condemned, Kenneth Williams, escaped 17 years ago and killed an assistant warden living nearby.
6. Syria blamed Israel for a series of explosions at warehouses near the Damascus airport that Israeli news reports said were full of weapons bound for Hezbollah in Lebanon.
The fires could be seen from a distance.
Israel doesn’t usually confirm military actions in Syria, but its intelligence minister said the strike was “consistent” with its goals.
7. Pope Francis heads to Egypt on Friday, just weeks after the Palm Sunday terrorist attacks on two Coptic churches there.
Al Azhar mosque, above, will be among his stops. He’s to meet with Christian and Muslim leaders, and he’s expected to press for the protection of minority rights in a sit-down with President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.
8. Can we talk about a commuting nightmare?
Amtrak is planning major repairs at New York’s Penn Station this summer that will close several tracks — officials declined to be specific about how many and for how long.
Hundreds of thousands of commuters stream daily through the station, North America’s busiest, for Amtrak, New Jersey Transit and Long Island Rail Road trains.
9. Two takes on motherhood, sparked by two very famous mothers.
Our fashion writer says Beyoncé “has created a new paradigm for what it means to be a pregnant woman in the public eye.” There’s just one problem: She’s setting the bar too high.
10. Finally, the late-night comedians had some fun with the White House’s tax plan.
