BRUSSELS — Facing criticism for neglecting child welfare, European Union authorities appealed on Wednesday to member-state governments to do more to protect the hundreds of thousands of young migrants who reach the Continent seeking refuge from wars and poverty.
The recommendations by the European Commission, the bloc’s executive body, are not binding on member states and do not involve new outlays of money. They are meant instead as guidance to prompt member states to do more to protect children at all stages of the asylum process and to address one of the more delicate aspects of the bloc’s migration crisis.
The recommendations call for a person responsible for child protection in all migrant reception centers and at all stages of the asylum process — a new suggestion that is not part of European asylum law. The commission also suggested offering legal assistance without delay to children regardless of their eligibility for asylum.
Other recommendations were aimed mainly at reminding member states to meet existing obligations. Those include providing unaccompanied minors the possibility of foster or family-based care, doing more to ensure rapid family tracing and family reunification procedures inside and outside the European Union, and ensuring there are enough adequately trained guardians for children.
The recommendations were “welcome and much needed” but did little to address “the underlying flaws in the E.U.’s approach to migration that are putting children at risk in the first place,” said Iverna McGowan, the head of the European institutions office for Amnesty International.
Ms. McGowan emphasized the need to create safe, legal routes so children are not forced to take journeys that expose them to violence, exploitation or injury.
She said that many of the 12,767 people stranded on the Greek islands are children living in appalling conditions without access to health care, education or proper housing — and that they should be moved to the mainland as soon as possible.
The announcement was partly aimed at quelling criticism of the European Union for its policies toward the most vulnerable migrants, and for not taking into account how unsafe, inadequate accommodations can make children more likely to run away and be exposed to even greater risks, or become radicalized.
About a third of migrants who arrive in the European Union are children, and their well-being has prompted waves of concern. A call last month by the European Commission to detain migrant children where necessary was roundly condemned by child protection groups.
Detaining children should be only “a last resort,” Vera Jourova, the European Union’s commissioner for justice, said at a news conference on Wednesday, calling it “another moment when they are traumatized more.” She acknowledged that fear of prisonlike conditions led many child migrants to refuse to give their fingerprints during the asylum process.
The announcement was another step toward addressing the consequences of a crisis in which more than one million migrants reached the European Union in 2015 alone. The influx continues to set off furious arguments in Europe over how to share the burden among member states.
