
Prosecutors in Pennsylvania have maintained that the evidence about quaaludes bolsters their case against Mr. Cosby, who is accused of drugging and sexually assaulting Andrea Constand, a Temple University staff member, in his home north of Philadelphia in 2004.
Mr. 
But Judge Steven T. O’Neill of the Court of Common Pleas in Montgomery County, Pa., denied prosecution efforts to include references to “Spanish fly,” a supposed aphrodisiac that Mr. Cosby had once bragged about giving to girls when he was young.
Prosecutors had sought to introduce a 1991 television interview in which he talked of dropping it into a girl’s drink, and a chapter of a book from that same year in which Mr. Cosby related a childhood story about how he and some other boys sprinkled Spanish fly on cookies to give to girls.
Mr. Cosby’s lawyers had argued that the stories were merely part of his comedy routine about the bravado of teenage boys.
In a separate ruling, Judge O’Neill decided that no one at trial will be able to discuss the 2005 civil case brought against Mr. Cosby by Ms. Constand that ended in an undisclosed financial settlement. Mr. Cosby’s lawyers had asked that all references to the settlement be barred, while prosecutors had requested that if the settlement could not be mentioned, all references to the case be forbidden.
Barring any other last-minute legal filings, the rulings are thought to be the last by Judge O’Neill before trial, which is set to begin June 5 in Norristown, Pa., after jury selection scheduled for May 22.
After Mr. Cosby was charged in December 2015, his legal team spent several months in pretrial hearings fighting to have the charges thrown out. More recently, both prosecution and defense have tussled over what evidence can be admitted at trial.
The trial is likely to be closely watched, and the impact that publicity could have on potential jurors is already such an issue that Judge O’Neill has agreed to import a jury from western Pennsylvania, across the state.
Judge O’Neill also decided in February that a second woman could testify that she, too, was sexually assaulted by Mr. Cosby, an appearance that prosecutors hope will help to support Ms. Constand’s account. Lawyers for Mr. Cosby were able to persuade the judge then to bar the testimony of 12 other accusers whose accounts prosecutors had sought to introduce, but not the woman identified in court only as “Prior Alleged Victim Six.” The woman, who had also appeared at a news conference where she was identified as Kacey, said she was assaulted in 1996 at Mr. Cosby’s California hotel bungalow.
Mr. Cosby was not criminally charged in that case.
It was during the deposition testimony he gave in the 2005 civil suit that Mr. Cosby admitted to obtaining quaaludes in his pursuit of sex with women. Prosecutors will be able to discuss Mr. Cosby’s admissions as remarks given in private testimony without going into any specific reference to the civil suit.
A spokeswoman for the Montgomery County district attorney, Kate Delano, declined to comment. Andrew Wyatt, a spokesman for Mr. Cosby, also had no comment.
In the case of Ms. Constand, Mr. Cosby testified during the civil suit that the three pills he gave her on the night of the alleged assault were Benadryl, a decongestant medicine he regularly used himself to help him relax. Ms. Constand told police that the pills, along with wine she said Mr. Cosby gave her to drink, left her unable to move or speak.
Mr. Cosby’s lawyers said this week that their client had already been convicted as guilty in the court of public opinion even before the trial, and said that a focus of their defense would be to win back public opinion. In apparent evidence of that strategy, one of Mr. Cosby’s daughters this week released a statement defending her father, and Mr. Cosby gave a rare interview for an article that led with a depiction of his blindness.