Scotland’s leader, Nicola Sturgeon, has described her dealings with Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain as cordial despite blunt differences over the future of the United Kingdom — Mrs. May’s intent to divorce the European Union and Ms. Sturgeon’s intent to divorce Britain.
But the relationship might be better, Ms. Sturgeon suggested, if Mrs. May and her colleagues in London would share more information.
“My experience of trying to reach some compromise with her over the past few months has been an unproductive and frustrating one,” Ms. Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, said in an interview on Wednesday with The New York Times Editorial Board.
“Much of the thinking and much of the decision making is very closed, and it’s very difficult to get into that in any meaningful way,” Ms. Sturgeon said.
Mrs. May’s government, Ms. Sturgeon said, did not give advance notice to leaders of Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales, the other components of the United Kingdom, when the British leader decided that March 29 was the day she would invoke the Article 50 clause of the European Union treaty, starting the withdrawal from Europe, known as Brexit.
“If I told you that not just the Scottish government, but the Welsh government and Northern Ireland found out the date of the triggering of Article 50 from the BBC, it probably gives you an insight,” Ms. Sturgeon said.
Representatives of Mrs. May’s government did not immediately respond to email requests for comment. But Mrs. May, the top advocate of Brexit, has said that she believes all constituents of the United Kingdom should now grow more unified, and that she strongly opposes Ms. Sturgeon’s push for Scottish independence.
“Now is not the time,” Mrs. May said last month in public remarks that seemed to Ms. Sturgeon and her supporters patronizing and arrogant.
Ms. Sturgeon, 46, leader of the Scottish National Party, has emerged as a formidable force in the independence effort, which failed in a 2014 referendum but found renewed energy after the Brexit referendum in June produced a victory for those who wished to leave the European Union.
A majority of Scots voted against independence — and against Brexit — partly because they wanted to stay in the European Union. Now, proponents of Scottish independence say, there is less incentive to remain part of Britain.
Last month, Scotland’s Parliament approved plans to request a second referendum on independence that could be held before Britain completes its withdrawal from the European Union.
Mrs. May, who must agree to the legality of such a vote, has said she would not support one until after the completion of the Brexit process in two years.
Ms. Sturgeon said the government in London did engage in consultations with representatives from Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland concerning the Brexit process, but she suggested that those interactions were perfunctory.
She spoke to The Times while visiting New York as part of a trip to the United States to promote Scottish business and investment.
Ms. Sturgeon is in an awkward position, advocating an end to a unification of more than 300 years without knowing the terms of Britain’s departure from the European Union.
She has made it clear that if Scotland eventually votes for independence, as she expects, she would want to see it join the European Union. Details such as what currency Scotland would use, and the precise nature of its economic relationship with Britain, remain unclear.
While Ms. Sturgeon expressed hope that British negotiators would achieve a successful outcome in the Brexit talks, she said her own experience in dealing with Mrs. May’s administration left her skeptical.
