A painting by William Thomas Smith, first exhibited in 1895, originally titled “They forged the last link with their lives: H.M.S. Erebus and Terror.”Credit...National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, London.
Illustrated. 384 pp. W. W. Norton & Company. $27.95.
In August 2016, the Crystal Serenity, an 820-foot luxury cruise liner with 13 decks, a casino, six restaurants and a driving range, set off on its first voyage from Alaska to New York through the fabled Northwest Passage. About two weeks after leaving Alaska, the Crystal Serenity passed by the spot where, in April 1848, two Royal Navy ships, the Terror and Erebus, on a mission to discover and navigate the Northwest Passage for the first time, were abandoned by their officers and crew. The ships, commanded by Rear Adm. Sir John Franklin, had been trapped in ice for more than a year, and were most likely running low on food. Poorly equipped, and dragging lifeboats filled with tons of gear and supplies, much of which proved useless, the hundred or so remaining men first walked east across the frozen sea, then south along the coast of King William Island. None of them survived, but the question of exactly how, and when, and why they died has continued to fascinate amateur and professional historians ever since.
In 2008, in the midst of the worldwide financial crisis, the Canadian government announced a multiagency government initiative to locate the wrecks of the two ships. The prime minister, Stephen Harper, was motivated more by politics than by an interest in naval history or marine archaeology. He saw the project as a symbolic element of a larger effort to assert Canadian sovereignty over the Arctic in opposition to counterclaims by Russia and the United States. This question of sovereignty had become pressing because the reduction in summer sea ice meant that the Northwest Passage was likely to become a significant trade route, and, perhaps more important, that the massive untapped oil and gas resources of the Arctic might soon become commercially exploitable.
When the wreck of the Erebus was finally discovered in 2014, Harper made the announcement at a victorious news conference, where he declared it “a truly historic moment” and went on to claim that the Franklin expedition had “laid the foundations of Canada’s Arctic sovereignty.” The logic of the latter claim is certainly questionable, since Sir John Franklin was British, not Canadian, but the fact that Harper would make it testifies to the mythic power that had attached itself to the Franklin expedition over the previous century and a half. Asserting ownership of Franklin, and Franklin’s story, it seems, is a way of claiming ownership of the Arctic itself.
Paul Watson, a former war reporter and himself a Canadian, doesn’t display much sympathy for Harper’s political machinations, and “Ice Ghosts” works to undermine his prime-ministerial hubris by arguing, fairly convincingly, that the group who really own the Franklin story (and therefore, by implication at least, own the Arctic) are the Inuit who had direct contact with the Franklin crew members back in the 19th century, and who then passed down their knowledge from generation to generation through oral storytelling. Watson suggests that the Inuit knew all along where the Franklin wrecks were located, but that white men either failed to ask them or, if they did, usually misunderstood the answers they received. The hero of the second half of “Ice Ghosts” is Louie Kamookak, an amateur Inuit historian, born on the Boothia Peninsula just northeast of King William Island, who dedicates himself to gathering and interpreting as many of the Inuit stories about Franklin as he can find, and who, in the end, plays a significant role in guiding the marine archaeologists to the correct search areas.
While there have been many previous books about the Franklin expedition and its mysterious fate, the notable originality of “Ice Ghosts” lies in the fact that it brings the story right up-to-date, covering not only the discovery of the Erebus in 2014, but also the discovery of the Terror, about 40 miles to the north, in 2016. The first half of the book tells the story of the original 1845 expedition, and of the many unsuccessful rescue efforts undertaken subsequently by the British government under pressure from Franklin’s extraordinarily persistent and energetic wife, Jane. It is a great story, but readers already familiar with it are unlikely to find much that is truly new or surprising here. The book moves up a gear, however, when Watson turns to the more recent past. Watson’s prose can be uneven sometimes, but he is at his vigorous best when describing places and people he has met and talked to. He provides sharp and entertaining portraits of the various Franklin obsessives whose experience and expertise fed into the 2008 initiative: men like Walter Zacharchuk, who built his own scuba tank out of a fire extinguisher, glued his own wet suit out of sheets of neoprene and became Canada’s first professional marine archaeologist, or Jim Balsillie, a former co-chief executive of Research in Motion, the makers of the BlackBerry smartphone, who ended up buying and refitting a fishing trawler to participate in the search.
This book has some flaws. The style can be digressive and occasionally confusing, and I could have done without the more mystical passages concerning Louie Kamookak and the Inuit, in which Watson seems to be reaching for some kind of effect rather than telling us how things really are or were, but it’s quick, enjoyable and sometimes gripping reading. Franklin aficionados will certainly want to add it to their libraries, and for anyone interested in the past and the future of the Arctic, it’s a much cheaper and more environmentally friendly option than a stateroom on the Crystal Serenity.