1. Here’s a rundown of the Trump administration’s day.
The president dropped his demand for immediate funds for a border wall, easing the passage of a spending bill by Friday to avert a government shutdown.
Financial markets soared on reports that President Trump aims to cut corporate taxes. The Nasdaq passed 6,000 for the first time.
And Mr. Trump spoke forcefully at a Holocaust remembrance ceremony, a possible reset of his relations with the Jewish community.
Lawmakers from both parties said Michael Flynn, the president’s first national security adviser, may have violated the law by not disclosing his business dealings with Russia.
And Ivanka Trump drew hisses at a conference in Berlin when she defended her father’s treatment of women and called him a “tremendous champion” of families.
There’s more on the border wall and the budget in our Daily podcast and in our latest edition of Right and Left: Partisan Writing You Shouldn’t Miss.
3. France honored Xavier Jugelé, the police officer killed in the attack on the Champs-Élysées last week. His partner, above, gave a moving eulogy.
The two presidential candidates, Emmanuel Macron and Marine Le Pen, attended the ceremony at Paris police headquarters.
Our Interpreter columnists came up with an interesting analogy for Western populism: entering its awkward teenage years, meaning able to have an influence on the household but too young to run it.
4. North Korea’s decision to hold only artillery drills for national celebrations, not a nuclear test, did not end fears of a military confrontation.
The U.S. strengthened its show of force, adding a submarine armed with Tomahawk cruise missiles to the naval exercises it’s conducting with South Korea. North Korea is holding three U.S. citizens.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis are scheduled to brief the entire Senate on North Korea at the White House on Wednesday.
5. We visited Flint, Michigan, where the water’s supposed to be safe now, but poverty and violence persist.
The city’s long-standing problems have grown worse because of the tainted water crisis, which poisoned residents and eroded the city’s reputation and property values.
6. Today’s energy jobs are in solar, not coal.
Solar has more jobs across the country, and the relatively new industry continues to add capacity. Above, a solar power-generating site in Nevada.
And a new report found that nearly half of the nation’s largest corporations have set their own emissions reduction targets — even as the government moves away from them.
7. The yogurt maker Chobani filed a lawsuit against the radio host Alex Jones, above, and the site Infowars for posting what it called false reports about the company and its owner.
Hamdi Ulukaya, the founder of Chobani, has been a target of threats from right-wingers who say he employs too many refugees.
Reports on InfoWars alleged that the company’s factory in Idaho was connected to a 2016 child sexual assault and a rise in tuberculosis cases.
The state voted largely for Trump, but it’s a prime recipient of arts funding that he wants to eliminate.
“As much as the people here like this, I’m not sure they would see it if it cost $80,” one theatergoer said.
9. In Indonesia, a palm oil company responsible for rain forest destruction helped purchase part of an island in Borneo for an orangutan sanctuary.
That enabled at least 200 animals — all refugees of development — to be freed.
But it also left environmentalists queasy about providing a cloak of respectability to a company that destroys orangutan habitats.
10. Finally, embrace your failures.
That’s the ethos of the Museum of Failure, which will open in Sweden in June.
The museum will showcase products that flopped, like the Rejuvenique mask, above, which was marketed as a facial toning system — all to prove that innovation requires failure.
