Not to belabor the obvious, but when you’re writing about streaming services, you discover a lot of them — and then find a whole lot more. I suppose you would learn that anyway, scrolling through offerings on Amazon Fire or Google Chromecast or a Roku, or just an app store. One could spend a month or more digging around Hero Talkies (“Watch Tamil Movies”) or InTube (“Watch Indian Films”) or Hindi Movies (no tagline, but pretty self-explanatory).
You also learn that services come and go. If you click on an app for a service and get a message that it hasn’t updated for the current operating system on your device, there’s a good chance its extinction is imminent. Learning that a streaming site has up and disappeared is arguably more irritating than finding out a movie you’ve had on a service’s watchlist has been deleted from the service. That said, much of the excitement of streaming is in the ability to get more of what you love (or think you might love).
Better-than-decent adaptations of classic material like Agatha Christie’s “The Witness for the Prosecution” are plentiful on Acorn. And the movies it does have are largely noteworthy. There’s the 2002 BBC Film “The Falklands Play,” a fast-paced, quick-witted movie about the Falklands War in which the great British actress Patricia Hodge (“Betrayal”) portrays Margaret Thatcher, a performance that actually gives Meryl Streep’s portrayal of the British prime minister in “The Iron Lady,” from 2011, a run for its money. “44 Inch Chest,” a 2009 adultery-and-kidnapping drama that’s a sharp critique of male sexual jealousy, has a spectacular cast of indefatigable lads: Ray Winstone, Ian McShane, John Hurt, Tom Wilkinson, Stephen Dillane, Steven Berkoff. The service also features the great Australian director Gillian Armstrong’s 1992 domestic drama, “The Last Days of Chez Nous,” with Miranda Otto, Kerry Fox and Bruno Ganz. The service is available as a website and an app, and on Roku, Amazon Fire and Chromecast, and costs $4.99 a month (a yearly subscription can be had for $49.99).
In February, this column covered Brown Sugar, a service dedicated to Blaxploitation movies, most from the 1970s. Such films represent a pretty narrow segment of cinema by or about African-Americans. The Urban Movie Channel ($4.99 a month, $49.99 a year), created by Black Entertainment Television’s founder, Robert L. Johnson, in late 2014, aspires to a wider range. Some solid, underappreciated films found on the site include “Second Coming,” a 2014 marital drama starring Idris Elba and Nadine Marshall, and “The We and the I,” from 2013, directed by Michel Gondry, an inventive story (set on a public bus) of Bronx high schoolers on their last day of classes.
The Urban Movie Channel, or UMC, also features five features directed by the Ghanaian filmmaker Leila Djansi, including her most recent, “Like Cotton Twines,” from 2016. The drama is a sensitive, beautifully shot story about “trokosi,” described in the opening as “a practice of religious slavery found in parts of Western Africa,” in which a virgin girl is given up by a family whose member has been found guilty of a crime. The picture depicts an American teacher in Ghana (Jay Ellis of the HBO series “Insecure”) attempting to rescue a student from being traded away by her father.
Some aspects of the site are a little befuddling; a “Classics” section features both the 1977 horror picture “The Hills Have Eyes” (arguably a classic) and the 1986 affirmative-action blackface comedy “Soul Man” (absolutely not a classic).
Just as it has much of everything, Amazon Video has a lot of horror, ranging from last year’s critically acclaimed “The Witch” to the cult classic “The House on Sorority Row” (1983) to microbudget no-name pictures for which the streaming service provides an ostensible shot at finding an audience. Netflix has a little over 250 horror movies, many of them classics — “The Legend of Hell House,” from 1973, loomed large in my early-teen years, because it’s really scary, and also because it touched off my lifelong crush on the actress Pamela Franklin. But some of them aren’t horror movies at all: “Scary Movie 2,” from 2001, is a parody of horror movies; last year’s “Yoga Hosers” is just an actual horror.
Screambox is very full-throttle and fan-oriented, with not just horror fare but also documentaries celebrating the likes of the “Friday the 13th” franchise. The grind-house nostalgist in me was delighted to find two 1981 obscurities: the Italian filmmaker Lucio Fulci’s mortifying gorefest “The Beyond” and “The Nesting,” an interesting novelty in which the New York sexploitation filmmaker Armand Weston tried to go mainstream, with mixed results. (It also happens to be the American ’40s and ’50s screen siren Gloria Grahame’s final film, and one you are unlikely to see on TCM.) Screambox and Shudder are not exactly replete with transcendent masterpieces, and honestly, neither are Acorn and UMC. But even the most refined viewer knows that masterpieces are not always the point. Digging for something is half the fun.