At the start of “Catastrophe,” Sharon (an Irish schoolteacher played by Sharon Horgan) and Rob (an American ad man played by Rob Delaney) meet in a London bar and proceed to have loads of sex, most of it unprotected. “A terrible thing has happened,” he tells her after learning that their six-night bacchanal has resulted in pregnancy. “Let’s make the best of it.” And with that, one of television’s funniest, filthiest, most realistic takes on the sweet mess of coupledom and parenting was born.
Ms. Horgan, 46, the Irish writer and actress, gave raw, ribald voice to the tumult of relationships. She even made nursing bras erotic. And she knows whence she writes: Now a mother of two daughters, she discovered she was pregnant six months into dating her husband, Jeremy Rainbird, an ad man at the time. Nope, it wasn’t planned.
Season 3 of “Catastrophe,” debuting Friday, April 28, on Amazon, finds the spouses exactly where they left off — with a receipt for a Plan B pill and a guilty conscience — and adds secret drinking, employment woes and financial struggles to the mire. “We wanted to make their life hard, not just for the fun of watching people having to deal with that but also because that feels like reflective of what’s happening in the world at the moment,” said Ms. Horgan, who lives in London but was speaking by phone from Atlanta, where she is shooting a movie. “Things are getting tougher, and people are having to dig deep.” These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
Carrie Fisher played Rob’s blunt, manipulative mom, with whom Sharon shares a mutual aversion. How are you dealing with her death?
Carrie is hugely in Episode 6. Even though it’s just one episode, her presence is felt a lot more. It’s fun writing a monstrous character, absolutely. But we wanted to get under the skin a little bit more. We had only just finished filming a couple of days when we got the news. And it was horrible, and we were absolutely devastated, and at the same time feeling madly lucky to have come into contact with this incredible presence. God, she knew how to deliver a line.
You and Rob met on Twitter, and then mined your real-life experiences for the show — agreeing not to make anything up. Is that still true?
It’s really not, if I’m honest. It was a good rule to have because if we know that what we’re talking about is at least the truth in our world, then no one can call us out on it, you know? Yes, there’s definitely still bits and bobs in there that we’ve taken from our own lives. But you can’t stop those characters from becoming their own people.
Now you’ve got Sarah Jessica Parker delivering your lines in HBO’s “Divorce,” which you created.
It’s a pretty joyous thing watching someone like her saying your words. That’s a good buzz, sitting by the monitors watching Thomas Haden Church and Sarah Jessica Parker sparring. So that never stops being strange and wonderful.
Couples watch that sparring in squirmy silence.
I’ve had that comment a lot, and I love the idea of couples watching my shows together. But I always felt that would be uncomfortable because things are said — and if people haven’t said them, they’ve thought them.
Does it take different chops to write about the beginning of a relationship versus the end of one?
Oh gosh, you have to use your imagination more about the beginning of one. It’s a very fun, sweet thing to write about two people falling in love, but I would say it comes more naturally to me to write about the dark side of it. Amy Gravitt, the head of comedy at HBO, said anyone who’s been long-term married could write about how it feels to want a divorce. And it’s a nice, vent-y thing. You can get things down on paper that you then don’t have to say out loud to the person you love.
Rob says “Catastrophe” was written against the idea that long-term relationships are boring.
I do agree with him. Whether you’re at a really high point or a sort of desperate low point, they’re always going to be interesting. And really, if they’re boring then shame on you.
The things that roll off your characters’ tongues are deliriously smutty. Which one of you is innately filthier?
Well, there’s definitely a lot of filth in there from me. But there’s something about the fully formed filth that comes straight out of Rob that I need most. I’ve never seen the like of it. I have to work really hard to make sentences funny or find the “thing” in them. But he has this ability to open his mouth and just perfect dialogue comes out of it and 80 percent of it is vile [laughs] — and it goes straight in there.