Judith Clark, who as a young woman was part of a violent left-wing movement and participated in a fatal botched robbery of a Brink’s armored car in 1981 in Rockland County, N.Y., was denied parole on Friday despite the support of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who ordered her sentence commuted late last year.
Ms. Clark has served 35 years of a minimum 75-year sentence for her role in the notorious crime, which left a guard and two police officers dead and was one of the final acts of rage of a waning movement. She will not be eligible for parole again until April 2019.
Speaking at the funeral of the former Daily News columnist Jimmy Breslin in March, he went further.
On Friday evening, aides to Mr. Cuomo said that while he was impressed with her rehabilitation, he could have chosen to commute her sentence in such a way that she would immediately have been released. Instead, he chose to simply make her eligible for parole.
The three members of the board voted unanimously against parole; only one of them was a Cuomo appointee.
While parole board hearings are not public and transcripts are not yet available, a summary explaining their decision was released late Friday.
Ms. Clark’s case became something of a Rorschach test for how people view punishment for a crime, and it sparked a debate about rehabilitation.
Law enforcement groups have steadfastly opposed Ms. Clark’s release, and last month, Republican state senators gave the parole board a petition, which they said contained 10,000 signatures, urging that she be kept in prison.
Some relatives of those killed also opposed her parole, expressing deep disappointment with Mr. Cuomo’s decision.
A groundswell of support for Ms. Clark began even before her sentence was commuted.
Last year, 13 former presidents of the New York City Bar Association signed a letter seeking clemency; so have prison officials who have worked with Ms. Clark during her incarceration, most of which she has spent at Bedford Hills Correctional Facility for Women in Westchester County.
Ms. Clark has said it was not until she was locked away that she came to know herself.
Her radicalization had started young.
She was just 14 when she began to delve deeply into politics, gravitating to the Weather Underground and an even more radical offshoot, the May 19th Communist Organization. The group attached itself to a revolutionary black organization, and together they hoped to plant the seeds for a guerrilla uprising. But the revolution would need to be financed.
So the group hatched a plan to steal $1.6 million from a Brink’s armored car.
Ms. Clark, in an interview with Tom Robbins in The New York Times Magazine in 2012, described what happened.
She said that as a new mother, she was nervous about the plot, but she agreed to be the getaway driver, fully aware of what she was doing. As she sat in a car in a parking lot of a mall in Nanuet, her associates approached the Brink’s van. Gunfire erupted. One guard was killed; another was left in a pool of blood.
Her associates grabbed the cash, hopped in a van and fled. Ms. Clark followed in the car she was driving. At a nearby parking lot, six gunmen abandoned the van and piled into the back of a U-Haul.
Someone threw the cash into the back of Ms. Clark’s car, and the caravan set off. The police, however, had set up a roadblock at a nearby entrance to the New York State Thruway.
The U-Haul was flagged and pulled over by the police. Ms. Clark heard gunfire; then two of her associates jumped into the car. She sped away, but it was not long before the police caught up, and soon she was in custody.
The gang had killed three people: the Brink’s security guard, Peter Paige; and two Nyack police officers, Sgt. Edward O’Grady and Officer Waverly Brown.
Her behavior helps explain her long sentence.
Her supporters argued that even though she never pulled a trigger, her sentence was much harsher than those of many of the others involved.
Ms. Clark’s daughter, Harriet, said she understood the seriousness of the crime but believed the decision by the board was an injustice. 
But others, especially those who were personally affected, felt differently.
A former Nyack detective, Arthur Keenan, who offered over an hour of testimony to the parole board arguing against her release, said he was informed shortly after 5 p.m. Friday that Ms. Clark had been denied parole.
“I am very pleased with their decision,” he said.