ALBANY — In his six-plus years as New York’s governor, Andrew M. Cuomo has slowly accumulated a national political portfolio peppered with popular, if niche, liberal causes: same-sex marriage, raising the minimum wage, and juvenile justice reform.
In the last four months, however, Mr. Cuomo has seemed intent on expanding his appeal by pursuing initiatives aimed at a larger constituency of vital importance to his and his party’s long-term prospects: the middle class.
There is perhaps no better illustration of Mr. Cuomo’s current focus than the so-called tuition-free college initiative he flaunted on Wednesday at LaGuardia Community College in Queens, standing alongside another centrist Democrat, Hillary Clinton, using his roots in the borough to amplify his connection to a tax bracket to which he does not personally belong.
Speculation about the future has recently been directed toward Mr. Cuomo, and the tuition plan and its target audience have only fueled speculation that the governor is angling not only for middle-class voters in Albany and Utica, but also for those in Ohio and Iowa in 2020.
The governor denies any presidential hopes, but the state’s 2017-18 budget — passed on Sunday, nine days late — contains many elements of a possible campaign platform, including issues like holding down taxes, increasing a child care tax credit and extending a tax on the state’s wealthiest earners.
Such initiatives have also been interspersed with attention to moderate social reforms, including gun control and paid family leave, dappled with more progressive policies like protections for transgender residents and a rejection of fracking.
Many of those moves were a departure from the early years of Mr. Cuomo’s first term, when his centrist tendencies saw him stray from the liberal platform, often to the chagrin of his own party.
“I had good friends in this area who couldn’t distinguish him from a Republican,” said Jeanne Zaino, a professor of political science at Iona College in Westchester County, the well-to-do area where Mr. Cuomo now lives.
But after a surprisingly difficult primary challenge on the way to his re-election in 2014, Mr. Cuomo’s leftward tilt began, including support for a tiered $15 minimum wage — an idea he had earlier dismissed — in 2016.
The election of President Trump brought about another adjustment to Mr. Cuomo’s political compass. He began positing that a socio-economic disconnect was the reason Mrs. Clinton lost, arguing at a fund-raiser that the election had proved to Democrats that “there is a middle class that we have not been attentive to, and it’s a middle class that’s been suffering for a long time,” The Daily News reported.
While some similar post-mortems were offered by others, Mr. Cuomo’s position as governor of New York — the president’s home state — may have given them extra weight, even as he began to criticize Mr. Trump’s policies on immigration and abortion, and subsequent proposals to cut federal funds to the state.
Mr. Cuomo’s push for “tuition-free” higher education seemed to combine his purported national ambitions and his party’s need to reconnect with the middle class. Mr. Cuomo, continuing his transformation from Albany insider to middle-class warrior, announced the plan in January alongside Senator Bernie Sanders, an early proponent.
That the plan may cover only about 32,000 students — according to one legislative estimate — and covers no part of room and board, or other student expenses has done little to dim the accolades for Mr. Cuomo’s plan from the likes of Mrs. Clinton.
In many ways, Albany observers say, Mr. Cuomo is taking a lead from Mrs. Clinton’s husband, President Bill Clinton, who appointed him as secretary of Housing and Urban Development in 1997. Mr. Clinton grafted middle-class and working-class issues into a single platform with broad political appeal.
Mr. Cuomo acknowledged on Wednesday that the college affordability plan originated from the scrap heap of the presidential campaign trail — an idea that was not going to be endorsed by Mr. Trump. But he also seemed to say it sprang from his own past in Queens, a place he said “believed in the mobility” of the middle class.
