DANCENOISE at New York Live Arts (April 13-14, 6 p.m.). The audacious post-punk performance duo of Anne Iobst (also known as the Naked Lady) and Lucy Sexton (the Factress), who have been working together since they met in the vibrant East Village scene of the 1980s, makes a welcome appearance at — or invades? — New York Live Arts as part of its studio series. In this Live Feed in Process engagement, the pair will present an informal showing of material currently percolating in their imaginative, theatrical minds. Political themes, nudity and a bountiful array of props aren’t out of the question. The show is followed by a discussion.
MARIANA VALENCIA at Brooklyn Arts Exchange (April 7, 8 p.m.; April 8, 7 and 9 p.m.). The choreographer Mariana Valencia, a 2016-17 BAX artist in residence, will unveil “Album,” a humorous one-woman show that weaves together text, music and dance. Inspired by Ms. Valencia’s relationship to urban life, vampires, love and marginality, “Album” reveals her personal journey, which she describes as being similar to an archive or altar for her body. Told in the form of an album, the evening-length work features lyrics from her dance-making journals. Structurally, she makes monologues out of dances and drops songs into scenes; in other words, “Album” is a saturation in which everything overlaps.
KATIE WORKUM at Brooklyn Studios for Dance (April 8-9, 7 p.m.). The choreographer, in collaboration with the fine dancers Eleanor Smith and Weena Pauly, presents “Here Are the Mountains,” a new performance installation featuring lighting by Madeline Best and sound design by James Lo. The premiere vacillates between the urges to create and to demolish in order to build what Ms. Workum describes in press materials as a “shifting and temporary monument.” Inspired by feminist art and sculpture, the work features sound and lighting that will be manipulated by the performers in real time.
YOUTH AMERICA GRAND PRIX at the David H. Koch Theater (April 12-13, 7 p.m.; April 14, 7:30 p.m.). This ballet competition, admittedly, has its high and low points, but it is a chance to catch performances by world-class professionals as well as young talent. The event highlights three programs: the final round of competition (April 12), “Stars of Today Meet the Stars of Tomorrow” (April 13) and “Julio Bocca: A Tribute to a Dance Legend” (April 14), which honors that Argentine ballet star. At the “Stars of Today” gala, expect performances by Svetlana Lunkina and Evan McKie of the National Ballet of Canada in an American premiere by David Dawson; Lucia Lacarra and Marlon Dino in an American premiere by Russell Maliphant; Tamara Rojo, the artistic director and principal dancer of English National Ballet, with Cesar Corrales.
ABBY Z AND THE NEW UTILITY at Abrons Arts Center (April 13-15, 7:30 p.m.). Survival tactics are on the mind of the choreographer Abby Zbikowski, who draws on the idea of rigor — both in the body and in the mind — to inform her premiere, “abandoned playground.” In it, she engages a cast of 10 to explore the necessity of physical rigor in time of futility. With a background in African diasporic dance forms and a punk sensibility, Ms. Zbikowski and her company, Abby Z and the New Utility, formed in 2012, explore the effort that goes into living. Expect energized dancing with a brutal edge; like life, it promises to be relentless.
