Television|Goodbye, Norman. Um, I’ll Just Leave the Key in the Room.
Goodbye, Norman. Um, I’ll Just Leave the Key in the Room.
A five-season-long psychological experiment comes to an end Monday night on A&E, and it has been a resounding success. The patient has proved utterly incurable.
The network brings down the curtain on “Bates Motel,” its ambitious prequel to “Psycho,” having taken Norman Bates from harmless-seeming youth to killer who dissociates from reality so often it’s impossible to tell which personality is the true one. Kerry Ehrin and Carlton Cuse, who created the show with Anthony Cipriano and wrote the final installment, serve up a finale that is dark and decisive, but also reflective.
When the show began back in 2013, they said they always envisioned that it would not have an open-ended run. The idea was to bring the characters — boldly reimagined, to be sure — up to the point that the world knew them from the Alfred Hitchcock movie. Plenty of TV series have the plug pulled abruptly and have to throw a final chapter together quickly or not have one at all.
“It’s really rare that you get to actually execute your plan, and rarer still that the plan holds up as well as it has held up,” Mr. Cuse said.
The finale spends a few moments reminding us of just how far the story has come, flashing back to some of the series’s early scenes, when it seemed as if it would be a simple tale of the anything-but-simple relationship between Norman (played by Freddie Highmore) and his mother, Norma (Vera Farmiga). To fans, that now feels like a long time ago, as the series has filled up with story lines about marijuana farming, the dark history of the Bates family, missing persons and more.
Two characters who early on seemed as if they might have small arcs but came to be pivotal figure prominently in the finale: Norman’s half brother, Dylan, played by Max Thieriot, and the former sheriff, Alex Romero, portrayed by Nestor Carbonell. Dylan, Mr. Cuse and Ms. Ehrin said, was always envisioned as a major player — “Right from the beginning we decided Norman should have a brother who was kind of the window for the audience on this relationship between mother and son,” Mr. Cuse said. Romero, though, was more of a character who forced his way into the lineup.
Romero eventually married Norma, and after her death at the hands of Norman in Season 4, he became driven by revenge. No “Bates” character transformed quite as much, and that is saying something for a show whose central figure ended up wearing his mother’s clothes.
“This has been a gift on every front,” Mr. Carbonell, who also worked with Mr. Cuse on “Lost,” said of the show, and he wasn’t referring just to the role. The “Bates” set became, in Ms. Ehrin’s words, “like an actors’ troupe from a couple of centuries ago,” with people trying out jobs other than their assigned ones. Mr. Carbonell directed three episodes, and Mr. Thieriot and Mr. Highmore got behind the camera, too.
The show wrapped in late January, leaving the team behind it wistful.
“You go through all these different mourning periods when a series ends,” Mr. Cuse said. “When you finish writing. When you finish the final episode. When the final episode airs.” But he said that the real jolt for him came when he saw a film clip of the demolition of the Bates Motel and eerie family house built just outside Vancouver. “They knocked it down so quickly,” he said.
In early 2013 I traveled to that set to write about the show’s forthcoming premiere, and the producers, at my request, arranged for me to sleep in the phony Bates Motel and, yes, even shower there, though the structure had no plumbing. Various fictional characters have checked into the motel over five seasons, but Mr. Cuse said just one real person actually spent a night there.
“You have the honor of being the only guest,” he told me.