As they embark on their 20th season, the Tampa Bay Rays have enjoyed fairly prosperous results over the last decade. They have made the postseason four times in the last nine years, highlighted by a 2008 World Series appearance, with consistently strong young pitching and third baseman Evan Longoria anchoring the offense.
Yet, within the Rays’ DNA also exists a strange propensity for reaching nadirs; five times since 2002, Tampa Bay has been no-hit, the most in baseball over that period. The Atlanta Braves, the Los Angeles Dodgers and the San Diego Padres have been no-hit three times in that span.
So Monday afternoon, on a picturesque spring day for baseball, it was understandable if Rays fans were feeling a familiar sensation of doom hovering over their franchise. For six and two-thirds innings, Yankees starter Michael Pineda was perfect, displaying the dazzling repertory of fastballs and sliders that have occasionally electrified Yankee Stadium since he arrived via trade in 2012.
But with two outs in the seventh inning, it was Longoria who drove a first-pitch slider into left field for a double, preventing his fifth experience on the wrong side of a no-hitter.
“I’ve been there a couple of times — more than a couple of times — more than I’d like to mention,” said Longoria, who struck out in his first two at-bats against Pineda on Monday.
Longoria’s extensive history in no-hit games, as well as near-no-hit games, may have helped him stay composed. In August 2010, he broke up a no-hitter by Toronto Blue Jays pitcher Brandon Morrow with two outs in the ninth inning.
Monday’s situation was a bit different, though. Several Rays players said there was an added sense of difficulty with an announced crowd of 46,955, a sellout for opening day at Yankee Stadium.
When Longoria entered the batter’s box in the seventh inning, he said, he was hoping for a mistake pitch by Pineda. At that point, he was 6 for 37 in his career against Pineda, having struck out 14 times.
After one of his earlier at-bats, Longoria went to watch tape and saw a stat that Pineda was overwhelmingly throwing first-pitch strikes.
But Longoria recalled that during his first at-bat, Pineda had opened with a slider. The second at-bat was a first-pitch fastball. So in the seventh, Longoria guessed Pineda would lead with a slider. He was correct.
“It was a sense of relief,” Longoria said of his hit.