Two recent train derailments at Pennsylvania Station in New York that created major travel disruptions were caused by track defects, Amtrak officials said on Thursday, increasing concerns about the aging infrastructure at North America’s busiest train station.
Officials also acknowledged that they had been aware of a defect on the tracks at the site of a derailment on Monday before it occurred, but did not recognize the urgency of the problem.
The derailment of a New Jersey Transit train on Monday resulted in four days of extraordinary upheaval for hundreds of thousands of commuters across the region. Regular train service was scheduled to return to Penn Station on Friday morning, Amtrak officials said.
The accident closed eight of Penn Station’s 21 tracks, causing a cascade of delays across the three railroads that share the station: Amtrak, New Jersey Transit and the Long Island Rail Road. The damage from the derailment required major repairs to the tracks, a complex labyrinth near the Hudson River tunnel.
On Thursday, Amtrak took responsibility for the accident this week and for the derailment of one of its Acela trains on March 24.
“Based on our recent investigations, we can confirm that problems with our tracks in Penn Station were a cause of both recent derailments,” said Charles W. Moorman, Amtrak’s chief executive.
The derailment on Monday was connected to a weakening of timber ties beneath the tracks that caused rails to widen and the wheels of the affected cars to derail. The derailment on March 24 was caused by a mismatch between two pieces of rail that connected together at a curve.
Mr. Moorman, speaking to reporters at Penn Station on Thursday, said that Amtrak had been aware of the defective ties involved in the derailment as a result of regular inspections, but had not properly assessed the immediacy of the problem.
Mr. Moorman also said that Amtrak and the Federal Railroad Administration were beginning an exhaustive inspection of the entire track infrastructure at Penn Station. He said he would personally lead a comprehensive review of Amtrak’s maintenance practices and its engineering departments with the help of independent experts.
Amtrak came under heavy criticism from Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey and officials at New Jersey Transit and the Long Island Rail Road after the accident on Monday. Mr. Christie, a Republican whose constituents endured the brunt of the delays, released a letter late on Wednesday in which he directed New Jersey Transit to stop payments to Amtrak for the use of its rails.
Mr. Christie was still on the offensive on Thursday, urging congressional leaders to hold hearings on Amtrak’s safety problems. Though he sought to insulate himself from the wrath of commuters who blamed him for the problems this week, he has faced fierce criticism over his 2010 decision to cancel a plan for a new train tunnel under the Hudson.
Mr. Christie’s leadership of New Jersey Transit has also come under fire, including after a New Jersey Transit train crashed at Hoboken Terminal last year, killing a woman and injuring more than 100 people. After the crash, federal investigators disclosed that they had found numerous safety violations at the railroad.
Mr. Moorman said he understood Mr. Christie’s anger, but he cautioned against overreacting.
“I will say that withdrawing funding is not going to solve any of the problems,” Mr. Moorman said, noting that New Jersey’s recent contributions to capital work at Penn Station had been spurred by congressional legislation.
For its part, Amtrak has often had to fight for federal money even as it struggled to meet the challenge of accommodating its booming ridership in the Northeast. President Trump’s budget proposal last month called for ending federal support for Amtrak’s long-distance train routes.
Mr. Trump’s budget would also slash federal funds for transit projects, potentially jeopardizing Amtrak’s project, known as Gateway, to build a new train tunnel under the Hudson River. The existing century-old tunnel that now carries Amtrak and New Jersey Transit trains between New York and New Jersey was badly damaged by Hurricane Sandy and needs major repairs.
Senator Cory Booker, Democrat of New Jersey, supports the tunnel plan. He said in a statement on Thursday that the rail problems would persist if Mr. Trump halted the Gateway project.
“If we continue down this disastrous track, the nightmare our region’s commuters continue to endure will become our new reality,” Mr. Booker said.
Federal officials have expressed concern over the derailments and are continuing to investigate the causes.
“While safety is our No. 1 priority, we also want to prevent service disruptions similar to those that recently occurred at the station due to train derailments, which impact commuters along the busiest passenger rail corridors in the nation,” said Marc Willis, a spokesman for the railroad administration.
Commuters who rely on train service at Penn Station said the safety problems were paramount.
“Our members are alarmed that Amtrak’s past lack of resources has created a situation where we cannot be entirely confident in the quality of Amtrak infrastructure that is shared by the L.I.R.R.,” said Mark Epstein, chair of the Long Island Rail Road Commuter Council, a riders’ group.
Steven Santoro, New Jersey Transit’s executive director, said that Amtrak had committed to reopening the tracks at Penn Station by 4 a.m. on Friday.
On a call with reporters Thursday afternoon, Mr. Santoro said he was on an Amtrak train returning from Washington after meeting with officials from the railroad administration about his safety concerns at Penn Station. He urged Amtrak to “step up to the plate” on the issue of maintenance.
Earlier in the day, Mr. Moorman apologized to commuters whose lives had been upended as they tried to reach Manhattan by train, bus or ferry.
“I have just visited with our hard-working crews and we expect to have all tracks at New York Penn Station at full service tomorrow,” he said.