Winston Paes, a federal prosecutor who specializes in financial fraud, is joining the law firm Debevoise & Plimpton.
Over the last year, the law firm Debevoise & Plimpton has hired the chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the head of that agency’s enforcement unit and a prominent federal judge.
That trend will continue on Thursday, when the firm’s white-collar defense group is expected to announce another acquisition from the government ranks: Winston Paes, a federal prosecutor who specializes in financial fraud.
Mr. Paes, who prosecuted a number of Wall Street cases as head of the securities fraud section at the United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn, will be counsel in Debevoise’s New York office, working alongside Mary Jo White, the former S.E.C. chairwoman; Andrew J. Ceresney, the agency’s enforcement chief; and John Gleeson, who spent over two decades as a federal judge in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York. Debevoise also has hired in its Washington office David A. O’Neil, the former acting head of the Justice Department’s criminal division, and Julie M. Riewe, a senior S.E.C. enforcement official.
Although the job-hopping partly reflects an exodus of Obama administration officials to several prominent firms — and a homecoming for longtime Debevoise partners like Ms. White and Mr. Ceresney — the metaphorical revolving door between Debevoise and the government is spinning fast these days. Debevoise’s lock-step compensation system, which pays partners in a narrow range according to seniority rather than revenue generated, is attractive to government officials who often prefer to focus on clients and cases rather than the credit that individual lawyers receive.
To critics, this revolving door fuels a perception of coziness between the defense bar and the prosecutors they face off against. But to the firms, it can be a selling point: Debevoise boasts that it employs 16 former federal prosecutors and is the only law firm with two former attorneys general. And although a recent report in The New York Law Journal revealed that the firm’s overall profit per partner dropped, the white-collar group was among the strongest performers.
“When I was coming out of the government, I looked around, and I quickly decided that Debevoise had the breadth and depth of coverage in the white-collar area,” Mr. Ceresney said in an interview, adding that it was important to hire people with “broad experiences in all the relevant regulatory agencies” across state and federal governments.
Mr. Paes’s departure from the United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn, known as the eastern district of New York, cleared the way for his deputy, Jacquelyn M. Kasulis, to take over the office’s securities fraud section, according to an internal memo. Ms. Kasulis, who joined the office nearly a decade ago, prosecuted organized crime before joining the securities group, which handles financial fraud and Wall Street misconduct.
Prosecuting those white-collar cases is something of a family business for Ms. Kasulis. Her husband, Tim Kasulis, is the co-head of the Wall Street task force at the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan.
The Brooklyn and Manhattan offices have long maintained a friendly rivalry, and it has gained steam as the Brooklyn prosecutors announced some prominent white-collar cases. Mr. Paes, for example, kept a spreadsheet comparing his office’s white-collar cases with those coming from his Manhattan counterpart, while the Manhattan prosecutors are known to take a broad view of their jurisdiction, jokingly referring to it as the “sovereign district” of New York, rather than the southern district.
In Brooklyn, Mr. Paes and Ms. Kasulis worked on some of their office’s most prominent financial prosecutions, including the case against Martin Shkreli, the hedge fund manager and pharmaceutical executive.
