This week at the eighth annual Women in the World Summit, led by the journalist Tina Brown, activists will talk about the experiences that ignited their sense of purpose. Here is a sampling.
I grew up as the daughter of India’s first woman war correspondent. My mother, Prabha Dutt, who was initially denied a job at a leading newspaper (female reporters were good for covering flower shows is what they told her), went alone to the front line to report the 1965 India-Pakistan war. Three decades later, I reported the 1999 Kargil conflict from the war front, but only after bypassing massive resistance to having a woman in an all-male battle zone. I realized then with gratitude how my mother and the women of her generation had wrenched the doors of prejudice open, to let in the light for those of us who followed. That, my mother taught me, is what feminism is about — freedom.
My involvement with refugees stemmed from a spontaneous trip I took to Jordan in 2008. I met with six families. They were all pretty desperate, but clung to the idea they were on some kind of wait list to be resettled and would get a call from the United Nations or the United States government saying, “Your life is saved, you can get on a plane.” So at the end of the week I talked with some folks from the United Nations and the U.S. Embassy. I said: “I’m a student at Yale Law School. I’m very interested in the refugee resettlement process. Can you tell me how long the wait list is?” And they said, “What wait list?” I found it tragic in a way that the best thing refugees could come up with as a symbol of hope was a wait list.
My son was 2 years old when his father was shot to death and left in a ditch for two weeks. My son is now 18. At the time of the murder I grieved, but I was also embarrassed. I come from a pretty upstanding community, a good family, mom and dad in the household. I didn’t want to tell people that my son’s father shouldn’t have been involved with the people who killed him.
And then I started to ask myself: “Why was he even there? What’s happening that so many people are being shot and killed?” I started looking at poverty and “miseducation,” which make so many people vulnerable to sudden death. I realized that the racial justice movement was the right place for me. I don’t show up to work because it’s always fun; I show up because my son’s life depends on it.
When it came to pursuing the Seven Summits, I finally gathered the courage to pick up the phone and nervously call my father, anxiously blurting out what was on my mind. His response, to my horror, was a fate-changing “No.” I took the biggest risk of my life and stayed up till dawn, pouring my heart out in an email to my father. I’ll never forget the anxiety I felt as I pushed that “Send” button. The next days I heard nothing, and my heart sank deeper and deeper with every passing moment. But never once did regret creep into my mind, and that’s when I knew how much this meant to me. At the end of those agonizing silent days, he replied, “You’re crazy, I love you, go for it.” 
I remember being driven to school when the car stopped at a traffic light and I looked out the window. I saw a girl exactly my age, her nose pressed against the pane. She was barefoot and her hand was stretched out. She was begging. Here I was sitting in the car, wearing a uniform, going to school, and the first question on my mind was, “Why is this girl not in school?” And that’s when really my journey started, because I started asking really difficult questions at home and difficult questions at school that nobody wanted to answer. And my mother just encouraged me to begin writing. So I wrote my first article at the age of 14, began writing poems and later made films about social justice issues.
As a critical care pediatrician who spends most of my time working on the Syrian conflict and teaching the few doctors left there, I am often asked about my impressions. There are so many.
But this is the most important one: There is still more life than death in Syria. Syrians didn’t come out on the streets in 2011 to discover all the different ways in which they could die — from snipers, bombs, torture, chemical attacks, horrible diseases or starving to death. They came out to live. When you live under a dictator, you don’t know any life other than oppression and humiliation. Syrians didn’t even know what freedom meant, but they knew they wanted it, and were prepared to fight for it, to discover what freedom means.
When you are born a woman in Morocco, you don’t have a lot of rights. When I was a girl, I realized very quickly that I don’t have the same rights as boys, as men, and if I don’t struggle, I will not have the possibility to live my dreams and to live with dignity and with freedom. I started practicing journalism in a Muslim country. When you are a woman practicing that profession, you are double-exposed.
Today, when you see what’s happening in the world, journalists are the first category of people who pay the price. When we see what happened at Charlie Hebdo, if journalism becomes as threatened as it is now it means that information and freedom are in danger.
I was aware of physical and sexual assaults to children, as well as severe mental harm — children harming themselves, talking about death. One day, protest activity started, and I was seeing my child clients — some as young as 4 — sitting around with signs that said: “We matter, too,” and “Where is the justice and freedom?” These huge signs were nearly as big as they were. They were just lined up against the side of the road, silent. And just looking at their eyes, having to walk by them every day, was heartbreaking.
I risked prison by documenting crimes and human rights violations toward asylum-seekers. However, the children and the refugees remain in Nauru three and a half years later, and in my view, the conditions haven’t changed.