SATURDAY PUZZLE — If you’re going to hunt for gimmes in a Saturday crossword — and you must, because that’s the only way to gain that all-important foothold — you can’t do much better than an entry that stretches right down the center of the grid. You can continue on in pretty much any direction from there, and it’s a real confidence-booster to know that you’ve conquered a big swath of the puzzle with just one entry.
That’s why I was so pleased to have MARILYN MONROE pop into my brain as soon as I read the clue “Famed Pop Art subject.” Andy Warhol’s 1962 portrayal of the movie star has been much imitated, so that was easy enough even though CAMPBELL’S SOUP fits in there too, not that I’m bitter. That’s Saturday for you.
Pro tip: I like to solve the crossings at either the beginning or the end of an entry like that, just to make sure I’m on the right track. I don’t know what this says about me, but I got EAU DE VIE (56A) right off the bat, too.
■ 17A: Great wordplay here. It’s not a geographic “Fault line?” — it’s a line uttered when accepting fault for something: MEA CULPA.
1D: Nice play on the old phrase “pin money,” which was the term for the money given to women by their husbands to buy pins for sewing on the two days of the year that shops were allowed to sell them. In today’s puzzle, “PIN money?” refers to the PIN you use at an A.T.M., and the answer is A.T.M. FEES.
I’ve always liked crosswords with wide-open centers. To my eyes, they often look like printers’ errors, because of the dearth of black squares in the middle ... and I admire a good “dearth,” on occasions.
However, one problem with open-center grids, is that they can be very segmented, meaning that the central open area could almost be a separate mini-puzzle. I’m hardly innocent in this regard, incidentally. I hope today’s puzzle is a bit more solver-friendly than some of my previous efforts, because of the long intersecting across and down entries that run through the center of the grid.
Also, I tried to make those six long entries as interesting as possible. However, I only succeeded with some of them: CAPITALISTIC won’t exactly set the crossword world afire. Maybe GEORGE SMILEY, and MARILYN MONROE will make up for it.
And DILLY DALLIES. I really liked that one.