Generally, the sign is obeyed. But during an untamed time, not long ago, New Yorkers routinely slid open the doors at the ends of train cars and stood in the open space as the train hurtled through the tunnel.
New Yorkers like the future president of the United States.
That was in his days at Kew-Forest School in Queens, Mr. Trump said, which were in the late 1950s.
As the city and the subway system deteriorated in subsequent decades, riding between cars became part of the chaotic subterranean landscape: Trains were covered with graffiti and broke down often, passengers smoked cigarettes or worse, and doors between cars banged open and shut of their own accord, practically inviting trespass.
“The people who ride our system now consider the ability to cross between cars their personal right,” a subway official wrote in 1983 to a federal safety board that was pressing the Transit Authority to outlaw crossing between cars when the trains were stopped. A seldom-enforced law against traveling between the cars of a moving train was already on the books.
On an N train on Thursday, Ronald Dupree, a bouncer and car salesman who grew up in Brownsville, Brooklyn, recalled his childhood pastime fondly.
“It was something to do — you’d feel the breeze,” Mr. Dupree, 46, said. The police “didn’t care about it back then,” he said.
About a decade ago, the police began cracking down, after it was finally made illegal in 2005 to cross between cars of a stopped train. The fine for switching cars is $75.
Benjamin Kabak, who writes the Second Ave. Sagas subway blog, said that he seldom sees people riding between cars anymore.
In wilder times, passengers moved between cars for reasons other than fun. Jake Dobkin, the founder of the news site Gothamist who writes the Ask a Native New Yorker column, would switch cars in the early 1990s “to escape particularly strong smells or danger,” like groups of bigger youths who seemed intent on mugging him.
If a train was too crowded to board, passengers on the platform would push open the folding gates connecting the cars and let themselves on that way. “That was a great rush-hour trick,” said Kevin Dresser, a graphic designer who moved to the city in the early ’90s.
These days, doors between cars are locked on some lines, though they still open on others. An ill-advised exploit on an N train Thursday morning confirmed that a childhood impression had not changed: To stand between cars, with the East River or the F.D.R. Drive rushing vertiginously beneath you, gripping the black rubber straps and feeling the connected cars shift under your feet, remains an exhilarating experience.
Not that you should do it. Ever. In recent years, several people lost their footing and fell to their deaths. In December, a man tumbled between cars of an F train in Manhattan and was decapitated.
On Thursday, Chief Joseph Fox of the New York Police Department’s transit bureau took to Twitter to warn riders: Don’t be like the president.
But there are times when a locked door poses its own dangers. On Tuesday, Rebecca Odes was on an F train in Brooklyn and the doors did not open when it got to her station. She went to the end of the car and tried the door. It would not budge.
“It was pretty freaky to be trapped,” she said. The doors opened after a couple of minutes.
The president’s parents might have wished for the same.
