HELSINKI, Finland — The Winter Olympics are already on thin ice even if the National Hockey League’s announcement about skipping next year’s Games in Pyeongchang, South Korea, turns out to be a negotiating ploy.
If the N.H.L.’s leaders are indeed not bluffing, it will be time to tread even more lightly.
This has been a brutal period for the newer, smaller, at-least-for-now-chillier version of the Games, first held in 1924 in Chamonix, France.
The 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia, not only cost an eye-watering $51 billion including related infrastructure. They were also a fraud, confirmed by the most recent report by the Canadian lawyer Richard McLaren that Russian athletes’ doping samples were tampered with on an industrial scale by Russia’s antidoping officials.
After a series of withdrawals, some forced by referendums, only two cities bid for the 2022 Winter Games: Beijing and Almaty, Kazakhstan. The winner was Beijing, which hosted the Summer Games successfully, expensively and all too recently in 2008. It still has major pollution issues and is a long way from being a winter sports mecca (and from the ski hill, in Yanqing).
It does not help that figure skating, once a pillar of the Winter Olympics, has seen its popularity slump significantly outside Japan, particularly in North America and Western Europe.
Now comes the N.H.L.’s announcement.
There were plenty of transcendent Olympic hockey moments before the N.H.L. players arrived in 1998, including, from an American perspective, the “Miracle on Ice” in Lake Placid in 1980 when an underdog United States team upset the Soviet Union and went on to win the gold medal.
But once you have seen the best in the world at work and on the medal stand, it is no easy maneuver to be satisfied with lesser talent.
The Winter Games never have been a truly global event. The classic winter sports inspire little interest and participation in big swaths of the world, particularly in Africa, southern Asia and much of South America.
Only 45 nations have won a medal in the Winter Olympics, compared with 150 nations in the Summer Games. Only 32 nations have won more than one gold medal in the Winter Olympics, compared with 85 in the summer version. Of the record 88 national Olympic committees that sent delegations to Sochi, only 60 had more than two athletes.
So the Winter Olympics can ill afford to let their fan base and relevance dwindle in any of their major attractions at this stage. Even if players who participate in the Kontinental Hockey League, based in Russia, and other international professional leagues would presumably take part in Pyeongchang, the N.H.L. remains the market leader.
Although Alex Ovechkin, the Russian N.H.L. star, made it clear on Tuesday that he intended to play for Russia in the Games no matter what, he may be one of the very few with enough clout to make that sort of call.
“This must be a huge disappointment for the players,” the I.O.C. said in a statement on Tuesday, neglecting to mention that it must have been a huge disappointment to the I.O.C. as well.
This is obviously not nearly as obvious to N.H.L. owners, the same people who have taken a hard-line approach with their own players over collective bargaining agreements, resulting in bitter lockouts in the 2004-5 and 2012-13 seasons. The league may be on the verge of another one, after angering its players two years before they can opt out of the current collective bargaining agreement.
For the I.O.C., dare to share the wealth with the N.H.L. and here come the N.B.A., P.G.A., L.P.G.A., A.T.P., E.T.C.
But if the I.O.C. is going to keep playing the great benefactor, it better be much closer to beyond reproach. “It’s all about money and Coca-Cola and where you can put the rings and where you can’t,” said Ryan Miller, the Vancouver Canucks goaltender who represented the United States at the Olympics in 2010 and 2014.
Some players expressed hope that this was all part of the rough-and-tumble negotiating process, one they know too well. Best to wait until the official start of the Northern Hemisphere summer to count the N.H.L. truly out.
Best, too, to wait until the bids come in for 2026 to start counting the Winter Olympics out.
The I.O.C. has approved its so-called Agenda 2020, which allows a more flexible approach to bidding. That could be particularly well suited to Winter Olympic candidates, which could deploy national bids or multinational bids to share infrastructure costs and cover the disparate bases of an event that needs not only big arenas for ice sports but also mountains steep and imposing enough to run a proper downhill (as well as a city big enough to house the bloated Olympic circus, media members like myself included).
He does think the lack of clarity on sanctions against athletes implicated in the Sochi doping scandal is hurting public perception of the Winter Olympics. “The feeling is, why hasn’t this been dealt with properly?” Koss said.
What could definitely be existential is climate change, and Koss agrees that the I.O.C. needs to prioritize the environmental factor as much as possible in its Winter Olympic choices.
Koss said emphasizing the climate connection was part of the platform the Oslo team was putting together when the city was a candidate for the 2022 Winter Games, before the Norwegian government called off the bid, citing a lack of support in the country as a whole.
Among those potentially in the mix for 2026 are former Winter Olympic hosts Calgary, Canada, and Innsbruck, Austria, as well as Sion, Switzerland, and Stockholm.
Nice list. But too many preliminary bids have proved nothing but preliminary of late. Make no mistake, Koss is concerned, as he and we — and above all the I.O.C. — should be.