WITHOUT WARNING, the Japanese artist Hiroshi Sugimoto begins to sing. Moments before, he had been guiding me through his minimalist penthouse loft in a verdant neighborhood of Tokyo, explaining in a voice barely louder than a whisper why white Japanese shikkui plaster is the most beautiful surface on which to view shadows. Then, in a soaring tenor, he starts belting out Handel’s “Lascia ch’io pianga,” his strong voice echoing off the bare walls.
Spend any time with Sugimoto, and such scenes will grow familiar: It is all but impossible to know what he will do next. Sugimoto built his name on photography; his meditative, black-and-white images of everything from drive-in movie theaters and eerily naturalistic wax figures to Rothko-esque seascapes are well represented in museum collections, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Centre Pompidou, Tate Modern and the J.Paul Getty Museum. Now, a full four decades into his career, there is architecture. At 69 years old, the artist is quietly making an ambitious transition, expanding his two-dimensional vision to one that captures the world in space.
A self-described “unlicensed architect” who splits his time between Tokyo and New York, Sugimoto has brought his monastic Modernist aesthetic to life through the firm New Material Research Laboratory, which he co-founded with the architect Tomoyuki Sakakida in 2008. “Most of my ideas are illegal,” says Sugimoto, who considers it Sakakida’s job “to make it look like it’s legal.” As Sugimoto leads me from his penthouse to a second apartment below — both of which he designed — it becomes clear the firm’s name is intentionally ironic. “New materials means ancient materials. Forgotten,” he says, walking through a hallway paved with stone beams rescued from temples and past sliding doors with a traditional cedar-bark and bamboo surface. “The material usually comes first, and then I think about the design,” he says. The loft has the quality of a Mondrian: Bare white walls are set off against rectangular panels of intricately grained rare woods, a grid of tatami mats and cylindrical white calico-covered stools floating on clear legs (also designed by Sugimoto).
He plans to host other artists for exhibitions and performances that “assist in the reconsideration of history,” according to the foundation’s mission statement, and the seaside retreat is poised to become to Japan what Donald Judd’s desert sanctuary in Marfa, Tex. is to America — an artistic destination and a living monument to creative ambition.
As our train heads toward Enoura — a sleepy community of citrus farmers now mostly occupied by retirees — we see views of modest wood homes nestled in the leafy slopes of the Hakone mountains and occasionally snatch glimpses of the soft blue of Sagami Bay. Sugimoto was born and raised in Tokyo, the son of parents who worked in the pharmaceutical industry; it was near here that he first saw the sea, while traveling by train on holiday. “I was only a boy, but felt as if I’d awakened from an age-old dream,” he wrote of that moment in a 2010 catalog essay.
His interest in design also took root in childhood, fostered by the family’s carpenter — “my best friend,” he says. When Sugimoto was 10, the handyman taught him how to build a chair. At 18, Sugimoto transformed the look of his bedroom from traditional Japanese to mock-English Tudor, complete with half-timbered walls. In the years since, he’s been uncompromising when it comes to his personal and work spaces; his studios are filled with furniture he crafted himself. And when museums exhibit his photographs, he usually requires free rein to design the gallery. For a recent Pace Gallery show, he built an ovoid viewing chamber with a light-diffusing muslin ceiling.
Despite the seeming weightlessness of the structures, virtually every surface and all the ornamentation has been created from stones in a dizzying array of shades and textures. One wall of the gallery is hewed from speckled Oya volcanic rock — the same material Frank Lloyd Wright used for the facade of the former Imperial Hotel in Tokyo. Charcoal- and ocher-hued specimens, dug up while excavating the buildings’ foundations, are painstakingly stacked to form low walls using a 16th-century stone-piling technique borrowed from Japanese castles. At the entrance to the steel chamber, a dozen sarcophagus-size stones — originally quarried for Edo Castle, which is now the site of Tokyo’s Imperial Palace — are arranged in a circular formation Sugimoto says was inspired by Stonehenge. The chamber itself will eventually display Sugimoto’s prized collection of fossils, which he refers to as “pre-photography time-recording devices.” Sugimoto talks excitedly about the origins, history and pedigree of each rock on the site. “I’m stoned,” he says, cracking himself up.
“YOU KNOW, THIS Zaha Hadid apartment doesn’t look good. And as ruins, it’s terrible,” Sugimoto once told me, while taking in the late architect’s soon-to-be-completed apartment building in Chelsea. Several years ago, he published a Michelin-style guide that rated different museums around the world where his work had been shown. He awarded only two stars or fewer to buildings by Philip Johnson, Cesar Pelli and Frank Gehry.
At the site, Sugimoto excuses himself to do more “stone hunting” at a nearby quarry, demurring when I ask to join. (“I have to concentrate.”) As I explore the buildings, I have the peculiar feeling of having entered a Sugimoto photograph. The inside of the gallery appears a monochrome mix of grays, and I watch how the light changes in the space — bright and white at the end of the walkway, softer coming in from the long wall of glass, and dark and flat along the wall made of stone. Gazing toward the end of the underground chamber facing the bay, I realize the rectangular opening has, like the lens of a camera, perfectly framed the horizon line of the sky and ocean, creating a living seascape.
