TUESDAY PUZZLE — Be it ever so humble, there is no place like the daily crossword puzzle. We last saw Gary Whitehead in 2013, when he was trying to make us age prematurely. Today, he’s back to teach us to appreciate what’s important.
Mr. Whitehead offers us a set of what appear to be disparate phrases, but they can be tied together by the revealer word HOME, seen at 71A.
If you put the word HOME before either of the two words in each theme phrase, you get a different phrase. For example, at 63A we have the phrase FRONT PAGE, and if you insert the word HOME before each word, you get HOME FRONT and HOME PAGE. Did anyone else get a kick out of seeing the analog FRONT PAGE change to the internet-based HOME PAGE by inserting something as analog as the word HOME?
HOME GUARD wasn’t that familiar to me, but a quick Google tells me that it can be a defense organization or a home alarm system of some kind. I was also unfamiliar with HOME ICE, but research tells me that it’s a hockey term, which makes sense.
I did note and like the sprinkling of Zs in the grid, both the pyramid in the center and the two in the northeast and southwest.
For more help on today’s theme, please click here to see the entire theme set revealed.
■ 15A: Wordplay alert! Beware of clues that use people’s surnames as nouns. “Parks of Alabama” is not a hint at their national park system. It refers to the civil rights activist ROSA Parks.
I created this puzzle seven years ago, so my memory of its inception is a bit fuzzy. I recall, though, having solved some puzzles with themes in which a first or second word of a compound word could be used with a keyword, and I wondered if it would be possible to have both words of a compound word work with a single keyword.
I don’t remember how I settled on the keyword that I did, but I do recall looking in a dictionary to find possible entries and being happily surprised that I could readily create compounds that worked in the way I’d hoped.
Regarding the fill, I like the little pyramid of zees in the center and the three-word phrases in some of the longer fill entries. It’s nice to have 20 Across clued the way it is, too, since I attended that school for a couple of years in the early ‘80s.
And, as we move on to the Wednesday puzzle, let’s click our ruby slippers together and say ...