Roberto Beristain, a 43-year-old undocumented immigrant, had lived in the United States for nearly 20 years. He and his wife of 17 years, Helen, an American, were raising their four children in St. Joseph County, Ind., and he owned a beloved local institution, Eddie’s Steak Shed.
Late Tuesday night, Mr. Beristain, whose wife voted for President Trump, was deported and dropped off in Juárez, Mexico, by Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials.
Mr. Beristain had twice filed a green card application and had a Social Security card, a work permit and a driver’s license, according to Mr. Buttigieg and Adam Ansari, a Chicago lawyer and former neighbor of the Beristains who used to frequent Mr. Beristain’s restaurant.
Customs enforcement did not immediately comment on Friday.
Only a couple of months into his presidency, Mr. Trump has emboldened immigration agents to deport undocumented individuals, encouraging agents to shed the practice of focusing mostly on those with criminal records. Mr. Beristain has no criminal record, Mr. Ansari has said.
On Feb. 6, Mr. Beristain was detained during his regular yearly hearing with immigration officials. Between that day and his deportation, he was moved by immigration agents through centers in Indiana, Wisconsin, Illinois, Louisiana, New Mexico and Texas, Mr. Ansari said.
Mr. Beristain is not alone in this experience. In February, for example, residents in an Illinois town were shocked when a manager of a popular restaurant was arrested by immigration agents.
In the November election, St. Joseph County — which includes Mishawaka, where the Beristains live — was split nearly evenly between Mr. Trump and his Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton. But Mr. Buttigieg says that Mr. Beristain’s deportation has affected some Republican residents’ opinions of the president.
The reactions have not all been supportive. The mayor said that the Beristains’ eighth- and ninth-grade daughters were on “the receiving end of some ugliness at their school.” He added that there had been some negative responses from people online, who have said that Mr. Beristain does not have an excuse because he had years to try and become a citizen.
Mr. Ansari — who has been helping the family and has assembled a team of immigration lawyers to provide them counsel — said the deportation was unlawful and a surprise because the lawyers had several pending motions on behalf of Mr. Beristain, which were being relayed to immigration officials.
“Unbeknownst to us, during the same exact time we were talking to immigration officials, they were shuffling him off to Mexico,” Mr. Ansari said on Thursday, adding that the lawyers were not aware that Mr. Beristain had been taken to Mexico until they received a call from Ms. Beristain. She received no information from immigration officials, Mr. Ansari said.
The New York Times was unable to reach Ms. Beristain for comment on Friday.
Mr. Buttigieg is still hoping for some kind of compromise solution.
