Hockey|What Does It Take to Earn Respect? A Puck in the Face.
What Does It Take to Earn Respect? A Puck in the Face.
VOORHEES, N.J. — To really irritate Ian Laperriere, the assistant coach in charge of the Philadelphia Flyers’ penalty-killing unit, all a player needs to do is avoid an opponent’s slap shot. The Flyers know Laperriere certainly never did that when he played hockey.
Laperriere, whom everyone calls Lappy, was hit in the face with flying pucks, too — twice in one fateful season. The second slap shot, launched by Devils defenseman Paul Martin in April 2010, ultimately led to Laperriere’s retirement in June 2012.
Laperriere still remembers everything about being hit by Martin’s shot — the dive to block it, the impact, the ringing in his ears, the lost vision in his right eye. He even remembers the first thing he said to the Flyers’ trainer when he came out to attend to him.
Despite sustaining a concussion and a fractured right orbital bone, Laperriere returned to the Flyers’ lineup one month later, playing in the final eight playoff games, including a six-game loss to the Chicago Blackhawks in the Stanley Cup finals. He planned to participate in training camp that fall.
But Laperriere, a Montreal native, was unable to continue because of postconcussion symptoms, which included headaches and vertigo. He was 36, a veteran of nearly 1,100 N.H.L. regular-season games, but he still wanted to play.
The end of the line had come, and Laperriere, married with two sons, had to find something else to do. He was a roster-filling free agent who played for the Flyers for only one season, but he had become a Philadelphia sports hero. T-shirts with an image of the badly bruised Laperriere and “Put on Your Lappy Face” became hot sellers.
The Flyers tend to find places in their organization for players who have sacrificed their bodies for the team. Laperriere spent three seasons in player development, learning about the younger players moving into the N.H.L., and on Oct. 7, 2013, he became an assistant coach.
Craig Berube, another fearless former player, was the Flyers’ head coach at the time, and Laperriere kept his job when Dave Hakstol took over last season. Flyers forward Wayne Simmonds said Laperriere, a smile on his face and a cup of coffee in his hand, was usually the first person the players saw when they got to the practice rink.
“He was just one of those players Philadelphia took to immediately,” Simmonds said.
Laperriere, now 43, said he enjoyed coaching.
Laperriere scored 121 goals in his career with the Blues, the Rangers, the Kings, the Avalanche and the Flyers. More significant, he amassed 1,956 penalty minutes. After a season with the Avalanche in which he got into 17 fights, the Flyers signed him for the 2009-10 season, and Laperriere got into 25 fights.
Laperriere was also fearless in other ways. In a game against Buffalo early that season, Laperriere blocked a shot from Jason Pominville with his mouth. He lost eight teeth and needed more than 100 stitches, but he was back at practice three days later.
“I wouldn’t wish that on anyone,” Laperriere told reporters.
Laperriere said he had tried to hide his symptoms from the Flyers in his attempt to resume his career the next season. But it was apparent to Paul Holmgren, the Flyers’ general manager at the time, that Laperriere was not his same old self.
The game has changed even since Laperriere stopped playing. Fighting has significantly decreased: The Flyers have been in only 27 fights this season, down from 45 three years ago. But there is a higher premium on shot blocking. This is where Laperriere can lend expertise.
The Flyers are in the middle of the pack in the N.H.L. at killing penalties, but they are among the league leaders in blocked shots. So Lappy has been an inspiration.
Tristan, 14, the older of his two sons, now plays hockey. Father and son have talked about what is sometimes needed to win — stepping in front of a shot being one example.
