LONDON — Prince Harry has said in a new interview that he suffered for years after the death of his mother, Princess Diana, before finally getting help about three years ago at the urging of his elder brother, Prince William.
The candid statement by the prince, in a podcast released on Monday by The Daily Telegraph, is the latest indication of a shift within the British monarchy toward greater openness, led by a younger generation. The two princes, along with Prince William’s wife, the Duchess of Cambridge, are leading a campaign called Heads Together to end stigma around mental illness.
Prince Harry, 32, said that not dealing with the trauma had contributed to years of “total chaos” in his late 20s.
The exchange, a rare glimpse into the private life of a member of the royal family, drew applause from advocates for people with mental illness.
Others praised the prince for speaking out about grief.
Princess Diana died in a car crash in Paris on Aug. 31, 1997, at age 36; she and Prince Charles, the heir to the British throne, had divorced the previous year. The reaction to the violent, unexpected death became a symbol of emotional and generational conflicts, and a turning point in the royal family’s relationship with ordinary Britons.
In the podcast, Prince Harry said he had tried to cope with the tragedy by not talking about it.
The prince also praised the virtues of getting professional help.
Prince Harry also said that boxing had helped.
“That really saved me because I was on the verge of punching someone, so being able to punch someone who had pads was certainly easier,” he said.
He added that staying quiet about emotional suffering in distress was “only ever going to make it worse,” and he urged people in such situations to seek help. “You will be surprised, firstly, how much support you get,” he said.
Prince Harry spoke to Bryony Gordon, a British journalist who has written about her own struggles with depression and with obsessive compulsive disorder. The prince was the first guest on the podcast “Mad World,” in which Ms. Gordon interviews a series of people about their mental health.
He had said that he regretted not discussing his mother’s death earlier in an interview last year.
This year, Prince Harry and Prince William announced that they had commissioned a statue at Kensington Palace of their mother to commemorate the 20th anniversary of her death.
As well as the Heads Together campaign, Prince Harry has also co-founded a charity to support children in Lesotho, where he spent time before joining the military, and created the Invictus Games, a sporting event for wounded or sick service members.