Good morning on this lovely Tuesday.
Jacqueline Kimmelstiel didn’t have a childhood.
Mrs. Kimmelstiel and her family spent 12 years moving through cities and small towns throughout France during the Holocaust.
She is one of 32 Holocaust survivors whose life stories will be told on a stage in New York City and in Scarsdale in the coming weeks as part of Witness Theater, a program that pairs high school students and Holocaust survivors to create works for the stage.
There are an estimated 50,000 Holocaust survivors in the New York City area, nearly twice as many as in the rest of the United States, according to Selfhelp Community Services, a nonprofit organization that conducts research on Holocaust survivors and is one of the largest providers of services for them.
Born in Frankfurt, Mrs. Kimmelstiel moved through Nice, Limoges and small French villages to escape the Nazis.
For a brief time in France, she said, she lived a somewhat normal life, and even received Hebrew instruction.
“Then they started to come,” she said of the Germans. Her family moved to Lyon, where she, her mother and eight other women hid with the nuns in a convent at night.
“Every day we would see convoys of people being brought to the train station,” she added. One day, she saw her Hebrew instructor being marched to the station.
In August 1947, her family moved to New York.
“When I saw the Statue of Liberty, I said, ‘I’m free, I’m free,’ ” she said.
Here, she worked as a seamstress in the garment center and studied English at night, where she met her husband, Albert Kimmelstiel, who had been imprisoned at Auschwitz. He was freed on May 2, 1945, by the American Army, and passed away last year.
In upcoming performances, the life of the younger Mrs. Kimmelstiel will be portrayed by Dalia Katz, 16, a student at SAR High School.
“I feel a little nervous because I want to do her story justice,” Ms. Katz said, referring not only to the harrowing events in Mrs. Kimmelstiel’s life but also to her bravery and strength.
“I get to not only help her, with the therapeutic part of the theater, but I get to share her story with so many others,” Ms. Katz added.
For Mrs. Kimmelstiel, the play is personal.
Ahead of Holocaust Remembrance Day/Yom HaShoah on April 24, you can see a performance based on Mrs. Kimmelstiel’s life story at 6:30 p.m. on Sunday at SAR High School in the Bronx. A full list of performances can be found here.
We’ll let the beautiful weather — 63 and sunny — speak for itself and note only that you may need sunglasses and a light jacket as you head out for the day.
• Scoreboard: Yankees dirty White Sox, 7-4.
• Rangers host Canadiens, 7 p.m. (NBCS, MSG), in Game 4 of the National Hockey League playoffs. Yankees host White Sox, 7:05 p.m. (YES). Mets host Phillies, (SNY).
• Alternate-side parking: suspended for Passover.
Earth Day is this Saturday, but here in the city, we’re celebrating all week.
Beginning at noon in Union Square, Earth Day New York kicks off with a festival of activities, performances and talks.
The Parks Department is hosting dozens of Earth Day events around the city, including tree giveaways, hikes and music and dance performances.
On Friday, you can join the Earth Day 5K, a tour of our city’s green spaces.
On Saturday, you can partake in Weekend Walks, where blocks around the city will be closed to vehicular traffic.
Or you can celebrate by commuting by bicycle.
In 2016, the city added more miles of bike lanes than any previous year: 80 additional or upgraded miles of lanes, according to the Department of Transportation. You can now travel across the city on more than 1,100 miles of bike lanes.
Download the 2017 Bike Map here before you head out.
Look closely at the cover and you’ll see a homage to one of our friends, the late Bill Cunningham, who was a Times fashion photographer and consummate city biker.