Arts|Richard Simmons Signs With Licensing Firm. Is a Re-emergence Next?
Richard Simmons Signs With Licensing Firm. Is a Re-emergence Next?
Richard Simmons, the reclusive fitness mogul whose sudden disappearance from public life spawned a hit podcast, might soon return to public life, thanks to a business deal. And in the latest odd twist in Mr. Simmons’s story, it may be a result of that podcast.
Prominent Brand + Talent, a management company co-founded by Mr. Simmons’s manager of three decades, announced on Wednesday that it had acquired exclusive rights to represent Mr. Simmons for merchandising, endorsements and licensing opportunities. The trade publication License first reported the deal.
Michael Catalano, Mr. Simmons’s manager, said in an interview that Mr. Simmons might be willing to come out of his self-imposed exile to help promote products that result from the deal. If Mr. Simmons does appear in public, it would be the first time he has done so since February 2014, when he stopped showing up to teach his class at Slimmons, his gym in Beverly Hills, Calif. He abruptly became a recluse and has not been seen since, spurring concerns about his well-being.
Dan Taberski, a former producer for “The Daily Show” and a friend of Mr. Simmons, set out to solve the mystery of what happened to the obstreperous crusader for exercise in a six-episode podcast series, “Missing Richard Simmons.” It quickly became the most downloaded podcast on iTunes but also attracted criticism, drawing complaints that it was violating Mr. Simmons’s privacy.
But the podcast did create new interest in Mr. Simmons, spurring this pursuit of new business deals. It put Mr. Simmons “front and center,” as Mr. Catalano said, which gave Mr. Taberski some solace.
Mr. Simmons’s representatives were critical of the podcast throughout its run, citing multiple welfare checks from the Los Angeles Police Department that showed Mr. Simmons to be in good health.
But “Missing Richard Simmons” did have a silver lining for Mr. Catalano.
Mr. Simmons, through Mr. Catalano, declined a request for an interview.