Mr. Binder turns 107 on Saturday, but he had the confidence to celebrate early during his regular Wednesday lunch at Mario’s on Arthur Avenue, the main drag in Belmont, a longstanding Italian neighborhood in the Bronx.
Until a few years ago, Mr. Binder was holding down two jobs. By day, he tended the Mario’s parking lot. By night, while working as a waiter of sorts, an occupational hazard upended his routine.
Experiencing shortness of breath, he moved out of his apartment in the area and into an assisted living center nearby. Not that this, or his early retirement, put a dent in Mr. Binder’s social life on Arthur Avenue.
He has been a popular character for decades there, livening up numerous establishments by singing and telling jokes.
“He came in a few years ago and said, ‘Can I have my job back?’” said Joe Migliucci, the fourth-generation owner of Mario’s, as he came out of the kitchen and shook Mr. Binder’s hand on Wednesday.
Mr. Binder was dressed sharply in slacks, a white turtleneck, a tan blazer and a tan pocket square. He wore a pinkie ring on his left hand and held a silver handled cane.
Local residents see a comic irony in Mr. Binder’s being the toast of an Italian neighborhood. He is Jewish and was raised by Yiddish-speaking parents in Brownsville, Brooklyn, but now is more conversant in Italian.  His wife was Italian and died in 1987.
His 100th birthday was celebrated in a neighborhood defined by the culinary and cultural experiences on Arthur Avenue, with many restaurants supplying dishes.
Mr. Binder said that before World War II he worked delivering U-Bet syrups and sodas, and that he had spent most of his time on and around the avenue since leaving the Navy in 1946.
Mr. Binder still makes frequent stops at what he calls his “fountain of youth,” the bar at Rigoletto, where he enjoys a brandy or two.
He sat on Wednesday with two women, Marge Marcone, 90, and Terry Cirillo, 81.
“He’s the most wonderful, most loving person who ever existed and that’s why he’s still alive,” said Ms. Marcone, adding that she still dances with Mr. Binder, be it rumba, merengue or swing.
“We’re just ‘hi’ friends,” Ms. Cirillo said. “The 53-year-old, that’s his gumar,” Ms. Cirillo said, using a slang term among some Italian-Americans for a mistress.
Phil Caggiano, 60, a friend of Mr. Binder’s, was also at the table and told a story.
“A few years back,” he recalled, “I’m in the neighborhood and I see a couple — the old-timers kissing on the street — what the old-timers used to call mushing it up.
Mr. Binder told a joke about going to the eye doctor and learning he had a cataract.
His friends knocked on the table — for good luck — and said they would see him a year later. Mr. Binder made no guarantees.
