The Mets glimpsed this Daniel Murphy for nine glorious playoff games that helped them win a pennant. The Washington Nationals have gotten the sustained version, a feared cleanup hitter who arrived at Citi Field on Friday to start what should be another season of damage against his former team.
“I think Murph just learned himself more,” said Ryan Zimmerman, the Nationals’ veteran first baseman, referring to Murphy’s well-known story of adjusting his approach through sessions with the Mets’ hitting coach, Kevin Long.
The Nationals were frustrated again last October, falling in a division series for the third time in five seasons. But April has been blissful. The team sits in first place in the National League East, and Zimmerman, the franchise pillar, is benefiting — at least to some degree — from Murphy’s example.
After the Mets’ halfhearted effort to retain him with a one-year qualifying offer after the 2015 World Series, Murphy signed a three-year, $37.5 million deal with Washington.
He hit .347 last season and led the N.L. in on-base-plus-slugging percentage, at .985, validating his concerted effort to launch more balls into the sky.
Zimmerman knows how to hit for power. He has a better career slugging percentage in 13 seasons as a National (.470) than Murphy had in seven seasons as a Met (.424). But Murphy, an expert in the analytics of his craft, studied data last winter that indicated why Zimmerman was not being rewarded for his hard hits.
He was hitting far too many ground balls, the numbers showed, and needed to raise his launch angle. Zimmerman has done so, but not drastically. Last year, it was 7.9 degrees; this year, 11.5 degrees — still well below the Mets’ Yoenis Cespedes, who is among the leaders at 24.5 degrees. But Zimmerman came into this series hitting .389, with five homers and a .778 slugging percentage that ranked fourth in the N.L.
Murphy, who was hitting .344 with two homers, has refused to take credit for Zimmerman’s success. It would make a neat story line, but it’s not quite reality. Zimmerman understood what Murphy meant, and he does have a better ground-ball-to-fly-ball ratio now. But he has not tried to remake himself the same way.
Getting those at-bats has been the problem. Zimmerman has spent much of the past three seasons on the disabled list because of a long checklist of problems: a fractured thumb and hamstring strain in 2014, plantar fasciitis and an oblique strain in 2015, and a strained rib cage and a wrist contusion last year.
With the injuries and the decline in performance — he batted just .218, with 15 homers, last season — it is easy to forget that Zimmerman is still only 32 years old. Manager Dusty Baker said the player’s age, track record and otherwise sound physical condition made him believe in a Zimmerman comeback.
Right fielder Bryce Harper has looked the way he did during his most valuable player season in 2015, and the newcomer Adam Eaton has been shining in center field. With left fielder Jayson Werth looking sturdy, the new catcher Matt Wieters fitting in well and shortstop Trea Turner activated from the disabled list Friday, the Nationals have been baseball’s best offense. They averaged 6.15 runs per game entering the weekend.
“He lengthens out the lineup so much,” Murphy said of Zimmerman. “The at-bats Ryan’s having right now are just really fun to watch. He’s taking advantage of mistakes on the plate, he’s not swinging at marginal pitches for balls. He’s been really dangerous in there.
Murphy’s plan to obliterate baseballs helped plant an N.L. champions flag high above right field in Flushing. Zimmerman’s plan is less overt but with a similar endgame: to be the best version of himself.
