SUNDAY PUZZLE — There are all sorts of “-nyms” in language, with synonyms and antonyms being the best known.
An apronym is a special kind of acronym where the initials spell out a word or phrase relevant to the expanded version. “Apronym” is, itself, a made-up word. It’s a portmanteau of “acronym” and the French ‘apropos,’ which is the relevant part.
Mr. Micolis offers us six apronyms as clues, and the answers are the expanded versions. As expected, all of the expanded versions are relevant to the apronym clue.
For example, at 23A: the apronym “SWAN” stands for the entry SWIMMER WITH ARCHED NECK. Similarly, at 97A, “OKAY” stands for OTHERWISE KNOWN AS YES.
The tough part is figuring out what the expanded version is, because they are largely made-up phrases. But they are by and large spot on, and with a good deal of toggling between the theme entries and their crossings, they are gettable. For linguists, this may be fairly easy.
As Mr. Micolis states below, there is additional theme material (I’m not sure I’d call them revealers, because they don’t identify themselves as part of the theme) at 69A (“Self-referential” for META) and 120A (“Opening letters?” for ACRONYM).
■ 26A: Today’s “crunchy, green vegetable” is the SNAP PEA, otherwise known as the only green vegetable The Boy will eat.
If the gentleman in the video looks familiar, it’s because you’ve seen him in the 1939 film “The Wizard of Oz.” It’s Ray Bolger, and he played the Scarecrow.
■ 1D: Note the capitalized M in “Mama.” That means it’s a proper name, and the answer to “Musical Mama” is Mama CASS, who sang with the Mamas and the Papas in the 1960s and ’70s.
■ 11D: ALAN King was a well-known comedian who served as an M.C. of sorts at John F. Kennedy’s presidential inaugurations.
■ 38D: Clever clue. “Certain house ... or house dressing” is RANCH. Would you have thought of that?
■ 60D: These pronunciation clues come up often enough that I like to point them out. For the clue “City, but not county, leader?”, the word “leader” means you need to pay attention to the first letter. The C in “city” is a SOFT C, whereas the C in “county” is not.
I’ve long been fascinated with self-referential stuff, from the mildly amusing (e.g., the Liar’s Paradox, “This statement is false”), to the visually dazzling (Escher’s “Drawing Hands,” “Print Gallery.”), to the deeply troubling (Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem and its mathematical foundation-rattling), to the cosmically profound (Wheeler’s Participatory Anthropic Principle of the Universe, and the like).
While on the amusing side, I had stumbled upon self-referencing acronyms — so-called “apronyms.” It recently occurred to me, “What great fodder for a crossword!” My first submission had five of them, including a few that Will wasn’t that crazy about (e.g., ENERGETIC LITTLE FELLOW). But he and Joel were sufficiently intrigued that they offered to workshop the idea with me. I shared a bunch more of my favorites, culled over time from various sources and my own addled brain. With Will and Joel adding their deft touches to a couple (A TOME LOCATING A STREET became AID TO LOCATE A STREET, for example), we ultimately landed on the six you see. Squeezing in six of such length made it challenging to keep the fill lively, and meant having to lose payoff entries such as the four-theme-word-crossing SELF-REFERENTIAL (and thus settling for the more subtle reveal in 69- and 120-Across), but I was very pleased with the final result and hope you had fun with it.
Once again, it was a huge pleasure working with Will and Joel. I was happy to see so many of my clues survive their expert and uncompromising editor’s scalpel. It was also gratifying to sneak in a reference to our youngest grandniece, ABIGAIL, who I hope will appreciate the “tribute” when she learns to read. Over all, I was sufficiently encouraged by the almost simultaneous acceptance of this and a not-yet-published weekday puzzle submission, after a disappointingly steady run of (however gracious and constructive) rejections following my “beginner’s luck” first submission last year, that I think I’ll stick with this newfound hobby/budding passion of mine for a while longer and see how it goes. Besides, Beebo (Abby) has quite a few siblings and cousins who may demand equal time.
Whew. Who’s ready for an easy Monday puzzle?