On a cold night in January, in a dark alley off Great Jones Street in Manhattan, Bruce Wayne was getting ready to fly.
This was the young, pre-Batman Bruce Wayne of the Fox series “Gotham,” played by David Mazouz, then 15. As a stunt double was strapped into an elaborate rig and repeatedly flung backward 30 feet — the result of a punch from a powerful shaman holding Bruce captive — Mr. Mazouz waited his turn a bit uncertainly.
Standing next to him, Ben McKenzie, the show’s star, offered encouragement with a story from his days playing high school football. The shoot, for the 16th episode of the third season — “Heroes Rise: These Delicate and Dark Obsessions,” on Monday, May 1 — was unusual in a couple of ways. It was the first episode directed by Mr. McKenzie, who plays James Gordon, a Gotham City detective — not yet the police commissioner of the comic books.
“Gotham” was a different sort of comic-book show from the start. Conceived as 100 percent origin story — how Bruce Wayne became Batman — it was a superhero series without a superhero. The protagonist was Gordon, a cop whose only superpower was his sense of justice. The format was closer to police procedural than the angst-and-battles of most comic-book shows.
In the absence of a larger-than-life hero, the show compensated by featuring its villains, including future Batman foes like the Penguin, the Riddler and a prototype of the Joker. Robin Lord Taylor, as Oswald Cobblepot, a thug who rises to become the Penguin, was the show’s breakout performer. Complementing the emphasis on villainy and the story’s film-noir roots have been a dark tone and a high level of violence, particularly for a broadcast-network show.
Despite those differences — or perhaps because of them — “Gotham” has been a bit lost in the shuffle amid the proliferation of superhero series the last five years. On one side, it’s overshadowed by Netflix series like “Jessica Jones” and “Daredevil,” which also go for a dark tone but stick closer to the singular-hero comic-book imperative (and which have benefited from the cachet of both Netflix and Marvel Comics). On the other, it gets less attention (though more viewers) than the more lightweight, purely comics-style shows on CW like “The Flash” and “Supergirl” (based, like “Gotham,” on DC Comics characters).
Ranking the superhero shows is difficult because they are so different. “Jessica Jones” stands out for the quality of its writing and performances, while “The Flash,” at times, is the most purely exhilarating. But if you like the dark version of Batman popularized in the comics by Frank Miller and onscreen by Mr. Nolan, then “Gotham,” with its grimness and its distinctive (and expensive) retro visual style, measures up.
Mr. McKenzie — who had wanted to direct since his tenure on TNT’s “Southland,” which was canceled before he had the chance — said his episode was more quiet than most. “The only constructive criticism I got was that it was ‘still,’” he said. “Which is one of the things I like.” But that stillness incorporated not just a decapitation but several shootings, an attack with a garden tool and a suicide.
“You know, it had some violence,” he acknowledged. As director, he handled one bloody scene by focusing primarily on the face of the aggressor, the Penguin.
Mr. McKenzie’s episode was the second half of a pair that began with “How the Riddler Got His Name,” in which the character Edward Nygma (Cory Michael Smith) assumed his comic-book persona. An important part of the Riddler story was the death of a woman he loved — the latest in a long line of female deaths on the show.
You might not find that answer satisfactory, but there’s a basic truth to it: The show is what it is, a violent, male-centric comic-book adaptation (with, to be fair, several female characters who are stronger and more menacing than most such shows can boast).
Viewership for “Gotham” has slipped from season to season, currently running about five million in the seven-day ratings. Fox hasn’t announced whether there will be a fourth season. Whenever the show ends, Mr. McKenzie was asked, can we expect the superhero to finally appear?
