Private investment firms in the United States are coming under pressure about foreclosed homes they are selling on high-interest installment contracts.
The contracts have attracted attention because buyers often cannot afford repairs or keep up with the monthly payments, and federal and state regulators have been scrutinizing big players in the business.
Now, the city of Cincinnati is taking aim at Harbour Portfolio Advisors, one of the biggest such sellers, with a lawsuit accusing the company of owing more than $360,000 in unpaid fines, fees and violation notices. The city asserts that the firm failed to properly maintain homes, which in one case lead to a child testing positive for lead poisoning.
Separately, a large mortgage servicer has also been hit with legal action.
Federal and state regulators unleashed lawsuits and enforcement orders against the mortgage servicer, the Florida-based Ocwen Financial Corporation, which specializes in servicing subprime mortgages issued to people with bad credit.
Twenty-two state mortgage regulators filed enforcement orders intended to limit or freeze Ocwen’s ability to acquire new mortgage loans to service in their states. They were aiming to curb what they said had been years of flagrant and repeated abuses, including illegal foreclosures, deceptive fees and extensive mishandling of customers’ home loan payments.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and Florida’s attorney general also filed lawsuits accusing the company of making mistakes at nearly every stage of the collections process, adding costs for borrowers trying to pay back their home loans.
Deutsche Bank is the first lender to be fined for failing to abide by the Volcker Rule and also has to pay up for violations of regulations on currency trading communications, The Wall Street Journal and Bloomberg reported.
The bulk of the fine is related to Deutsche’s allowing currency desks to chat online with competitors.
The German lender failed to detect that traders engaged in “unsafe and unsound conduct” in discussing their positions, the Federal Reserve said.
Deutsche had also admitted to the Fed that it lacked adequate systems for keeping track of activity that might run afoul of the Volcker ban on proprietary trading. Deutsche has 60 days from this past Thursday to submit plans to comply with the rule.
Partners at Chadbourne & Parke voted on Thursday to remove Kerrie L. Campbell, a female partner who filed a gender discrimination and pay inequity lawsuit against the firm, from the partnership.
About 70 partners voted and hers was the sole vote against expulsion, the law firm said.
Her effort to block the vote was rebuffed by a federal district judge in Manhattan on Monday.
Ms. Campbell has been on leave recovering from surgery. Chadbourne, which is based in New York, cut off her salary at the beginning of April.
Chadbourne, which is soon to be merged into Norton Rose Fulbright, said her expulsion was unrelated to the lawsuit and suggested that it had to do with her performance as a partner.
“However the action may be mischaracterized by her, Ms. Campbell’s decision to sue the firm and her more recent medical condition were not a basis for today’s outcome and were expressly not considered by the partners in reaching their decision,” the firm said in a statement.