KINSHASA, Democratic Republic of Congo — Two suspects were arrested in connection with the murders last month of two United Nations investigators in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the authorities said on Friday, although one of them subsequently escaped.
The bodies of Michael Sharp, an American, and Zaida Catalan, a Swede, were found in a shallow grave two weeks after they disappeared on March 12, along with four Congolese colleagues. The investigators had been appointed by the United Nations Security Council to look into a rebellion and accusations of human rights abuses in restive Kasai-Central Province.
In a news conference in Kinshasa, Gen. Joseph Ponde Isambwa, Congo’s military auditor, identified one of the suspects as an “insurgent” named Daniel Mbayi Kabasele, but he did not disclose additional details. General Isambwa also declined to say how the other suspect had been able to escape, though he said that four police officers responsible for guarding the pair had been arrested.
Mr. Kabasele was transferred from the remote village of Bunkonde, where the bodies were found, to the city of Kananga on April 4, with the support of the Congolese Mission to the United Nations, General Isambwa said. More details will be released as his hearing gets underway, he added.
The Congolese interpreters and drivers working with the investigators remain missing. The United Nations, which is carrying out its own inquiry, could not be reached for comment.
The deaths of Mr. Sharp and Ms. Catalan, who had extensive experience working in conflict zones, were unusual even for a country that has been plagued by civil war and endless small wars for 20 years, ever since its longtime dictator, Mobutu Sese Seko, was overthrown by the Rwandan Army and a small Congolese rebel group.
United Nations experts had never before been reported missing in Congo, according to Human Rights Watch. Shortly before they were killed, a video surfaced showing what appeared to be army soldiers killing civilians in the same region.
The deaths occurred against the background of political paralysis in the nation, largely because of President Joseph Kabila’s reluctance to step down after failing to hold elections, as constitutionally mandated, last year.
In a bid last week to carry out a transitional agreement brokered with the opposition in December, Mr. Kabila named a former leading member of the main opposition coalition as prime minister. But his selection of a different candidate from the one nominated by the opposition may stoke further protests rather than quell them.
In a country where the rule of law is largely absent, some people had little doubt who lay behind the killings of the United Nations officials.
