242 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.95.
Looking at Bausch’s career as a whole — and his new story collection in particular — it’s clear that he has followed his own advice. With 12 novels and eight story collections published since 1980, he’s managed to send original fiction out into the world with stunning regularity. Violence doesn’t always figure overtly in Bausch’s fiction, but the atmosphere never precludes it. Sometimes the violence is deeply buried and psychological, an underground river of anguish that threatens to flood the surface narrative. Or it’s the kind of violence that comes from above, like an act of God, a battering of one’s chances against the cosmic wheel.
Bausch’s latest book is aptly titled. The 14 stories in “Living in the Weather of the World” inhabit places where the outlook for their characters is uncertain at best and cataclysmic at worst. Here love and marriage are brittle, people are driven by lust and desire they barely comprehend, and a lack of self-knowledge can ruin a man’s life just as surely as a loaded gun. Sometimes the action is galvanic, an explosive moment that puts the reader in mind of Flannery O’Connor’s ability to open out a story into dangerous, unknown territory. And, like O’Connor, Bausch is able to pull a story back from melodrama, no matter how sudden or dramatic the turn of events.
A less accomplished writer might have lost us right here. The action could feel spring-loaded, preordained, but what follows is a stunning and strange encounter with a self-described “bandit” who attempts to mug Joseph during his loop through the tree-lined neighborhood. In the shift of power and violence that takes place between the two men, there’s a kind of curbside confessional. “My wife told me this morning, man. She’s leaving me,” Joseph blurts out. “I thought we were happy. I’m falling over, you know? I’m sailing down. Plummeting. I can’t believe it.” The would-be mugger, who “wore a baseball cap with the FedEx logo on it, only the word was FEDUP,” says “Jesus.” Then, a beat later, “If I’d’ve known. I wouldn’t’ve bothered you, really.” When a story can bring us convincingly to this kind of reversal, we know we’re in the hands of a writer keenly attuned to the subtleties of human frailty and want.
Bausch routinely takes us out to the end of the narrative pier and asks us to jump. Infidelity, as a literary theme, interests me less at face value than just about anything I can think of. But in three of these stories, Bausch uses it to excavate a surprising sense of drama and revelation.
That Bausch can deliver such convincing humanity, no matter the initial angle of ascent, is a testament to his powers of technique and observation. Not all the stories in this collection are as vertiginous as the two I’ve mentioned here, but they’re all well crafted and energized. Moving among them, we find two half siblings rediscovering each other after decades; a talented young artist becoming beguiled (and betrayed) by the woman whose nude portrait he’s been commissioned to paint; an old couple grappling with choice amid a terminal illness; a drama-prone sister crashing her brother’s honeymoon; two 90-something World War II veterans, one German, one American, reuniting in the media spotlight. The world and the range of its emotional weather are on full display.
In Bausch’s “Letter to a Young Writer,” Rule No. 6 simply reads: “Be willing.” “Be open for business all the time,” Bausch explains. “You must try to be that person on whom nothing is lost.” After nearly 40 years of his distinctive, sometimes electrifying fiction, it’s fair to say that Bausch has stayed open for business through all kinds of circumstances and conditions, that he’s been able to keep the lights on and burning bright.