In 1947, W.H. Auden published a very long poem that, despite winning a Pulitzer Prize, is now remembered less for its contents than for its title: “The Age of Anxiety.” Something about the idea that an age can be anxious must resonate deep in America’s cultural bones, because the phrase has been used to describe countless moments since, from the vogue for tranquilizers like Miltown and Valium in the ’50s and ’60s to the coronation of today’s young adults as, in The New York Post’s recent estimation, “The Anxious Generation.” At this point, it’s difficult to imagine a slice of time whose resident humans would not agree with the notion that their lives were more hectically modern — more anxiety-inducing, more in need of the occasional benzo — than any before.
Neurasthenia was assumed to affect the nerves. Around the same time, Freud began to isolate a purely psychological component: “anxiety neurosis,” a free-floating fear “ready to attach itself to any appropriate idea.” Predictably, as soon as this feeling was given a name, people saw it everywhere. Every decade birthed some new technology, social transformation or global turmoil that left people feeling as though they lived in a world-historical peak of tension and noise. Faced with that, what kind of person wouldn’t be anxious? 
Our current anxieties are the opposite of Americanitis. It’s not a rush of progress that’s said to be unsettling us; “economic anxiety” is shorthand for a wave of failure. To understand why that shorthand has lately proved so useful, it helps to remember what it’s like to experience anxiety. It is not a coherent fear of a particular thing, and it tends not to focus on the problems you already have. (A poor person’s immediate challenge isn’t “monetary anxiety”; it’s poverty.) Anxiety is the ambient apprehension that terrible things might happen and the physical response — tension, alarm, fight-or-flight vigor, snapping awake at 2 a.m. to check the president’s Twitter feed — that accompanies this feeling. As a way of describing the political behavior of millions, anxiety is irresistibly broad: All it really says it that people are expressing profound unease, even if they have incoherent or contradictory senses of why, or what it is they fear, or what should be done about it. It describes an emotion, not an analysis.
By the end of last summer, the assumption that “economic anxiety” was a straightforward political motivation had come under sustained attack, with dissenters pointing to the incomes of Trump supporters (higher than average), the antipathy toward Trump among many working-class people (especially nonwhite ones) and the more statistically persuasive connections between Trump support and attitudes about race. (For a while, “economic anxiety” became a wry joke on social media: Surely the racial slurs and anti-Semitic harassment appearing in your feed were really arguments for a more robust manufacturing sector.) But alternative theories about what was driving the election — racial anxiety, demographic worries, cultural reaction — still assumed people were emotionally, not ideologically, unsettled. And since one of the strange things about anxiety is how easily it can be made contagious, with one person’s quivering unease shattering the next person’s calm, this year so far has felt like a national exercise in reactive nervousness. Your angst might center on immigration or on a swelling deportation force, on the threat of North Korea or the safety of South Korea, but the expectation is that you will be racked by some sense of adrenalized dread over it.
We’ve reached a weird, quiet agreement that the most potent force in our politics is, for the moment, a stew of unease, fear, rage, grief, helplessness and humiliation. Anxiety, after all, need not be rational, need not be coherent, can contain multitudes. It’s possible to be anxious about things that will almost certainly never affect you; it’s possible for anxiety to prevent you from accurately assessing danger and making plans to address it. (This is how we remain more panicked by terrorism than medical bankruptcy.) Americans are acknowledging, more openly than we’re used to or comfortable with, that the life of the nation may not take place in a realm of issues and policy and consensus-​building but someplace more disordered, irrational and human.
A mainstay of 20th-century age-of-​anxiety complaints was that our world was becoming too complex for anyone to keep track of or feel like a relevant participant in, full of strange and byzantine distances between individuals and the grand global forces affecting us. This feels as obviously true today as it might have to a midcentury reader of Kafka. You can argue with a store owner; you can’t argue with the call-center representative of the company contracted to maintain the point-of-sale machine owned by the other company contracted by the multinational conglomerate that owns the store. Freud connected psychological anxiety with birth and infancy, when human beings experience wrenching change they’re completely unequipped to make sense of. According to Michel Dugas, a psychologist at the University of Quebec, feelings of anxiety are closely connected to an inability to handle uncertainty. What might make human beings less anxious, it seems, is having a firmer sense of what in the world is happening and what’s likely to happen next. We seem temporarily short on both.
A quarter-century ago, in the Prozac-not-Xanax era after the end of the first gulf war, we were worrying at these same uncertainties. In the 1991 novel “Generation X,” one of Douglas Coupland’s characters ventures that “the world has gotten too big — way beyond our capacity to tell stories about it, and so all we’re stuck with are these blips and chunks and snippets on bumpers.” A pressing national worry, right now, is that our dueling bumper-sticker snippets have nothing productive to say to one another. An unpleasant thought follows: that maybe the only thing that could relieve our national anxieties is something bad happening to us — something so clarifyingly awful that we’re forced to become solemn and still and agree about it.