WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court struggled to decide on Monday whether criminal defendants who may be mentally ill are entitled to independent expert witnesses to help defend them, or whether court-appointed experts who report to both the prosecution and the defense are sufficient.
The case concerns a death row inmate from Alabama, James E. McWilliams, but the issue in his case also figures in two of the eight executions Arkansas had hoped to carry out this month. Last week, the Arkansas Supreme Court stayed the executions of two men to await guidance from the United States Supreme Court in Monday’s case, McWilliams v. Dunn.
Mr. McWilliams is on death row for the 1984 rape and murder of a convenience store clerk in Tuscaloosa. Before his sentencing, his lawyer asked for a psychological evaluation, and a court-appointed psychologist prepared a report that was distributed to both sides.
Monday’s argument was almost entirely devoted to an attempt by the justices to divine what their predecessors had meant in a 1985 decision, Ake v. Oklahoma.
Stephen B. Bright, a lawyer for Mr. McWilliams, said the Ake decision meant his client was entitled to his own expert, one who could help him prepare his defense.
But several justices voiced doubts about whether the decision had gone that far or, even if it could plausibly be read to require an independent expert, whether it had established a clear rule.
Because the case reached the court as a federal habeas corpus challenge to Mr. McWilliams’s death sentence, he can win only if he can show that a state court’s ruling against him was at odds with clearly established Supreme Court precedent.
“You can’t work both sides of the street,” he said.
Andrew L. Brasher, Alabama’s solicitor general, disagreed. “Neutral experts are capable of assisting the defense,” he said.
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. noted that a leading criminal law treatise had called the Ake decision “deliberately ambiguous” and that many lower courts had not understood it to require an independent expert. In light of that, the chief justice told Mr. Bright that he faced an uphill fight.
“All of those things — not saying whether you’re right or wrong on the merits, but that body of authority that takes a different position would seem to me to establish that the question was ambiguous, at least coming out of Ake, as opposed to clearly established,” Chief Justice Roberts said.
Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. said the Ake decision was similar to ones he and his colleagues had written and joined. “This is an opinion that is deliberately ambiguous, because there was probably disagreement among the members of the majority about how far they wanted to go,” he said.
But Justice Kagan said there was only one natural reading of the Ake decision. “It means somebody on the defendant’s side,” she said. The decision, she said, used variations on the term “assist” countless times.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said that in the context of legal representation, there would be no doubt what “assist” meant. “Assistance of counsel doesn’t mean neutral,” she said.
Justice Stephen G. Breyer said some of his colleagues were asking the wrong question. The issue was not whether the expert in the case had been independent but whether he had provided the required assistance. Justice Breyer suggested that the Supreme Court could send the case back to the lower courts to explore that question. Justice Anthony M. Kennedy appeared intrigued by the idea.
Justice Neil M. Gorsuch said he was worried that a ruling in Mr. McWilliams’s favor would open the door to all kinds of court-appointed experts.
