BOSTON — A dank and dreary night, a head-over-heels flip into the stands and a jittery performance from Yankees closer Aroldis Chapman could not put a damper on Aaron Judge’s 25th birthday.
Judge made his first trip into the Fenway Park caldron a memorable one on Wednesday night, hitting the first pitch he saw — from the reigning Cy Young Award winner Rick Porcello — for a two-run homer, then following that up by tumbling over a wall to make a highlight-reel catch.
Judge’s efforts backed the sterling pitching of Luis Severino, who shut out the Red Sox on three hits over seven innings in a 3-1 victory that was finished off — barely — by Chapman, the Yankees’ $86 million closer.
After Chapman had given up two walks sandwiched around a double by Mookie Betts, he struck out Jackie Bradley Jr. for the second out. That brought up Josh Rutledge, who, after fouling off a pair of 2-2 fastballs, hit a slider high and far down the left-field line, bringing the crowd to its feet.
As the ball hung in the air, it was reminiscent of two memorable World Series home runs — Carlton Fisk’s game-winning drive down the line in Game 6 of the 1975 World Series and the game-tying homer that Cleveland’s Rajai Davis hit off Chapman for the Chicago Cubs in Game 7 of the Series last fall.
But the ball drifted just foul, landing in the upper deck that abuts the line. Chapman then ended the drama by throwing a fastball past Rutledge on the next pitch.
“It’s never easy here, and we know that,” said Manager Joe Girardi, who had to fight off flashbacks to last September, when Hanley Ramirez hit a game-ending homer off Dellin Betances, kicking off a four-game sweep that all but knocked the Yankees out of the playoff race.
If this rich rivalry is entering a new phase after the retirements of Alex Rodriguez and David Ortiz, two sluggers who took their outsize personalities with them, the Yankees and the Red Sox have plenty of candidates ready to step into central roles.
It was Judge’s turn on Wednesday. A 6-foot-7, 275-pound right fielder, Judge is quickly turning last season’s sketchy cameo, when he struck out in half his at-bats, into a distant memory. He has now hit seven home runs and leads the Yankees with 15 R.B.I., and his .672 slugging percentage is second in the American League to Mike Trout.
Judge has made his mark with prodigious power, blasting a 459-foot homer on Saturday in Pittsburgh — one of three home runs he has hit this season that have exceeded 435 feet — but there is more to his game than that. He has made several excellent catches in the outfield and showed strong instincts and good hustle on the bases.
If some young players might be seduced by lure of the Green Monster, Judge showed restraint, taking a fastball that was low and away and driving it into the Yankees’ bullpen in right field. The home run, with Starlin Castro aboard after an error by shortstop Xander Bogaerts, put the Yankees ahead, 2-0.
Judge scored the Yankees’ final run in the sixth, drawing a two-out walk from Porcello after falling behind, 0-2. Judge advanced to second on a wild pitch and hustled home on Greg Bird’s line single. The hit was an especially welcome one for Bird, who had only one in his previous 21 at-bats and was 5 for 50 on the season.
But Judge’s most eye-catching play came in the field. Bogaerts lifted a fly ball down the right-field line in the third, and Judge went barreling toward the low wall that hugs the line. He slowed only at the last instant, reaching over the wall to catch the ball and then tumbling into the stands. The row that he plunged into was vacant — a fortunate byproduct of the miserable weather conditions.
Judge, on his back and partially out of view, flipped the ball to Castro as Boston’s Marco Hernandez tagged up and advanced to third. The first-base umpire Mark Carlson initially ruled that Judge had not caught the ball, but the Yankees challenged the call and a replay review confirmed the catch.
It was an unnerving moment for Manager Joe Girardi.
Asked if he had tumbled over a wall like that before, Judge said he had.
“But never at Fenway Park,” he added.
For many young players like Judge, a first trip to Fenway Park can be jarring. Severino said recently that he did not like pitching there. Fenway is unlike contemporary stadiums. Even the ones that are nostalgically modeled after old ballparks are built much higher, with upper decks that are usually stacked upon a layer of suites. Fenway, with its fabled left-field wall, is intimate and feels as if it is a step back in time.
Judge had been to Fenway once before — as a college sophomore in the summer of 2012, when he briefly worked out there with the Brewster Whitecaps of the Cape Cod League.
Judge also enjoyed his visit Wednesday. His home-run ball was retrieved as a memento, and he will probably have a few bruises as reminders of his catch. All that, and the Yankees managed to win.
Asked if he had ever had a more memorable birthday, Judge smiled.
