Taking mass transit in New York City is like being an extra in an endless movie trailer — disaster or horror, take your pick. Here we are, derailed under the East River. Here we are, stampeding because of a shots-fired false alarm in the hellhole of Penn Station. Now we’re all cheek-to-cheek-to-cheek in a rush-hour subway car, praying in the rot and gloom for the far-off day we cease being held by the dispatcher.
Cut to sunshine and a completely different movie. It’s called NYC Ferry, and it’s about a boat ride, one you will soon be able to take for the cost of a MetroCard swipe, all along the waterfront. New ferry service begins in the city on May 1. It’s a project of Mayor Bill de Blasio, who is running for re-election, and who unveiled it with a boat christening and celebratory ride on Monday morning.
There will be two routes to start: One in the East River will connect piers at 34th Street and Wall Street in Manhattan with spots along the Queens and Brooklyn waterfront, and Governors Island. Another will link Wall Street, the Brooklyn Army Terminal and the Rockaways. Four more routes are coming: South Brooklyn in June, Astoria in August and, sometime next year, the Lower East Side and Soundview in the Bronx.
The city isn’t claiming that 20 boats will be the answer to subway crowding, or crumbling train tunnels, or decades of disinvestment in transit infrastructure across the region. A few million rides here and there will not change the game (the subway accounts for about 1.7 billion rides a year). But for thousands of straphangers and drivers who live near the water and who have become inured to the indignities, delays and crowding of land-based commuting, ferries will be a blessing. The word for it is multimodality — adding options to add flexibility and strength to a transportation web that is frayed, overstretched, splitting at the seams.
The city was a ferry wonderland in the 19th century, but that age faded in the era of subways and automobiles. The index item “Transportation” nearly fills a page in the monumental Robert Moses biography “The Power Broker,” but it doesn’t mention ferries; the Moses vision involved a lot of crisscrossing over and under the water, but apparently not on it. Give credit to administrations that think outside the grid — like that of Mayor Michael Bloomberg, which unexpectedly managed to add bicycles to the commuting mix, and now Mr. de Blasio, doing more to reconnect workers with the waterfront.
What was true in Walt Whitman’s day, and Robert Moses’, is just as true now. It makes no sense to have all this water around us and not use it.