Given the economic, environmental and social policies emanating from the White House, the United States could be headed for its most dynamic era of public resistance since the 1960s, one for which the Women’s March last winter was just a warm-up. Such an era would demand fresh developments in political art, meaning art with a populist reach. Where will that come from?
Not from our mainstream art world, the one represented by big museums and art fairs. That world is a tight and self-regarding place, an echo chamber with mirrored walls. It’s a bit more diverse than it used to be, but still lags way behind the population at large. In terms of economics and class? It’s a gated community, a closed door.
If you’re searching for cultural models, even flawed ones, that effectively brought a message of social change into the street, the schools, the workplace, people’s lives, you’ll have to look further afield. One place to start is the exhibition “Black Power!” at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, a branch of the New York Public Library in Harlem.
The Schomburg has done sublime art exhibitions in the past. “African Zion: The Sacred Art of Ethiopia” in 1994 fundamentally changed my view of both Africa and religious art. But “Black Power!” is a different sort of show, mostly archival. And it does some of what the Black Power movement did: It broadens art as a term, applying it equally to public murals, disposable fliers and wheat-paste posters; to photographs, fashion and spoken words; and to public gatherings that have the visual allure, choreographic rigor and emotional weight of theater.
Debates continue about the origins — the when and the who — of the Black Power movement. There’s a widely held view that it was a brash, fierce urban impulse replacing the gentler, rural-based civil rights movement. But the exhibition — organized by Dr. Sylviane A. Diouf, director of the Lapidus Center for the Historical Analysis of Trans-Atlantic Slavery at the Schomburg — argues that, at least initially, the two coexisted and had much in common.
The show attributes the first official use of Black Power as a political brand to Willie Ricks and Stokely Carmichael, members of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), who introduced the slogan at the March Against Fear in June 1966. Their purpose was to bring a more defiant stance to the fight for racial justice, and they promoted, as a visual emblem, the form of a leaping black panther, an animal, it was said, that did not attack unprovoked but also did not retreat from aggression. That October, Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale adopted the image as the logo for the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense, which they founded in Oakland, Calif.
By the show’s estimate, the Black Power movement in America operated at full strength for about a decade. Many people involved found their inspiration in the radical human rights activist Malcolm X, but took different lessons from his example. The Black Panthers adhered to his injunction to provide on-the-ground care — education, nourishment, protection — for black communities in the United States. Concurrently, the black nationalist movement emphasized his globalist and Pan-African interests. Between these two poles arose splinter groups with conflicting agendas.
Malcolm X had a cleareyed view of what people were up against in a nation — in a world — saturated with racism. For years, he seemed to suggest that the only solution was a separatist show of arms. But in his last years, before his assassination in 1965, he came to advocate culture as a weapon of resistance by persuasion, a resistance generated almost entirely outside established art institutions which, whether they wanted to be or not, were shaped by classism and racism.
The show documents some forms this persuasion took under the umbrella title of the Black Arts Movement, sometimes called the cultural wing of Black Power. In photographs we see one of its early monuments, the 1967 Chicago mural called the “Wall of Respect,” a collaboration among more than a dozen artists, working outdoors, on large-scale portraits of black heroes, from W. E. B. Du Bois and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. to James Baldwin, John Coltrane and Nina Simone. In the same year, Emory Douglas, as minister of culture for the Black Panther Party, began creating graphically snappy and elegant poster and newsprint designs that spread across the country and that punctuate sections of the Schomburg show, as do images of the raised black fist, now a universal emblem of political assertion.
A cultural infrastructure supporting the new art grew. Revolution-minded galleries, bookstores and presses opened in African-American neighborhoods. The show has photographs of several such grass-root outlets, along with informal portraits of artists and writers they exhibited and published, among them Amiri Baraka, Romare Bearden, Jayne Cortez, Nikki Giovanni, Larry Near, Sonia Sanchez and Askia M. Touré. Some of these people worked in schools, others in prisons; most regularly hit the streets, as protesters and moral witnesses.
But despite its intense motivational energy, Black Power as a movement foundered. The show doesn’t address this directly, but its excellent catalog does. Rival factions, driven by ideologies or personalities, came to blows. The United States government subjected movement participants to unrelenting surveillance and attack. A misogynist streak in the movement, as in American society in general, held firm. The single most universal sign of solidarity, black-is-beautiful fashion, was absorbed by the market, including the entertainment industry, and reduced to commercial fodder, a process already at work in the new protest culture today.
Especially germane to the political present is the way the Black Power concept, at its most militant and pragmatic, has expanded far beyond its source community and its originating period. Through photographs, the exhibition illustrates, in particular, versions of the Black Panther model adopted in Africa, Asia, Australia and the Middle East, as well as within Latino, Asian-American, Native American, feminist, and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender populations in America. And you could hear evidence of continuing Black Power impact in the address given by Angela Y. Davis, one of the historical movement’s heroes, at the 2017 Women’s March in Washington.
The key word in the Baker quotation and in Ms. Davis’s address, as it must be in protest today, is “we.” True, it’s a huge word, and a concept no single institution can probably hope to encompass. But the mainstream art world, despite a well-advertised veneer of diversity, still barely even tries.