Updated, 8:30 a.m.
Good morning on this iffy Friday.
Full service has been restored at Penn Station in Manhattan, according to Amtrak. New Jersey Transit is back to operating on a regular weekday schedule. The Long Island Rail Road is running on a reduced schedule. Allow extra travel time.
How would you rate the recent performance of our politicians?
First, let us remind you that Senate Republicans used the “nuclear option” to change voting rules after an impasse over the nomination of Judge Neil M. Gorsuch to the Supreme Court. Lawmakers in Albany still haven’t passed a budget. And after a minor New Jersey Transit derailment brought days of delays, some in New Jersey say that Gov. Chris Christie has been shortchanging transportation.
And that was just this week.
Perhaps you think you could do better. Maybe you’ve even considered putting your name on the ballot. If so, you’re not alone.
“There’s been an enormous uptick in interest in running for office,” said Sarah K. Steiner, an election lawyer, referring to city government.
Here’s a primer on what it takes to run for office on the City Council.
The city requires candidates to gather 450 signatures. But you should collect around 3,000 to be on the safe side, said Martin Connor, a former state senator and the chairman of the New York City Bar Association’s election law committee. Petitions are due in July.
How much money does a person need to raise?
The city’s public financing program will match, in a ratio of six to one, donations of up to $175 given by a city resident to a candidate. So if a person gives a candidate $100, the city matches that amount with $600, for a total of $700. If you take matching funds, your spending limit is capped at $364,000.
“Which means you don’t have to go begging to deep-pocketed special interests,” said Matt Sollars, the director of public relations for the city’s Campaign Finance Board.
How do you run a campaign in New York City?
First, you’ll need thick skin.
What’s the secret of success?
“Candidates who are successful have a community of some sort behind them,” Ms. Steiner said.
A cloudy Friday to cap off our week, with a high near 50 and a 40 percent chance of rain. Meh.
But then, a streak of flawless, springy weather. Think sunshine, blue skies and warmer temperatures stretching through the weekend and into next week.
• Scoreboard: Penguins ice Devils, 7-4. Islanders quell Hurricanes, 3-0. Wizards cast a spell on Knicks, 106-103. Magic curse Nets, 115-107. Mets bust Braves, 6-2.
• Yankees at Orioles, 7:05 p.m. (YES). Mets host Marlins, 7:10 p.m. (SNY). Knicks at Grizzlies, 8 p.m. (MSG).
• Rangers at Senators, 12:30 p.m. (MSG). New York Ciy FC at D.C. United, 4 p.m. (MLS LIVE). Yankees at Orioles, 4:05 p.m. (YES). Nets host Bulls, 5 p.m. (YES). Islanders at Devils, 6 p.m. (MSG, MSG+). Mets host Marlins, 7:10 p.m. (SNY).
• Watch “The New York Times Close Up,” featuring The Times’s Paul Krugman and other guests. Saturday at 2 and 10 p.m. on NY1.
• Knicks at Raptors, Noon. (MSG). Yankees at Orioles, 1:35 p.m. (YES). New York Red Bulls at Orlando City SC, 4 p.m. (ESPN). Islanders host Senators, 5 p.m. (MSG+). Rangers host Penguins, 7 p.m. (MSG). Mets host Marlins, 8:08 p.m. (ESPN).
On Monday evening, much of the New York area’s Jewish population — the largest outside Israel — will begin observing Passover, a holiday commemorating liberation from slavery in Egypt.
One central part of the Passover Seder is reading about the 10 plagues that God imposed on the Egyptians to cause their cruel ruler, the pharaoh, to set the Israelites free.
The plagues are, traditionally: blood, frogs, lice, flies, pestilence, boils, hail, locusts, darkness, and the killing of a firstborn.
Tell us, New York: What are our modern plagues? Share your thoughts in the comments, or email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Please include your full name, age and the neighborhood in which you live.
Use your imagination and encourage your friends and family members — children, parents, grandparents and acquaintances, Jewish or not — to submit answers.
The New York Today team may contact you for possible inclusion in an upcoming column.