This is an anniversary tale, but it’s also a confession. Someone in my household once played a tiny role in spreading a benevolent purple scourge throughout the land.
Twenty-five years ago, on April 6, 1992, PBS broadcast the first episode of “Barney & Friends,” the children’s series starring a purple Tyrannosaurus rex who preached a gospel of friendship, cooperation and love. The show, a mix of music and gentle stories with educational elements thrown in, hit some sort of sweet spot for the preschool set. It ran until 2009, providing one of the earliest television experiences for millions of toddlers while driving their parents and older siblings crazy with its treacly good cheer.
How “Barney” came to be on the air involves a determined set of do-it-yourselfers, a fateful trip to a Connecticut video store and an equally fateful phone call. The first two pieces have been documented before; the third hasn’t. Until now.
These sorts of D.I.Y. home videos were the web series of that era — a lot of individuals and small companies were shooting them, hoping they’d catch on. Unlike many of those, the “Barney” creators understood the importance of marketing, and through a grass-roots effort they managed to get their early “Barney” tapes into schools, video stores and other outlets well beyond Texas.
Around this time, PBS had let it be known among its affiliates that it was interested in broadening its offerings for children, having had success with “Sesame Street” and “Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood.” Larry Rifkin, then the executive vice president for programming at the Connecticut affiliate, CPTV, didn’t give PBS’s request much thought, since CPTV didn’t have a significant producing budget.
It was on Route 69 in Prospect, Conn., beside a gas station — long gone now, but well-enough stocked then that it had a copy of “Barney & the Backyard Gang” on the shelves. Mr. Rifkin’s 4-year-old daughter, Leora, pulled it off — maybe, Mr. Rifkin speculated, she was attracted by the colorful box — and once they got it home she wouldn’t stop watching it.
To make sure Leora wasn’t atypical, he wanted to see if another kid had the same reaction to “Barney.” That’s when the phone rang in our house in Cheshire, Conn.
None of the four parents involved — the Rifkins, Larry and Carmelita; the Genzlingers, Neil and Donna — can now remember why Leora and our 4-year-old, Emily, were playmates, but they must have met in a kiddie tumbling class or some such. So it was our house that Mr. Rifkin called when he needed to borrow a child for his mini-focus group. Emily has no memory of her first “Barney” exposure; her mother and I mostly remember that she stayed at the Rifkins for a long time. Long enough for Mr. Rifkin to confirm that he was looking at an opportunity.
Mr. Rifkin went on to secure a production deal and, a little more than a year later, “Barney & Friends” made its national debut on PBS. The television exposure sent Barney-mania, which had already been building, into overdrive.
It’s tempting to here employ the cliché that “the rest is history,” but it almost wasn’t. PBS, Mr. Rifkin said, had just switched to a model in which, rather than being affiliate-driven, decisions about what stayed on the air were to be made by an executive at the national level. And that executive apparently didn’t “get” Barney or understand how fast the dinosaur’s fan base was building; the show was scheduled to be axed after its first 30 episodes.
That was ultimately prevented by a bit of lobbying, including, Mr. Rifkin recalled, a memorable appearance by Barney at the shops in the Hartford Civic Center.
“That’s the closest I’ve ever come to feeling what Beatlemania was like,” he said.
Sure, the show was irritating to anyone over the age of 5, but perhaps enough time has passed to temper our judgment. One person who is reassessing Barney is Leora Rifkin, now 30 and living in Boston.
“Especially when I was growing up, like when I was in high school, it wouldn’t be a cool thing to talk about,” she said. Nowadays, though, she has come to appreciate Barney and the messages of the show.
She is a founder of one nonprofit, Boston’s Racial & Economic Activated Dialogue (known as Bread), and also works for another, Epicenter Community. My daughter, meanwhile, is also in the nonprofit world, currently at Charley’s Fund, which is dedicated to Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
So cut Barney some slack. In his unbelievably annoying way, maybe he did some good.