Standing by his locker after the Rangers’ 3-1 loss to the Montreal Canadiens in Game 3 of their playoff series on Sunday, Mats Zuccarello modeled a fresh set of stitches and a streak of blood on his chin.
“Maybe a high stick,” he thought.
He did not know the exact number of stitches and he could not recall the incident. Frankly, those things did not matter a bit to him. What bothered Zuccarello, and what had him apologizing profusely, was his own loose high stick that drew blood from Andrei Markov in the second period.
That sloppy mistake in the offensive zone cost Zuccarello a pair of two-minute minor penalties, leading to Montreal’s pivotal second goal and eventually a two-games-to-one lead for the Canadiens.
If any single player represents the esprit and soul of this Rangers team, it is Zuccarello. The team’s little sparkplug and leading scorer this season can fly, pass and finish. But like many of his high-profile teammates, he is finding himself frustrated and bottled up by Montreal’s structured, pinching defense.
The Rangers will need to break out of their typical home-ice malaise on Tuesday in Game 4 if they are to stay in this best-of-seven series. They can ill afford a seventh straight home playoff loss over three baffling springtimes.
There is a long-held theorem in hockey, a formula more instinctive than mathematical, that applies to the N.H.L. playoffs: If two teams are paired in a relatively even matchup, then the more desperate club will probably win the next game. That should make the Rangers favorites for Game 4 at Madison Square Garden because they would be unlikely to recover from a three-games-to-one deficit heading back to the Bell Centre for a Game 5.
There is the gnawing thought that these two clubs are not so even, that the Canadiens have demonstrated more fire, more discipline under pressure and by far the more effective special teams in man-advantage situations.
The Canadiens scored the biggest goal of this series, tying Game 2 with less than 18 seconds left in regulation with an extra skater after pulling their goalie. Then, in Game 3, the Rangers went 0 for 3 on power plays — they are now 0 for 10 in the series — while Montreal scored on two of three such opportunities.
Alain Vigneault, the Rangers’ coach, complimented the Canadiens on their structure and resolve, while aiming considerable criticism at Zuccarello and J. T. Miller, both guilty of critical infractions.
The Rangers have scored just six goals in the first three games. Chris Kreider, the team leader with 28 goals in the regular season, has not scored or managed an assist. Kevin Hayes, who struggled late in the season, is also without a goal or an assist.
The Canadiens, meanwhile, congratulated themselves on a nearly perfect road game. They neutralized the Garden crowd, an easily discouraged bunch. There was no sense of energy inside the place after that second goal by Shea Weber 7 minutes 42 seconds into the third period.
The Rangers and their fans now have precious little margin for such indifference. But this series already spun once on a dime, and may do so again. If the Rangers had held on for just 18 more seconds during regulation in Game 2, it might have been enough to demoralize the Canadiens and set this series on an irreversible course.
That did not happen. Twist the cliché in whatever direction and it’s still true for the Rangers in Game 4: Die, or do. Never, or now.