FRIDAY PUZZLE — People tell you that you can’t prepare for the realities of parenthood, but it doesn’t really hit home until you’ve been handed the baby, told to go home and actually raise it.
And, if you are anything like me, you will totally blank out. You will come down with the greatest case of stage fright ever, in front of the brand-new person you want to impress more than anyone else.  That’s right, I sang all 26 letters to my baby, because every other song I had every heard in my entire life evaporated at the thought that I had to be entertaining. And she fell right to sleep, which just goes to show you what kind of standards babies have.
I bring this up because I came to a full stop at 17A’s “Rock music?” in Patrick Berry’s puzzle. As a veteran solver, I knew two things about this clue. I knew 1) that the question mark meant that I needed to think about something other than actual rock music, and 2) that the answer had nothing to do with actual rocks.
But as a veteran parent whose children are nearly grown, I didn’t make the connection to CRADLE SONGS, a phrase that was unfamiliar to me, but does make the required connection to “Rocking.” It’s probably just me.
But I’m still convinced that those early sessions of the “Alphabet Song” made my kids into early readers. So there.
■ 23A: #TIL that the alleged Chicago mafia consists of one family called the Outfit. Back in the day, they allegedly ran different businesses, one of which was allegedly the SPEAKEASY.
■ 33A: This one isn’t about taxi drivers, it’s about truck drivers. The front of the truck that the driver sits in is called the cab, and some, if not all drivers are TEAMSTERS.
■ 4D: Since this is Friday, I figured that we weren’t picking up a mess on the floor. We’re picking up something in a mess hall, and my first guess was TRAY. I haven’t spent a lot of time in mess halls, but I thought that you pick up the tray and the FOOD is placed on it by someone else, right? Or have I been watching too much M*A*S*H?
■ 16D: Clever. “Mind one’s place?” sounds like an authoritarian clue, but it’s not. Someone who minds their place HOUSECLEANS.
Your thoughts, as I sing you all to sleep?