An article last Sunday about political television shows in the Trump era misspelled, on first reference, the name of a “House of Cards” showrunner. She is Melissa James Gibson, not Melissa Jane Gibson.
An article on Page 114 this weekend about the quirky, unconventional work of the French artist Sophie Calle, which blurs the distinction between art and life, misidentifies the medium in which her “The Birthday Ceremony” series and her “Voir la mer” series were made. “The Birthday Ceremony” is comprised of sculptures, not photographs, and “Voir la mer” is comprised of digital films, not photographs. The article also omits part of the title of a Calle show. It is “My Mother, My Cat, My Father, in that order” — not merely “My Mother, My Cat, My Father.” In addition, the article misstates the year a show by Calle will open at the Musée de la Chasse et de la Nature. It will be shown starting in October 2017, not 2018. The article also misstates part of the name of the organization curating Calle’s upcoming show “Sophie Calle: Missing.” It is Ars Citizen, not Arts Citizen. And, finally, the article refers incorrectly to Calle’s connection to a burial plot at Green-Wood cemetery in Brooklyn. She was offered the plot as part of a site-specific project she is making there; she has not bought a burial plot there.
An article on April 16 about Japanese photography after the 2011 earthquake, tsunami and nuclear disaster misidentified the medium in which Shimpei Takeda made photograms from radioactive soil. He exposed the soil to photosensitive film, not photosensitive paper.
An article last Sunday about French influences in Harlem misidentified the birthplace of Fabrice Warin, owner of Barawine Harlem. He was born in Bordeaux, not in Alsace.
An article last Sunday about drinking in Brno, Czech Republic, referred incorrectly to the city’s location. It is southeast of Prague, not southwest.
The Frugal Traveler column last Sunday, about Pittsburgh, misidentified the location of the Akers National Roll company. It is in Avon-more, Pa., not Avondale.
An article on April 9 about southern Laos rendered the name of a local beer incorrectly. It is Beerlao, not Beer Lao.
The Roving Eye feature on April 9 attributed an erroneous distinction to “Ghachar Ghochar,” a novella by Vivek Shanbhag. It is one of the first books originally written in the Kannada language to be published in America, but not the first. There has been at least one earlier, “Samskara,” by U. R. Anantha Murthy, first published here by Oxford University Press in 1976.
A review on April 9 about Paul Watson’s “Ice Ghosts: The Epic Hunt for the Lost Franklin Expedition” misstated the role that Jim Balsillie, one of the participants in the hunt, played at Research in Motion, the makers of the BlackBerry smartphone. He is a former co-chief executive of the company, not one of its founders.
An article last Sunday about Maureen Chiquet, a former executive with Chanel, misspelled the surname of an artist whose work decorates Ms. Chiquet’s home. She is Alice Neel, not Neal.
An article last Sunday about financial abuse of older people referred incorrectly to systems for complaints and intervention in suspected cases. Though the federal government has no such system, each state has its own; it is not the case that there is no government-run system.
