LAURIE ANDERSON at Highline Ballroom (April 29, 8 p.m.). The experimental musician Laurie Anderson is headlining this concert in celebration of Highline’s 10th anniversary. Since she started her music career with the stunning electronic opus “O Superman” in 1981, Ms. Anderson has proved an indefatigable force in contemporary art: putting on visual exhibitions around the world, holding residencies at universities, scoring movie soundtracks and continuing to record new music. Despite having a remarkable career of her own to draw from, Ms. Anderson will use this performance to honor another visionary: She plans to feature a guitar drone created by her husband, the musician Lou Reed, who died in 2013.
THE BESNARD LAKES at the Bell House (May 4, 8:30 p.m.). Since releasing its debut album in 2003, this often overlooked Canadian five-piece has released five sprawling albums of swirling psychedelic rock that have earned the group frequent comparisons to studio mavens like the Beach Boys and the Beatles. Despite minimal mainstream recognition, the band has carried on undaunted. Its alluring and ambitious techniques — characterized by heavenly, multilayered harmonies and reverb-soaked guitar riffs — are on display on its latest album, “A Coliseum Complex Museum,” selections from which are sure to feature in Thursday’s show.
JOJO at Irving Plaza (May 2 and 4, 7 p.m.). The pop singer JoJo, born Joanna Levesque, broke out in 2004 with the rousing girl-power anthem “Leave (Get Out).” But in 2007, her ascendant career was stalled when she became embroiled in a legal battle with her first label, Blackground Records, which eventually released her from her contract in 2013. This headlining tour will feature new music from “Mad Love,” only her third studio album, along with one-off songs and material from the mix tapes she released during those difficult years. With Stanaj.
THE REVOLUTION at B. B. King Blues Club & Grill (April 28, 8 p.m.) and Webster Hall (May 3, 8 p.m.). Throughout much of the 1980s, the Revolution served as Prince’s nimble backing band (it played on one of his best albums, “Purple Rain,” released in 1984). Now, one year after his death, some members of the band — Wendy Melvoin, Lisa Coleman, Bobby Z, BrownMark and Dr. Fink — are coming together for a celebration of his life and legacy. Don’t be surprised if a few special guests pop in to honor his memory, too.
DIANA ROSS at New York City Center (through April 29, 8 p.m.). These days, a public appearance by Diana Ross is almost as rare as a unicorn sighting; at 73, she rarely gives interviews or performs for an audience. But since former President Barack Obama awarded her the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation’s highest civilian honor, in November, Ms. Ross has been enjoying something of a comeback. Before a headlining performance at the Essence Festival in New Orleans, Ms. Ross is wrapping up a five-night engagement at City Center with shows on Friday and Saturday. Nearly every song on the career-spanning set list is a classic, from Supremes tunes (“Where Did Our Love Go”) to solo material (“Love Hangover”).
ROSTAM at the Bowery Ballroom (May 3, 9 p.m.). Rostam Batmanglij may be best known as a founding member of the Grammy-winning indie-pop outfit Vampire Weekend. But after leaving the group last year and collaborating with artists like Carly Rae Jepsen and Frank Ocean, he is focusing on his own work as a solo artist. Mr. Batmanglij will perform his genre-spanning brand of pop — which draws on E.D.M., chamber pop and the Iranian sounds of his ancestry — and perhaps unveil songs from his coming debut studio album. With Deradoorian.
JAIMIE BRANCH at Nublu (May 3, 7:30 p.m.). The latest dispatch from Chicago’s avant-garde jazz diaspora is “Fly or Die,” the trumpeter Jaimie Branch’s forthcoming debut album. Ms. Branch now lives in Brooklyn, but the record bears the pulpy, melodic sound print of her former home. Her trumpet playing is redolent of Don Cherry, but bolstered by her own suite of extended techniques; it drifts from tuneless clouds to long, coagulated tones. Ms. Branch appears here with the same remarkable quartet of Chicago transplants featured on the album: the cellist Tomeka Reid, the bassist Jason Ajemian and the drummer Chad Taylor. Also on the bill are the James Brandon Lewis Trio, featuring the guest guitarist Anthony Pirog, and Soghost, Jason Nazary’s electro-percussion project.
RON CARTER’S 80TH-BIRTHDAY WEEK at the Blue Note (May 2-7, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Carter, a bassist, is one of the most recorded sidemen in jazz history. He’s also the author of some remarkable — if rather overlooked — solo albums, in formats ranging from duets to little big bands. The stately Mr. Carter will celebrate the week of his 80th birthday with concerts alongside an array of collaborators. On Tuesday, he’s in duo with the guitarist Bill Frisell; over the next four days, he will convene various quintets including the likes of Benny Golson, Kenny Barron and Renee Rosnes; and on May 7 he closes the run with his Golden Striker Trio, featuring Russell Malone on guitar and Donald Vega on piano.
INTERNATIONAL JAZZ DAY WITH JEFFERY MILLER at the National Jazz Museum in Harlem (April 30, 3 p.m.). In celebration of International Jazz Day, headquartered this year in Havana, the pianist Jon Batiste has booked a band of rising musicians to perform at the National Jazz Museum in Harlem, where he is an artistic director. The group features a straight-ahead trio led by the fleet young trombonist Jeffery Miller — a New Orleans native who’s now studying at Juilliard, and whose name you’re likely to start hearing a lot more.
DAVID MURRAY AND CLASS STRUGGLE at the Village Vanguard (May 2-7, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). After living in Europe for many years, Mr. Murray, a tenor saxophonist, is diving back into the New York jazz scene that once called him royalty. Mr. Murray’s waggish improvising and brawny tone have rarely sounded better than on last year’s “Perfection,” on which he performs with the pianist Geri Allen and the drummer Terri Lyne Carrington. For this weeklong run Mr. Murray presents a relatively new ensemble, Class Struggle, featuring Mingus Murray, Mr. Murray’s son, on guitar; D. D. Jackson on piano; and the brothers Rashaan and Russell Carter on bass and drums.
BOBBY WATSON QUARTET at Smoke (April 28-30; 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Watson, a seasoned alto saxophonist of buttery tone and lithe inflection, has a new album out, “Made in America.” It features nine original compositions dedicated to often-overlooked figures in African-American history: people like Wendell Pruitt, a Tuskegee airman who was killed while serving, and the actress Butterfly McQueen. Its strutting postbop is enlivened by a top-flight quartet, including the pianist Stephen Scott, the bassist Curtis Lundy and the drummer Lewis Nash. The album came out on Smoke Sessions Records, the label associated with Smoke; the same band will play at that club all weekend.
