Political figures loom large in our featured titles this week: Hillary Clinton, whose presidential campaign receives a painful autopsy in “Shattered”; Paul Ryan, whose Wisconsin hometown is the subject of “Janesville”; and George W. Bush, whose best-selling book of paintings of veterans, “Portraits of Courage,” occasions debate about the value of bearing witness to a war of your own making. Dominic Dromgoole’s “Hamlet Globe to Globe” takes readers around the world with a production of Shakespeare’s tragedy, and a debut novel, “My Cat Yugoslavia,” enchants with its depiction of the disorientation of exile.
HAMLET GLOBE TO GLOBE: Two Years, 190,000 Miles, 197 Countries, One Play, by Dominic Dromgoole. (Grove, $27.) To celebrate the 450th anniversary of Shakespeare’s birth, London’s Globe Theater performed “Hamlet” all around the world. Dromgoole’s witty account of the ambitious two-year tour — “a compulsively readable, intensely personal chronicle of performances in places as various as Djibouti and Gdansk, Taipei and Bogotá,” in the words of our reviewer, Stephen Greenblatt — offers insight about the play and its enduring appeal.
ONE OF THE BOYS, by Daniel Magariel. (Scribner, $22.) After a brutal custody battle, two brothers watch their father drift into addiction in a gripping and heartfelt first novel that brims with wisdom about the self-destructive longing for paternal approval. For all the betrayal and resentment that binds them, Magariel’s characters feel neither typecast nor pitied.
PORTRAITS OF COURAGE: A Commander in Chief’s Tribute to America’s Warriors, by George W. Bush. (Crown, $35.) The former president began painting three years after leaving the White House, inspired by Winston Churchill. Now Bush’s portraits of 98 veterans, accompanied by their harrowing stories of injury and recovery, reveal a surprisingly adept artist doing penance for a great disaster of American history.
SIGNS FOR LOST CHILDREN, by Sarah Moss. (Europa, paper, $19.) This fine exploration of a marriage between a doctor in Victorian England and her architect husband feels contemporary in its attention to the competing pulls of work and love, highlighted by distance. Tom’s employer sends him to Japan; Ally works in insane asylum in Cornwall; and the novel juxtaposes their individual quests and the effect on their nascent relationship.