BRUSSELS — There are about 150 major art fairs around the world each year, and collectors and dealers routinely complain that there are too many. But as an Art Basel and UBS Art Market report recently pointed out, fairs generated an estimated $13.3 billion in sales in 2016, about 41 percent of dealer transactions.
Top-level contemporary fairs like Art Basel in Switzerland in June and Frieze London in October have become “destination” events that attract a truly global audience, but the tier below has become ever more competitive.
This year, two regional fairs are emerging as standouts in the overcrowded global art scene: Independent Brussels and Art Brussels, which both capitalize on Belgium’s depth of discerning collectors for contemporary art. Thanks to low rents, the city has been a magnet for artists and galleries, prompting it to be hailed by some as a new Berlin.
This is the second year that Independent, a dealer-organized event in New York that tries to look more like an exhibition than an art fair, is holding a European edition at the Vanderborght Building in Brussels. Eschewing the formality of aisles and booths, 70 international gallerists are presenting contemporary artworks through six floors of a stylish Art Deco former department store. Thirty are first-time exhibitors, including the Budapest gallerist Erika Deak.
Ms. Deak is showing new works by the Hungarian artists Attila Szucs, a prominent painter, and Zsofia Keresztes, an emerging sculptor.
Independent’s presence in Belgium reflects the strength of the country’s collector base. So does the 35th edition of the more mainstream Art Brussels contemporary fair, which had a preview on Thursday at the Tour & Taxis customs warehouse, as well as the numerous galleries and foundations holding shows in Brussels this week.
Major local collectors such as Mimi Dusselier, Bruno van Lierde and Walter Vanhaerents were spotted at Independent, as were the Russian collector Maria Baibakova and Axel Haubrok from Berlin.
Yet, as is the case at most contemporary art fairs in these uncertain times, buyers at Independent remain highly selective. Collectors balked, for example, at the asking price of 26,000 euros, or $28,000, for Mr. Szucs’s photography-inspired painting “Red Garden” — well above the artist’s current auction high of $23,670.
The New York and Brussels gallery Clearing, which also opened a 5,400 square-foot space in the Belgian capital this week, did sell a colorful 2017 pastel abstract, “Untitled,” by the Los Angeles-based artist Aaron Garber-Maikovska, for $25,000. The Approach gallery in London presented a strikingly diverse and thought-provoking group of works by the Dutch conceptual artist Germaine Kruip, who lives in Brussels. These included “Kannadi,” a 2017 relief sculpture incorporating geometric metal mirrors made for religious rituals in southern India, which found a buyer at €40,000.
Mr. Gevart said he prefers visiting a few of Europe’s smaller regional fairs and its galleries, and Art Brussels is on his list. “It’s not too big, the selection of galleries is good, and it’s not too trendy,” he said, adding that he estimated that there were at least 200 collectors in Belgium who spend €50,000 or more a year on serious contemporary art.
This year’s edition of Art Brussels features 145 galleries, presenting a range of 20th- and 21st-century works. Predictably, collectors have gravitated toward the 30 dealers in the “Discovery” section, where the New York gallery The Hole has a solo presentation of new politically charged pastel drawings by the Los Angeles artist Eric Yahnker.
Collectively titled “Alternative Fiction,” the drawings include a portrait of Barack Obama with atomic explosions reflected in his sunglasses, and a study of a white cat smoking a pipe, with the Magritte-inspired title, “This Is Not A Cat Smoking A Pipe.” The latter was one of two works that quickly sold to Belgian collectors for €12,000 each.
Art Brussels, in contrast with Independent, also offers plenty of works by blue-chip names, albeit up to a certain price level. One big-ticket sale was a 1969 black-and-white stripe abstract by the French artist Daniel Buren, which the Brussels dealer Xavier Hufkens sold to a Belgian collector for €285,000.
Mr. Hufkens has shown at Art Brussels for about 25 years, and he gave a dinner this week for more than 200 clients, including collectors from Japan and the United States who are trickling back to Brussels after the shock of the March 2016 terrorist attacks in the city.
The packed art fair calendar continues to evolve. On April 12, the ABC contemporary art fair in Berlin announced that it would introduce an event in that city in collaboration with Art Cologne, the world’s longest-established contemporary fair, whose 51st edition opens on Wednesday. The inaugural edition of the collaboration, called Art Berlin, is scheduled to replace ABC at the Station Berlin events center from Sept. 14 to 17.
But the fair will have to compete with another new event, this one in the German city of Düsseldorf. In February, Art Basel’s parent company, MCH Group, bought a 25.1 percent stake in art.fair international, the organizer of a satellite event in Cologne. That fair will now be expanded and rebranded as Art Düsseldorf, which will run from Nov. 16 to 19.
Welcome to the regional-art-fair merry-go-round.