Opinion|Even as President, Donald Trump Panders to the N.R.A.
Even as President, Donald Trump Panders to the N.R.A.
President Trump eagerly repaid his campaign debt to the National Rifle Association on Friday by appearing at its annual convention in Atlanta. Last year, candidate Trump benefited greatly from the N.R.A.’s endorsement and $30 million worth of campaign support; the N.R.A., in turn, relished Mr. Trump’s fear-inducing agenda, which led to greater arms sales among more and more ordinary Americans.
Interestingly, however, now that Mr. Trump’s in the White House, gun sales have been leveling off, gun company stocks are dropping and industry workers are being laid off. One reason is that President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton have departed the political scene, thereby depriving gun marketeers and the N.R.A. of the selling point that caused an eight-year binge of gun sales to buyers who feared tight new regulations.
Americans concerned for public safety can only hope that the decline will continue as the nation’s gun carnage seems likely to produce another year of 30,000-plus deaths. Mr. Trump himself has displayed no sense of responsibility to offer prescriptions for how that toll might be reduced through gun safety. Rather, in his appearance Friday, he stuck to the red-meat stuff expected at a convention where hundreds of companies displayed an astonishing 15 acres of guns and firearms paraphernalia for thousands of conventioneers.
“You came through for me and I am going to come through for you,” Mr. Trump declared, as gun owners cheered. Exactly how he might do that remains to be seen, although the president pointed to his decision to ease federal restrictions against the use of lead bullets on federal hunting grounds. Lead ammunition remnants prove highly toxic in the animal food chain and had been restricted.
Beyond that, Mr. Trump did not touch on such N.R.A. priorities as the gun lobby’s push in Congress to expand its “concealed carry” campaign of gun ownership by requiring states to recognize different gun permits issued in other states. This is currently the gun industry’s main hope for a sales rebound — weakening permit laws to see more guns in more people’s pockets in more public places.
