In recent years, internships have gone from nice-to-have-on-a-résumé to absolutely critical. Employers today go on to hire about 50 percent of their interns as full-time workers, according to the Collegiate Employment Research Institute at Michigan State University. And the share is growing every year in industries like construction, consulting, accounting and scientific services.
This new emphasis has upended the traditional recruiting calendar on campuses nationwide. With more companies drawing from their intern pools, recruiters have shifted their attention from hiring soon-to-graduate seniors to scoping out juniors, even as early as the fall term, for summer internships. Postings for internships now make up a significant proportion of the overall entry-level job openings in engineering, graphic design, communications, marketing and information technology, according to Burning Glass Technologies, a data analytics company that studies the job market.
With so many employers hiring their interns, the last internship before graduation is perhaps the most important one. “He who gets them last gets them for good,” Mr. Ward said.
So how do students make the most of these short-term experiences? I asked four recent interns in different industries to share their advice.
He returned to the department every summer, building up the skills that got him hired after graduating from George Mason University in 2015 with a degree in history.
That day, Visa invited Ms. Mullen for an interview. She got the internship.
“But also be careful what you say,” she added. “I was unsure if I wanted to live in California,” where there was a full-time job with Visa. “I mentioned that uncertainty to my manager, who misconstrued it as me not wanting any offer that would place me in California.” Ms. Mullen, who graduates in May in informatics, will start in the fall on Grant Thornton’s cyber risk team.
Ms. Morrison landed a marketing stint with Ford in Orlando, Fla., and was the only intern in the office. “I was laser-focused,” she said. “I sat at my desk every day until my mentor told me that if I did just that for the rest of the summer, I’d be just a number in a large company. I went around and asked people what they were working on and if they needed help. I got another project that way, where I had to present to the regional managers at the end of the summer.” Her managers were impressed. Ford offers jobs to about half its 600 interns every year. Ms. Morrison was one of those hired.
BE PATIENT Zane MacPhee thought that interning with a minor-league baseball team before his junior year would get him to the big leagues the following summer, where he would do big things analyzing player data to improve the team’s performance. “I quickly learned that major league teams only take interns after graduation.” He went back for the summer to the minor league team, the Walla Walla Sweets of Walla Walla, Wash.
After graduation from Whitman College, he landed an internship with the Los Angeles Dodgers, but still no moneyball in the front office. Rather, he was a marketing intern picking subjects for the Kiss Cam. “When that ended, I sent out résumés to every major league team. I got one bite.” It was for another internship, this one with the Minnesota Twins.
