A movement to use federal programs to offer treatment and a place to live to the chronically ill has a new worry: expected cuts and tax code changes.
For eight months, Jamal Brown’s body shook, so violently that he lost consciousness and ended up in the hospital more than 30 times. Though only in his 30s, his face drooped, his arms and legs often felt numb, and he was overcome with the anxiety of being a homeless drug addict trying to get clean in Camden, N.J.
Then, last July, as he lay in a hospital bed after his third stroke, a representative of the Camden Coalition of Healthcare Providers came to his bedside and suggested a different kind of treatment for his illnesses: a federal housing voucher.
Within months, Mr. Brown, who had been bouncing between shelters, had a one-bedroom apartment in Somerdale, N.J., 10 miles from where his father first introduced him to crack cocaine. Mr. Brown has not been back to an emergency room since.
Mr. Brown is a beneficiary of a movement by health care providers to use federal housing and tax programs to prescribe housing along with medications to treat ailments. Some hospitals have created housing units that act as real estate developers — buying, renovating and renting buildings to patients. Other hospitals and health care providers have brokered deals with local housing authorities to obtain housing vouchers for their patients.
But that movement has a new worry: deep but unspecified cuts that President Trump has proposed for housing programs, including rental assistance; and a sweeping simplification of the tax code that could reduce targeted tax breaks like those aimed at developers of low-income housing, in order to lower tax rates broadly.
For tax experts and economists, the clutter in the tax code impedes economic growth and inefficiently allocates economic activity. But one person’s inefficient tax break is another’s lifeline. And health care administrators say housing has to be part of the answer to the nation’s health woes.
Dr. Jeffrey Brenner, the founder of the Camden Coalition and now a senior vice president for integrated health and human services at the insurance giant UnitedHealthcare, said that in Camden, the nonprofit provides housing with Section 8 vouchers from the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
That thinking has motivated the UnitedHealth Group, the parent of UnitedHealthcare, to invest more than $350 million to build 56 affordable housing communities in 14 states since 2011.
Boston Medical Center also began a pilot program in October aimed at connecting several chronically ill patients with housing instability to public housing and Section 8 vouchers through a partnership with city officials and local groups.
“It’s actually a housing diagnosis, not a medical diagnosis,” said Dr. Megan T. Sandel, associate director of the Grow Clinic for Children at Boston Medical Center and one of the doctors working on the program.
Dr. Sandel said about a quarter of the patients admitted to Boston Medical Center were homeless and repeatedly visit for issues like kidney disease — having dialysis treatments and taking medications on time is a struggle for patients without housing.
Others, like 9-month-old Angelov Charry Diaz, may be getting sick because of the environment in which they are forced to live. His mother, Neslie Diaz, 22, is in the process of applying for housing through the pilot program.
For now, Ms. Diaz is living with her mother and camping out in her 14-year-old sister’s room. Angelov, who was born premature, is underweight, has developed allergies, and is not doing things that babies his age are supposed to do, like eating solid food and lifting his head. Both Ms. Diaz and Dr. Sandel worry that his health issues could be related to the dogs in the home and Angelov’s sleeping with his mother because there is no room for a crib.
Dr. Kelly J. Kelleher, vice president for community health at Nationwide Children’s Hospital in Columbus, Ohio, said children like Angelov need to have a chance to grow up in neighborhoods that provide places where they can thrive. His hospital started the Healthy Neighborhoods Healthy Families program in 2008 and has invested more than $8 million in improving homes, renovating places and developing affordable housing.
He said if doctors and nurses could start the health care system over, they would not begin by building hospitals.
“You would start with a healthy home, parents who had jobs, and kids who were eating the right things and living in a stable neighborhood because we know that ZIP code always trumps genetic code when it comes to outcomes,” Dr. Kelleher said.
As Mr. Trump tries to cut costs, health care providers fear doom for housing programs. George Kleb, executive director for housing and community development at Bon Secours Baltimore Health System, said that while he was concerned about cuts to the Department of Housing and Urban Development, he worried most that Mr. Trump’s plan to streamline and simplify the tax code would scale back the number of low-income housing tax credits, which are given to developers to subsidize the cost of building and maintaining affordable housing.
He said that since the 1990s, when waves of drug use left rows of abandoned homes near Bon Secours vacant, the hospital has used low-income housing tax credits to buy and renovate 729 units in West Baltimore. Hospital officials hoped that improving the streets immediately facing the hospital might persuade more potential employees to join the staff, and patients to visit with the doctors.
But classic tax overhauls would trim back such targeted tax breaks to lower overall tax rates. Developers would not have to scramble for low-income housing tax credits if their tax rates were already coming down.
So far, Mr. Trump has said nothing about the low-income housing tax credit, which could be worth $40 billion to $50 billion over the next 10 years. But as Congress takes on tax reform after failing to pass new health care legislation will most likely be reviewed.
In Somerdale, Mr. Brown, who is still recovering from his strokes, is hoping that the programs keeping him out of a homeless shelter and an emergency room will continue to get the funding they need.
