The French disco-rock band Phoenix, known for giddy, heartstring-tugging hits like “1901,” takes years to produce its meticulous albums.
But the album also hints at a darkness that surrounded the group while it recorded in Paris during a turbulent time, as its hometown absorbed a swell of refugees, underwent a surge in alt-right sentiment and endured terrorist attacks. On the night of the attacks at the Bataclan, a concert hall where Phoenix had played and attended shows, the guitarist Christian Mazzalai was trapped in the studio, where the band was recording after the police shut down Paris.
Like his bandmates — all of whom he’s known since they were youngsters living outside Paris alongside future members of Daft Punk and Air — Mr. Mars, sporting a perfectly mussed indie-rock bedhead, is chatty and charming and prone to slightly nerdy asides about short stories or scientific principles. Since the core of Phoenix’s music is improvisational, it’s hard for him, or any band member, to explain why each album sounds the way it does.
For “Ti Amo,” the band found an unorthodox place to create: an old opera house near the Pompidou Center, in the heart of Paris, that has been refashioned into a tech incubator, museum and concert hall. Starting in 2014, Phoenix took over a space on the top floor, where they installed synthesizers and recording gear and got to work.
In a phone interview from Paris, where the band was set to begin tour rehearsals, Mr. Brancowitz said that Phoenix didn’t set out to create such a sunny record — it just turned out that way.
A few days after the drink with Mr. Mars, the band’s bassist, Deck D’Arcy, called in from a rehearsal. Things were going well: Muscle memory was mostly taking care of the old songs, the new ones were working themselves out.
The concept for the tour, Mr. Brancowitz said, has something to do with “mirrors and duality,” but it’s an idea so hard to pull off that the band still is not sure if it will work. Which isn’t a bad thing: After almost 20 years together, discovering new territory is what keeps Phoenix inspired.
