It was a crushing blow to nearly two dozen established graffiti artists when in 2013 the owner of the Queens building complex known as 5Pointz ordered a surprise nighttime whitewashing of their colorful murals, leaving them with little chance to document or save the spray-painted artwork that had attracted worldwide attention.
But now they will have their chance at payback in a place that many graffiti artists try to avoid: a courtroom.
This is no vandalism case in a criminal courthouse, but rather a federal lawsuit filed in 2013 by the 23 artists who painted regularly at 5Pointz, against its owner, Jerry Wolkoff, who ordered the artwork destroyed.
The artists scored an incremental legal victory on March 31 when Judge Frederic Block of Federal District Court in Brooklyn ruled that their case could have a jury trial.
The plaintiffs hope it could become a landmark case. Celebrity artists like Banksy have gained prominence in recent years, and street art — whether spray painted, stenciled or wheat-pasted — has gained increasing respect and value, even when created on walls not owned by the artists.
The ruling sets up the fascinating scene of a trial in which art experts could be called to weigh in on the integrity of what court papers call “aerosol art,” and to evaluate the graffiti artists themselves. Evidence will include articles on 5Pointz, a building complex along Jackson Avenue in Long Island City that was covered with spray-painted murals by top street artists from New York and around the world.
Painting with Mr. Wolkoff’s permission, artists had turned the spot into an international graffiti mecca, an exhibition space and conservatory.
Preparing to build high rises on the property in 2013, Mr. Wolkoff faced opposition from the artists, who sought to block the demolition. He hired a crew that painted over the murals under cover of night, then left the building sitting for months until it was knocked down in 2014.
The judge’s ruling offers the artists a chance to confront Mr. Wolkoff in court and to seek redress for painting over their work, said Jonathan Cohen, an artist who had curated the murals and helped organize the artists at 5Pointz since 2002.
Mr. Cohen said he was hopeful that the suit might become a landmark case to establish street art as legitimate contributions worthy of protection.
In an interview, Mr. Wolkoff called the judge’s decision “mind boggling” because the art was never intended for anything but short-term display.
The 5Pointz artists followed a street graffiti tradition of creating murals knowing full well that they would soon be painted over by other artists, he added.
Mr. Wolkoff said he liked and respected the artists and was a fan of their work.
“I never thought they’d sue me — they bit the hand that fed them,” he said, adding that the work was, after all, spray painted on his property. He said he reminded the artists constantly that one day he would turn the building into high-rises.
“They knew for 10 years I was going to tear the building down,” he said.
But Eric Baum, a lawyer with Eisenberg & Baum, the firm handling the artists’ lawsuit, said Mr. Wolkoff did not provide legal notice in writing at least 90 days in advance that the building was being demolished, which would have given them the opportunity to protect and preserve their art.
In the suit, Mr. Baum contends that the art, created by recognized artists who had secured permission from the building owner, falls under the Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990, which has been used to protect established artists who have created public art that is of “recognized stature” on someone else’s property.
Visible from the passing No. 7 train, 5Pointz gained worldwide renown for murals rendered with bubble letters, colorful cartoons and deftly spray-painted images.
Marie Flaguel, a community liaison for the artists, said 5Pointz had become a community gathering place and a center for hip-hop culture that attracted artists, tourists, students from around the world and tour buses from Manhattan.
In 2013, artists including Banksy had argued publicly for its preservation, but Mr. Wolkoff ended the debate by having workers slap paint over the artwork one night.
Mr. Baum called the action disrespectful and cruel. Mr. Wolkoff said he had chosen a stealth whitewashing option to avoid further confrontations and to spare everyone — himself included — the pain of seeing the painted walls being pulled down.
“I know people laugh at me but I cried” watching the building come down, Mr. Wolkoff said.
In its place, two high-rises are being built that will offer 1,200 market-rate rentals starting in 2018, Mr. Wolkoff said, adding that the development would include a public plaza with broad concrete walls. He said he planned to invite street artists to return and paint — with some exceptions.
