An article last Friday about a report that said 12 teachers had sexually abused students at Choate Rosemary Hall, the elite Connecticut boarding school, over several decades misstated how many of those faculty members have since died. It is three, not five. Because of that error, the article misstated the number of accused faculty members The New York Times tried to reach. It was nine, not seven. The errors were repeated in an article on Saturday about school administrators who helped hide the accusations for decades.
An article on Thursday about Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson’s diplomatic efforts with Iran erroneously included Bahrain among allies of the United States that have a Sunni Muslim demographic majority. It is majority Shiite (though the family that leads Bahrain is Sunni).
An article on Wednesday about an attack on a police checkpoint near St. Catherine’s Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula of Egypt misstated the monastery’s denomination. It is Greek Orthodox, not Egyptian Orthodox.
The About New York column on March 31, about the sale of elephant ivory by a Manhattan gallery, referred imprecisely to the status of the investigation. The gallery’s owners, Behrooz Torkian and Hersel Torkian, will not be charged in that case. An investigation into the ivory supply chain remains ongoing.
A headline and a picture caption with the Tech Fix column on Thursday, about Samsung’s new smartphone, misstated the name of the device in some copies. It is the S8, not the G8.
An article last Friday about General Motors’ plans to expand its self-driving car operations in Silicon Valley referred incorrectly to SuperCruise technology, which G.M. plans to offer as an option in certain models and is supposed to be capable of piloting a car on limited-access highways. It is separate from technology developed by Cruise Automation, an autonomous-driving software company G.M. acquired; Cruise Automation is not part of the basis of the SuperCruise technology.
A review on Thursday about Bailey Bryan’s debut country album “So Far” misstated her age. She is 19, not 18.
