Robert Draper wrote about President Trump’s first defeat on Capitol Hill and his new attempts to draw lawmakers to his side.
An enlightening and scary account of internal dynamics regarding power and ideology. This makes Trump look like a leaky vessel for the crackpot ideas of Stephen Bannon, Paul Ryan and others — ideas that have nothing to do with the public good but rather with advancing poorly informed, twisted and juvenile philosophies about power. These people sound like a private club of uneducated, inexperienced tycoons who will drink their whiskey, smoke their cigars, pat one another on the back for being important and try to enact bad laws that will harm tens of millions of citizens.
The United States may be an experiment in democracy, but it is not the lab of mad scientists who want to stitch together the corpses of failed political and economic philosophies of the past. These men should have stayed entangled in their lunatic fringe, but their money, audiences and recycled bad ideas gave them the power and opportunity to do immense harm while not suffering any real consequences themselves. Suzanne Burke, Savannah, Ga.
What was astonishing in this article was the flattering tone and language used to describe the activities of Trump and his associates.
The article is making it appear that Bannon and Ryan are motivated by anything but plain greed for power. These men do not have any moral, ethical or intellectual motivations. Their sole motivation is to make themselves and people who they think are like them richer and more powerful.
The article is also making it appear that Trump actually cared about the quality of the G.O.P. replacement bill by making statements like “repeatedly asked his aides if it’s good.” If he actually cared, wouldn’t his questions be more about the policy details? If he wanted to keep his promises, wouldn’t he work on making sure that the bill included the relevant options? Instead this was classic Trump: adding his name to something someone else came up with (namely Ryan). Nothing more!
I’m disappointed that The New York Times, which had been consistent in its coverage of the true reality of Trump rather than all the smoke and mirrors, seems to be a part of the act being put on by Trump and his associates to fool the American people. Shantha Daniel, Austin, Tex.
Elisabeth Rosenthal wrote about how hospitals have learned to manipulate medical codes, often resulting in mind-boggling bills.
Elisabeth Rosenthal’s description of Wanda Wickizer’s trip through the uninsured-patient horror show should scare all of us. Our present leadership in the White House and Congress are proposing to provide many of us covered by Medicare and Medicaid with vouchers to go out and find — if we can — an insurance company willing to cover our major costs.
The corruption of the coding systems in the service of revenue creation is only half the problem. The other half is in the charges imposed by providers, which are all too often vastly in excess of the actual costs of services, as they appeared to be for Wickizer. Fortunately, Medicare controls so much money that it has clout. Richard Sawyer, Danville, Pa.
What a coincidence that I read “The Code Rush” the day I came home from a three-day stay in the hospital. I was so incensed by the shadowy and blatantly unfair coding system described in the article that it almost warranted a trip back to the emergency room.
While I am fortunate to have health insurance, I dread the bills that will soon be arriving. As I read Rosenthal’s article, I found myself brainstorming as to how I might possibly negotiate questionable charges that I know will appear on my bill.
The shame of it all remains that the hardest-working medical professionals — nurses, nurse assistants, maintenance professionals and the like — don’t reap the financial rewards under this dreadful coding system. It’s still the paper pushers and the hospital chief executives. Katherine Silke-Connell, Coral Springs, Fla.