There is a worldwide glut that includes oil wells, steel plants and eager would-be workers, and it will take more than a United States presidential election and a few months of solid global growth to fix it.
That, in a sentence, is the reality that haunts the world economy a third of the way through 2017.
For years, low inflation across most of the advanced world was part of a vicious cycle featuring onerous debt burdens and low growth. Major central banks struggled to lift inflation to the 2 percent annual rate they aim for.
Finally, after an uptick in oil prices in 2016 and an abrupt shift in sentiment after Donald J. Trump’s election in November, it looked as if the world economy might be getting jolted out of that cycle. Some called it the Trumpflation effect. But it now seems that proclamations of victory were premature, and that the low-inflation world will be with us for at least a while longer.
In the eurozone, inflation reached 2 percent in the year ended in February for the first time since 2013. In the United States, a key inflation measure favored by the Federal Reserve passed over that 2 percent level for the first time in five years.
It appeared more of the same was on the way — or at least that was the future that global investors started to account for. Bond prices last summer suggested consumer prices in the United States were expected to rise only 1.4 percent annually over the next five years; that soared to 1.96 percent in late January.
But now that assessment has partly reversed, with the same measure having fallen to 1.85 percent inflation expected over the next half-decade. Measures of core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy, have basically been stable for months. The one the Fed watches most closely, the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, has been at 1.75 percent for three straight months.
A big part of what has changed is that it looks clearer that the rise in inflation over the winter was driven by a one-time recovery in oil prices from lows in early 2016.
Oil prices have stabilized — a barrel of West Texas Intermediate crude has hovered between about $48 and $54 since the start of December, up from as low as $26 in February 2016. There are few signs that oil will keep feeding a rise in overall prices in the months ahead.
Beyond oil patches, the underlying global dynamics are pushing in the direction of lower prices. There appears to be more worldwide capacity for major commodities like steel and aluminum than there is demand, in part because of China’s sheltering of state-run enterprises from the vicissitudes of the marketplace. The integration of highly populous countries like China and India into the world economy continues apace, creating what may be a glut of workers.
Essentially, all the factors that have created downward pressure on prices throughout the 21st century continue to do so, regardless of what President Trump does or doesn’t do.
Moreover, some of the Trump administration plans that seemed to point toward higher inflation and higher interest rates are looking like vaporware. A large-scale infrastructure investment program, for example, could push both interest rates and inflation higher in the United States. But so far the administration’s focus on infrastructure has not translated to specific policy ideas.
The combination of powerful long-term forces and policy gridlock in Washington means that we probably won’t see some magical moment when the low-inflation monster has been vanquished. Rather, the world is going to have to keep climbing out the hard way.
If the Trump administration delivers a bigger fiscal boost than is now priced into markets, that could fuel higher inflation; an unexpected spike in commodity prices would do the same. Geopolitical instability, such as open conflict with North Korea, could work in the opposite direction and push the world economy back toward deflation.
But absent something surprising, it looks as if the most likely course is a lengthy grinding process: The global demand for goods and services slowly rises until the supply glut gradually gives way to tighter labor markets, and the world economy becomes constrained by its industrial capacity.
That is already well underway in the United States, with its 4.5 percent unemployment rate and rising wages. If the economy works the way the textbooks say it should, that should feed back into higher incomes, higher consumer demand and higher prices in the months ahead.
It’s a reminder that many of the biggest forces in the economy don’t announce themselves with an election or a central banker’s announcement, but through shifts in the underlying forces that make the global economy tick. And those don’t change overnight.