William Gibson’s science fiction is so eerily prophetic that sometimes it seems as if he’s creating the future, not just imagining it.
He coined the word “cyberspace” and popularized the concept through his 1984 debut novel, “Neuromancer,” well before the internet transformed human communication and daily life. He was crowned a prophet of the information age and has been credited with foreseeing the ways technology shapes our identity, and the rise of reality television and technological innovations like Google Glass.
The result is “Agency,” Mr. Gibson’s next novel, which Berkley will publish in January. The story unfolds in two timelines: San Francisco in 2017, in an alternate time track where Hillary Clinton won the election and Mr. Trump’s political ambitions were thwarted, and London in the 22nd century, after decades of cataclysmic events have killed 80 percent of humanity. In the present-day San Francisco setting, a shadowy start-up hires a young woman named Verity to test a new product: a “cross-platform personal avatar” that was developed by the military as a form of artificial intelligence. Meanwhile, characters in the distant future are interfering with the events unfolding in 2017, through technological time travel that allows them to send digital communications to the past.
In some ways, “Agency” functions as both a sequel and a prequel to Mr. Gibson’s noirish 2014 novel, “The Peripheral,”set partly in the same futuristic, postapocalyptic London, after the world has been devastated by climate change, droughts, famines and political chaos. The novel’s plot also hinges on technological time travel, which enables people from the future to alter past events and create a “stub,” or an alternate time track.
He changed the framework by resurrecting the time-travel mechanism he created in “The Peripheral” and making the world in which Mrs. Clinton won the presidency a stub, an alternate branch of reality created by a meddling time traveler.
Perhaps not surprisingly, given his grim vision of the future, Mr. Gibson tries to shrug off the prophet label. He’d rather not be called a prescient visionary.
