FRANKFURT — With crucial elections approaching in France, the European Central Bank opted on Thursday against rocking the boat, leaving its monetary policy unchanged for the 19 nations using the euro.
But for analysts and investors — who parse every word spoken by Mario Draghi, the president of the bank, alert to even subtle changes in language or tone — there was plenty to focus on.
The upshot on Thursday was that the central bank’s Governing Council has become more optimistic about the eurozone economy, moving ever so cautiously toward the day when it will begin withdrawing its stimulus measures and, eventually, raise interest rates.
The euro rose as much as 0.6 percent against the dollar shortly after Mr. Draghi started speaking, but it has since given up most of those gains.
Observers of the central bank are obsessing about when in 2018 the bank might begin to wind down, or taper, those bond purchases. A few subtle changes in the language used by Mr. Draghi signaled that the central bank is laying the groundwork for tapering, but that it is still on the distant horizon.
After every meeting, the central bank’s Governing Council issues a statement giving its view on the state of the economy in the eurozone.
But the change in tone was not so significant that it caused most analysts to recalibrate their forecasts of when tapering might begin.
A rise in the rate of inflation would put pressure on the central bank to ease its stimulus efforts.
At its previous meeting, the bank said that an increase in the official eurozone inflation rate, to 2 percent, was the result of higher oil prices rather than being an indicator that the economy was heating up.
On Thursday, Mr. Draghi repeated the central bank’s view that higher inflation was most likely temporary. “Underlying inflation pressures continue to remain subdued and have yet to show a convincing upward trend,” he said.
If the central bank were to hint at concern about accelerating inflation, it would be another reason to expect tapering to begin sooner rather than later.
The bank has been saying for some time that it would not touch official interest rates until after it had stopped buying government and corporate bonds.
Still, there has been speculation it could raise the so-called deposit rate — the interest that banks receive on money they keep at the bank — sooner.
Since June 2014, the rate has been negative, meaning banks have had to pay the central bank to keep their euros safe.
Questioned repeatedly about the issue Thursday, Mr. Draghi said the bank’s stance had not changed. Interest rates will not rise until the bond buying is over.
Without fail, the central bank’s monthly statements beseech leaders in the eurozone to take politically unpopular steps to overhaul their economies by reducing red tape and making it easier for companies to dismiss unwanted workers.
Just as reliably, politicians in the eurozone pay no attention whatsoever.
But the emergence of Emmanuel Macron as the front-runner to become president of France means that a reformer could soon take charge of the eurozone’s second-largest economy, after Germany’s.
Mr. Draghi declined to comment on the French elections. But a question about the vote prompted him to embark on a long discourse on how reforms would increase productivity and cut unemployment. Some countries have made changes, he said, without specifying which ones. “The picture is not uniformly bleak,” Mr. Draghi said.
While also declining to comment on American politics, Mr. Draghi said he was less worried that the Trump administration would take measures that would interfere with world trade. “The risk of protectionism may have somewhat receded,” he said.