WASHINGTON — President Trump is not usually one to turn down a big crowd.
But as 43,000 baseball fans gathered for the Washington Nationals’ season opener here on Monday, the city’s most prominent resident was occupied with official duties, declining the team’s invitation to throw out the ceremonial first pitch.
White House officials said Mr. Trump had a scheduling conflict. On Monday afternoon, the president met with President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt.
In Mr. Trump’s place, the Nationals invited service members from the five military branches — the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marines and the Coast Guard — to throw simultaneous first pitches.
Presidential first pitches have been around since 1910, when William Howard Taft was the first to throw one. Jimmy Carter, a well-known Atlanta Braves fan, is the only president since who has not taken part while in office.
But for any president, there is a peril in trying to throw a ball 60 feet six inches in the middle of a packed stadium, hecklers poised.
On opening day in 1986, President Ronald Reagan threw a pitch so wild that he asked for a redo. Even Vice President Dick Cheney got involved: At the Nationals’ opener in April 2006, he was mercilessly booed while he took the mound.
Mr. Trump, who was the captain of his high school baseball team, is not known as a committed baseball fan, much like his predecessor, Barack Obama, who also turned down the offer to throw out the first pitch on opening day during his first year in office.
Mr. Obama did eventually throw one in a Nationals warm-up jacket and a cap for the Chicago White Sox, his favorite team. He flung a rainbow of a pitch at the plate, grinning as the crowd hissed.
And there are times when the demands on presidents go beyond the throw. Mr. Obama, for instance, was ridiculed for wearing what people called “dad jeans” during one pitch. Ari Fleischer, who was President George W. Bush’s press secretary, helped his boss practice in a bulletproof vest before several of his first pitches.
As for Mr. Trump’s decision this week? Mr. Fleischer thinks it was wise.
“Anyone who has ever studied a video of President Obama throwing a baseball knows it’s a high-risk endeavor,” Mr. Fleischer said.
Mr. Obama was not always as unconcerned about his form as he was that day at Nationals Park in 2010. While running for the Senate in 2004, he agreed to throw out the first pitch at a Kane County Cougars minor league game, trying to charm voters. He practiced by throwing to a young campaign aide, David Katz, at Wrigley Field while the Chicago Cubs were out of town.
While he cleared that bar, Mr. Obama did not look as rehearsed as he really was.
There was also a time when a presidential appearance at a ballpark signified more than the start of the season.
Paul Dickson, a co-author of “Baseball: The Presidents’ Game,” has studied how mutually beneficial that relationship between presidents and the game can be.
Tom Holster, the former president of the Washington Baseball Historical Society, recalled a time when a president’s participation on opening day in Washington — when the team was the Senators — was basic to the start of the baseball season.
Mr. Trump has a more contemporary predicament, Mr. Dickson said, as an “incidental symbolic figure” vulnerable to jeers from government employees unfriendly to the president’s politics.
Some in the crowd on Monday wanted a diversion from the dramas of the new administration. Holly Meyers, a Washington native, was at the first game ever played at Nationals Park in 2008, when Mr. Bush, near a low in popularity, threw out the first pitch to resounding boos.
“I think it’s cruel. I don’t have to put my opinions out there to shame someone publicly,” Ms. Meyers said.
Mr. Trump has thrown out several ceremonial pitches while wearing a suit and tie. In March 2004, before an exhibition game between the New York Yankees and Houston Astros in Tampa, Fla., he came to the mound and promptly bounced the pitch to the plate.
Even though Mr. Trump remained across town on Monday — missing the Nationals’ 4-2 victory over the Miami Marlins — he had once demonstrated serious, if youthful, interest in the game: He was remembered as a hotheaded grade school player who smashed his bat and dirtied his jersey.
When he was 12, he wrote a poem for his school yearbook in a familiar voice.
