James E. Staley, the chief executive of Barclays, is under investigation by the British authorities after he admitted to trying to learn the identity of a whistle-blower last year, the bank said.
Mr. Staley will receive a formal reprimand and take a pay cut; he has already apologized to the board.
Mr. Staley had attempted to unmask a tipster who had alerted the bank to a personal matter involving a senior executive, the bank said.
The case is also under scrutiny by the Department of Financial Services in New York, Bloomberg reported, citing a person with knowledge of the matter.
“I assumed I would get a job and be able to pay it back,” said Ashley Hardin, a restaurant server in Seattle, on the $150,000 she borrowed to pay for a photography course.
Her lender, SLM Corporation, better known as Sallie Mae, knew differently, according to government lawyers. Ms. Hardin had taken out high-risk private loans in pursuit of a low-paying career.
Navient, the company spun off from Sallie Mae in 2014, has since come under fire over its collection practices. It is also being sued by the attorneys general of Illinois and Washington State.
They say that Sallie Mae engaged in predatory lending. These private subprime loans also became a tool for Sallie Mae to build relationships with colleges and universities across the country.
The students who took out the loans have been weighed down by them for decades.
Navient has denied any wrongdoing and is fighting the lawsuits, saying it does not offer loans itself.
When Dawn Fitzpatrick turned up at the American Stock Exchange trading floor in 1992 as a 22-year-old clerk, traders took bets on how long she would last.
Those who bet against her lost.
Ms. Fitzpatrick rose to lead the internal hedge fund at UBS and is now chief investment officer of Soros Fund Management, managing about $26 billion for George Soros, perhaps the finance world’s most famous investor.
It will be a challenge. The company has churned through eight chief investment officers since 2000.
And Mr. Soros, one of the best traders in history, still chips in over how his money is managed.
Ms. Fitzpatrick is more bullish on the stock market than her boss, although she maintains that they are not out of sync on the big picture.
“As an investor, you have to continuously evolve and learn,” she said.