TORONTO — A stuffed Easton equipment bag and a hockey stick were propped against the wall in the chambers of Madam Justice Mara Greene.
They made for an odd sight, competing for space with law books and reference material.
But it is not unusual for those who know the hockey passion of Greene, who presides over criminal matters at Old City Hall, a provincial courthouse in the downtown core.
Greene is helping to redefine the work-life balance in Canada’s justice system.
Along with skating in a women’s hockey league and taking skills lessons, she is an assistant coach of her daughter’s hockey team. Sometimes, when she needs to clear her head, she spends her lunch break skating alone on the outdoor rink at city hall, adjacent to the courthouse.
Greene is the only female hockey-playing judge among a roster of about two dozen judges, including 10 women, at the Queen Street courthouse, opening her up for quizzical looks as she totes her equipment into the courthouse and up to her office.
“You probably wouldn’t have seen that 20 years ago,” said Janet Leiper, 55, a lawyer who plays on a team with Greene on Monday nights.
Greene gives only faint recognition to the stark contrast between the austere judge she is by day and the freewheeling player she is by night.
She is not alone in her puck pursuits. Two male criminal judges at Old City Hall — Rick Libman, 60, and Steven Clark, 66 — play pickup hockey.
Judges here have been known to prefer racket sports, cycling or jogging in an effort to maintain a healthy work-life balance.
League hockey, because of its intense nature, is relatively uncommon for judges. Age works against them. By the time they are appointed to the bench, they are usually in their later years, and competitive hockey is often shelved for something less physically demanding.
Still a few years shy of 50, Greene has a youthful energy, although she is rather late to the game. She took up hockey shortly after being appointed a judge in 2009.
When Clark became a judge 15 years ago, there was a different mind-set about how to manage stress.
The current generation would typically go to the gym, not to the bar, if a trial was shortened.
“That’s our play hard,” Clark said.
Leiper, a criminal and administrative lawyer, said women in the Toronto legal community see hockey and other sports as a way to blow off steam.
“I think a whole bunch of people realize now that going out drinking is not a sustainable way to manage stress,” Leiper said.
She takes a group of women surfing each year in Costa Rica.
“We make sure we get some balance in our lives,” Leiper said.
Greene, who has delivered judgments in cases involving sex abuse, human trafficking and unlawful police detentions, receives positive feedback when she is spotted toting her hockey bag and stick around.
“She wears her passion for hockey on her sleeve and I wouldn’t be surprised if she conceals a hockey jersey under her robes on some days,” the criminal defense lawyer Edward Prutschi said in an email.
He said that by such open displays, Greene shows the human side of judges.
On the ice, of course, the judges are on an equal footing with defense lawyers, prosecutors and police, who are natural adversaries in the courtroom.
The ice is no place to even the score or take out grudges. There is no hitting, even if the letter of the law is not always observed.
On Greene’s desk sits a small gavel. Next to it is a rather ordinary-looking puck. But it’s not ordinary for her. It represents her first goal in competitive hockey a couple of years ago.
Sometimes, the worlds of hockey and justice collide in her courtroom.
Last year, she sentenced the convicted pedophile Gordon Stuckless to six and a half years in prison for crimes that occurred decades ago, when Stuckless was an equipment manager at Maple Leaf Gardens, the former home of Toronto’s N.H.L. team. Using his position of trust, Stuckless lured boys with promises of free hockey tickets.
In a twist, Greene takes hockey skills lessons at the same rink, now called the Mattamy Athletic Center.
Growing up in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Greene was not drawn to the sport, although she had a brother who played.
It was only after taking her son to the hockey rink that Greene decided to take an adult skills course.
With a friend, she threw caution to the wind and purchased all the equipment before even taking a lesson.
She did not skate well and could not shoot the puck. But Greene saw the value in taking on a new skill, which, as an adjunct professor at Osgoode Law School, is important in understanding her students’ learning struggles.
Through the learning curve is steep, her ego has not taken a hit.
“In fairness, my self-esteem is not invested in my hockey playing,” she said with a laugh.
Greene does not closely follow her current hometown’s team, the Maple Leafs, and pays only passing interest to N.H.L. games on television.
Clark, her fellow hockey-playing judge, is a loyal fan of the Montreal Canadiens. The most prized possession in his chambers is a red chair that Clark bought in an auction when the storied Montreal Forum closed in 1996. The seat bears the number 10 in honor of his hero, Guy Lafleur.
Clark and Greene have jokingly talked about being warned not to play hockey in the courthouse hallways.
Clark said he teases a member of the custodial staff — a die-hard Boston Bruins fan — that one day, when the halls are empty, he will take his sticks and ball out of his chambers and turn the courthouse floors into a ball hockey surface.
