SUNDAY PUZZLE — There are few things that make me happier, cruciverbally speaking, than a constructing debut, because it means that someone who worked very hard finally reached a level of expertise that merits publication. That’s a long trek, and seeing your byline on a New York Times crossword is a thrill. So I’m happy for anyone who can do that.
Now add to that the fact that the constructor is a young woman whose debut pays loving tribute to the first lady of song, ELLA Fitzgerald (also known as LADY ELLA), and you can imagine how happy that makes me. The fact that one of the constructor Olivia Mitra Framke’s favorite musicians is someone who died 20 years ago gives me hope for our future.
But wait, as a wise man once said, there’s more. Ms. Framke’s muse is Liz Gorski and her mentor is Nancy Salomon. That’s a lot to live up to, and while some of the fill could be more exciting, the theme is beautifully placed and I think today’s debut is stellar.
The singer ELLA Fitzgerald was born 100 years ago on April 25, 1917, as the title of today’s puzzle indicates.
Two of the songs Ms. Fitzgerald made famous — “A TISKET, A TASKET” and “HOW HIGH THE MOON” — as well as her notable quote, “I SING LIKE I FEEL” and her frequent collaborator, LOUIS ARMSTRONG, make up the bones of the theme, but it’s the center of Ms. Framke’s grid that warmed my heart.
LADY ELLA (split between 68- and 70 Across) sits on her throne right in the middle, and there is a notepad in the puzzle: “When this puzzle is done, draw a line connecting the 11 circled letters, starting and ending in square #28, so as to spell a phrase related to the puzzle’s theme.” Not only does it spell out “QUEEN OF JAZZ,” but the line traced draws a picture of a crown.
Like I said, stellar.
■ 89A: Rapa NUI is also known as Easter Island and the monoliths are the moai, or stone statues made from hardened volcanic ash.
■ 125A: Your “State representatives?” can be people, but on an American flag, the states are represented as STARS.
■ 87D: “One in line?” refers to a family line, not the kind one stands on. The answer is HEIR.
I am so grateful and amazed that my first published crossword is with The New York Times ... and on a Sunday, no less. 
It was during my college years at Vassar that I really got into crosswords; not on campus, but when I’d visit home. It became a ritual that my dad would hoard The Times Magazines so that we could do the Sunday puzzles together when I returned. We’d take turns, and each time I’d try to “crack” the theme before he did. In the beginning, I didn’t have a chance at finishing one on my own, but I did so many that soon I was getting the themes before my dad even got a chance to look at them.
Solving Elizabeth Gorski’s 2013 Secretariat puzzle was a turning point for me. I was completely floored by her ingenuity, and wanted to know exactly how she pulled off such a cool trick. So I started looking into what it takes to make crosswords, and made a few for fun.
Three years later, I found myself with a lot of time on my hands after finishing graduate school. I started to wonder about the world of crossword publication, and got in touch with Nancy Salomon, who kindly gave me a crash course in puzzle construction. I learned so much from her, and there is simply no way I would be here without her tough love and incredible patience. With her help, I went from struggling to find the right construction software to having this puzzle accepted by Will in just under six weeks. 
I’m very proud of today’s puzzle, which honors one of my all-time favorite musicians. The grid went through many iterations, but once I decided on using a phrase as the connection points for the image (instead of alphabetical connectors), it started to come together.
Welcome, Ms. Framke.