Andy Karl, the star of the new Broadway musical “Groundhog Day,” injured his knee during a preview performance Friday night, just three days before the show was scheduled to open.
The moment was dramatic — the show was stopped while an announcer asked a version of the classic line, “Is there a doctor in the house?” Mr. Karl required a walking stick to finish the show and was visibly in tears at the curtain call.
Something went wrong at "Groundhog Day." House lights went up. Call for a Dr. Looked like one of the stunts in the second act went awry.
On Saturday morning, the show’s producers said they would cancel the Saturday matinee performance, and that Mr. Karl’s understudy, Andrew Call, would for the first time go on in the lead role, as the television weatherman Phil Connors, on Saturday night.
The show had no scheduled performances on Sunday, and a spokesman said a decision would be made later in the weekend about whether the opening, scheduled for Monday night, would proceed.
“Groundhog Day” has been one of the most anticipated new musicals of the current Broadway season, after a well-received production at the Old Vic Theater in London. At the Olivier Awards — London’s analog to the Tonys — on April 9, “Groundhog Day” was named the best new musical, and Mr. Karl, who led the British production, was named the best actor in a musical.
The show, produced by Whistle Pig, Columbia Live Stage, and The Dodgers, is also among the more costly of the season. It has been capitalized at up to $17.5 million, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The musical, featuring a score by Tim Minchin and a book by Danny Rubin, is adapted from the 1993 film, starring Bill Murray, about a man doomed to relive the same day again and again.
Mr. Karl is a highly regarded Broadway actor, and “Groundhog Day,” which was developed around his performance, is expected to be a breakout role for him. His last two Broadway-musical appearances, as a self-regarding film star in “On the Twentieth Century” in 2015 and in the physically strenuous title role of “Rocky” in 2014, were both nominated for Tony awards, but “Rocky” was a disappointment because the show flopped.
He also had a recurring television role in “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit,” though his character was killed off in 2016.
The show, directed by Matthew Warchus, is technically complex, with five turntables built into the stage floor; they have jammed several times during previews, causing significant disruptions to performances. But Mr. Karl’s injury on Friday was unrelated to the set’s mechanical elements, according to a spokesman for the production.
A spokesman for Actors’ Equity said the union would investigate the incident, a routine practice when a performer is injured while working on a show.
The injury occurred about 15 minutes before the end of the show, on a night with many journalists in the audience, as critics prepared to render their verdicts. When the show resumed, Mr. Karl leaned on the stick and on a castmate to stand, and added a joke about his injury. (Instead of urging another character to “shake a leg,” he quipped, “What, you hurt your leg or something?”) Many in the audience cheered his decision to return to the show as a laudable example of the “show must go on” credo held by many actors.
Among those who had been planning to attend the Saturday performances were critics (theater journalists are usually invited to attend one of several performances before a show opens) as well as some members of the Tony nominating committee; they will have to be rebooked so they can assess the show with Mr. Karl in the lead role. If the show is forced to postpone its opening, it has a narrow window in which to reschedule; it must open by April 27 in order to maintain its eligibility for this season’s Tony awards.