Public Theater - Martinson Theater, 425 Lafayette St.
If the past is a foreign country, as L. P. Hartley once wrote, Rufus desperately wants to visit it — preferably with an experienced resident as a guide. He may be just 28, but this English lawyer is the kind of gay man who’s more interested in the stylings of the cabaret singer Mabel Mercer than in hi-NRG house music. So he’s excited to meet Beau, a pianist who accompanied Mercer in the 1960s, via an online dating site.
The twist in the Public Theater’s production of Martin Sherman’s new play, “Gently Down the Stream,” is that Beau is portrayed by Harvey Fierstein. For a show about the transmission of gay culture, casting the creator and star of the landmark “Torch Song Trilogy,” the man who wrote the book for “La Cage Aux Folles,” means that your lead actor’s baggage (in the best sense of the term) becomes an integral part of the story.
Mr.  You half-wonder why Rufus (Gabriel Ebert, a Tony winner for “Matilda the Musical” and an alum of “Casa Valentina,” Mr. Fierstein’s play about a resort for cross-dressers) doesn’t grill Beau about what it was like playing a drag queen on Broadway in the prehistoric 1980s.
Harvey Fierstein and Gabriel Ebert in a scene from Martin Sherman's new play.
Add the fact that “Gently Down the Stream” is by the author of “Bent,” the Tony-nominated 1979 drama about the persecution of gay men by the Nazis, and is directed by Sean Mathias, also the director of that drama’s movie adaptation. This may all sound like peripheral information, but it’s impossible to ignore as it places the audience in a hall of mirrors that refracts and amplifies the new play’s modest charms.
The show’s allure derives almost entirely from Mr. Fierstein’s fairly restrained, impeccably timed performance. It’s a joy, for instance, to watch him suggest Beau’s self-conscious bashfulness after his first night with Rufus. Beau does not quite believe that this handsome man, full of youthful energy (though Rufus is bipolar and might be going through an upswing), could be genuinely interested in him.
Maybe it’s those happy interludes that were elusive dreams, because Beau also chronicles judgmental families, surreptitious assignations and affairs doomed by prejudice. “I knew it would end badly,” he says of one love, “because that was just simply the way it was with our lot.” Some of these personal remembrances are also intricately linked to epochal disasters in gay history, notably the AIDS crisis and the fire at the UpStairs Lounge in the French Quarter in New Orleans in 1973 (a horrific case of arson that is the subject of the Off Broadway musical “The View UpStairs”).
The years go by, and one day Rufus announces that he’s fallen in love with the performance artist Harry (Christopher Sears). Beau remains his friend, acting as best man when the couple tie the knot and becoming an avuncular figure later on. By that time Mr. Ebert, whose archness felt a bit forced early in the show, has settled into a prickly confidence that’s well matched with Mr. Sears’s finely tuned petulance.
Throughout, Mr. Sherman paints a portrait of endurance in the face of discrimination, and of how gay men — well, gay people in general, but women do not feature in this show besides Mercer and a brief reference to the philanthropist Judy Peabody — formed new families when their blood ones abandoned them.
Now there are marriage and children, but Beau, while awed by this brave new world, is a daily reminder of the price that had to be paid. Left unsaid, but looming over the show, is that despite Rufus and Harry’s confidence, rights come, but they also go.