ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — Pakistan’s highest court ordered an investigation on Thursday into offshore wealth held by the family of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, but it stopped short of removing him from office over allegations of corruption and money laundering.
Last April, the Panama Papers revealed that three of Mr. Sharif’s children controlled shell companies through which they owned expensive residential properties in London. The revelations set off political turmoil, as opposition parties accused Mr. Sharif of financial wrongdoing and money laundering, which he and his family denied.
In November, the Supreme Court began hearing a series of petitions against Mr. Sharif based on the accusations.
On Thursday, in a courtroom overflowing with government ministers, opposition politicians and lawyers, Justice Asif Saeed Khosa said a team consisting of civilian and military intelligence investigators would investigate Mr. Sharif’s finances and report its findings within 60 days. The five-member panel led by Mr. Khosa voted 3-2 that there was insufficient evidence to remove Mr. Sharif from office.
Mr. Khan, leader of the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party, left the courtroom in the capital, Islamabad, soon after the ruling was announced, and he later demanded that Mr. Sharif step down while the investigation proceeded. “What moral authority does Nawaz Sharif have to stay prime minister?” he said at a news conference at his residence.
Last fall, Mr. Khan had threatened to shut down Islamabad with street protests demanding the prime minister’s resignation, but he called off the demonstrations after the Supreme Court said it would address the issue.
Members of Mr. Sharif’s governing party, Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz, were jubilant on Thursday, with supporters handing out candy at the doorsteps of the courthouse.
There was no immediate statement from Mr. Sharif, but his daughter and presumed political heir, Maryam Nawaz Sharif, posted pictures on Twitter of her smiling father embracing and celebrating with relatives and party leaders.
Salman Akram Raja, a lawyer for Mr. Sharif’s family, said the ruling was vindication for the government, which had said that it supported an independent investigation of the allegations.
Tariq Fazal Chaudhry, a lawmaker with the governing party, said its members would not hesitate to appear before the investigators. “We will also be victorious once the investigation is completed,” he said.
Opposition figures echoed Mr. Khan’s call for the prime minister to step aside while the investigation was carried out.
Mr. Raja said there was no reason for Mr. Sharif to step aside, and he noted that the court had not said that the prime minister should do so.
Analysts said the ruling took some political pressure off Mr. Sharif, who has spent most of his term fending off the political onslaught from Mr. Khan, as well as pressure from the country’s powerful military.
In 2014, Mr. Khan led thousands of his supporters to the capital and staged a sit-in outside Parliament for months, accusing Mr. Sharif of rigging the previous general election. Since April of last year, Mr. Khan has made the Panama Papers revelations the centerpiece of his campaign against the prime minister.
“The bottom line is that Sharif isn’t off the hook, but he’s also not heading out the door, and ultimately that’s a big victory for the government,” he added.
