TORONTO — It sounds like an oxymoron: a silent opera chorus. But reviving an opera that delves into Canada’s charged relationship with its indigenous population as the nation celebrates its 150th anniversary may call for an unorthodox approach.
The opera, Harry Somers’s “Louis Riel,” tells the story of Riel, who led two 19th-century uprisings against the young nation of Canada, helped found Manitoba and was hanged for treason. When it was first performed here half a century ago — it was commissioned for Canada’s centennial — many saw the opera, which pits French-speaking Catholics against English-speaking Protestants, as an allegory about Quebec and its dreams of separatism.
The piece raises thorny questions about cultural appropriation. It is not an easy subject for the opera stage, especially given the dearth of indigenous opera singers. But rather than take the approach of many other opera companies — which routinely use makeup and costumes to transform their singers and choruses into the Egyptian soldiers of “Aida,” the Chinese courtiers of “Turandot” or the Japanese geishas of “Madama Butterfly” — Peter Hinton, the director of “Louis Riel,” opted for something different: a silent chorus, made up of Métis and indigenous performers in modern clothes.
The opera, with its historical sweep and its mix of atonal passages, folk melodies, popular songs and electronic elements, is considered by some to be the great Canadian opera. But after a few early revivals, it went dormant, unperformed by professional companies for decades. Alexander Neef, who has placed an emphasis on Canadian opera since he was appointed general director of the Canadian Opera Company in 2008, was drawn to the challenge.
Mr. Hinton — who, in his years as the artistic director of English theater at the National Arts Center in Ottawa, made a point of producing works by indigenous artists every season — worked to tweak “Louis Riel” without straying too far from the text. He reimagined a buffalo hunt scene that originally depicted a rowdy group of Métis men, removing the drinking and the “tarts” who were included in the original scene and using a new text in Michif, the Métis’ language. He transformed the historical character of Poundmaker, the Cree chief, into a speaking role so it could be played by Billy Merasty, a celebrated actor and writer of Cree descent, and gave Poundmaker’s music to another character played by a non-native singer.
Another problem was more complicated: One of the opera’s most famous arias, “Kuyas,” which Riel’s wife sings in Cree to their baby, was actually based on music from the mourning song of another people, the Nisga’a, called “Song of Skateen.” Dylan Robinson, a scholar of indigenous arts at Queen’s University in Kingston, Ontario, informed the opera company that the song was supposed to be sung only by those who hold the hereditary rights to it.
An excerpt of the aria performed by Simone Osborne in the role of Marguerite Riel.
Mr. Neef said he assumed that Somers, who died in 1999, had viewed the music as folk material “no different from the way Bartok would have collected the songs of Transylvania and integrated them into his work.” But the company agreed to meet with members of the Nisga’a, Métis and other First Nations; to include a note about the issue in the opera’s program; and to recognize the Nisga’a with an address on opening night.
Some indigenous performers declined invitations to take part in the production, not wanting to participate in any celebrations of Canada’s 150th anniversary. Others were concerned that Russell Braun, the Canadian baritone singing the role of Riel, is not of Métis descent. But several cast members of Métis and indigenous heritage said that they thought the process had been worthwhile.
And Cole Alvis, who is of Métis, Irish and English heritage and who plays a new character called the Activist, said he hoped the experience would pave the way for future operas created and performed by indigenous artists — and that the silent chorus would have an impact.
