The Formula One series was off last week, giving Fernando Alonso free time to travel to Alabama on an exploratory mission.
He spent the weekend at Barber Motorsports Park in Birmingham getting to know his competitors and teammates for the Indianapolis 500.
Alonso, a two-time Formula One champion, figured to be an also-ran in next month’s Monaco Grand Prix. It was an ignominious prospect for one of Formula One’s most talented drivers, who is also a two-time winner at Monaco.
So it was not difficult for Zak Brown, the new chief executive of Alonso’s McLaren team, to suggest something highly unusual: Alonso should skip Monaco on May 28 and run the Indianapolis 500 on that day instead. Brown knew that Alonso harbored a not-so-secret desire to try his hand at Indy.
But the opportunity was only made possible by a recent, important shift in the dynamics of international motorsports.
Until this year, the titans who ruled Formula One the past 40-odd years would not have allowed it. They would have considered it a betrayal in a competitive turf war that has raged between Formula One and Indy cars for decades.
“I would have blocked it,” said Bernie Ecclestone, 86, the major-domo of Formula One until he was pushed out this year in a power struggle with the new ownership of the series.
Also out of the picture now is McLaren’s equally imperious chief executive, Ron Dennis, 69, who was replaced by Brown in the off-season.
When Dennis took control of the team in the early 1980s, he pulled McLaren’s entries at the Indy 500, which the team had won three times in the 1970s.
But Brown, a 56-year-old American, enthusiastically fostered the deal that would allow Alonso to drive for Michael Andretti’s team using a McLaren-branded car in the 500.
For Alonso, who has been despondent this season about McLaren’s lack of pace in Formula One, the Le Mans race also holds great interest.
Le Mans is a dream that Alonso, 35, sees as further down the road — perhaps after his Formula One career is over. His focus is now on Indy.
Mark Miles, IndyCar racing’s chief executive, said he saw McLaren’s decision to return to Indianapolis as a plus for motorsports in general — but especially for IndyCar and Formula One.
“It creates interest around both events that wasn’t there before,” he said.
Formula One was sold this year to an American media conglomerate, Liberty Media, with the stated aim of broadening Formula One’s appeal and promoting new ideas and areas of interest.
Down through the years, Ecclestone and other Formula One executives like Max Mosley actively thwarted the intentions of many drivers like Mario Andretti, the IndyCar star who aspired to race in both circuits. Andretti, who said he was threatened with international competition license revocations and other punitive measures, had to skip the Indy 500 in 1979 to race at Monaco. He finished a dismal 12th.
“It would have been impossible to do both races since they were on the same day that year,” Andretti said.
That the Monaco Grand Prix, inaugurated in 1929, and the Indy 500, which last year celebrated its 100th running, are now held on the same day is a relatively recent phenomenon.
Indy’s unusual scheduling before 1974 often allowed a number of drivers, from Formula One to Nascar, to participate.
The Nascar drivers Bobby Allison and Cale Yarborough also drove at Indy, but Nascar’s current drivers face similar conflicts with the Coca-Cola 600 run near Charlotte, N.C., on the same day as the 500. Drivers like Tony Stewart, Robby Gordon and Kurt Busch have attempted to “do the double” by racing at Indy in the morning and flying to Charlotte for the evening event there.
Cooperation, though, was far greater in earlier racing eras; in fact, in the 1950s, the Indy 500 was actually a points-paying event on the Formula One calendar.
So although he would have tried to block Alonso’s dream to run the 500, Ecclestone still wished him well in the endeavor.
