Opinion|What’s Not to Like About Pre-K?
What’s Not to Like About Pre-K?
Mayor Bill de Blasio, getting slightly ahead of himself, has just announced an ambitious plan to expand free, full-day prekindergarten in New York City by starting at age 3, not 4.
He garnished his announcement on Monday with exuberant praise from an impressive array of politicians, educators, religious leaders and child advocates. He had not yet assembled a similar lineup of supportive facts: He called the program universal, although it isn’t, and it never will be until he finds about $700 million in federal and state funds that he has no clear path for getting. Facing the malign hostility of Republican-occupied Washington, and an instantly dubious reaction from some lawmakers in Albany, the odds for this $1.1 billion program look long.
But Mr. de Blasio has met and overcome dubiousness before, with pre-K for 4-year-olds, one of his signature accomplishments. And just because this plan — which he calls “3-K for All” — is a big lift doesn’t mean it isn’t also a good idea. The mayor should press on. People who support high-quality early-childhood education (and who on earth doesn’t?) should accept his promise, and hold him to it. So what if a local tabloid dismissed the news as just so much hot air, using a front-page image of the mayor as a Thanksgiving parade balloon?
The program is to begin this fall in two of the poorest school districts in the city — District 7 in the South Bronx and District 23 in Brownsville, Brooklyn — together, home to about 1,800 3-year-olds. It will cost $16 million in its first year. It will eventually cover eight of the city’s 32 school districts and cost about $377 million a year. To reach full coverage, serving more than 60,000 children citywide, the mayor said he needed to build a “coalition” to deliver the other $700 million in state and federal funds.
Mr. de Blasio promises that the investment will be worth it — a “high quality” education, not just enhanced day care, that readies young minds for productive school careers, and saves money in the long run. When you consider, he says, that the city already spends a total of $25 billion for its whole school system, from pre-K to 12th grade, adding an entire grade for a billion dollars looks like a relative bargain. Which it would be, if the program showed the educational gains he is promising, with subsequent cost savings from having better-prepared and less-disruptive students, who need less remediation and have higher literacy and graduation rates over all.
It’s clear that many children across the city face daunting challenges to reaching their academic potential. It’s also clear that early learners become better learners. Mr. de Blasio deserves credit for trying to improve their odds. The city’s long-term goals are these: by 2026, having 80 percent of students graduate from high school on time, with two-thirds of graduates ready for college. We now know the timing of the race, the height of the hurdles, the location of the finish line. The outcome will be worth watching.