Battered by financial losses and rising competition from low-cost airlines, Cathay Pacific, one of Asia’s biggest full-service carriers, said on Wednesday that it would replace its chief executive officer.
Cathay, the Hong Kong-based carrier controlled by the Swire conglomerate, said in a stock exchange filing that Ivan Chu, a three-decade veteran of Swire, would step aside as chief executive but would retain a seat on the board.
Rupert Hogg, 55, who has been at Swire since 1986 and is currently Cathay’s chief operating officer, will replace Mr. Chu, 55. The move is part of a broader reshuffling of the airline’s executive ranks.
Like other full-service airlines in the region, Cathay has faced growing competition from low-cost carriers like AirAsia, which is based in Malaysia. It has also made unlucky financial bets on the direction of fuel prices, one of its biggest operating costs. Overcapacity on many popular routes to mainland China has also weighed on its performance.
Last year, Cathay posted a loss of 575 million Hong Kong dollars, or about $74 million, down from a profit of 6 billion dollars in 2015.
In addition to traditional rivals from the region such as Singapore Airlines, Cathay is struggling to fend off emerging rivals from mainland China and even from Hong Kong.
“The key challenges faced by Cathay Pacific are stiff competition from well-funded, state-owned Chinese carriers, as well as Hong Kong Airlines and HK Express, which have aggressive fleet-expansion plans in the next two years,” said Corrine Png, the founder of Crucial Perspective, an Asian aviation industry consultant.
While the state-backed carrier Air China is Cathay’s second-biggest shareholder, after Swire, other airlines from mainland China are signing agreements with foreign carriers. Ms. Png pointed to the recent deal between American Airlines and China Southern, the mainland’s biggest airline, which is based in the southern city of Guangzhou. Ms. Png said such deals could drive more regional traffic through mainland hubs, bypassing Hong Kong and adding pressure for Cathay.
In a statement on Wednesday about the reshuffling, John R. Slosar, the chairman of Swire Pacific, the publicly listed flagship of the Swire conglomerate, praised Mr. Chu but highlighted the tough environment that Cathay is facing.
“Ivan played a key role in the airline’s management during some very good times and, more recently, some difficult and challenging times,” Mr. Slosar said.
Mr. Chu will remain on the board of Cathay and Swire Pacific, and will lead the conglomerate’s interests in mainland China. Mr. Hogg, the new Cathay chief, has held positions in Hong Kong, Southeast Asia, Australia and Britain over nearly 30 years at Swire.