Brooklyn’s time may have come. But what of the Brooklyn Museum’s?
With art enthusiasts and donors increasingly enamored by contemporary art, and the borough now officially hot, the Brooklyn Museum is struggling to preserve and promote its identity as a serious encyclopedic institution that spans thousands of years. As leaders there are finding, it isn’t easy to attract paying customers with historic collections.
While many museums with comprehensive collections face similar challenges in keeping up with trends, the Brooklyn Museum is also facing serious financial pressures. To deal with a budget deficit of about $3 million, the museum has undergone two rounds of buyouts and halted acquisitions.
The museum’s board seems to have bet on a contemporary emphasis by choosing a new director with a background in that field, Anne Pasternak. Yet she needs to find her own balance between recent art and the museum’s vast holdings in pre-20th-century work.
Ms. Pasternak says she favors “contemporary thinking,” not contemporary exhibitions, but that approach — along with a notably accelerated effort to rethink the museum’s presentation of its American, Egyptian and European collections — has inevitably required some internal adjustment.
“It’s hard to make a turn; it’s not always comfortable,” said Catherine J. Morris, senior curator for the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art at the museum.
At the same time, as cultural institutions grapple with how to make a case for themselves in an age of increasing internet competition and dwindling philanthropic funding, outside observers say the Brooklyn Museum has no choice but to try to change with the world around it. The city’s other encyclopedic museum, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, to which the Brooklyn Museum is often unflatteringly compared, has been wrestling with the same challenges. Last week, the Met revealed that it was considering charging admission for visitors from outside New York to raise revenue.
Even trustees acknowledge the pressure to attract contemporary art audiences and collectors.
In light of its financial situation, the Brooklyn Museum is regrouping, even as Ms. Pasternak continues to settle in. She faced a steep learning curve when she arrived in 2015, having never run an institution with a $39 million budget — eight times larger than that of Creative Time, the public nonprofit she ran for 20 years.
In part, the museum has been scrambling to replace a five-year, $43.8 million fund for programs and other needs, which was underwritten largely by Robert S. Rubin, who remains on the board.
Ms. Pasternak, 52, who succeeded the 18-year veteran Arnold L. Lehman, said the museum is heading in a positive direction, though she admitted that the financial hurdles are real.
Mr. Berliner also said that annual attendance is 10 percent higher than it was a decade ago and trending upward. And the museum has added 10 board members, in part bolstering the representation of contemporary art collectors.
While Mr. Lehman also focused on contemporary art, Ms. Pasternak has presented some experimental programming more akin to the type she championed at Creative Time, such as having artists interpret the rock star Iggy Pop’s nude body in a life drawing class.
Every category of operations is up for reconsideration, from the costly basement printing press for in-house publications (Ms. Pasternak got rid of it) to how long-held artwork should be presented. Ms. Pasternak has already reinstalled the American collection and refreshed the European as well as half of the Egyptian collections, and plans to reopen the Korean gallery, which has been closed for eight years, she says.
The museum reinstalled the entire American collection in six months, a rapid overhaul Ms. Pasternak called “totally taboo in the museum field.” In the process, she added, the museum explored current issues like immigration and Black Lives Matter.
In covering the colonial period, for example, the museum now features masters like Gilbert Stuart alongside the self-trained black artist Joshua Johnson. “We want to make sure that our audiences are seeing themselves as part of the history of this country, too,” Ms. Pasternak said.
Some curators in more traditional areas say they do not feel neglected. “We’re looking at historical material through a contemporary lens in a way that feels urgent,” said Lisa Small, who Ms. Pasternak recently promoted to senior curator of European Art.
Admittedly, there is one obstacle the museum will never be able to overcome: being in Brooklyn, where tourists and Manhattan patrons will always be less likely to go.
But rather than bemoan its longtime status as stepchild to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Ms. Pasternak said the Brooklyn Museum should celebrate its otherness.
