The fifth pitch from Jacob deGrom in the Mets’ 3-1 extra-innings loss on Wednesday was a 98-mile-per-hour fastball at the knees of Atlanta Braves center fielder Ender Inciarte, who fouled it off. That was faster than any of the 2,353 pitches deGrom threw during his 2016 season, which was hampered by injuries.
“Last year, it felt like all I could do to get to 93 or 94,” deGrom said.
DeGrom started that season with slower velocity, then experienced latissimus dorsi tightness in April and discomfort in his elbow in September, requiring surgery. He still posted a 3.04 E.R.A., second-best on the Mets, over 148 innings — a testament to his resilience and his ability to pitch without his best.
So watching deGrom, 28, pitch on Wednesday as he had during his All-Star season in 2015, and as he had during spring training this year, heartened the Mets even as they reeled from injuries to Steven Matz and, now, Seth Lugo. For deGrom, it helped that the main nuisance of 2016 had been addressed: the pesky ulnar nerve in his throwing arm that caused tingling in his fingers and discomfort in his elbow.
“It was pretty miserable pain, and that’s why I kept asking, ‘Can a nerve do this?’” deGrom said of his conversations with the team’s medical staff. Yes, he was told, that little nerve was responsible for all his discomfort.
DeGrom showed that he was fully healthy again, allowing two hits over six scoreless innings in a matchup against Bartolo Colon, the popular former Met. While Jay Bruce provided the Mets’ only offense with a home run, Hansel Robles coughed up the lead in the seventh inning. Rafael Montero lost the tie in the 12th inning when Matt Kemp smacked a two-run double.
DeGrom delivered his strong outing hours after General Manager Sandy Alderson had addressed the health of the Mets’ pitching staff, as he has often had to do.
Matz, one of the team’s expected starters, was found to have left elbow inflammation during the final week of spring training. Then Lugo, valuable rotation insurance, complained of elbow tightness following his first spring training start after his return from pitching for Puerto Rico in the World Baseball Classic.
Lugo was diagnosed on Tuesday with a minor tear of his ulnar collateral ligament, and he will try to follow a path that has been successful for other pitchers: avoiding Tommy John surgery with rest and an injection of platelet-rich plasma. Lugo was optimistic about his recovery, but Alderson acknowledged that there was no guarantee that he would avoid surgery.
Lugo’s elbow problem once again raised a debate about injury risk of the W.B.C. Alderson said doctors had told the team that the fluid in Lugo’s elbow indicated that the injury had occurred recently.
“Whether it happened during the W.B.C. or after or somewhat before, that’s an issue I can’t address right now,” Alderson said.
Lugo said that he had felt the elbow pain early last season in the minor leagues and that it had later disappeared, but that it had been worse than it is now and perhaps had represented the start of the current ligament tear. He said he knew the injury risk of the W.B.C., but it was one he was willing to take.
Alderson said the Mets had no problems with the way Lugo had been used during the W.B.C.
While Lugo rested, deGrom looked like his old self on the mound. He pinpointed mid-90s fastballs around the strike zone and fired sliders that baffled the Braves. Of his six strikeouts, five were looking.
DeGrom enjoyed two stellar major league seasons, which included his winning the National League Rookie of the Year Award in 2014, before the nerve became a problem.
During Tommy John operations, like the one deGrom had in 2010, some prominent surgeons also move the nerve out of the way. David Altchek, the Mets’ doctor who performed deGrom’s Tommy John surgery, typically does not.
Over time, deGrom said, his nerve became constricted by scar tissue in his elbow, and that caused the tingling in the fingers.
“And when it wasn’t able to move, that’s when it turned into pain, when it was pinched,” deGrom said, sounding like an amateur doctor himself after having received plenty of medical information over the past year.
The earliest deGrom will admit to having noticed something wrong with his right elbow last season was a start in mid-August in which he allowed a career-high eight runs. He coyly smiled when asked if the discomfort existed before then.
Altchek operated on deGrom on Sept. 21 to move the ulnar nerve. DeGrom said the nerve had been freed, moved up in his arm and held in place by a sling made of tissue. Once deGrom completed his rehabilitation program, he had a normal off-season of preparation.
“I feel better than I felt at any point last year,” deGrom said during the final week of spring training.
As the Mets cope with existing injuries, and prepare for the ones that may arise over the next six months, they hope that deGrom and his fixed nerve will help carry them.