Frederick B. Lacey, a police chief’s son who as a tenacious federal prosecutor helped drain New Jersey’s fetid swamp of political corruption and who later built a reputation as a stringent judge presiding over celebrated cases, died on April 1 in Naples, Fla. He was 96.
His death was confirmed this week by his son John.
As an imposing, 6-foot-4 United States attorney for New Jersey, Mr. Lacey smashed the corrupt Democratic machines in Essex and Hudson Counties.
He successfully prosecuted Mayors Hugh J. Addonizio of Newark and Thomas J. Whelan of Jersey City; John V. Kenny, the Hudson County party boss; and Mafia leaders with whom local politicians, power brokers and officials conspired to plunder the public coffers.
“Everything has a price on it,” he said at the time.
In Federal District Court, Judge Lacey oversaw trials involving Soviet spies and payola from record companies to radio station disc jockeys. He sentenced the confessed heroin smuggler in the so-called French Connection case, involving Marseille-based traffickers who were immortalized in the 1971 film of the same name that starred Gene Hackman.
He also rejected a suit by the 85-year-old widow of Bruno Richard Hauptmann, who had claimed that the state wrongly executed her husband in the 1932 kidnapping and murder of Charles A. Lindbergh’s infant son.
In 1978, Judge Lacey refused to free M. A. Farber, a New York Times reporter who had been held in contempt and jailed by the trial judge for refusing a defense request to turn over his notes in the so-called “Dr. X” murder trial of Dr. Mario E. Jascalevich.
Judge Lacey argued that because Mr. Farber also had a book contract, he was “standing on the altar of greed.” Mr. Farber served 40 days.
Even after he retired as a judge, Mr. Lacey wielded his cudgel as the court-appointed independent administrator of the corruption-riddled International Brotherhood of Teamsters, ousting Barry Feinstein in 1993 as president of Local 237, which represents New York City employees.
He was also named to monitor Bristol-Myers Squibb after an accounting scandal and was a court-appointed special master to remap New York’s congressional and legislative districts in 1992 and 2002 when proposals by state legislators had been found wanting.
As an independent counsel appointed by Attorney General William P. Barr in 1992, Mr. Lacey found, to the dismay of Democrats, no evidence that the Justice Department under President George Bush had bungled an investigation into loans by an Atlanta branch of the Italian Banca Nazionale del Lavoro to help arm Saddam Hussein in Iraq’s war with Iran. A Senate committee blamed bureaucracy and errors of judgment for the flawed investigation rather than an overt cover-up.
Frederick Bernard Lacey was born on Sept. 8, 1920, in Newark to Frederick R. Lacey, a Newark police chief, and the former Mary Armstrong. He earned a bachelor’s degree from Rutgers in 1941, served in the Navy as a lieutenant commander during World War II, and graduated from Cornell Law School.
He married the former Mary Stoneham, who died in 2005. In addition to their son John, he is survived by their three other sons, Fred Jr., Jim and Bob; three daughters, Virginia Field, Mary Pat McCann and Kathleen Albert; 22 grandchildren; and 22 great-grandchildren.
While working as an assistant prosecutor in the mid-1950s Mr. Lacey also served as a councilman in his hometown, Glen Ridge, N.J.
As a partner at Shanley & Fisher, a New Jersey firm, he was a pro bono counsel for a Rahway State Prison inmate who claimed that he was being unconstitutionally denied wages for prison work. Mr. Lacey successfully argued the case before the United States Supreme Court.
On Senator Clifford P. Case’s recommendation, Mr. Lacey was appointed a federal prosecutor in 1969 and served until 1971, when President Richard M. Nixon named him to the federal bench. He retired in 1986 and joined what was then known as LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby & MacRae, a law firm headquartered in New York.
Although he was a Republican, Mr. Lacey was under consideration in 1979 for the post of deputy attorney general in the Carter administration, but he withdrew after critics complained that as a judge he had been predisposed toward the prosecution.
Judge Lacey was named that same year to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, which considers government eavesdropping applications.
As a prosecutor Mr. Lacey was best known for battling mob bosses, among them Angelo DeCarlo, who was known as Gyp, and Ruggiero Boiardo, who was known as Richie the Boot.
“Organized crime is, in the vernacular, taking us over,” Mr. Lacey warned.
As a prosecutor Mr. Lacey was notably evenhanded when he searched for talent. Among the last cases he handled in private practice before becoming the federal prosecutor was the bribery trial of an oil company executive whom he was defending as part of a legal dream team of Edward Bennett Williams and Simon H. Rifkind.
The executive was convicted, thanks to a young Justice Department prosecutor, Herbert J. Stern. Mr. Lacey’s first appointment as a United States attorney was to hire Mr. Stern as his chief assistant.