The prosecution of William T. Walters for insider trading had it all: outsize personalities from the worlds of sports and business, a defendant known for high-stakes betting with a history of brushes with the law, the prosecution nearly compromised by an F.B.I. agent leaking confidential information to the news media, and a seriously flawed cooperating witness who struggled to tell the truth, even on the witness stand.
In the end, though, it was the power of the insider trading narrative, which is so appealing to jurors, that helped convict Mr. Walters, known as Billy, on multiple counts of securities and wire fraud. His trades resulted in gains and losses avoided of about $43 million, making it one of the largest prosecutions ever.
Among those whose names came up at trial was Phil Mickelson, a World Golf Hall of Fame member who repaid a little over $1 million to the Securities and Exchange Commission for trading on information he received from Mr. Walters about Dean Foods. Mr. Mickelson was not charged with any wrongdoing, although it came out during trial that he would avoid testifying by asserting his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination.
Another name that surfaced briefly was Carl C. Icahn, the activist investor who is an unpaid adviser to President Trump. Prosecutors sought permission during the trial to introduce evidence that Mr. Walters traded on information he received about Mr. Icahn’s investments to show a general proclivity to use confidential information, but that never came to pass.
The key witness in the case was Thomas C. Davis, a former chairman of the board of Dean Foods who also worked as a consultant in an activist campaign involving Darden Restaurants. He admitted giving inside information about both companies to Mr. Walters, but this was far from a simple case of an insider making a mistake by tipping a friend.
Mr. Walters helped arrange loans of nearly $1 million to Mr. Davis, who had financial problems and never repaid the full amount he owed. Mr. Davis said that he innocently gave Mr. Walters information at first, but over time became a “virtual conduit” about corporate developments.
Their relationship developed to the point, Mr. Davis testified, that Mr. Walters gave him a prepaid cellphone that was nicknamed the “Bat Phone” over which they communicated in code about companies, such as referring to Dean Foods as the Dallas Cowboys.
The challenge for the government was that Mr. Davis was hardly a model of propriety, admitting that he lied repeatedly to investigators, stole $100,000 from a battered women’s charity and used an escort service on multiple occasions. On cross-examination, he struggled to answer clearly, leading The Financial Times to describe him as a “human piñata” under the relentless questioning of Barry H. Berke, Mr. Walters’s lead counsel.
During his closing statement, Dan Goldman, one of the prosecutors, said: “Tom Davis is morally corrupt. He’s a womanizer, a bad husband, and he stole money from a charity he ran.” Not exactly a ringing endorsement for the only witness who could link the inside information to Mr. Walters.
Mr. Walters’s lawyers argued that he was a great bettor who applied those skills to the markets, getting a “read” on a stock much as he could on an opponent across the green felt of a poker table. Mr. Berke said that an appeal of the convictions was planned.
The structure of insider trading cases makes it easy to find a violation because they involve transactions that are often so well timed and lucrative that there is a visceral appeal to jurors asked to decide whether it was just investing acumen or something more nefarious. Mr. Davis carried some heavy baggage, so prosecutors built their case on the circumstantial evidence. They showed a pattern of interactions between the two men and let the jury infer that it must have been something more than gut instinct that led Mr. Walters to place the large wagers on the stocks that he did.
The New York Times reported that prosecutors pointed to the timing of the calls between Mr. Walters and Mr. Davis, including testimony from an F.B.I. agent that the two men spoke on the phone for 10 minutes in 2008 and then just one minute later Mr. Walters spent $9.3 million to buy 462,200 shares of Dean Foods. Although not direct proof that inside information was passed, this type of circumstantial evidence can go a long way toward showing that something untoward was going on, especially when few investors have that much money to throw around on a speculative bet.
The government also called Mr. Davis’s estranged wife to testify about his pattern of calls with Mr. Walters in an effort to bolster his testimony about their interactions. Given his profligate lifestyle, calling a soon-to-be former spouse can actually help his credibility, because if she is willing to support his version of events, then it is more likely to be true.
That is a sure sign that, even if they found Mr. Davis a person of questionable character, there was enough evidence to support his version of the events. Sometimes in a credibility battle it is not so much who the jury believes as whether there is enough so that the witness is not completely disbelieved.
After the Supreme Court took a broad approach to insider tips in its decision last December in Salman v. United States, the conviction of Mr. Walters shows that the path is clear for the Justice Department to continue its aggressive pursuit of insider trading.
Winning a case with a cooperator as open to attack as Mr. Davis shows that the key evidence is often the combination of exceptional timing and some contact between the insider and the trader — at least when there are no recordings of information being passed. Unlike witnesses who use escort services, telephone records and highly profitable trading can be enough to build a case because they are objective.
The conviction means Mr. Walters is facing a substantial prison term based on the amount of his gains and losses avoided. Under the federal sentencing guidelines in effect at the time of the trading, the recommended sentence will be at least eight to 10 years.
Judges are not required to follow the guidelines, and many have shown a proclivity to impose a sentence below the recommendation for insider trading, although that does not mean Mr. Walters will avoid having to spend at least some time in prison. He is 70 years old and has no prior convictions, so a prison term closer to five years is more likely.