Gary Austin, who helped changed the shape of American comedy as the founder and artistic director of the influential improvisational theater company the Groundlings, died on Saturday in Los Angeles. He was 75.
The cause was cancer, which Mr. Austin learned he had more than 20 years ago, said Vanessa Richardson, a spokeswoman for his family.
They include Will Ferrell, Phil Hartman, Lisa Kudrow, Pat Morita, Jon Lovitz, Kristen Wiig, Kathy Griffin, Helen Hunt, Melissa McCarthy and her husband, Ben Falcone. Bill and Cheri Steinkellner, the writers and producers of the sitcom “Cheers,” were also products of the Groundlings.
And so was Paul Reubens. Mr. Austin helped him develop the anarchic character Pee-wee Herman in the 1980s and even provided him with his gray suit.
“I don’t know what my dad or I would have ever become without you,” Chris Kattan, a former “Saturday Night Live” cast member, said on Twitter. His father, the comedian Kip King, who died in 2010, also worked and studied with Mr. Austin.
A children’s theater in Corpus Christi, Tex., and the radio performances of Gene Autry and Roy Rogers rounded out his early experiences with the performing arts, he said.
Mr. Austin studied theater at San Francisco State University, where he began his acting career as a member of the Committee, an improv troupe. He soon moved to Los Angeles, where he was as a social worker by day and pursued an acting career at night.
In 1972, he began gathering other performers to practice and perform for one another in an informal setting. He called them the Gary Austin Workshops.
By the next year, the workshops were drawing eager audiences at various locations in Hollywood, where Mr. Austin and his friends performed improv skits, monologues and songs. He formed the Groundlings in 1974 with 50 members, each of whom paid $25 to participate in the workshops.
The company quickly grew to 90 members and attracted attention from prominent comedians like Lily Tomlin as well as Lorne Michaels, the creator of “Saturday Night Live.” The troupe became so popular that it acquired its own theater, which was completed in 1979.
That year, Mr. Austin stepped down as artistic director and began to focus more on teaching, both at the company and through his own workshops.
One bit of advice to his students was applicable both to performing and just living, he said.
His survivors include his wife, Wendy McKenzie; a daughter, Audrey Moore; a sister; two brothers; a grandson; and three great-grandchildren.