It’s not as if the Knicks weren’t warned; they can’t be surprised. Almost two years ago, Kristaps Porzingis announced himself to America as different, as driven, as not your just-grateful-to-be-here European tall man.
This, of course, was very good news. Porzingis was shooing away stereotypical suggestions and fears that he might be a skyscraping international bust. Targeting the doubters in New York, his predraft destination of choice, he was promising that in no way was he going to be another Andrea Bargnani or Frédéric Weis, two European skeletons in the Knicks’ closet.
Not much later, after the shock wore off that the Knicks had chosen this startlingly long 19-year-old, bedecked on draft night in a loud burgundy suit, New York was pinching itself and praying Porzingis wasn’t too good to be true. The city’s basketball-loving masses were dazzled by his confident smile, his cultural ease and his knack for an enlightening quotation or quip.
Should anyone now be astonished that Porzingis, after two seasons of standard Knicks dysfunction, has begun acting out like any American-born prodigy, trying to set the rules in a calculated mind game of truth or consequence?
Unhappy with the direction of the franchise and the chaos and haplessness of Phil Jackson’s reign as team president, Porzingis blew off his season-concluding exit meeting with Jackson two weeks ago. He rode around Manhattan on a bicycle and then went home to Latvia, where he announced he would play this summer for his national team — despite nagging injuries that limited him this season to 66 games — even though the Knicks would rather he not.
Be it out of his own frustration or in combination with someone’s advice, he has become a behavioral hybrid — a petulant 21-year-old who is also demonstrating a tired-of-the-nonsense leadership and delivering to James L. Dolan the badly needed message that the Knicks franchise is officially on the clock.
Dolan, as the team’s owner, needs to stop hiding behind Jackson and remember that within a few years Porzingis will have free-agent options. In a recent interview with a Latvian magazine, Porzingis, while expressing a diplomatic desire to remain in New York, added that winning would be his priority and the motivation in any eventual long-term decision-making process.
Yes, we heard that from Porzingis’s early career mentor, Carmelo Anthony, who ultimately re-signed with the Knicks as a free agent, talking himself into the belief of Jackson as the franchise savior. Just a hunch, but the Knicks shouldn’t count on Porzingis hanging around New York beyond his contractual obligation just for the sake of building his brand.
Porzingis has played for three coaches in two seasons. Derek Fisher, coach No. 1, was whacked by Jackson halfway through Porzingis’s rookie season. Kurt Rambis, coach No. 2, was widely disliked and distrusted as Jackson’s puppet. Jeff Hornacek, coach No. 3, was promised by Jackson the freedom to implement the offense of his choosing and then embarrassingly usurped.
Compound the coaching carousel with the triangle travails; Jackson’s bizarre behavior toward Anthony, the news media and others; and the excellent view Porzingis had from the free-throw line of Charles Oakley being hustled out of Madison Square Garden by security guards in February, and who would blame him for wondering what difference there is between the N.B.A. and the A.C.B. league in Spain?
In the season before he came here, Porzingis was a rising teenager for C.B. Sevilla, a franchise on the verge of a nervous breakdown. In deep financial trouble, ownership was transferred from a Spanish bank to an American entrepreneur, who turned out to be a cyclone of destabilization, wrecking the season and almost causing the team to fold.
That was then. The Knicks are now. Porzingis knows he hasn’t wasted his time in New York, but he believes both losing seasons were made much worse by a noxious environment. A person in the N.B.A. familiar with Porzingis’s situation and speaking on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to comment on Knicks personnel, said Porzingis had been expressing frustration with the operation of the franchise as far back as December.
Yes, Porzingis might have chosen a more mature way to express his dissatisfaction with Jackson. Conversely, that would have been private, and clearly the point to the petulance was to make this public, and to ensure that Dolan, most of all, knew how he felt.
The anticipated dealing of Anthony and the total rebuild that will logically follow — around Porzingis and other young players — are likely to mean that Porzingis won’t see the N.B.A. playoffs for at least the first four or five years of his career. That is hardly enticing, but how can the Knicks meaningfully improve via free agency when Jackson has made such a mess of the franchise’s curb appeal to the league’s stars?
For the foreseeable future, Porzingis will be a Knick, but that doesn’t mean he has to accept having no say in what they do. Remember, he arrived in America declaring he was well versed in the language and culture of the game. And for two years, he has watched closely as Jackson and Anthony struggled for control, the team president with 11 coaching championship rings and the shooter with the no-trade clause.
Porzingis versus Jackson may be next on the card. The willful Latvian, no Euro softy, won’t be empowered by his contract, but beware the fortitude of his cause.