NEW ORLEANS — Another governor was arrested last week in Alabama. It happens not infrequently. With guilty pleas on two misdemeanors on Monday, Robert J. Bentley, the “Love Gov,” became the third Alabama governor in the last six to be convicted of a crime. He resigned; the new governor has not been arrested for anything so far.
A voter could get cynical about this record, which has this past year been even worse than it sounds. Mr. Bentley’s guilty pleas in a sex scandal came months after the former speaker of the Alabama House, Mike Hubbard, was sentenced to prison for corruption.
“If you get interested in politics and run for office here, the odds are 50-50 you’re going to jail,” Steve Flowers, a former state legislator turned political columnist, said.
Politicians, right?  The swamp. A longing for the outsider who will mosey in and clean up this no-good town is not uncommon these days. It’s tradition in Alabama.
This is what happened 30 years ago, when a contest between leading Democratic candidates became so ugly that a little-known farmer, preacher and Amway distributor named Guy Hunt slipped in to become the state’s first Republican governor in 113 years. “To see the old crowd swept out of office,” a politician said at his inauguration, several years before Mr. Hunt would be forced to resign after a felony ethics conviction.
Alabama did it again in 2010, when the Republican gubernatorial primary turned into a dogfight, headlined by a bout between a Tea Partier and a business-class moderate. Accusations were traded about heresy, against both the Bible and the University of Alabama football program.
Weary voters looked for a fresh face, someone honest and authentic. Here came the Sunday school Cincinnatus: a mild-mannered dermatologist, Baptist deacon. Decent-seeming, even awkwardly so. With the marquee candidates clobbering each other in the press, Mr. Bentley’s grandfatherly blandness was refreshing. How much trouble could he get into?
“He looked like some old country doctor who used to come around making house calls,” Mr. Flowers said.
This is how Alabama likes to think of its choice candidates: as good, common-sense fellas who come in to clean up the politicians’ messes. But the truth is the voters like it both ways.
The same year Mr. Bentley was elected governor, Mr. Hubbard was elevated to speaker of the House. Here was the insider’s insider, the slick-haired politician par excellence; he even had a son named after a former governor, Robert Riley. As chairman of the state Republican Party, Mr. Hubbard had almost single-handedly engineered the Republican takeover of the Legislature and as speaker could almost single-handedly decide what legislation would fly and what was dead.
With a passel of lawmakers who owed their careers to him, Mr. Hubbard was, far more than Mr. Bentley, the center of power in Alabama politics. Legislators largely ignored the governor, grumbling when he sent his top aide to berate them about some budget issue. As his small circle shrunk, Mr. Bentley came to rely ever more on this top aide, a former TV anchor named Rebekah Caldwell Mason. Boy, they seemed close.
In fall 2014, Mr. Hubbard was indicted, charged with using his sway and connections to lobby officials on personal business and hit up the state’s big money men for personal investments. The Legislature mostly stuck by him, but he was convicted this past June. That’s the insider for you, right? Exactly the kind of politics a man like Mr. Bentley was elected to clean up.
Far from having a web of powerful cronies, Mr. Bentley seemed to have fewer allies by the day. Even his wife left him.
“It was a different kind of crooked,” explained Jack Campbell, a strategist in the early months of Mr. Bentley’s first gubernatorial campaign. Mr. Hubbard’s corruption was that of your traditional insider — deals, back-scratching, pocket-lining. Mr. Bentley was so far on the outside, Mr. Campbell said, that he had very few people he could trust other than someone as far on the outside as he was. He trusted this outsider so much that, as audiotapes would reveal, he liked to come up behind her and fondle her breasts.
The wheeler-dealer insider and the feckless outsider: a pox on all of them. Maybe what you really need is a good old-fashioned, true-believing populist.
Oh, Alabama had that this year, too.
His name was Roy Moore. The elite of both parties loathed him. Sure, he had been pushed out as chief justice of the state Supreme Court in 2003 for refusing to move a 2-ton monument of the Ten Commandments from the state judicial building. But that just meant he was a fighter — not a glad-hander or a milquetoast. In 2013 he was back again as chief justice, riding in on small-dollar donations and an ardent evangelical fan base.
The thing with true-believing populists, though, is that they truly believe. And so Mr. Moore went on to wage a quixotic crusade against the United States Supreme Court over same-sex marriage, a crusade that ended, rather predictably, with Mr. Moore’s suspension for the remainder of his term by a state judicial oversight court. That happened last September — a couple months after Mr. Hubbard’s conviction and a few months before Mr. Bentley’s.
It has been that sort of year in Alabama. The outsiders were too outside, the insiders too inside, and the zealots too zealous. The line is starting to form for next year’s governor’s race, and we will soon see what sort of judicious leader my sadder but wiser home state will turn to. Like maybe a football coach.