The bar was in Doylestown, Pa. It wasn’t one of those places that would become the centerpiece of a story because the neighborhood or the venue or the crowd made you fear for your life.
It wasn’t a show where you dodged beer bottles being flung at your head or indifference flung in your face.
But it was the kind of place you hoped would be firmly in your rear view when you finally got that TV credit you’d been wanting for years and hopefully – oh, yes, please! – left the world of $250 one-nighters in bars in Doylestown, Pa., behind.
Looking up at me was the crooked smile of the guy I’d seen on the Dean Martin roasts as a kid, when I would sit in the tiny TV room around the only set in the house with my dad, my mom, my brother and my sister — just the five of us, big bowls of popcorn and tall glasses of milk when everything just seemed to fit and before everyone went away. Everything was in this guy’s face: the plastered-on little-boy smile that I imagined was champing at the bit to say, “We done yet, ya dummy photographer?”; the forehead, shiny with sweat and the spotlight and the fun; and those eyes that lured you to “Come closer, I’m not going to hurt you,” and then POW!
Now, at this point, I would love to tell you that the moment I came home from that show in Doylestown I whipped the cover off “Hello Dummy!,” listened to it over and over and learned countless lessons at the Master of Malice’s feet. But it was the year 2000 — even I didn’t have a turntable anymore. So I hung that album cover on my wall.
Over my quarter-century as an insult comic, I have joked many times, “When is that old Jew Rickles gonna die so I can be the only insult comic in the world?”  As an insult comic and as a family member, you say those things but you realize, whenever they go, it will be too soon. And you actually hope that day will never really come.
Don Rickles warmed my childhood and he made it O.K. to do the comedy I like to do. He made it obvious that the warmer you are offstage, the more brutal you can be onstage. He made it O.K. to make fun of every type of person if you truly hold no prejudice against anyone. He said every horrible thing he could think of about everyone in every audience, and the result was that by the end of that show, everyone felt equal.  Isn’t that the greatest compliment of them all?