Times Insider shares insights into how we work at The New York Times.
For more than 30 years, the Soviet émigré Boris V. Shekhtman taught Russian to budding Moscow correspondents on assignment for The New York Times. “I think I was the 16th!” says the current Moscow bureau chief, Neil MacFarquhar.
Here’s how it happened, in the voices of some other Times correspondents whose lives and careers he touched.
Rather than going to Middlebury or Monterey to learn Russian in 1985 as [my wife] Felicity and I prepared to move to Moscow, I pinged Jane Taubman, my sister-in-law and professor of Russian at Amherst College. She put me in touch with fellow Russian instructors at universities in the Washington area, where we were based. Who was the best Russian instructor in Washington? The answer soon came back: Boris Shekhtman at the State Department’s Foreign Language Institute.
Introductions were made. At first, Boris was not sure he could freelance, though he clearly was drawn to an association with The Times. A generous financial offer, at least by State Department standards, sealed the deal. Soon Boris and a fellow Russian instructor, Natasha, appeared at our home in Woodley Park. Boris looked uncannily like Boris Badenov, the bad guy in “Rocky and His Friends” and “The Bullwinkle Show,” popular cartoons of the early 1960s. Natasha wasn’t quite as good a match for Badenov’s sidekick, Natasha Fatale, but Felicity and I were immediately captivated by our Boris and Natasha.
Within a few weeks, we were speaking short bursts of Russian, having memorized the “islands” (or brief scripted passages) that Boris employed to give students confidence that they could master such a challenging foreign language. I can still recite those islands, sounding momentarily like a fluent Russian speaker.
I never spoke better Russian than the day in 1988 when I returned unexpectedly early to my hotel room in Kazakhstan, after witnessing an underground Soviet nuclear test, to find two local KGB agents poking through my luggage and pocket phone book. Boris’s training clicked in reflexively as I suddenly found myself speaking nearly perfect Russian.
The thing that made Boris a brilliant teacher, I think, was that he knew what you knew — he knew precisely where you were on the learning curve, so he could begin every lesson by pushing you higher.
Boris was the mastermind of an experiment that has been portrayed by some as a scam, though I insist it was not. In the summer of 1986, we convinced The Times to rent us a house in Bethany Beach, Del., for several weeks of immersion. This was never some expense-account junket for learning the always useful Russian words for fresh lobster and melted butter. In the mornings and afternoons we had intensive lessons and drills. During breaks, my wife and I would pace the beach, cramming vocabulary. In the evenings, there was a revolving cast of Boris’s Russian immigrant friends — his entourage of smitten babushkas, former Kiev taxi drivers and literary divas — who accepted a free week at the beach in exchange for tolerating sandy hubris and bad Russian. We finished the summer more confident of our language, and nicely tanned.
Bill is right — Boris’s genius was knowing what you knew. Then, with a suite of tricks worthy of a magician, he knew how to push you to know more. When I had my turn on the phone with an émigré who spoke no English, the object of the exercise was for me to find out the ingredients in a particular recipe. I understood her to ask, “Can you take notes?” I responded (or tried to), “Yes, I have a card here to write on.” Boris remained impassive as the conversation continued and concluded. When I hung up, the impassive expression was replaced by a wide grin and some chuckles. “What did I say wrong?” I asked. His response: “You said, ‘I have a potato to write on.’” Ah, the misplaced stress. He taught me to appreciate the rhythm of the language, which I still believe is as important as the meaning.
I read this sad news on an island — which those who have worked with Boris will appreciate — while studying Mandarin. Everything Boris taught about trying to master a language quickly (in other words, the short cuts) has been swirling in my mind the last few weeks. Just the other day I asked my tutor how to say the equivalent of Boris’s “Chto vy imeyete vvidu?” (“What do you mean?”) — the question he insisted you ask instead of saying, “Sorry, I don’t understand.” The latter, he insisted, correctly, was a conversation killer. But if you could just learn this one sentence, you might keep a conversation alive enough to understand a little more the second time around, and then leap to your next island and speak beyond your limited means. (This is also, by the way, a great journalistic tip in any language.) The tutor hadn’t thought of it before but agreed it was a brilliant tactic.
I did my little introductory “island” the other night at a craft beer bar where I was doing my homework (yes, Taiwan is awesome): “I am an American journalist, and I study Chinese …” Saying it still makes me feel as self-conscious as the cowboy in the old Budweiser commercial who walks into a big city bar and starts introducing himself in a friendly way, freaking everyone out. But the barkeep complimented me and said it gets easier in a few years. Success!