Washed-out colors — moss green, dusty blue, sunlight like aged parchment — give the premiere episode of “The Handmaid’s Tale” an almost fairy tale quality. Flashbacks depict a near-future version of the United States, full of people that use cellphones and reference Uber. But that world eventually becomes Gilead, a retrograde and repressive theocratic society in which the title characters wear Amish-like bonnets. The cinematography and the blend of signifiers from different time periods make it all feel somewhat timeless. (Which is part of the point. This could be any moment in time given the history of female oppression.) But there is one color that stands out: blood red. It’s the color of the robes that “handmaids” like Offred (Elisabeth Moss) must wear as a mark of their position in this world.
It’s a world in which birthrates have plummeted, so a woman’s fertility is at once a gift and a curse. It saves them from being sent to the oft-mentioned colonies, where they would be forced to clean up toxic waste and live short, painful lives. But it also means they are forced to become handmaids, routinely raped in order to bear heirs for the men in power whose wives are infertile. Offred, like all handmaids, is rarely alone. She travels with her fellow handmaid Ofglen (Alexis Bledel) to pick up food at a grocery store that seems straight out of a 1950s Sears catalog, with chipper music and blindingly white décor. “Aunt” Lydia (a chilling Ann Dowd) teaches Offred the responsibilities of her post at the Red Center. Rita (Amanda Brugel), the “Martha” of the household (the domestic help), regards her with little more than wariness.
There is no sense of connection between these women. The culture that shapes their lives purposely breeds a sense of distrust among them. Men like Cmdr. Fred Waterford (Joseph Fiennes) appear in the margins, their direct presence felt only during those brutal nights. But his wife, Serena Joy (Yvonne Strahovski), is always there, treating Offred with open disdain and jealousy. “The Handmaid’s Tale” is best when charting this territory, demonstrating the ways that women become complicit in a patriarchy that ultimately keeps them powerless. Yet, there seems to be some nuance missing. In many ways this premiere aims to cut like a freshly sharpened blade but instead bludgeons like a baseball bat.
This episode works best when it relies on sparse dialogue and focuses on Moss’s face. Offred is introduced while comforting her young daughter, Hannah (Jordana Blake), in the back seat of a car as her husband, Luke (O. T. Fagbenle), drives their car away from unseen pursuers. After they’re forced to escape on foot, Luke is killed offscreen, Hannah is taken, and Offred is knocked unconscious. Moss’s performance is equal parts wounded, steely and yearning. It’s superb work, which makes the decision to include heavy-handed voice-over a disappointing one. I’m aware it’s meant to establish Offred’s interiority — creating a juxtaposition between her biting, sometimes vulgar remarks and her obedient exterior — but the series thus far feels most potent when mining the horror of this dystopia in the quiet glances between characters.
As when Offred walks into the handmaid training facility for the first time and locks eyes with Moira (Samira Wiley), a close friend from college: The memory of Moira becomes an anchor for Offred once she finds herself in the home of Fred and Serena Joy. It’s the hope of reconnecting with Moira and with Hannah that helps Offred survive the loneliness, the rape and the cruelty. Offred’s memories are threaded into the episode in ways that further give the story a dreamlike quality.
There’s a touching moment in a flashback when Offred reveals to Moira that she’s pregnant and afraid, given the rise in infertility. But Moira comforts her — “You and me, like always.” Offred fiercely holds onto the hope of reconnecting with Moira after they’re separated. But then Janine (Madeline Brewer), a somewhat unhinged handmaid whose right eye was plucked out because of disobedience, gives Offred news that nearly breaks her. Moira tried to escape only to be caught and sent to the colonies. By now she’s likely dead.
Just when Offred is coming undone, she finds a surprising ally: Ofglen. Over a walk one afternoon, Ofglen slowly opens up about her life before with a wife and son who were both able to escape to Canada. In turn, Offred speaks of Hannah and Luke. “There’s an Eye in your house,” Ofglen warns when they part ways, referring to a member of the secret police. “Be careful.” But this sudden sign of concern brings with it unease. Is it a coincidence that Ofglen opens up when Offred is at her most vulnerable? Is Ofglen being kind or seeking to make Offred so paranoid that she puts herself in danger?
Whether there is an Eye spying in the household is beside the point. Handmaids are always being watched and studied for the mere whiff of radical thought. Offred can’t afford to let fear upend her. As she says to herself in the close of the episode, Offred has to do the one thing Gilead makes nearly impossible: survive, and not let the red cloak she wears define her.
• One of the most powerful scenes comes when Janine is encircled by other handmaids who insult her as she’s forced to recount a brutal gang rape. This scene isn’t just notable for the brief cameo of Margaret Atwood, who wrote the novel on which the series if based. It’s also notable for the way it introduces a central conflict within Offred: Surviving in order to find her daughter makes her complicit with the same forces that undermine what little hope she still has.
• “The ceremony” ritual is harrowing. Fred is fully clothed. Offred’s arms are held down by Serena Joy, who keeps her eyes on her husband. Offred’s face is impassive, but at times her fear and disgust briefly breaks through.
• Having Moira played by a black actress brings up a lot of questions about racial dynamics. I’m curious if the show will directly address them. Showrunner Bruce Miller and the cast seem aware of how such a change affects the series.