John Ridley has already made some ambitious television, and he’s at it again with “Guerrilla,” a microstudy of radicalism in Britain in the early 1970s.
This six-part series, which begins on Sunday on Showtime, isn’t easy to climb aboard, especially for American viewers steeped in the misbelief that the passions of the Vietnam War era were exclusive to the United States. But it’s notable for its unromanticized view of a period that can be subject to mythmaking, and for its deceptively diffuse buildup to a fabulous final hour.
Jas (Freida Pinto) and Marcus (Babou Ceesay) are lovers who like to pay lip service to black power and immigrant causes but haven’t really done much on the action side. When a friend is killed by the police, though, they commit to becoming real revolutionaries, and as their first act, they bust a noted radical, Dhari (Nathaniel Martello-White, in a terrific performance), out of prison.
That plunges them into a world of revolutionary causes that, as portrayed here, is defined not by grand speeches and heroic defiance, but by infighting, competing goals and romantic entanglements. The early ’70s, like today, were full of bombings and other acts of terror, but the landscape was a jumble of causes and voices, not a meticulously planned, unified assault on the establishment.
Mr. Ridley has already taken some criticism over the series because it does not depict black women as playing significant roles in the movement — Ms. Pinto is Indian, as is her character. But that doesn’t mean that there are no strong female roles here. Ms. Pinto is quite good, and Denise Gough is even better. She plays an Irishwoman whose boyfriend’s death sets the chain of events in motion. Her psychological war with a police officer (Daniel Mays) who presses her to become an informant is the most riveting relationship in the series.
Idris Elba, an executive producer of “Guerrilla,” also plays a character with questionable loyalties. As investigators close in, Jas and Marcus and their newfound fellow travelers plan a major statement, a bombing that they hope will strike at the very heart of the police unit that is tracking them.
The series builds to that climax in an almost casual way, fleshing out some characters and plotlines but leaving others thin. That can be frustrating at times, but it’s all a sort of misdirection that makes the final episode all the more jolting.