Good morning on this radiant Tuesday.
Tax Day (next Tuesday) is near.
So to help as you crunch numbers and power through paperwork, members of the New York State Society of Certified Public Accountants shared a few of the common, or unusual, questions they have been asked.
A gym membership? That’s one that John R. Lieberman, a certified public accountant and personal finance specialist at Perelson Weiner, is frequently asked.
Clothing? It’s deductible only if it’s mandatory for your job but unsuitable for everyday wear. “If you can wear it in public, in a normal situation, it’s not deductible,” Mr. Lieberman said. A tuxedo or gown that you could wear to a work event or wedding would not be deductible, but a mechanic’s outfit that says “Amber’s Auto Body Shop” in large letters would be.
Botox? Mr. Lieberman said he gets this inquiry primarily from men, as a job-hunting expense. The answer is no.
Tattoo removal? Also cosmetic and not deductible, according to Sallie Mullins Thompson, a C.P.A. and financial planner.
Pet care? Clients have asked Ms. Thompson whether they can deduct pet food and maintenance as a charitable contribution if the pet comes from a shelter or rescue organization. “No,” she said.
A cellphone bill? “You can deduct it, if you’re an employee using the cellphone for business but your employer did not reimburse you for the cost,” she said.
And transportation? Depending on your situation, you may be able to write off transit as an unreimbursed employee expense, Ms. Thompson said. If you’re using a MetroCard, for example, to commute to work, you cannot write off the expense. But if you were using your MetroCard to go from your office to see a client and were not reimbursed, you may deduct the cost of that trip.
Bring your calculator and green eyeshade.
Glowing skies and a high of 78 might make tax-filing a more satisfying experience if you move it outdoors.
It’s Day 2 of the warmest weather we’ve seen in months.
Enjoy it. A sea breeze will pick up this afternoon, and there could be drizzle tonight.
• Scoreboard: Yankees extinguish Rays, 8-1. Mets surpass Phillies, 4-3. Celtics slash Nets, 114-105.
• Mets at Phillies, 7:05 p.m. (SNY).
• Alternate-side parking: suspended for Passover.
When you file your New York tax returns this year, you’ll be asked for your New York State driver’s license number or state-issued ID number.
“It’s a new request that clients are a little freaked out over,” said Marc J. Strohl, a certified public accountant with Protax Consulting Services and member of the New York State Society of C.P.A.s.
The Internal Revenue Service, the state revenue authorities, software manufacturers and many accounting firms are taking steps to fight identity theft, Mr. Strohl told us. The new ID request is one part of that, but there are additional steps you can consider.
Take a moment this week to educate yourself about several tax scams and consumer alerts.
And review these tips for hiring a tax preparer, like asking to see registration certificates from the I.R.S. and New York State.