An article last Sunday comparing streaming services misstated prices for the streaming service Mubi. It is $5.99 a month, not $4.99, and offered a $34.99 yearly subscription only as part of a Black Friday promotion.
An article last Sunday about choral music attributed incorrectly the statement from 1571 that “in the choir no more shall be used in song that shall drown any word or syllable.” Robert Horne, bishop of Winchester, made the statement, not Archbishop Cranmer.
An article last Sunday about airline fee transparency under the Trump administration misstated the Travel Technology Association’s position on the Transportation Department’s proposal on baggage fees. The group said the proposal did not address whether consumers can purchase add-ons for checked baggage on third party travel websites, not that they could not view them.
An article last Sunday about the Festival International de Louisiane in Lafayette, La., misspelled the surname of a radio host who commented on the instrumentation in zydeco, a southwest Louisiana musical tradition that is featured in the festival. He is Herman Fuselier, not Fusilier. The article also referred imprecisely to the cultural significance of gumbo. The stew is representative of south Louisiana culture in general, not specifically Acadiana culture.
The Frugal Traveler column last Sunday, about Kansas City, Mo., and Kansas City, Kan., misspelled the surname of a man who works at the vintage store Varnish and Vine, on the Missouri side, and misstated his role there. He is Michael Lais, not Lays, and he is a buyer; he did not open the store. In addition, the article misstated the type of ribs served at Joe’s Kansas City Bar-B-Que, on the Kansas side. They are spare ribs, not baby back ribs.
An Opinion article about tech company culture last Sunday misstated which tech companies are run by only men. It is the top 15 privately held tech start-ups worth more than $1 billion, not the top 15 tech companies worth more than $1 billion.
An article last Sunday about the New York real estate heiress Isabel Rose and her daughter’s gender transition misidentified the university that Ms. Rose’s husband, Jeffrey Fagen, attended. It is the University of Pennsylvania, not Dartmouth.
