Politics|What if the Senate Goes Beyond the Filibuster ‘Nuclear Option’?
What if the Senate Goes Beyond the Filibuster ‘Nuclear Option’?
WASHINGTON — Senate Republicans are preparing to abolish the final vestige of power that the minority has to block Supreme Court nominations through a filibuster. Many senators in both parties now worry that the final and biggest domino — the power to filibuster legislation — will be next.
In recent years, as partisanship has escalated, the Senate has required a 60-vote majority for almost any controversial legislation to overcome a filibuster. Gone, for the most part, are bipartisan quorums that used to pass large and complex laws with simple majorities.
But as both parties have moved to do what was once unthinkable — eliminating the filibuster for judicial and cabinet nominees, known as the nuclear option — senators are now forced to consider if the final step could be in the offing, one that would fundamentally alter the character of the Senate and make it indistinguishable from the House in a crucial way.
This is especially true now for Republicans in control over Washington who understand that the priority of Democrats tends to be increasing government programs that become very hard to end later, as demonstrated by the Republicans’ current inability to unravel the health care law, even with a majority in both chambers.
Without the current filibuster rule on legislation, Democrats, should they dominate Washington again one day, could seek a large increase in the minimum wage, increased Social Security benefits, paid family leave or Medicare for all. And they would need only a simple majority to do it.
Similarly, Republicans could pass large permanent tax cuts, oil drilling in the Arctic or a national concealed-carry gun law. Such power is something that President Trump might see as quite delicious, and something that he may well push for if Republicans confirm Judge Neil M. Gorsuch for the Supreme Court without meaningful support from Democrats.
“There is not a single senator from the majority who thinks we ought to change the legislative filibuster,” said Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader. He is expected to move this week to remove the 60-vote threshold to proceed with a vote on Judge Gorsuch’s nomination. But, that, he insisted, would be the end of it.
Of course, both parties are complicit in getting the Senate to this stage and have changed their positions relative to their status.
“Both parties have been on both sides of this issue, depending on whether they were in the majority,” said Donald A. Ritchie, the former Senate historian. “Bill Frist proposed it during the Bush years,” he said, referring to the former majority leader from Tennessee.
Mr. Reid, the retired Nevada senator, moved to curtail the filibuster in 2013 when he removed the 60-vote threshold to advance confirmations of federal judicial nominees and executive-office appointments after Republicans repeatedly blocked President Barack Obama’s nominees to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
While Republicans were highly critical of Mr. Reid, the rule change has come in handy as they have moved to confirm a bevy of Mr. Trump’s cabinet nominees, some of whom would almost certainly have been blocked if forced to face a 60-vote procedural threshold. Many Democrats at the time also saw the danger of the move.
Even so, experts on Senate rules say that a change on legislation is a bridge that neither party wants to cross.
But both sides have made the same claims about changes to rules concerning nominees, and many see the slope as getting more and more slippery. Without the voice of the minority, they worry, legislation would fall prey to the extreme instincts of the base of both parties, as is often the case in the majority-rules House.
