Beverly Smith, who goes by Bevy, is the host of the show “Bevelations” on SiriusXM satellite radio. She likes to spend weekends in Harlem, where she lives. “I love on a Sunday when you’re on your way to brunch and you see everybody all decked out for church,” Ms. Smith said. “I love when you’re walking around Marcus Garvey Park and the drummers are there in a drum circle — those kinds of cultural moments that you don’t get in other parts of the city.” Ms. Smith, 50, also appears on “Wendy’s Style Squad” on BET and will appear on the gossipy “Page Six TV” later this year.
GET UP AND GO Normally I go out on Saturday nights, so waking up is around 9-ish, and that’s when the plans start: calling up the girlfriends to see what time we’re going to meet up for brunch and where.
BUT FIRST, ZUMBA Zumba is definitely before brunch, because you’re drinking at brunch. Zumba is a lot of fun.
CREW I have a regular brunch crew. I like Corner Social, Melba’s. In the summer we like to go to Food Bar. I like Cove Lounge, I like Babbalucci, BLVD Bistro, Barawine — they have the best music.
BUY THE BOTTLE There’s a big trend in brunches to have unlimited mimosas. I don’t go for that. I’ll usually buy a bottle of sauvignon blanc or Sancerre, and that will be my unlimited.
SAUCE ON THE SIDE My favorite thing to have for brunch is eggs Benedict with salmon, with the hollandaise on the side, because once I found out that hollandaise is a sea of salmonella, I’m just freaked out by it. And if I go to a place like Melba’s, I like catfish with scrambled eggs.
TAKING THEIR TIME That’s a really long and languid brunch.  There’s music playing, and other people will come and join us, and we’ll see other people from the neighborhood, and we’ll stay and dance and laugh and talk. So a brunch could run from 1 to around 5 o’clock, 6 o’clock.
CARAVAN By then maybe we’ll go off to another place for a little cocktail somewhere. We always wear walking shoes. We pick up more people as we go along, and become a caravan.
UP TO NO GOOD My entire life is work, because what I do on “Bevelations” is talk about my life. So if there was a long line at the gym to check in, I’ll take a picture of that and put it on Instagram. And people will call in and be like: What was that long line about? So everything I do on the weekend is content. All that is to say that on a Sunday, I am out and about, or as I like to call it, I’m in the ’hood, up to no good.
TAKE THE CAKE I like to bring them treats. I might bring them a coconut pineapple cake from Sylvia’s or some sweet potato pie.  We’ll watch a really bad movie that I would never watch on my own. And we’ll just spend quality time. We’ll laugh and watch the bad movie and maybe some TV. My dad is 92, and my mom is 89.
BLESSED Just seeing them puts me in a really great sense of gratitude, because I’m like, wow, look at how blessed I am. I still have my parents at the age I am, and they’re still in relatively good health. They’re able to get around on their own. So I’m really very thankful. And though I’m not a churchgoer, I do have a day of gratitude, and it culminates when I go and see my parents.
SOAK Then just a bath and go to bed. After that day, honey, all that drinking and visiting the Smittys — that’s what I call them, the Smittys — I’m usually able to wind down really quickly.