It takes audacity to recreate the circumstances behind a movie whose stature is sacred. “CasablancaBox” — a production at Here, a downtown locus of experimental theater — is a brave, almost foolhardy undertaking, presenting the backstage drama during the making of “Casablanca,” and daring its audience to compare its cast members to the actors in what many believe to be the finest Hollywood movie of all time. And it delves into the factors that informed a classic: World War II geopolitics, a hothouse studio-system environment, assorted colorful personal histories and a series of happy accidents.
“CasablancaBox” was written by Sara Farrington and directed by her husband, Reid Farrington, a specialist in blending video with live performance. (Earlier productions have paid tribute to Hitchcock’s “Rope” and screen renditions of “A Christmas Carol.”) The new show makes effective use of scrims on which scenes from “Casablanca” are projected (the actors onstage recite their lines behind them), but most of the action takes place offscreen.
Amid the movie passages are thumbnail portraits, often in broad strokes, of the film’s players and their loved ones, with multiple roles inhabited by the play’s cast members. Mr. Free’s Curtiz is comically harried and frustrated, not the severe autocrat Curtiz actually was; Erin Treadway’s Mayo Methot, Humphrey Bogart’s alcoholic wife at the time, is more a nuisance than deeply troubled; Zac Hoogendyk — alternating in one scene as Ingrid Bergman’s first husband, the future surgeon Petter Lindstrom, and her second, the director Roberto Rossellini — toggles between blandness and caricature.
The brothers Julius and Philip Epstein, two of the three credited screenwriters on “Casablanca,” are closer to merry dandies than the clever, cynical, seasoned experts in adapting plays that they were. (“Casablanca” began as an unproduced play, “Everybody Comes to Rick’s.”) To its credit, the show acknowledges the presence of European refugees on the set: Gabriel Diego Hernández and Matt McGloin play actors who miss their Old World showbiz glories.
As Bogart, Roger Casey captures the actor’s tics but not his undercurrents; Catherine Gowl’s Bergman, racked by the filmmakers’ indecision over the movie’s ending, invites greater sympathy. The most impressive performers here are the most naturalistic: Ms. Regina’s Irene is put upon but resourceful, and Toussaint Jeanlouis’s Dooley Wilson (Sam in “Casablanca”) persuasively likens the studios’ loaning of actors among themselves as a kind of human trafficking.
Woefully absent is the producer Hal B. Wallis, arguably the most pivotal creator behind “Casablanca.” And yet the story behind the movie’s making deserves to be told. “CasablancaBox” is a noble effort.