Could Legalized Gambling Save Us From the Insufferability of Fantasy Sports?
Credit...Photo illustration by Cristiana Couceiro. Dustin Pedroia (top): Billie Weiss. Brice Butler (center): Hannah Foslien. Isaiah Thomas (bottom): Vaughn Ridley. All images from Getty Images.
In the early 1990s, Bill Bradley, the New Jersey senator and former New York Knick, argued several times in front of Congress that legalizing sports betting would dehumanize athletes and lead to the rampant corruption of children. This was no cynical political crusade; Bradley was a true believer. He liked to declare that athletes were not “roulette chips” and tell the story of a game he once played in Madison Square Garden. His Knicks were up by 5 at the end when the other team hit a meaningless basket to cut the final lead to 3. A confused Bradley heard cheers in the crowd, and when someone told him why — the opponent had just lost by fewer points and beat the spread predicted by oddsmakers — his eyes were opened to the sordid callousness of the gambling world. Bradley helped push through the Professional and Amateur Sports Protection Act in 1992, all but banning sports betting outside Nevada and driving a growing industry that employed hundreds underground.
As it turned out, the country’s millions of sports gamblers didn’t share Bradley’s concern for the sanctity of athletes like Bill Bradley or the children who might grow up to be just like him. In practical terms, the Sports Protection Act has mostly failed, and gambling has effectively grown to be an inescapable part of big-time sports. Nobody knows how many Americans bet illegally on sports, but the American Gaming Association estimates that roughly $150 billion is wagered annually. (By contrast, $4.5 billion was bet in Nevada sports books last year.) A gambler with a hunch about, say, a Golden State Warriors playoff game this month can use a debit card on any one of dozens of offshore online betting sites. If the gut feeling runs a bit more toward whether a specific player can handle the big stage, he or she can pick him in a daily-fantasy lineup and enter a contest to win thousands.
Sometime in the next four months, the Supreme Court is likely to decide whether to hear an appeal by Gov. Chris Christie and the State of New Jersey that would essentially let states determine whether to allow sports betting within their borders. What the court will do is not certain: The debate is largely being framed in the language of states’ rights versus intrusive and economically harmful federal overreach, and the position the Justice Department will take in any opinion it files is unclear. But most in the gambling industry believe that some court case either now or in the near future — seven other states have recently expressed interest in the added tax, infrastructure and tourism revenue that would come from legalized gambling — will succeed in repealing or gutting the Sports Protection Act.
Legal gambling on sports doesn’t necessarily mean we will soon follow the example of European and Asian soccer teams that put the logos of online betting sites on the front of their jerseys. There’s still a sizable public-relations gap to overcome — nobody really likes sports bettors. It’s why the charming gamblers in movies tend to be cardsharps or pool hustlers and rarely sports bettors. In cards and pool and games of chance, the people who get hurt are the house or the sucker who willingly took on the hustler. In sports betting, everyone’s a victim: the teammates, the fans, the innocent spirit of American youth. The potential ruin doesn’t stop with the gambler but with the corruption of the sport itself.
This, of course, is a dubious fear — those who gamble away their savings at the craps table are no different morally speaking from those who blow their money betting on the Cavaliers. And if it sometimes seems as if betting scandals are routine in Europe and Asia — allegations of match-fixing in the lower circuits of professional tennis have circulated for years, for example, as have claims of Asian gambling moguls fixing prominent European soccer matches — the legality of sports betting in a particular country hardly matters when the sharp behind an illicit operation lives in Malaysia and bets millions in a casino in Macau. Regulated sports gambling in New Jersey is unlikely to lead to a new generation of high-powered match fixers in the United States.
Credit...Photo illustration by Cristiana Couceiro. Yu Darvish (left): Sean M. Haffey. Rob Gronkowski (right): Scott Halleran. Both images from Getty Images.
The larger fantasy-sports industry, however, offers both a model and a cautionary tale for how sports betting could grow once it moves into the light of day. For both fantasy sports and gambling, a vast market has emerged for any bit of information that might provide an edge, and its reach has been evident for years, since N.F.L. broadcasts introduced fantasy stock tickers and pregame segments full of references to obscure metrics like “yards after catch” and “defense-adjusted value over average.” Over the past 20 or so years, the world of fantasy sports has broadened its originally stultifying conversations — arguments over how many yards the running back Tiki Barber would gain against the Cowboys’ defense — into inquiries about how games are actually won on the field, whether by examining the way a baseball catcher frames pitches or by establishing the most efficient spots to shoot from on a basketball court. Fantasy talk evolved into real insight.
If gambling wants to shake off its bad associations, fueled in no small part by the scammers who offer their stone-cold lock of the week for a one-time payment of just $49.99, it will need to share all the data that goes into making an informed sports bet. “There’s nobody in this country who knows more about predictive analytics than the guys working in sports betting,” Brian Musburger, the founder of the new media venture Vegas Stats & Information Network, told me. For years, Brian’s uncle, Brent, the longtime CBS sportscaster, always tried to wink at the gamblers watching his games. If a seemingly meaningless field goal covered the spread, Brent found a way to work in a reference to the people who had just sighed in great, full-bodied relief. Brent left ESPN and joined his nephew’s start-up this year.
The Vegas Stats network, which debuted in February, still does not have many viewers (if you type VSIN into Google, search results for “vain” still pop up), but if it succeeds, there may be an unexpected benefit to traditionalists like Bradley who want sports to be about wins and losses, free from financial concerns or selfish individual accomplishments. Fantasy might have inspired smarter ways to look at actual game play, but it has also tended to make the experience of watching sports, whether with friends or at a bar, downright unbearable.
We’ve long since normalized the horror of listening to someone telling you about the tragedy that befell a fantasy team, but if that talk were instead about whether the Cowboys were going to cover the spread, wouldn’t that conversation come closer to the actual, idealized point of the game? There are hundreds of reasons that a team might win a football game by, say, 10 or more points. Each one requires you to consider offenses, defensive schemes or, at the very worst, minor details like the rumors about the quarterback’s recent trip to Cabo San Lucas or what your equipment-manager cousin told you about the impact of last night’s rain on turf conditions — and every such discussion beats talking about your fantasy squad. If Bradley wanted fans to root based on the play of their favorite team, he banned the wrong pastime.