• U.S. launches missile strikes against Syria.
President Trump announced the first U.S. military action against forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad on Thursday. American missiles struck an air base that launched a deadly chemical weapons attack this week.
Here’s a transcript of Mr. Trump’s address to the nation, what we know and don’t know about the attack, and a map of the Syrian airfield.
U.S. allies in Europe and the Middle East were supportive, but Russia and Iran strongly condemned the attack today. President Vladimir V. Putin called it a “significant blow” to his country’s relationship with the U.S.
We look at where countries around the world stand. Some of Mr. Trump’s supporters on the far right were also critical.
• A foreign policy upended.
It was difficult to reconcile the anguished president with the snarky critic who advised his predecessor not to strike Syria after a chemical weapons attack three years ago, our writer says.
But in launching a military strike 77 days into his presidency, Mr. Trump has a chance, but hardly a guarantee, of changing a perception of disarray in his administration.
• The Supreme Court battle is over.
Judge Neil Gorsuch was confirmed by the Senate to the Supreme Court, ending a rancorous political conflict that lasted over a year.
The final vote followed a busy day in the Senate on Thursday. Democrats staged a filibuster until Republicans voted to lower the threshold for advancing nominations to a simple majority from 60 votes.
Afterward, senators on both sides talked about finding common ground to prove that the chamber still functioned.
• Truck rams into department store in Stockholm.
A driver appeared to steer his vehicle toward a crowd of people and then slammed into a department store in the heart of the Swedish capital today, killing at least three people, local news outlets reported.
The Swedish prime minister, Stefan Lofven, said that everything about the incident suggested that it was a terrorist attack.
• Russia and the U.S. election.
Classified briefings with senior lawmakers indicate that the C.I.A. had evidence of Russia’s intentions to help Mr. Trump much earlier in the presidential campaign than previously thought.
On Thursday, Representative Devin Nunes announced that he would step aside from leading the House Intelligence Committee’s inquiry into Russian efforts to disrupt the election.
And Hillary Clinton condemned what she called Moscow’s “weaponization of information” in contributing to her loss.
• A harder line on trade with China.
Mr. Trump plans to sign an executive order targeting the dumping of steel into the U.S. market, a measure aimed mainly at China, officials said.
The move is expected after President Xi Jinping of China leaves the Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida.
In today’s show, we discuss a troubling day in Syria and a historic day in the U.S. Senate.
• The U.S. economy added 98,000 jobs in March, the weakest showing in nearly a year. Economists had been expecting a gain of about 180,000 jobs.
The unemployment rate fell to 4.5 percent, from 4.7 percent in February.
The numbers show why Mr. Trump shouldn’t focus on job growth, our economics correspondent writes.
• Aided by social media, activists are increasingly demanding that brands take sides on divisive social and political issues, posing a new challenge to corporations that prefer to stay out of the fray.
• Twitter sued the U.S. government to block the unmasking of an anonymous account that has posted messages critical of the Trump administration.
• Want to move faster on your morning runs? Here’s how.
• By doing more, you’re getting less done. Start monotasking.
• Recipe of the day: Make some plump and juicy tavern-style hamburgers at home tonight.
In today’s 360 video, peek backstage, fly on a trapeze and meet the ringleader of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey circus, which is closing for good.
Don Rickles, a stand-up comic for more than half a century, made outrageously derisive comments about people’s looks, ethnicity or anything else he could think of. He was 90.
Read about how the other side thinks: How President Trump is like Franklin Roosevelt, why the left should reject net neutrality, and the “grand bargain” now at risk.
• A comeback bid for Damien Hirst.
After years of uncharacteristic silence, the artist known for his love-it-or-hate-it pieces is presenting his first major show of new work in 10 years.
The question the art world is asking: Will he sink or swim?
• Join our podcast club.
Even longtime listeners lament that there isn’t an easier way to discover and get hooked on new programs. That’s why we’re starting a Facebook group to discuss podcasts.
To get you started, here are nine episodes worth discussing.
Jay Leno made a cameo appearance on “The Tonight Show” on Thursday, returning to the program he once hosted to heap scorn on lawmakers on both sides of the aisle.
Today is World Health Day, an annual awareness campaign that also commemorates the founding of the World Health Organization in 1948.
One of the United Nations’ earliest agencies, the W.H.O. combats disease and health emergencies like the Ebola and Zika outbreaks.
This year’s theme is depression, and the W.H.O. is encouraging people to seek and get help. The group estimates about 300 million people worldwide are living with depression.
For decades, the W.H.O. focused on combating communicable diseases.
Against the backdrop of the Cold War, the two superpowers raced to be the best; the U.S. took the lead fighting malaria, and the Soviet Union took on smallpox.
By the 1960s, some members of the W.H.O. felt they weren’t being supported, and the organization shifted its mission to primary care and disease prevention by the 1970s.
