WASHINGTON — Dr. Scott Gottlieb, President Trump’s nominee to lead the Food and Drug Administration, told Congress on Wednesday that he could speed the approval of new drugs without compromising safety or increasing risks, deflecting questions about his past writings, drug-company investments and Mr. Trump’s controversial positions.
“We should reject a false dichotomy that it all boils down to a choice between speed and safety,” Dr. Gottlieb said at his confirmation hearing before the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee.
Democrats tried to focus Dr. Gottlieb’s confirmation hearing as much on the president who chose him as on the nominee himself. Mr. Trump has broken with Republican orthodoxy by embracing a Democratic push to allow the importation of prescription drugs from Canada and to allow the government to negotiate lower drug prices. Mr. Trump has also flouted established science with his efforts to link childhood vaccines to autism.
As for Dr. Gottlieb, Democrats tried to raise doubts that the nominee could be objective after earning hundreds of thousands of dollars as an investor in and consultant to pharmaceutical, biotechnology and health care companies.
But in two and a half hours of testimony, Dr. Gottlieb deflected most of the criticism, and he appeared to be headed for confirmation unless some damaging new information turns up.
The issue of speed versus safety goes to the core of the F.D.A.’s work. Dr. Gottlieb wrote five years ago that the drug agency sometimes displayed an “unreasonable hunger for statistical certainty” and that its staff was sometimes too cautious in reviewing new drug applications.
Some patient-advocacy groups and members of Congress agree and have urged the agency to speed the approval of lifesaving cures and treatments. But some health policy experts fear that quicker drug safety reviews would increase the likelihood that the agency will allow sales of unsafe or ineffective drugs.
He told Congress that, if confirmed, he would be “an absolutely objective regulatory watchdog” and would not do anything that could “besmirch the agency” or undermine public confidence in its work.
Indeed, Dr. Gottlieb said, his experience with the pharmaceutical industry would be an asset in regulating it — a point made also by the chairman of the committee, Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee.
Mrs. Murray complained about restrictions imposed on over-the-counter sales of an emergency contraceptive when Dr. Gottlieb was working at the F.D.A. in the administration of President George W. Bush.
Dr. Gottlieb plans to recuse himself for one year from agency decisions involving about 20 companies that he has worked with or invested in.
Senator Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont, asked Dr. Gottlieb what he would do about the “outrageously high prices” of some prescription drugs. He asked the nominee, in particular, if he agreed with President Trump that consumers should be allowed to import lower-cost drugs from Canada and other countries and that Medicare should negotiate prices with drug manufacturers.
“I have a lot of ideas that I want to work on right away” to increase competition and lower prices, Dr. Gottlieb said.
Dr. Gottlieb was repeatedly asked about views he has expressed in more than 800 articles written in his career. Last year, for example, he criticized Mr. Trump’s drug-importation proposal, and said that imports could endanger consumers without saving them much money.
“I’ve written a lot of things on a lot of different subjects,” he said.
Dr. Gottlieb said it might be possible to “modernize how we do clinical trials” — for example, through greater use of special procedures for “breakthrough therapies” that promise a substantial improvement over existing treatments.
F.D.A. employees and some members of Congress have expressed concern about Mr. Trump’s plans for a federal hiring freeze, saying it would hamper the agency’s ability to carry out a new law that authorized the hiring of more scientists to improve the review of drugs and medical devices.
Dr. Gottlieb said the opioid epidemic was “a public health emergency, a public health crisis” no less challenging than the Ebola outbreak and the Zika virus. The epidemic has “staggering human consequences” and should be the highest priority for the food and drug agency, he said, promising to look for ways to speed the approval of alternative, nonaddictive painkillers.
