Imagine that the next time you arrive at a foreign airport a customs agent asks you to unlock your phone, hand it over and, for good measure, cough up the login and password information for any social media accounts you have. You could then wait for hours while government officials sift through your address book, your emails, your chats and, yes, even your photos. If all goes well, you get your phone back, get a new stamp on your passport and start your journey with the sinking feeling that follows an arbitrary breach of privacy.
If some Trump administration officials have their way, this Orwellian scenario could soon become commonplace for visitors to the United States. That has the potential to fundamentally alter global travel, take a toll on America’s tourism industry, and subject United States citizens to tit-for-tat measures when they travel overseas.
No one has made a convincing case that such forms of enhanced screening would make the United States any safer. In fact, the opposite is true.
The government already has sweeping authority to demand that non-American travelers seeking to be admitted to the United States turn over electronic devices at ports of entry, including airports. Customs officials do not need to explain why such searches are warranted, and travelers who refuse to provide passwords may be turned away. Homeland Security officials say those powers have been used sparingly in recent years. But they are considering expanding those powers significantly, according to a recent Wall Street Journal article.
Putting aside privacy concerns, there are major problems with this proposal. For starters, significant resources would be needed to carry it out, and taxpayers would have to provide those resources. Second, it would be easy for travelers with malicious intent to avert detection by carrying decoy phones or by deleting any questionable content on their devices before traveling.
Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri, argued that the proposed screening of phones and social media accounts on a broader scale would be of limited value and terribly damaging to America’s image as a welcoming nation.
“If they know we’re going to look at their phones, and we know we’re going to ask them questions about their ideology, they’re going to get rid of their phones,” said Ms. McCaskill, a former prosecutor. “And guess what they’re going to do on ideology? They’re going to lie.
