When preparing for a trip to South Sudan last May, the American designer Sandra Zhao’s packing list was straightforward: “I wanted something I could shove in a backpack, that wouldn’t look like I’d just shoved it in a backpack.” Zhao, a New York City transplant, was living in Nairobi, where it’s fast and cheap to have clothes tailored, so she designed the dress she had in mind: resistant to wrinkling, airy enough for the equatorial sun and long enough (in sleeves and skirt) to be culturally appropriate. The resulting piece — a tunic-style dress that’s fitted in the shoulders and loose through the body — hit all the marks. It also, remarkably, looked good. Zhao traveled in the dress; then she started living in it.
At a wedding later that year, Ashleigh Gersh Miller (another New Yorker who had recently relocated to Nairobi) saw Zhao in the dress and was immediately drawn to it. “It was the week of my due date with my second child,” Miller says, so the loose, forgiving cut appealed. (“It doesn’t look like a muumuu,” says Zhao, “But it kind of feels like one.”) The two struck up a conversation. Soon after, they went into business.
The design of the dress has changed only slightly from Zhao’s first iteration. In response to feedback from friends, they’ve lengthened the sleeves (making it possible to tie the dress around one’s waist as a skirt) and added pockets. Buttons run down the front, so it can be worn as a jacket. “Personally, I like to wear it over pants,” says Miller.
Equally central to the designer’s shared aesthetic is their choice of material. At any given time, the dress is available in limited-run colorways cut from Dutch wax fabric: the riotously bright, playfully patterned cotton cloth that is, to many, synonymous with “African dress.” Though Zhao and Miller source their fabric from the continent — specifically Tanzania, Congo and Nigeria — historically, it’s not African at all. Initially produced by the Dutch to tap into the Indonesian Batik market, the wax-printed cotton cloth traveled via colonial channels to East and West Africa, where it became ubiquitous.
For now, the dress itself is also on the move. Available online and stocked by St. Cloud in Houston, Tex., as well as by Merchants on Long in Cape Town, South Africa, Zuri’s in-store presence comes mostly in the form of pop-ups. Two are slated for June, one at Shinola in Detroit and one in New York.
