It took nearly two years, but Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo on Friday reached an agreement with the New York State Legislature to put back together a long-running affordable housing program, known as 421-a, that gives developers a city tax break in return for building lower-price rental units.
Just do not call it 421-a.
The newly named Affordable New York Housing Program, announced at a news conference in Albany, will annually generate 2,500 units of housing affordable to poor, working-class and middle-class New Yorkers, Mr. Cuomo said. In a change to the nearly 50-year-old program, developers will be required to pay a “fair wage” to construction workers to qualify for the city tax benefits.
At a time when housing costs have escalated well beyond the means of many New Yorkers, the program was a subject of contention between Mayor Bill de Blasio and Governor Cuomo. Both have made affordable housing a hallmark of their administrations.
But some housing groups and budget watchdogs said that the new version of the program will be more expensive than past versions and that it was overly generous to developers.
Developers have long argued that the high costs of land, construction materials and taxes make it nearly impossible to build rental housing in the city without some form of subsidy.
Under the updated program, developers of market-rate rental buildings of 300 units or more in certain neighborhoods can get a full property tax exemption for 35 years if they set aside 25 to 30 percent of the units for low- and moderate-income tenants. Earlier versions of the program had shorter exemption periods.
The program is to remain in effect until at least 2022.
Additionally, the program requires developers to pay construction workers an average of $60 an hour in wages, benefits and payroll taxes at projects below 96th Street in Manhattan, and $45 an hour at projects within a mile of the East River waterfront, an area gentrifying rapidly.
Projects outside those zones can “opt in” to the program if they fulfill the requirements.
The city comptroller will determine whether developers have complied with the minimum-wage standards — a challenge given that wages during a typical two-year construction period can vary widely depending on who is on site, such as high-paid crane operators or electricians, or lower-wage laborers.
The State Assembly, Mr. Cuomo and the de Blasio administration defeated a push by Senate Republicans to make luxury condominiums eligible for tax breaks, a provision that by some estimates would have raised the cost of the program by $1 billion over 10 years.
The city hailed the deal, even as the program’s cost per unit of affordable housing rose above the levels estimated under the de Blasio administration’s 2015 proposal for changing the 421-a.
The city plan, the result of long negotiations with the Real Estate Board of New York, the development industry’s powerful lobbying arm, was scuttled by the governor, in part because it did not have a requirement to pay union wages.
The city estimates that the housing program will cost $82 million a year more in unrealized taxes than it would have under the 2015 proposal.
Currently, the 421-a tax breaks cost the city about $1.4 billion a year in forgiven taxes.
The group predicted a “rush of developers” applying for the new program, both those with new projects and those seeking to gain benefits for buildings started 18 months ago.
But the agreement last week also unlocked $2.5 billion for a state program intended to build 100,000 units of affordable housing and 6,000 units of supportive housing throughout the state. Given the anticipated cuts to federal housing programs, Rafael E. Cestero, president of the Community Preservation Corporation and a former city housing commissioner, said the money could not have come at a better time.