MEXICO CITY — There was a time when Donald J. Trump — first as a candidate and then as president — could rile Mexico without really trying.
His threats to build a border wall and make Mexicans pay for it would ignite firestorms of patriotic fury and resentment. His promises to deport millions of undocumented immigrants would send politicians off to draft contingency plans. His vows to re-engineer the North American Free Trade Agreement and bring Mexico to heel would shake the foundations of the state.
But on Wednesday, the suggestion from the White House that Mr. Trump was finalizing an executive order to begin the process of withdrawing the United States from Nafta revealed a different, more experienced Mexico: one learning to live with what it considers Mr. Trump’s bluster and stagecraft, and not inclined to react publicly too quickly.
Mr. Peña Nieto then issued a brief statement of his own, saying he, Mr. Trump and Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada had a “shared objective to modernize” the trade agreement.
On Thursday, Mr. Trump said on Twitter that he had received phone calls from Mr. Peña Nieto and Mr. Trudeau and agreed to renegotiate the treaty instead of pulling out.
Mr. Trump had also come under pressure from congressional Republicans and business leaders alarmed by the possibility that he would move hastily toward a withdrawal.
The day’s vicissitudes left many Mexicans with a bit of whiplash — the Mexican peso took a nose-dive — but also with a mild sense of satisfaction that they were finally learning to read the American president.
In interviews with politicians, analysts, economists, business leaders and former diplomats, a general sentiment had emerged throughout the day on Wednesday that Mr. Trump’s threat to withdraw from the treaty using an executive order was mostly a piece of political theater — aimed as much at his voting base as at Mexico and Canada — and not something to get terribly worked up about.
Some speculated that the news of the order was a controlled leak intended to gauge the reaction of the other Nafta parties and put them on the defensive.
Still, the news came as a surprise to many who had been watching the process closely.
After months of tough talk by Mr. Trump, his administration had appeared to be on track to begin negotiations over Nafta as soon as this summer. Administration officials circulated a draft of a letter in March that laid out goals in a negotiation, an obligatory step in the process. The letter suggested a far more modest approach than Mr. Trump had threatened, leaving much of Nafta intact.
Before talks can begin, the Trump administration still needs to consult with several congressional committees and formally notify Congress of its intention to renegotiate the treaty.
In recent weeks, administration officials had expressed frustration with the pace of that process, which has been slowed in part by delays in the confirmation of the United States trade representative, Robert Lighthizer.
During the day on Wednesday, administration officials said the proposed executive order would open a different process for withdrawal, with a six-month countdown. But it would not have stopped the White House from continuing to pursue negotiations, leaving many observers in Mexico to interpret the threat of an order as a transparent pre-negotiation strategy.
Some speculated that Mr. Trump was trying to look tough to appeal to his voting base, particularly considering his mixed record in achieving his goals as the 100-day mark of his term approaches.
“Clearly, in Mexico, this should be seen as a type of tantrum of a spoiled child who did not get the presents he expected for his birthday, for the 100 days,” said Rafael Fernández de Castro, an expert on United States-Mexico relations at the Autonomous Technological Institute of Mexico in Mexico City.
The Peña Nieto administration has publicly adopted a tough stance on Nafta, declaring its readiness to update the treaty but also its willingness to walk away from the table, and from the trade agreement altogether. In recent weeks, Mr. Peña Nieto has deployed proxies, including his foreign minister and his ambassador, to make public statements reaffirming those positions.
Mexicans feel emboldened by the support they have received from prominent members of the American business community and elected officials, including Republicans on Capitol Hill, who have increasingly voiced their backing of Nafta and of the United States’ alliance with Mexico.
At the same time, mindful of Mr. Trump’s hard-line threats and unpredictability, Mexico has been exploring new trade deals with other countries and modernizing old ones.
In congressional testimony in Mexico City on Tuesday, Luis Videgaray, Mexico’s foreign minister, reaffirmed the Peña Nieto administration’s position.
In an interview Thursday on Radio Fórmula, Mr. Videgaray described the call between Mr. Trump and Mr. Peña Nieto as “cordial.” The Mexican president told Mr. Trump that he shared the Americans’ desire to begin trade negotiations as soon as possible, but he also emphasized that Mexico was “looking for a negotiation that is good for Mexico, a win-win,” Mr. Videgaray said.
An order that started an American withdrawal from the treaty would have had “a very negative effect on Mexico and practically canceled any possibility for a constructive negotiation,” he said.
Mr. Sarukhán, the former ambassador, said the Mexican government had once faced Mr. Trump like “a reindeer caught in the headlights in the middle of the woods,” but had since adopted a more mature position, carefully picking its battles and issuing “surgical, precision-delivered statements on the relationship and playing the grown-up.” This stance, he said, was on display Wednesday.