342 pp. Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill. $26.95.
Lauren Grodstein takes a different approach with her fourth novel, “Our Short History,” an unabashed tear duct rooter that should come with its own box of Kleenex Ultra Soft and a plush toy from the American Cancer Society. What sets Grodstein’s novel apart is that the cancer diagnosis switches places: Jacob Neulander, the 6-year-old boy at the center of the book, is cancer-free, while his mother, Karen, a hard-charging, 43-year-old political consultant who raised Jake on her own, has recently been found to have late-stage ovarian cancer and is facing a grim prognosis. With the time Karen has left, she undertakes to write her son a book and fill it with everything she wants him to know: a catalog of the things that have made her happy; the story of how he was named; a record of the final campaign she runs for Jimmy (Ace) Reynolds, a philandering City Council member from the Bronx; and an account of how, kicking and screaming, she allows Jake to start spending time with his biological father, a one-term congressman from New Jersey who broke Karen’s heart and lives with his new wife along the Palisades. If the conceit of having Karen write an entire book to Jake in direct address gets clunky in places, particularly after her remission gives way to recurrence and her condition deteriorates, it is consistent with “sick lit” as a genre and keeps the pages turning.
“I plan to be honest here,” Karen promises at the novel’s beginning. “I plan to be excruciatingly, extraordinarily honest. I will not edit out the truth; I will not try to make myself look better than I really was. Than I really am.” This ethic of honesty compels Karen to confess uncomfortable truths to Jake — “the night you were born was not the best night of my life,” she writes; “I was terrified, I was tired, I was sad” — and, especially, to give herself free rein to record the turmoil of feelings that erupt after Jake and his father meet for the first time and get along famously. They bond over Playmobil and Star Wars; she realizes, watching the two of them together, that Jake is “exactly like him.” Karen seethes and lets her paranoia run wild. She imagines Jake posing for a Christmas card with his new family after she’s gone; she yells at him when he suggests that his father’s wife (with her “Calista Gingrich hair”) would make him snacks on demand. This primal eruption of maternal jealousy and rage is the dramatic high point of the novel — “I am your only mother!” Karen howls in a $2,000 wig, a Wii controller clutched in her hand. The rest of “Our Short History,” unfortunately, is content to deliver the tamer pleasures of “sick lit” for adults.