Officials at Amtrak, which owns and operates Penn Station, say the infrastructure at the terminal has become so brittle that it urgently needs an overhaul. The closings would probably prompt extensive delays and route changes for two of the nation’s largest railroads, New Jersey Transit and the Long Island Rail Road, which rely on Penn Station.
A decision to upend the lives of so many riders would follow years of failures to invest adequately in aging infrastructure even as ridership boomed in the busiest region of rail travel in the country, and it would be a break from Amtrak’s traditional strategy of trying to minimize disruptions.
Amtrak leaders have discussed closing several tracks at Penn Station for days or weeks at a time in the coming months, according to officials who were briefed on the discussions but did not want to talk publicly about the plan. Weekday track closings would undoubtedly lead to misery, but officials said Amtrak would try to minimize the inconvenience.
As Amtrak officials worked to complete their plans, commuters suffered yet another round of delays on Tuesday when an Amtrak train became stuck at Penn Station during the morning commute, and power problems plagued the evening commute. On Monday, there were major delays because of track inspections and maintenance work at the station.
In a sign of the problems the region faces, New Jersey Transit warned riders on Monday to expect delays for the foreseeable future because of Amtrak’s continuing work at the station. New Jersey Transit blamed the delays on speed restrictions at the station, but Amtrak said the delays were due to specific work on a track foundation and a rail connection.
On Tuesday, commuters took to social media to express dismay and alarm about the possibility of further train disruptions.
Nancy Eve Dalin, 40, a legal secretary and New Jersey Transit commuter, said she had mixed emotions because she knew the repairs were needed.
In the past, Amtrak has shied from closing tracks during the busiest travel periods. But that approach has limited the railroad to the work its crews can fit into the overnight hours and a 55-hour period on the weekends, when traffic is lighter.
Amtrak officials say the time has come to deviate from that upset-the-fewest-customers policy and accept more cancellations and rescheduling in the short term to prevent further derailments, which could result in injuries or worse to passengers and rail workers.
The shift also comes at a time of harsh attacks on Amtrak’s management from Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey and officials at New Jersey Transit. Mr. Christie threatened to withhold payments to Amtrak for the shared use of its rails and station platforms.
Some Amtrak executives viewed that criticism as the breaking of a compact. After all, they said, it was Mr. Christie who in 2010 unilaterally halted an ambitious project to alleviate commuting congestion by building a rail tunnel between New Jersey and Manhattan. But Amtrak officials have mostly refrained from firing back at Mr. Christie because New Jersey is a partner in Amtrak’s new plan to build a tunnel under the Hudson River.
Brian Murray, a spokesman for Mr. Christie, referred questions about Amtrak’s plans to New Jersey Transit.
The derailment of a New Jersey Transit train on April 3 was caused by weak timber ties that Amtrak knew needed to be fixed. The accident closed eight of Penn Station’s 21 tracks, setting off a cascade of delays across the three railroads — the type of disruptions the track closings under discussion could create.
Since the Federal Railroad Administration found track defects at Penn Station this month, Amtrak has imposed a 10-mile-per-hour speed restriction for the entire station, down from 15 m.p.h., until Amtrak finishes track inspections and repairs, said Marc Willis, a spokesman for the railroad administration.
In an interview last week, Amtrak’s new chief executive, Charles W. Moorman, hinted at the disruptions riders would be likely to face. Mr. Moorman said he had walked through the area at Penn Station where the derailments happened and had determined that Amtrak had to make more long-term repairs soon.
“My conclusion is that what we really need to do down there is just bite the bullet and start a much more significant renewal program,” he said.
The problems in recent weeks proved to Mr. Moorman that commuters would not tolerate another derailment, he said.
Beth DeFalco, a spokeswoman for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which oversees the Long Island Rail Road, said the agencies would review Amtrak’s plan when it was released.
“We expect Amtrak will coordinate with the M.T.A. and L.I.R.R. as they’ve committed to do to make the improvements necessary while minimizing impact to riders,” she said.
Steven H. Santoro, New Jersey Transit’s executive director, met with Mr. Moorman last week, said Nancy Snyder, a spokeswoman for New Jersey Transit. Mr. Santoro discussed “the importance of New Jersey Transit having a voice at the table around prioritization of track and other maintenance,” along with tunnel evacuation procedures and customer flow at Penn Station, Ms. Snyder said.
After the meeting, Mr. Santoro sent a letter to Mr. Moorman on Friday asking for a trove of information about Amtrak’s plans for Penn Station and its evaluation of the infrastructure on the Northeast Corridor.
“New Jersey Transit is willing to continue investing in the maintenance of the Northeast Corridor, provided that Amtrak carries out its end of the bargain and actually maintains the infrastructure in the required state of good repair,” the letter said.
Amtrak is facing a series of pressing challenges as it works to upgrade its aging infrastructure. President Trump’s budget proposed eliminating federal funding for its long-distance routes and slashing a grant program that Amtrak was counting on to build a new Hudson River rail tunnel. The tunnel proposal is the railroad’s top priority after the existing, century-old tunnel was damaged by Hurricane Sandy in 2012.
Stephen Burkert, a New Jersey Transit union leader and a longtime conductor, questioned why repairs had to be done during daylight. The track closings might force some trains to be redirected to Hoboken Terminal in New Jersey, which is still partly closed because of damage from the fatal derailment of a New Jersey Transit train at the station last year.
Amtrak should seek suggestions from workers about how to minimize disruptions because they know the system and regularly interact with riders who are growing increasingly frustrated, Mr. Burkert said.
“The commuters have dealt with more than their share of commuting nightmares connected to the multiple track issues,” he said.