Mutual Funds|Emerging Market Stocks Have Come Roaring Back. Can They Go Any Higher?
Emerging Market Stocks Have Come Roaring Back. Can They Go Any Higher?
Propelled by a rebound in commodity prices, emerging market stocks have roared back over the last year. But if the sector is to continue to prosper, many fund managers say, it will need to be fueled by other factors.
Weak commodity prices, which contributed to emerging market mutual and exchange-traded fund losses in 2013, 2014 and 2015, helped these funds post double-digit gains in the first quarter of this year. The funds are now up almost 17 percent in the 12 months through March.
“What has been driving emerging market returns in the last year was the recovery in commodity prices, which led to a number of commodity producers’ doing well,” said Arjun Divecha, head of the emerging markets equity team at the asset management firm GMO.
This explains why funds focused on oil-dependent markets have risen more than emerging market equities as a whole: iShares MSCI Russia Capped E.T.F., for instance, is up more than 28 percent over the 12 months through March, while iShares MSCI Brazil Capped E.T.F. is up nearly 39 percent as oil prices have climbed 37 percent.
But commodity bets are notoriously volatile and will take you only so far with emerging market stocks, several fund managers say. Several other strategies may make more sense for the longer term.
For example, Michael Kass, manager of the Baron Emerging Markets Fund, favors what he calls EM 2.0 — companies led by “value creators” working in cutting-edge areas like software development, machine learning, artificial intelligence, biotechnology and other health sciences. “The biggest profits will be found in high-profit-margin companies trying to gain market share in all those areas,” he said.
One such company is China’s Alibaba Group, which like Amazon.com is branching out beyond online retail into areas like cloud computing, machine learning and robotic delivery mechanisms like drones and driverless cars. Alibaba is the top holding in the Baron Emerging Markets Fund.
An added benefit of owning these types of high-quality growth stocks, Mr. Kass said, is that they are likely to hold up better than their peers if emerging markets take another spill — one set off, perhaps, by rising interest rates in China and the United States.
Innovation is not the only factor that may determine the success of investments in the developing world. “One focus now is on structural reform stories,” said Ben Kirby, co-manager of the Thornburg Developing World Fund. He points out that many countries have been trying to restructure their economies for more sustainable growth.
China has embarked on “supply-side reforms” to tackle overcapacity in several crucial industries, including steel and coal. “They’re shutting down idle capacity and high-cost producers,” Mr. Kirby said. In fact, he said, this may be one reason commodity prices have started to lift as Chinese supply is being restricted.
India has also embarked on an economic reform effort. It just passed a national goods and services tax, which will replace and untangle a web of local- and state-levied fees. The hope is that the tax shift will promote business activity across the vast country’s different regions, while raising tax revenues.
The tax policy changes and India’s recent demonetization efforts — which pulled popular rupee notes from the market in an effort to root out counterfeiting and black-market activity — are expected to drive deposits into the formal banking sector and bolster the formal economy.
What type of company would benefit from that? “One stock we’ve added to lately is ICICI Bank,” Mr. Kirby said. ICICI is not the most dominant bank in India — that would be the Mumbai-based HDFC Bank, he said, which is a leading provider of mortgage loans.
“The problem is HDFC is expensive,” he said, noting that the stock trades at more than four times the company’s book value. In contrast, ICICI trades at a small fraction of that multiple, Mr. Kirby said, and the bank’s focus on corporate loans means it could benefit from any economic improvements in India brought about by reform.
Another approach to emerging market investing, and a classic one, still works well, said James Syme, senior fund manager with J O Hambro Capital Management. Investors can focus on exporters “that benefit from demand in the developed world,” he said.
These can be companies like Samsung Electronics and Taiwan Semiconductor, which supply components to Western technology manufacturers. But they can also be exporters that cater to consumers in the developed world, like the Hyundai Motor Company.
