AUGUSTA, Ga. — Since Lexi Thompson lost in a playoff Sunday in the first women’s major of the year after receiving four penalty strokes for a day-old infraction brought to the L.P.G.A.’s attention by a television viewer, a debate has raged about whether armchair rules officials should be able to offer input.
Rory McIlroy, voicing an opinion popular among touring professionals, noted on Tuesday that there is no other sport in which people can email or contact officials about a missed call — much less affect a competition the day after the fact.
Mickelson added that the players should not be the ones responsible for monitoring one another.
“I think that the tour should go to those players and say, ‘Look, we’ve noticed you’ve been a little lax in how precise you’ve been in marking the ball. We’d like you to be a little better at it,’” he said.
After Thompson, 22, was notified of her four-stroke penalty — two for the bad mark and two for signing an incorrect scorecard — at the ANA Inspiration, many golfers took to Twitter to explain that it is virtually impossible to place a ball back in the exact original position.
A LIFT FOR SPIETH’S CONFIDENCE On the par-3 12th hole during a practice round, the 2015 champion Jordan Spieth hit his tee shot to within a foot of the pin. 
In February, Spieth won the AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am after holding the 54-hole lead — as he had last year here — and said that his success there helped him move past what happened in the final round here in 2016. He talked as if Tuesday’s trip around Amen Corner was also cathartic.
ANOTHER SPIETH’S DREAM If Wednesday’s par-3 contest does not get rained out, Spieth’s younger brother, Steven, will make his Augusta National debut as a caddie. Steven Spieth, a senior at Brown University who averaged 17.3 points for the basketball team this season, has never been able to attend the Masters because of his school schedule.
Spieth’s brother, a 6-foot-6 left-hander, intends to pursue a professional basketball career overseas, but he has a more pressing goal at the moment: take a shot on the par-3 course.
VERBAL TIPTOEING Augusta National is particular about its tournament: No running is allowed on the grounds, no cellphones are allowed on the course, and there are no spectators — only patrons. The myriad rules had Spieth looking over his shoulder during his news conference, and not just when asked if his brother would be hitting a shot in the par-3 contest.
