Since Donald Trump was sworn in as president, Democrats and most news media have been fixated on two story lines: his supposed disdain for Muslims, and his supposed obsequiousness (or worse) to Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin. With one decisive and necessary military strike — in defense of Muslim civilian lives, against one of Mr. Putin’s closest allies — those story lines have been called into question.
This is not to absolve Mr. Trump of his often reckless and inflammatory language, or his many policy stumbles. It is, however, to recognize that Mr. Trump takes seriously the need to aggressively revise President Obama’s hands-off approach to Syria, under which hundreds of thousands of civilians were slaughtered and Russia’s influence was permitted to grow.
The writer, an international affairs professor at Columbia, has advised both Democrats and Republicans on foreign policy and national security.
President Bashar al-Assad’s evil and miscalculated actions against innocent children and women gave President Trump the perfect opportunity to shore up his sagging approval ratings since taking office. The strikes on Syria have been swift and ferocious.
The proverbial killing of several birds with one stone is perfectly underscored: The president shows his constituency that he is more decisive than President Barack Obama, he shows off his assertiveness to the visiting Chinese president and he appears to stand up to Russia, Mr. Assad’s backer.
Is it any wonder that the president is not, for once, dismissive of the intelligence community’s assessments or the media’s reports of Mr. Assad’s sarin gas attack on innocent civilians as “fake news”?
FODEI J. BATTY, HAMDEN, CONN.
The writer is an assistant professor of political science, Quinnipiac University.
President Trump rushed to judgment in ordering the attack on the Shayrat airfield in Syria.
There are too many red flags about the chemical weapons attack in Idlib to believe the official version of events that immediately assigned guilt to the Assad government.
I think it’s possible that the incident was a false flag operation perpetrated by the rebels with a view to destroying the peace process and prolonging the war. The Assad government would in no way benefit from a chemical weapons attack on innocent people when he is winning the war. The rebels, however, would have something to gain, as they could blame the Syrian government, and hope the United States would attack and thereby weaken the Syrians’ position.
At the very least, these questions demand an independent investigation.
LOWER GWYNEDD, PA.
Mr. Blinken is correct when he states, “The real test for Mr. Trump is what comes next.” He may also be correct when he states that striking Syria was the right thing to do; mass murder is indefensible.
However, genocides and mass atrocities are being inflicted on many people in several nations in Africa — Sudan, Nigeria and Central African Republic to name a few.
Are African lives less valuable than Syrian lives? Is an African child not also “a child of God,” as President Trump referred to the Syrian victims? What difference should it make morally whether the mass murder is caused by chemical weapons or by other means?
The United States could more immediately and effectively mitigate the slaughter in Africa than in Syria. The Syrian problem should be one for Middle East Muslim nations to solve. And also Russia, since it owns this conflict more than any other nation outside of Syria itself.
STERLING HEIGHTS, MICH.