Bloop and a blast.
Any hitter can luck into a bloop single. Any slugger can drive a mistake to the seats. The Mets seem incapable of doing much offensively, but they do take big swings.
Even more chilling, on Sunday night, was the presence of the Washington Nationals’ Max Scherzer, who has won two Cy Young Awards. Scherzer has also thrown two no-hitters, including a singular masterpiece at Citi Field in 2015: the only no-hitter ever with no walks and at least 17 strikeouts.
Those Mets shrugged and went to the World Series. These Mets, of course, want to get back. But after Scherzer throttled them, 6-3, they have sputtered to eight losses in nine games, and Washington looks fearsome.
Collins says he is not overly concerned. He insisted, with odd specificity, that the Mets would have a nine-game winning streak at some point and jump right back in it.
Yes, he has to say such things, but Collins also sees that unless the Mets hit homers, they are almost helpless. On Sunday they had a leadoff homer by Michael Conforto and a two-run homer by Neil Walker. Otherwise, they advanced no one on the bases against Scherzer. The nature of their offense limits what a manager can do.
Before Sunday, the Mets ranked second in the majors in homers, with 27, but only two teams had fewer doubles. Only three teams had a lower batting average than the Mets’ .211. The Mets ranked third in walks but were last in stolen bases.
The Mets also had the oldest group of position players in the National League, with an average age of 30.3 years, and speed rarely ages well. The Mets do have Jose Reyes, the last major leaguer with 75 or more stolen bases in a season. But that was in 2007, and Reyes, now 33, has seven hits in 67 at-bats — a .104 average — through Sunday, when Collins put him back in the lineup after giving him a mental break on Saturday.
Then there is Yoenis Cespedes, who missed his third start in a row on Sunday with a left hamstring strain. Since trading for Cespedes in 2015, the Mets are 114-81 when he starts and 18-27 when he does not. He was available to pinch-hit Sunday, and he told Collins he expects to be ready for the Mets’ next game, Tuesday.
Even when the Mets’ lineup is at full strength, however, its fundamental nature will not change. The Mets are unabashed power hitters, a leading example of the modern hitting ethos: Don’t worry about singles or subtlety, just work the count and do damage. Last season they were fifth in the majors in homers, 25th in batting average and 28th in steals. Yet even with a rash of pitching injuries, they won the top N.L. wild-card spot.
Now the Mets’ top three starting pitchers are healthy, which means the team’s approach — as maddening as it can be — has a chance to work.
Dominant pitching, with the hope of a bloop and a blast. That formula is not quite working yet, but for the Mets, it is their best — and only — choice.