Hillary Clinton will deliver the commencement address this year at Medgar Evers College, a central Brooklyn school that is part of the City University of New York, the college’s president announced Friday.
Mrs. Clinton’s speech marks the second straight year that a first lady will help celebrate a rite of passage with graduates of the City University of New York, many of them poor and the first in their families to go to college. Michelle Obama gave her final commencement address as first lady at the City College of New York, the university’s flagship campus, and saluted the American dream while also criticizing the man who ultimately defeated Mrs. Clinton in the presidential election, Donald J. Trump.
Mrs. Clinton is also giving this year’s graduation speech at Wellesley College, her alma mater, where in 1969 she was the first student speaker at commencement and gave a speech that catapulted her to national prominence. The Medgar Evers event, on June 8, is scheduled for two weeks after the Wellesley address.
In an interview, Rudolph F. Crew, the president of Medgar Evers, said that Mrs. Clinton’s address before an estimated 1,500 graduating students could not come at a more critical time in public higher education. Dr. Crew noted that Medgar Evers, named for the murdered civil rights activist, has a high number of first-generation college students and female students.
For Mrs. Clinton, the speech promises to be another chance to, as she put it recently, “come out of the woods” since the election. She delivered a St. Patrick’s Day speech in Scranton, Pa., where her father and grandfather grew up. She is publishing a new book of personal essays in the fall.
Dr. Crew, a former New York City schools chancellor, said that he had known Mrs. Clinton and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, for years. He said that he first thought about inviting Mrs. Clinton to speak a year ago, after welcoming last year’s commencement speaker, Donna Brazile, a former chair of the Democratic National Committee. But it was only within the last few weeks that Mrs. Clinton agreed.
And while Mrs. Clinton, a former United States senator from New York, has visited the Medgar Evers campus a number of times, Dr. Crew said, the graduation ceremonies will take place at Barclays Center, a short subway ride away from her 2016 campaign headquarters.