ALBANY — With the State Senate gone and the Assembly miserable, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo proffered a possible deal on Thursday to try to break the deadlock over the state’s overdue budget.
But with emotions raw, and patience and trust stretched thin, the outlook for an end to the worst budget season of Mr. Cuomo’s administration was far from certain.
The budget deadline was April 1, but negotiations sputtered. A weekend “grace period” came and went without an agreement. On Monday, the Legislature was forced to pass an emergency “extender” bill to keep the government operating through the end of May. Some budget bills passed on Tuesday and Wednesday, but after an evening news conference by the governor, the Senate bolted out of Albany at the start of the 18-day Easter break.
The Assembly remained behind — members have now been in Albany for 11 straight days — and the gloom deepened.
Perhaps aware of the damage being done to his carefully cultivated reputation as an efficient leader, Mr. Cuomo called a meeting at his office on Thursday to try to broker a compromise between the leaders of the Democrat-led Assembly and the Republican-led Senate on three issues that he identified as sticking points.
While both sides have agreed to most of that proposal, disputes arose over whether corrections officers or the Office of Children and Family Services would monitor youthful offenders after they had completed their sentences. The governor has proposed establishing a panel made up of law enforcement personnel and social workers to evaluate and make recommendations on such cases.
Another dispute centers on charter school funding and a law expiring in June that froze tuition increases for such schools. If lawmakers do not act, a $1,500 tuition increase kicks in, burdening local school districts. Democrats have opposed that increase, and Mr. Cuomo has suggested a one-year freeze, followed by annual increases received by traditional public schools. Savings from the freeze were estimated to be $100 million.
The final issue involves efforts to renew the 421-a subsidy, a lapsed tax abatement program for developers meant to promote affordable housing. There had been talk of linking that renewal to rent control, which lapses in two years, but Mr. Cuomo has urged that the idea be dropped.
How such proposals were landing with the fatigued and occasionally feisty Assembly Democrats was not totally clear. On Wednesday night, after the governor spoke, dozens of Democrats stood side by side with their Assembly leader, Carl E. Heastie, as he pledged to keep working for a full budget.
Lawmakers are not being paid during the duration of the emergency extender; the governor is. The governor had thwarted a possible pay raise for lawmakers last fall, after his appointees to an independent pay commission declined to approve a raise from their current base salary of $79,500.
On Thursday afternoon, Mr. Heastie said that progress was being made — a common refrain from a long week — and that the governor’s proposals on raising the age of criminal responsibility and on charter schools had been helpful. “We’re here, we’re ready to work, and we want to shut this down,” he said.
Those five words had also been echoing around the Capitol — a gothic, crepuscular masterpiece where fresh air can be tough to find and where small details can suddenly blow up into big, deal-snagging problems. One such issue came about on Wednesday when a sudden infusion of nearly $60 million in additional aid had materialized for charters.
