Sylvan Esso, an electronic pop duo, was hoping to give an interview about its new album, “What Now,” under the whale: the fiberglass model of a giant blue whale suspended overhead in a central gallery at the American Museum of Natural History.
“This is my favorite place,” said Amelia Meath, Sylvan Esso’s singer and lyricist, as she reclined on the floor, gazing up at the grooves on the animal’s belly. For her, the museum had been a frequent destination when she was an indie-rocker based in Brooklyn; it was the first visit for her partner in Sylvan Esso, Nick Sanborn, who concocts the tracks behind her voice. They live now in Durham, N.C.
“What Now” is the second Sylvan Esso album, the sequel and reaction to the duo’s self-titled 2014 debut album and its spiraling popularity; it included “Coffee,” which has been streamed more than 47 million times on Spotify alone. When the album appeared, Sylvan Esso started out touring clubs in a Prius, with Mr. Sanborn running lights as well as music from his computer. A year later, they were performing at big festivals and headlining theaters.
Sylvan Esso grew out of a chance meeting on the indie-rock circuit in 2010. Ms. Meath’s band at the time, the folky three-woman group Mountain Man, shared a bill at a club in Milwaukee with Mr. Sanborn’s solo project, which he once described as “loud, bad instrumental hip-hop.” She asked him to remix a song, and that led, eventually, to them teaming up as Sylvan Esso, a name derived from characters in the video game Superbrothers: Sword & Sworcery.
They found loyal listeners. “Radio” and “Die Young,” songs previewed from the new album, have had millions of streams.
“They seem to be embraced by many different segments of the music-consuming populace for many different reasons, which I think is a lot more representative of how music is actually made in 2017,” said Jenn Wasner, who sings and writes songs for the rock band Wye Oak and the electronics-oriented Flock of Dimes, which will be touring with Sylvan Esso in August.
The interface between humanity and technology — sometimes productive, sometimes antagonistic — matters a lot in Sylvan Esso’s songs, in both sound and lyrics. Ms. Meath’s voice is natural, chipper and conversational, with melodies as direct as pop and folk songs. Much of the music, meanwhile, comes from synthesizers and drum machines. But Sylvan Esso evades the booming, repetitive overkill of typical electronic dance music. Instead, the tracks stay fragile and keep coming deliberately unsprung, defying mechanical regularity.
“Kick Jump Twist” considers the public lives lived on social media: “They want all invisible eyes on them,” Ms. Meath sings, amid skeletal, unsteady syncopated blips.
