But for Dance Theater of Harlem’s City Center season, beginning Wednesday, Virginia Johnson, the company’s artistic director, wants her ballet dancers to brush up against some of that ecstasy and suffering.
The José Limón Dance Foundation operates out of Dance Theater of Harlem’s headquarters. So when Ms. Johnson decided that she wanted to have a classic modern work in the repertory, it was natural for her settle on a Limón piece, “Chaconne,” which he created as a solo for himself in 1942. Set to Bach’s Violin Partita No. 2 in D minor, it is stately, introspective and lushly seamless.
Ballet dancers are capable of expressing those qualities, of course. What’s trickier for them to grasp is the way weight is used in modern dance. Instead of airiness, they must dig into the floor, as well as master the contraction and release of the pelvis to attain an entirely new way of holding the body.
In its purest form, “Chaconne” is a solo. It will be performed that way on Friday by Dylan Santos, but for opening night it has been reconfigured for five dancers — three from Dance Theater and two from the Limón company. Last Thursday, the cast gathered in a studio with Ms. Johnson, the Dance Theater ballet master Keith Saunders and the Limón company’s artistic director, Colin Connor.
For the expanded “Chaconne,” each dancer performs a solo, etching the space with Limón’s voluptuous turns, both fleet and slowly curving, and weightier moments of stillness in which stoic poses are embellished with sculptural touches, like the arms held overhead with the backs of the wrists touching.
The reconfigured work will begin with the elegant Dance Theater member Jorge Andrés Villarini, followed by Logan Frances Kruger of Limón, Mr. Santos, Ross Katen of Limón and Stephanie Rae Williams of Dance Theater.
One challenge is holding the stage in what Mr. Connor described as “naked dancing.” It’s impossible to hide in the solo; it has a formality to it that emphasizes line, but it also deals with the idea of building momentum. Mr. Santos said he had to find a way to understand that the positions in the work are more than poses, but feelings.
