MINSK, Belarus — The child care was done, if only for a moment, and Victoria Azarenka was back where it all began, leaning against the wall that had been her first tennis companion.
“It was the best hitting partner, because it never misses, never complains,” Azarenka explained.
The wall is in a small gymnasium in the Republic Olympic Training Center, a labyrinthine tennis facility in Minsk that was a short walk from the small, two-bedroom apartment Azarenka shared with her parents, her older brother, Max, and her grandparents.
Her mother, Ala, worked in the tennis center, and Azarenka had the run of the place from a young age.
In that world, she dueled Steffi Graf or Monica Seles, the superstars of the time, who would retire before Azarenka’s time.
“I did get to play them; it happened right here,” she said, touching the wall.
But the gymnasium — repainted in recent years a pale and luminous blue — was both a haven and a gantlet.
The stakes are rather higher now: Grand Slam titles, millions of dollars, national pride and, in November, a surprising first Fed Cup final for Belarus against the United States here. But the Darwinian nature of tennis remains the same.
Azarenka, once No. 1, is on an extended break after pregnancy, but she is quietly yet fiercely determined to rise again. She will return with a new coach, the former journeyman pro Michael Joyce, and a new traveling companion in her son, Leo, who was born in December.
She resists calling it a comeback. After all, she was not sidelined by injury, illness, burnout or misfortune.
But she will effectively be starting from scratch. When Azarenka returns to tennis, most likely in late July for the hardcourt tournament in Stanford, Calif., she will have no official ranking after more than a year away from the game. Instead, she will have a protected ranking of No. 6 that will allow her entry — but no seeding — at eight tournaments, including two Grand Slam events, in the following 12 months.
Azarenka will come back, at least initially, to a world in which her biggest stumbling block is missing. Serena Williams, the greatest player of this era, is on leave, too, after announcing last week that she was pregnant and that she would not play until the 2018 season (if she returns at all).
Williams and Azarenka are friends, and Williams visited Azarenka’s home in Manhattan Beach, Calif., in early February.
In the meantime, Maria Sharapova, who was suspended for 15 months for using the banned substance meldonium, will return to competition on Wednesday in Stuttgart, Germany. Sharapova, a former No. 1 who just turned 30, has not beaten Williams since 2004.
“I think the two hungriest players are going to be Maria and Vika,” Joyce said, using Azarenka’s nickname. He was Sharapova’s hitting partner and then coach from 2004 until early 2011, and they remain in contact.
Many see Azarenka, a two-time Grand Slam singles champion, as the biggest beneficiary of Williams’s absence. She has a 4-17 career record against Williams, with 10 of those losses coming in Grand Slam events.
Mouratoglou described Azarenka as “very stable,” but there has been much upheaval in Azarenka’s personal and professional lives in the last 16 months, some of which was not disclosed until now.
During a tournament in Brisbane, Australia, in January 2016, her brother called in tears and, she said, told her that their mother had cancer. Azarenka said their mother denied it when she called her.
“Because she’s a very strong woman, and she never shows when she’s in a tough moment,” Azarenka said.
She went on with her season, reaching a peak in March and April when she swept to the Indian Wells and Miami titles, the so-called Sunshine Double, defeating Williams, 6-4, 6-4, in the Indian Wells final.
When Azarenka returned home to Minsk, her mother, by then very ill, met her at the airport with other members of the family.
Azarenka was also pregnant, although she did not know it yet. She was ill at tournaments in Madrid and Rome in May. She then retired, distraught and with an injured knee, in the first round of the French Open. She learned she was pregnant when she arrived in London after that defeat. She called her mother, who was about to have surgery.
Azarenka withdrew from Wimbledon that summer, citing the knee injury, and on July 15 she announced her pregnancy and break from the game. Leo was born in Los Angeles on Dec. 19.
Azarenka’s new house with an ocean view in Manhattan Beach remains her primary base with her boyfriend, Billy McKeague, but she has chosen to do most of the preparation for her return in Minsk, where she has extensive family support. She plans to remain here until early July.
She schedules her training around breast-feeding, and McKeague is an involved father.
McKeague, 27, and Azarenka met in Kauai, Hawaii, where she was visiting friends, the big-wave surfer Laird Hamilton and his wife, Gabrielle Reece. McKeague was working as a golf pro at upscale resorts on the North Shore.
He has an upbeat, easygoing personality, which can contrast with Azarenka’s intensity. But sometimes they compete, as they did during Azarenka’s morning fitness session at the luxurious Falcon Club, a new sports and entertainment complex.
The club, on the banks of the Svislach River, is a short drive from the crowded gymnasium of Azarenka’s youth but light-years removed in terms of creature comforts. On a recent Monday morning, she and her team were the only ones using the facilities.
This is Azarenka’s third team in three seasons, a high turnover for a player of her caliber. Her longtime coach and mentor Sam Sumyk, with whom she is now estranged, surprised her by leaving to work with Eugenie Bouchard in early 2015 and now coaches Garbiñe Muguruza. Azarenka then hired Wim Fissette as coach and added Sascha Bajin, Williams’s former hitting partner, to the mix.
Her game progressed under the well-respected Fissette, but Azarenka said he chose to coach the British star Johanna Konta rather than wait for Azarenka’s return.
Azarenka said she parted ways with Bajin, who is now working with Caroline Wozniacki, because she could no longer justify having a full-time hitting partner.
Joyce, based in Boca Raton, Fla., did not arrive in Minsk until this month. Azarenka appreciates that he is straightforward.
He did some research on athletes’ returning after pregnancy and was reassured.
Azarenka wants to improve her serve and be more aggressive in her service games. She wants to upgrade her tactics and movement, and strengthen her body. Azarenka began hitting again on Feb. 4, close to seven weeks after giving birth, but she has focused mostly on fitness to prevent injuries. Though she said Williams was urging her to return for the French Open in May, Azarenka is taking her time.
She certainly is not slacking off in the gym. The exercises in her Monday session were diverse and creative, often demanding a mix of draining effort and fine-tuned motor skills (rather like tennis). At one stage, Azarenka faced off with McKeague. They kept their hands near their ears and then, on a trainer’s signal, reached down quickly to try to be the first to snatch a tennis ball off the floor.
“I think he’s scared to beat her,” said Dionne Sanders, Azarenka’s personal assistant.
McKeague did not rebut that, cracking a grin as they dueled even if Azarenka did not.
This is McKeague’s fourth trip to Belarus. A former college hockey player, he trains here with a local hockey club. His Russian — the lingua franca in Minsk — remains limited, but his appreciation for the cuisine (above all, Ala Azarenka’s) and the culture is growing.
Azarenka seems more connected to Belarus, too. She left young, at 14, to train in Spain and then in the United States. In an interview before the 2015 season, she was frequently negative about the progress in Belarus and expressed sadness about the mood of the people and the heavy drinking there.
But Leo’s birth has brought her closer to her roots. She was much more upbeat in Minsk, both at lunch surrounded by her new team and around the dinner table in the house she had built for her family with her winnings.
Her parents live there full time, and it was decorated and designed largely by her mother. It is on the shores of a reservoir known as the Minsk Sea — “even though it’s as far from the sea as it can possibly be,” Azarenka said as she pulled into the garage in her Porsche.
Geography is indeed destiny for Belarus, a flat and forested country of about 10 million that became independent from the Soviet Union in 1991. Situated on the North European Plain, Belarus has long been a thoroughfare for armies and empire builders. Minsk, the capital, was largely reduced to rubble during World War II. Its old quarter is a reconstruction.
Of late, there have been small-scale protests against the authoritarian rule of President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko, who has been in power since 1994. Azarenka, one of her small nation’s most prominent figures, avoids talking publicly about politics, but she said she understood the challenges facing Lukashenko.
“My mom thought I was, I don’t know, kidnapped,” Azarenka joked.
At the tennis center where she grew up, Azarenka and her mother walked through the corridors. Her visit was unannounced, and in another context, an athlete of her stature might have been mobbed in a setting like this. But the Belarussians kept a respectful distance, gesturing toward her and speaking in hushed tones as she walked past. One man handed Azarenka a child’s racket, which she signed with his ballpoint pen.
She went up a flight of stairs, past the nook where she used to watch Eurosport tennis coverage, and chatted briefly with some of her Fed Cup teammates. She then arrived at another wall, one that had not been there during her childhood. It is decorated with photos of the top Belarussian players and coaches. Azarenka’s picture is in prime position next to one of Natasha Zvereva, a 1988 French Open finalist and former No. 1 doubles player from Minsk.
Asked what went through her mind when she looked at the display, Azarenka thought for a long time and then turned her gaze toward another section of the wall that featured athletes who were top national players but never top professionals.
She pointed to faces, and Ala, who was beside her, named the countries or cities where the players now coach or work.
“Luxembourg, America, Ukraine, Moscow, America, America, Moscow,” Ala said.
Azarenka has seen plenty of the world herself. She left Minsk and her family very young to maximize her talent and her chances. She recognizes that there is an element of luck involved in having succeeded.
Azarenka says this slowly and calmly. For a woman who can generate so much sound and fury on a tennis court, she seems at peace. It is in part because of Leo and her new sense of purpose, but also because of another recent piece of news.
