Walk through a certain colorful section of Greenwich Village and the sign is hard to miss: Unoppressive Non-Imperialist Bargain Books. The shop, at 34 Carmine Street, between a Nepalese crafts store and an Asian tapas restaurant, has been in the same building for 25 years.
At Unoppressive, conversations among staff and visitors tend to be literary. Or political. The store very briefly housed the Occupy Wall Street library in 2011. In 2016, it was one of the four Manhattan headquarters for the Bernie Sanders presidential campaign.
The entire place is maybe 25 feet across, and rows of bookshelves divide the space into two long, narrow aisles. A few years ago, rising rents prompted Mr. Drougas to rent one of the aisles — about 40 percent of the store — to Carmine Street Comics. Unoppressive has the other aisle.
Though the sound system has been quiet lately, it has been known to play Dylan from opening until closing. Mr. Drougas has begun using magnets to affix some 50 other posters to the store’s metal ceiling, creating “a Sgt. Pepper effect.” Nelson Mandela, the Dalai Lama, Patti Smith and the Beatles are already up there.
Carmine Street Comics stocks all the latest popular titles, along with indie comics, self-published comics and graphic novels. The Unoppressive shelves feature Mr. Drougas’s favorites: Blake, Dylan, R. Crumb, Aldous Huxley, J. Krishnamurti, Art Spiegelman, Alan Watts. There are sections for poetry, fiction, American history, Hollywood, the ’60s. If you’re not interested in one subject, move a few inches and you’ll find something else to think about: Einstein, Bartlett’s quotations, cooking, travel, photography, art. Recently a few shelves were given over to Civil Service Exam books. Standing Rock East, a center for Native American activism, occupies a small back office.
One recent Saturday afternoon, enticingly low-priced books lay on the tables outside the store, as usual. Mr. Drougas worked on the inside table near the front, stacking and pricing recently delivered books. A young woman and man, who appeared to be on a date, browsed the comics section, and then Unoppressive. They were talking, of course, about books.
There was also a group visiting from rural New Jersey. One of them found a book on Western art he wanted to send to a cousin, but he was worried about the low price. “Take off the price sticker,” Mr. Drougas said.
On another morning, a British couple bought a book of Rumi poems. It was $7.75. Mr. Drougas tried to give the man change for his $8. “You keep it,” the man said.
“O.K., if you’ll take a quote card; they’re 25 cents,” said Mr. Drougas, who likes to choose certain cards — featuring quotes from famous authors — for his customers.
