Yes, it was that Bill Murray, the actor and comedian. And yes, he was singing Gershwin with classical accompanists, as part of a rehearsal and recording session in a Manhattan studio last week for his latest unexpected project: “New Worlds,” a program of songs and literary readings paired with chamber music led by the cellist Jan Vogler.
Mr. Murray, 66, may always be recognized by his fans as one of the world’s greatest comedians. But for nearly two decades, he has been breaking down every expectation of the career path of a Hollywood comedy star, playing moody and haunted characters in films like “Lost in Translation” and “Broken Flowers,” indulging his love of poetry and thrilling fans with unexpected encounters.
With “New Worlds,” Mr. Murray is pushing further into surprise territory. The program has him singing Stephen Foster’s “Jeanie With the Light Brown Hair” and songs from “West Side Story,” and reading Whitman and Hemingway while Mr. Vogler’s trio — which includes Mira Wang, his wife, on violin, and Vanessa Perez at the piano — plays Schubert, Bach and Piazzolla. It will have its United States premiere at Festival Napa Valley in California on July 20, followed by a North American tour that will come to Carnegie Hall on Oct. 16.
The project had its origins in early 2013, when the two men sat across from each other on a flight from Berlin to New York. They struck up a friendship, mingled in each other’s creative circles, and two years ago Mr. Murray invited Mr. Vogler to Poets House’s annual poetry walk across the Brooklyn Bridge. Soon after, they began developing the idea for their project, which is being billed as Bill Murray, Jan Vogler & Friends.
“I still remember those days at your house, sitting around the fireplace with a pile of books and some good music,” said Mr. Vogler, 53, looking at Mr. Murray with a boyish smile.
At the session last week, Mr. Murray wore a loosefitting salmon shirt and a white and black bandanna, and complimented his colleagues by saying that one passage “makes me laugh.” At one point, Sofia Coppola wandered in (of course), hugged Mr. Murray and then pulled out her phone to shoot some video of him singing Van Morrison.
The “New Worlds” recording, planned for release in August, is intended as a memento of the shows.
With an ensemble that includes members born in the United States, China, East Germany and Venezuela, “New Worlds” will explore themes of American history and identity. One setting has Mr. Murray reading a painful passage from “The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn” as the group plays “Moon River.” Mr. Vogler said he first encountered the classics of American literature through his father’s library in East Berlin.
Mr. Murray described the idea as “the collision of America and Europe,” in part reflected in the backgrounds of each of the four members of his new group.
