Klaus Kleinfeld, who resigned as the chairman and chief executive of Arconic this week after sending an unauthorized letter to the activist hedge fund antagonizing him, stepped down from the board of Morgan Stanley on Friday.
In a regulatory filing, Morgan Stanley said that Mr. Kleinfeld had resigned on Friday and would not stand for re-election.
Mr. Kleinfeld was forced out of Arconic, the industrial parts maker spun off from Alcoa, after the company disclosed that he had sent a letter to the hedge fund Elliott Management without the permission of his board. Elliott eventually disclosed that the executive had sent a rambling letter to its founder, Paul E. Singer, insinuating that the investor had committed embarrassing acts during a visit to a soccer tournament in Germany in 2006.
Last year, the toymaker Mattel tried to refresh the Barbie brand by rolling out curvy, petite and tall versions of its well-known fashion doll. That strategy did not seem to bolster sales. Mattel shares were down sharply on Friday after the company reported weak first-quarter earnings after the bell on Thursday.
■ Honeywell International said it had higher-than-expected profit in the first quarter.
■ The annual spring meetings of the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund bring government officials, central bankers, journalists, and members of academia and the private sector to Washington for briefings on the global economy and development. Emerging markets are showing signs of strength.
■ Samsung Electronics continues the rollout of its Galaxy S8 and has packed it with new features: taller, curved screens; encrypted facial recognition; deeper display colors; systemwide voice control and the ability to turn into a desktop computer.
■ Don’t forget to read the DealBook Morning Agenda.
General Electric — which has been under pressure from the activist investor Nelson Peltz — has pared back its assets to focus on its industrial division, but it still faces trouble.
Its revenue dropped less than expected in the first quarter compared with the same period last year. In an effort to return to its core industrial focus, the company shifted its headquarters to Boston from Fairfield, Conn., tried to recast itself as a more digital company, shed its appliance division and pared down GE Capital.
But there was pain in the oil and gas division, where sales were down 9 percent compared with the year before. The company is set to merge its energy business with Baker Hughes in a deal that it expects to close this year.
Exxon Mobil, Lockheed Martin and G.E. were among the big American names in 11 deals signed on Friday in Jakarta as part of Vice President Pence’s visit.
The memos of understanding worth more than $10 billion include a 20-year Exxon deal to sell a million tons a year of liquefied natural gas to the state-backed Indonesian firm Pertamina starting in 2025, according to news reports. In another, Lockheed Martin, the world’s largest defense contractor, agreed to upgrade Indonesian Air Force F-16 fighter jets.
“We think there are opportunities to clear open the way for American companies to participate more greatly in Indonesia,” Mr. Pence told Reuters on Friday, before heading to Australia.