The young American soprano Nadine Sierra was in Venice rehearsing Donizetti’s “Lucia di Lammermoor” at the ornate Teatro La Fenice the other day when her phone started ringing. She didn’t pick up. “I was having an orchestra rehearsal,” she explained.
It was not until the rehearsal was over that Ms. Sierra, 28, called back from her dressing room and heard the good news: She had won the prestigious 2017 Richard Tucker Award, which comes with a cash prize of $50,000 and a gala concert, to be held Dec. 10 at Carnegie Hall.
“It’s fantastic,” Ms. Sierra said by telephone from Venice, referring to the award, which was officially announced on Tuesday morning.
The award was the latest accolade in a career that started during her high school days in Florida, when she began singing in the Palm Beach Opera chorus. At 15, she sang on NPR’s program “From the Top.” At 16, she sang the Sandman in a Palm Beach production of “Hansel and Gretel” conducted by Julius Rudel. She became the youngest winner of both the Marilyn Horne Foundation Vocal Competition and the Metropolitan Opera National Council Auditions.
Barry Tucker, president of the Richard Tucker Music Foundation — and the son of the Brooklyn-born tenor for whom it was named — said that he had watched Ms. Sierra develop since she was in college. “She possesses an artistic maturity that is well beyond her years and is destined to be a leading light of the opera world,” he said in a statement.
Next season will be another big one for Ms. Sierra: She will perform on opening night at the Royal Opera House in London as Musetta in a new production of Puccini’s “La Bohème,” sing the title role in Massenet’s “Manon” for the first time at San Francisco Opera and sing Susanna in Mozart’s “Le Nozze di Figaro” for the first time at the Metropolitan Opera.
Ms. Sierra said that when she first saw that Mr. Tucker was calling, she thought he was simply checking in on her, as he has since she first won smaller grants from the foundation in 2010 and 2013. “When I was really young — and in some people’s eyes, far too young to be in the opera world and the industry, the Richard Tucker foundation in general just gave me a family to be a part of,” she said.
Previous winners of the Richard Tucker Award include many of the greats of the opera world: Renée Fleming, Lawrence Brownlee, Stephanie Blythe, Joyce DiDonato, Michael Fabiano and Jamie Barton.