GREENBURGH, N.Y. — The Rangers issued all the appropriate proclamations heading into Wednesday’s playoff opener at Montreal, but amid the platitudes were potential pitfalls.
The Rangers lost all three of their meetings with the Canadiens this season. They did not play particularly well in the season’s final weeks, winning only eight of their 21 games since Feb. 25.
Although the Rangers recorded a league-leading 27 road wins, they have struggled in recent seasons at the raucous Bell Centre in Montreal. They lost their lone visit there this season, by 5-4 on Jan. 14, as Henrik Lundqvist replaced an injured Antti Raanta after the first period and allowed five goals.
Center Derek Stepan, a veteran of 85 playoff games, said nuance and hard work would be crucial the moment the puck dropped in Montreal.
The Rangers finished fourth in the Metropolitan Division with 102 points, and facing Montreal in the opening round — instead of the Washington Capitals, who had the N.H.L.’s best record — could be seen as a benefit. The Canadiens trailed the Rangers in the Eastern Conference standings for much of the season before finishing 1 point ahead of them.
Like the Rangers, the Canadiens are a speed team. And as with the Rangers, Montreal’s success depends heavily on a star goalie. Montreal’s Carey Price, who was injured by the Rangers’ Chris Kreider in Game 1 of the 2014 Eastern Conference finals, finished with 37 wins and a 2.23 goals against average this season.
His rival with the Rangers, Lundqvist, 35, registered his 400th career victory among his 31 wins this season. But he was inconsistent at times, especially after the long layoffs brought on by the Rangers’ bye week and the All-Star break. He also missed several games after straining his hip in early March. He returned to win only one of six games down the stretch.
But Lundqvist revels in the postseason, having registered 55 wins with nine shutouts and a 2.28 goals against average since 2006. The Rangers have missed the playoffs only once during his 12-year career.
Lundqvist, who seems to fully embrace his role as the Rangers’ resident sage during the playoffs, said it would be essential for him and his teammates to forget their troubles in Montreal. He has a 4-8-2 regular-season record there.
Lundqvist has started 103 straight Rangers playoff games and has reached the Stanley Cup finals only once — a five-game series loss to the Los Angeles Kings in 2014. He said savoring the moment would also be important from a mental standpoint, as well as in finding a higher physical gear.
Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault, who coached the Canadiens from 1997 to 2000, would not tip his hand as far as lineup decisions, except for announcing that defenseman Kevin Klein would most likely sit out the opener in favor of Brendan Smith.
It also seemed likely that the agitator Tanner Glass would play on the fourth line instead of Pavel Buchnevich.
Jesper Fast, who figures to play on the fourth line with Glass and Oscar Lindberg, said the Rangers would need to use their speed against the Canadiens, who are led by Max Pacioretty and the huge defenseman Shea Weber.
Stepan said he tried to illustrate to his younger teammates the sudden rise in energy and pressure the playoff atmosphere generates. He emphasized that firsthand sensory overload would be the best teacher.
