U.S.|What Does a Superhero Look Like?
What Does a Superhero Look Like?
This is the latest edition of the Race/Related newsletter. To get it in your inbox weekly, sign up here. Tell your friends and share your stories.
Trying to find someone who looked like me in the world of superheroes is not something I thought about growing up in the ’70s. My parents are from Ecuador, but I was born in the United States and always thought of myself as American (no preceding modifier and hyphen needed), and what could be more American than the fight for truth and justice?
It was not until I started writing in 2002 about the comic book industry for The Times that I really started thinking about diverse representation. By 2006, more concerted efforts were underway for comic book heroes to be more reflective of the real world and its increasingly diverse readership.
My entry into the world of comics was “Super Friends” (1973-86), which united DC Comics heroes in animated form. They had colorful costumes, but their skin tones were almost uniformly white. The first hero who stood out to me as “other” was Green Lantern, though his darker hue was more like a deep tan.
Four diverse heroes were added to Super Friends in 1978. The intent was well meaning then, even if it seems especially ham-handed now: Apache Chief (Native American), Samurai (Japanese), El Dorado (Mexican) and Black Vulcan (one guess). The show rarely depicted their civilian lives, so viewers never learned much about them.
The world of comic books, though, was more lacking. The first Latino hero I met was Vibe, a Justice Leaguer who premiered in 1984. Out of costume he was Paco Ramone, a Puerto Rican break dancer. His first page has cringeworthy dialogue: He says “fresh,” “chill” and “wack,” and uses “chu” (instead of you) a lot, but a few pages later, we learn that this is largely posturing. Among his large, close-knit family, he drops his accent and pretense.
Later that year I met Yolanda Montez, who would become Wildcat II. She was of Mexican descent and added some diversity to her team, Infinity Inc. Yolanda came with an odd tick: Her thoughts and speech were often expressed in Spanish and English. This helped readers who were not bilingual, but made me wonder: Why is she always repeating herself — and in two languages?
Several of Mr. Walker’s lessons deal with supporting comics with diverse representation. It seems obvious, but it is not: People need to buy these books (not download them illegally) for them to survive. “The comic industry responds to how money is spent or not spent,” he writes. “Nothing else matters.” It would help these characters from being the scapegoat for lagging sales, which is how a small number of retailers recently saw a sales slump at Marvel.
The Black Panther series, written by Ta-Nehisi Coates, sold more than 300,000 copies of its debut issue. Issue no. 11 sold just over 35,000, but interest in the series was strong enough to warrant a couple of spin-offs, one of which began last week.
That brings me back to Vibe, who has done well for himself, considering that he was murdered in 1986. He was resurrected in comics and, in 2012, he fought androids and break-danced in one of the animated shorts of DC Nation. Two years later he became a key part of “The Flash,” which is reaching an average of 2.87 million viewers a week.
For the next generation of superheroes fans, representation will be easier to find. Nothing wack about that.
My interest in the Mexico-U.S. border stemmed from the thought that there are an infinite number of ways to cross illegally, but only 48 legal checkpoints. I set off to visit all of them.
In August 2015, the Mexican-American painter Mauricio Cortes and I set off on a research trip along the entirety of the border, east to west, documenting the conditions there. I returned to the studio with a spool of fencing wire a mile long. From this spool I began to make coils, cut them into rings, and weave the rings into a textile in the form of the United States flag.
The resulting piece is about 6 feet by 3.5 feet, and weighs just under 50 pounds. It is displayed on the floor and made to be interacted with, draped over and bunched. The phenomena of chain mail, with its liquid-metal qualities, relies on synergy between touch, sight and sound. The tones of red, white and blue are achieved by incorporating three distinct styles of chain-mail weaves, which can be loosely categorized as European, Japanese and Persian.
These ancient groupings delineate spheres of competing influence that continue to define international politics. This chain-mail flag is my personal meditation on both the weight and malleability of the American mission.
Here are some of the articles that we’re talking about, beyond The Times.
The Times publishes many articles that touch on race. Here are a few you shouldn’t miss, chosen by Race/Related editors.
