On the Friday last month that the House Republicans’ bill to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act was supposed to go to the floor, as it became increasingly apparent that the legislation was on the verge of collapse, three reporters worried that a story they had been working on as part of The New York Times’s new approach to health care coverage might collapse with it.
But it was about to be resurrected. The next day, Celia Dugger, The Times’s health and science editor, put the new team to work. Ms. Goodnough and Ms. Zernike began reaching out to legislators who had opposed the bill to find out if the Medicaid cuts had played any role in their decision. Less than 72 hours later, the piece ran on the front page — no longer a story about an entitlement program on the chopping block but one about an institution so ingrained in American health care that its imperilment had contributed to the bill’s failure.
Historically, reporters covering different facets of the beat — medical treatment, policy, business — have been spread across various desks corresponding with the print sections of the paper. But health care is a sprawling subject. “People don’t live health in those silos,” Ms. Dugger said.
So in January, health reporters and editors from across the paper were pulled together into a new team, led by Ms. Dugger, that’s more reflective of how tightly the different threads of health care are knotted together. (The Times has formed other teams that similarly concentrate on single topics like climate and gender.) There are 19 reporters on Ms. Dugger’s staff, including three former Business Day reporters and two, Ms. Goodnough and Ms. Zernike, who moved over from the national desk.
Now, the team can work strategically and think expansively about health care without trying to cram a complicated story into one box or another.
As the team gets settled in, the aim is to tackle more ambitious, collaborative projects at the intersections of the different vectors of health care. There will also be more visual storytelling — the health team has been working closely with the graphics editor Haeyoun Park on infographics that elucidate opaque health policy and legislation — and, in keeping with The Times’s push to grow its international readership, an increased focus on global health coverage, particularly stories that examine the connections between business and public health.
Ultimately the reorganization is meant, quite literally, to meet readers where they live: Covering the enormously complex Rube Goldberg machine that is the health care system means covering how those interlocking dynamics shape each other — and the lives of ordinary people they touch.
When the Medicaid story took an unexpected turn, reporters tacked along with it, generating a piece that wove together real-time political reporting, historical narrative, policy analysis and interviews with those who might have been affected by a rollback — program recipients and their families. “It was a national story, a policy story, and a human story,” Ms. Dugger said.