He was in Italy for meetings with other G7 foreign ministers, and heads next to Russia amid deepening strains over the tougher U.S. stance on Syria. Mr. Tillerson will see Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov — but President Vladimir Putin said he was unavailable.
2. The U.S. strike on Syria and its positioning of a Navy carrier strike group near the Korean Peninsula are feeding fears of a military response if North Korea conducts another nuclear test.
China and South Korea agreed to toughen sanctions on the North in the case of new tests, possibly aiming to persuade North Korea to refrain as it celebrates the birthday of its founder, Kim Il-sung, on Saturday.
3. Two Wells Fargo executives were ordered to pay back $75 million after a scathing report on the company’s sales fraud scandal, in which thousands of employees created fraudulent accounts in an effort to meet aggressive sales goals.
The board pinned most of the blame for the scandal on the bank’s former chief executive, John Stumpf, and its former head of community banking, Carrie Tolstedt.
4. Neil Gorsuch was sworn in as the 113th justice of the Supreme Court, placing a devoted conservative in the seat once occupied by Justice Antonin Scalia.
Justice Anthony Kennedy, 80, presided at the ceremony in the White House Rose Garden, with President Trump looking on.
5. Hours after impeachment hearings against him began, Gov. Robert Bentley of Alabama resigned. He had been enmeshed in a sex scandal that staggered the state and prompted criminal investigations.
A special prosecutor said Mr. Bentley quit in connection with a plea agreement on two misdemeanor campaign finance charges.
Lt. Gov. Kay Ivey will succeed Mr. Bentley; she is a former state treasurer who will be the first Republican woman to hold the office.
6. We took a look at what’s at stake in President Trump’s proposed 31 percent cut to the Environmental Protection Agency.
What could be affected by a budget drop to $5.7 billion from $8.1 billion, and the loss of a quarter of the agency’s 15,000 jobs?
Your tap water, for starters. Enforcement of laws and regulations, regional cleanup projects and vehicle emissions standards are just some of the other programs that could face cuts. Above, the Gowanus Canal in Brooklyn, a designated Superfund site.
7. The New York Times won three Pulitzer Prizes, and The New York Daily News and ProPublica shared the coveted Pulitzer Prize for public service.
From The Times, Daniel Berehulak won for photographs that provided a haunting portrait of a violent campaign in the Philippines; C.J. Chivers won for a magazine piece on a young veteran of the war in Afghanistan suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder; and a team from The Times won for international reporting for a series on Russia’s surreptitious assertion of power.
Above, one of Mr. Berehulak’s photographs.
The Daily News and ProPublica won for a series on the New York Police Department’s abuse of a decades-old law to force people suspected of illegal activity from their homes and businesses.
If a new immigration bill is passed, police agencies would face conflicting directives from the state and the federal government.
The law goes next to the Assembly, where it is expected to pass. But Gov. Jerry Brown has not indicated whether he supports it.
9. United Airlines came in for intense criticism after a video circulated of a passenger being dragged off an overbooked flight.
He was forcibly removed from his seat and dragged through the aisle on the runway in Chicago despite his screams and protests by other passengers.
Three passengers said the man was a doctor who had appointments to see patients, but that could not immediately be confirmed.
The man was one of four people asked to leave the plane to make room for United employees seeking to travel to the same destination, the airline said.
10. Finally, the baseball season’s back.
The Yankees won their home opener in the Bronx against the Tampa Bay Rays. Their longtime general manager, Brian Cashman, has his hands full trying to resolve the team’s identity crisis — and boost attendance.
Want to look back? Here’s Friday night’s briefing.