The Learning Network|What Would You Write in a Letter to the Editor?
What Would You Write in a Letter to the Editor?
It is very likely you have responded to social media postings with a comment or two, but have you ever written a formal letter to a newspaper editor, for publication?
Talk with a classmate about your experience with letters to newspaper editors. What is the purpose of such a letter? In what ways might a letter to the editor benefit the writer? In what ways might it help or influence those who read it?
Then, with your classmate, think about the saying "the pen is mightier than the sword" and decide if you think it is true. How important is it to you to share your opinion in writing, with a wider group? How much influence or impact does a letter to the editor have?
They pour in around the clock, roughly a thousand a day: from poets and bricklayers, from politicians and psychiatrists, from laypeople and Nobel Prize winners alike.
Some, like today’s letter from a woman who met her future husband through a misdialed telephone call, are lighthearted. Others, like the letter submitted last July from the mother of Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens, who was killed in Benghazi, Libya, in 2012, are forceful and moving.
Publishing letters sent from readers is a longstanding daily tradition at The New York Times. And despite the many competing platforms that now allow for the public airing of opinions and grievances — the endless chatter on Facebook and Twitter, a given article’s online comments — The Times’s letters section is as robust a forum as ever.
Mr. Feyer, a Hungarian immigrant who has been an editor at The Times since 1980 and the letters editor since 1999, estimates that he has read upward of three million letters. He begins the process each morning by combing through the recent submissions, a vast majority of which now arrive via email, and settling on the main topic of the day. From there, he collects a “cluster” of letters (usually four to six) that form the lead section — “After Health Bill Defeat, What’s Next?” in today’s paper.
In all, between 10 and 15 letters appear daily in The Times. And given the constraints — limited page space, the demands of timeliness, the ever-flowing current of news — it isn’t simply a matter of selecting the best individual letters.
“It’s a bit like a building a ship in a bottle: It’s a very tight space, and we have to make it fit to the line,” Mr. Feyer said, noting that oftentimes he holds letters for a day or two simply because he doesn’t have sufficient space to publish them.
— Can a letter to the editor educate, influence, shape public opinion or advocate a cause? If so, how? Give examples.
— How is writing a letter to the editor an act of citizenship? Why?
— Is there a cause or opinion you could write about in a letter to the editor? Is there an article you’ve read to which you would like to respond? If so, what is it? What would you write about, and why? For tips from Mr. Feyer, see this Times article.