LOS ANGELES — Lynda Obst was watching the documentary “The Jinx: The Life and Deaths of Robert Durst” two years ago when a chilling, decades-old memory began to surface.
A film and television producer with a string of hits, Ms. Obst, 67, recounted her experience in a pretrial hearing on Wednesday and Thursday in Superior Court in Los Angeles, where Mr. Durst, 74, a scion of a prominent New York real estate family, is charged with the murder of a close friend, Susan Berman, in December 2000.
Prosecutors contend that Mr. Durst shot Ms. Berman in the back of the head in her Los Angeles home to prevent her from telling the authorities what she knew about the disappearance of Mr. Durst’s first wife, Kathleen.
Mr. Durst has insisted that he is innocent of Ms. Berman’s death and that he has no knowledge of what happened to his first wife.
At the time Kathleen Durst vanished in 1982, Ms. Berman served as a shield between Mr. Durst and tabloid reporters eager to discover what had happened.
Ms. Obst testified that Ms. Berman had revealed to her that she had tried to get the police off “Bob’s back” by making a phone call to Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, posing as Mr. Durst’s wife, who was a student there. The phone call, prosecutors contend, was designed to make the authorities believe that Mrs. Durst was still alive after she left the couple’s home, 50 miles north of Manhattan.
Ms. Obst was one of a string of witnesses called over three days by the prosecution in what are known as conditional hearings, in which testimony is taken from witnesses age 65 or older who could die or be killed before a trial, which, in this case, is likely to take place sometime next year. Ms. Obst was the second “mystery witness” to appear in the hearings — her name was not publicly revealed until she took the stand.
The proceedings are taped in case the witnesses are not available later, and the defense is allowed to cross-examine them. But it is unclear if any of the testimony in these hearings would ultimately be admissible at trial.
Kathleen Durst’s body was never recovered, and Mr. Durst has not been charged in her disappearance. Ms. Obst testified that Ms. Berman once told her, “Kathie was a coke head and disappeared” — an explanation that Mr. Durst, too, offered in 1982.
When Mrs. Durst vanished, Ms. Obst was working with Ms. Berman to turn her recently published book, “Easy Street,” into a movie. Ms. Obst said that she loved the book — her first film project — and Ms. Berman’s take on growing up in Las Vegas, the privileged daughter of a mob boss.
In an effort to impeach Ms. Obst’s testimony, Dick DeGuerin, one of Mr. Durst’s lawyers, repeatedly asked her why she had not disclosed her conversation to the authorities earlier, either when Ms. Berman was killed in 2000 or when Ms. Obst was interviewed by the producers of “The Jinx” in 2011.
On Thursday, he repeatedly asked whether she was “conflating” her memories of what Ms. Berman told her with magazine or newspaper articles she had read about the case, in particular the much-discussed call to the Albert Einstein medical college.
Ms. Obst acknowledged that she had confused some dates, but she was emphatic that she had a vivid recollection of Ms. Berman’s account of making the call and, at Mr. Durst’s behest, pretending to be Mrs. Durst.
The women’s five-year effort to produce a screenplay failed, and the conversation was soon forgotten, Ms. Obst said.
Ms. Obst’s testimony complemented that of another witness, Miriam Barnes, who also testified about the phone call to the medical college.
Ms. Barnes, 66, a psychiatric social worker, told the court that she had become friends with Ms. Berman in the early 1980s, when they lived in adjacent townhouses on the East Side of Manhattan.
One day, Ms. Barnes testified, Ms. Berman called her, asking her to come over to her apartment right away. “She said: ‘I have to tell you something. Don’t ask me any questions,’” Ms. Barnes recalled.
Ms. Barnes said it was during this conversation that she learned that Mr. Durst’s wife was missing.
Ms. Barnes said she had kept the conversation a secret for nearly 35 years, before friends persuaded her to talk to a New York Times reporter.
After she was quoted in an article about Ms. Berman in December, the prosecutor asked her to come to Los Angeles to testify.
As Ms. Barnes left the stand Wednesday morning, a stone-faced Mr. Durst swiveled in his chair to follow her progress out of the courtroom, until one of his lawyers redirected his gaze toward the judge.
Additional pretrial hearings are scheduled in July, when the prosecution plans to call Richard B. Markey, the last person to see Ms. Berman alive; Paul Kaufman, her onetime lover; and Stewart and Emily Altman, longtime friends of Mr. Durst’s.
