LOS ANGELES — Unions representing 12,000 Hollywood writers said on Monday that members had overwhelmingly voted to authorize a strike, bringing show business closer to its first production shutdown in a decade.
If no agreement is reached, a walkout could happen as soon as May 2 and potentially idle tens of thousands of workers — not just writers but the drivers, caterers, set carpenters, dry cleaners and other service providers who make Hollywood’s wheels turn. Writers picketed for 100 days in the 2007 strike, bringing TV production to a halt and causing $2.5 billion in economic losses in Los Angeles, according to government economists.
A strike would first affect late-night talk shows and soap operas that use guild writers, sending the programs into repeats or forcing hosts to ad-lib. The production of scripted TV series would slow down, as producers burned through scripts. Networks would rely more heavily on news, sports and reality programming. Moviegoers would not experience immediate effects; studios have finished shooting most summer and fall movies.
Striking is awkward for Hollywood unions because of optics: The workers involved are not coal miners struggling to feed their families. Some television staff writers earn hundreds of thousands of dollars a year. A few elite wordsmiths — Chuck Lorre, Shonda Rhimes — earn millions.
But leaders of the two writers’ unions, which bargain as one, say that the middle-class majority of their members are struggling as never before, even as television production booms in the video-streaming age and some blockbusters take in more than $1 billion at the worldwide box office.
Networks are ordering fewer episodes per season — as few as 10 compared with 22 just a few years ago — so series writing jobs pay less than they once did. At the same time, staff writers can work for only one series at once, taking them off the market for up to a year. And broadcast network reruns do not attract many viewers anymore, limiting residual payments. On the movie side, studios have cut way back on what is known as development, or the polishing and reworking of scripts to produce a good one.
Health care is also a major union concern. In part because it provides extremely generous benefits — by some measures, studios say, better than coverage offered to other Hollywood unions — the writers’ health fund has begun to run steep deficits. Writers want studios to help make up the shortfalls, which can total tens of millions of dollars a year.
The movie and television companies point to systemic industry problems as reasons they must limit improvements to the Writers Guild contract. Studios contend that they are facing an uncertain future, with streaming services threatening their enormously profitable cable operations: With the rise of Netflix, HBO Go and Amazon, consumers are downgrading cable TV packages or foregoing connections altogether.
Media companies have their own optics problem. While they contend that they are unable to give writers more than small raises, most have boasted to Wall Street of climbing profits. And pay for media moguls has been rising. Earlier this month, CBS disclosed that its chief executive, Leslie Moonves, received a 2016 pay package worth $69.6 million, a 22 percent increase over 2015, when the company did not perform as well.