BERLIN — Kenda Hmeidan arrived here from Damascus, only in November. She left behind a country at war, and her family. The separation was painful, but her path was not what you might expect. She is an actor who came here to join the newly created Exil Ensemble.
It’s a group of seven performers from Syria, the Palestinian territories and Afghanistan who can’t pursue their art in their home countries and who are now in residency at the Maxim Gorki Theater, one of Germany’s most innovative public stages.
As the war began, Ms. Hmeidan, 24, had watched friends escape for Europe, but she chose to stay and finish her acting degree in Syria in 2015.
“I hadn’t wanted to come illegally, because I want to go back someday,” she said last week, sitting in the Gorki’s cafeteria.
But how do you turn your own arrival into art so soon? How do you face the trauma? And express yourself in a new language?
For Ms. Hmeidan and the Exil Ensemble, the answer is “Winterreise,” or “Winter Journey,” a tragicomic docudrama built around a bus tour that the actors took through Germany in the coldest weeks of January. The group’s first stage production — and a powerful confluence of art, politics and diaspora — it opened at the Gorki on Saturday to strong reviews.
Some stories that emerged in rehearsal were too raw to put onstage, so “Winterreise” became a kind of meditation on exile and arrival, built around a journey more than around a plot.
The Exil Ensemble actors have full-time contracts at the Gorki through the fall of 2018. Their mandate is to create two main-stage productions a year, in addition to holding workshops and studying to prepare for careers on the German stage. The Gorki is funded by the City of Berlin and has an ensemble of 18 actors. The Exil’s residency has been underwritten by 1.2 million euros (more than $1.2 million) from the German federal government, the Berlin lottery and the private Mercator Foundation.
Munich Kammerspiele has a similar initiative, the Open Border Ensemble. The new ensembles are part of a growing cultural response in Germany to the influx of more than one million asylum seekers from the Middle East since 2015, which has caused soul-searching about national identity. That surge has also led to a rise in right-wing political parties, which argue that the country took in too many refugees.
“I would describe the climate in society as very fragile,” said Philipp Ruch, the artistic director of the Center for Political Beauty, which produces artistic “interventions” that have pointed political messages.
“The politicians say we’ve given enough refugees shelter; now it has to be stopped,” he said. In a rich country like Germany, which is still grappling with its Nazi past, “this has nothing to do with reality,” he added.
The Exil Ensemble also has a touring educational component. “Winterreise” will run at the Gorki through July, then travel in Germany and to Zurich, performing at theaters that co-produced the play. The goal is to raise awareness about immigrants, said Shermin Langhoff, the Gorki’s artistic director, who moved to Germany from Turkey as a child and who has often commissioned work that addresses questions of identity.
In Dresden, Niels wants to show them the capital of German Romanticism, but instead they find a demonstration by Pegida, an anti-immigrant movement whose name stands for Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamization of the West.
In the scene, Hussein, played by Hussein Al Shatheli, an actor from Damascus, and Karim, played by Karim Daoud, a parkour champion from Qalqilya, a Palestinian city in the West Bank, look out their hotel window to read the signs of demonstrators. “Fatima Merkel,” one reads, referring to Germany’s chancellor.
“I thought it’s Angela,” Karim says in Arabic.
In another scene, Mr. Shatheli, 32, who was born in Syria to parents from the Palestinian territories, explains how he arrived in Germany in early 2015. He flew to Turkey, paid a smuggler to take him to Greece, and eventually flew to Germany via Zurich after buying a fake Italian identity document.
Like Ms. Hmeidan, Mr. Shatheli is a graduate of the Academy of Performing Arts in Damascus, where he, she and Mazen Aljubbeh, another Syrian in the ensemble, all studied with Ayham Majid Agha, 36, the Exil Ensemble’s artistic director, who helped recruit them.
German theater critics have also praised how “Winterreise” tackles, with humor, the culture shock of sex. Maryam Abu Khaled, 26, is from Jenin, a Palestinian refugee camp, which has conservative social mores, and in the play, her character struggles to understand a new German boyfriend who’s in an open relationship. “There must be something for me in between an arranged marriage and an open relationship,” she says.
Beyond the laughter, there are detours into darkness — inevitable, given the history and circumstances. The group also visited the Buchenwald concentration camp. Mr. Agha said that was the hardest part of the trip. A writer and filmmaker of Chechen-Armenian origin who grew up in Syria — and who studied the Stanislavsky method in Damascus with Russian teachers — he is married to a German playwright of Russian-Jewish origin, and they have two children.
