The tourist guides of New York, ever adaptive to the city’s tics and quirks, have added a crowd-jammed stop at two statues now facing off fiercely in the financial district — “Charging Bull” and “Fearless Girl.” The gleaming bronze works, one massive, the other tiny, confront each other like Debbie vs. Goliath just a few feet apart in Bowling Green park.
Arturo Di Modica, the creator of the 7,000-pound bull sculpture, is near despair at what he sees as the intrusion into his space last month of the four-foot-tall girl with hands on hips as she confronts the bull in all his maleness.
“The girl is like, ‘I am here, what are you gonna do?’ ” Mr. Di Modica complained with open emotion as he talked Wednesday of a potential lawsuit to undo conditions he never imagined when he made his piece. He insisted the whole aesthetic point of his 27-year-old work — a salute to the resurgent power of America after the 1987 stock market debacle — has been hijacked by “Fearless Girl” to become part of a statement about feminist resolve in the face of Trumpian slurs and the denigration of women, a message he has no quarrel with in other contexts.
“Lean forward! Hands on hips like the little girl!” a mother directed her young daughter as if she were auditioning for “Annie.” Happy crowds, spilling into Broadway, took endless selfies throughout the day, with the bull far from neglected as people posed and embraced him from horns to hind end.
Both works were put into place without the city’s permission for a permanent installation. Just as the bull’s instant popularity forced City Hall’s acceptance decades ago, so now has the girl with the obstinate glare. Her stay has been extended until the 2018 International Women’s Day, in March.
How the two might ever get along seems a minor question in the face of the daily hubbub and jubilation they stir as a twosome. Politicians are feasting on the dispute as much as the public is. “Men who don’t like women taking up space are exactly why we need the ‘Fearless Girl,’” Mayor Bill de Blasio tweeted, taking sides against Mr. Di Modica and a bull that seems more raging than ever.