Politics|The Spending Bill Was Supposed to Be Easy. Then Trump Intervened.
The Spending Bill Was Supposed to Be Easy. Then Trump Intervened.
WASHINGTON — To be clear, it isn’t that hard to keep the government’s lights on.
Fights over short-term spending bills have long been used by Republicans and Democrats as proxies for broader policy fights. But with Republicans fully in control of Washington, President Trump has turned a sure thing into a major drama, with a Friday night deadline before much of the government shuts down.
Congressional appropriators, always happy to spend money together, seemed on a glide path to do so, until Mr. Trump intervened, insisting on using the bill to get a down payment on a wall at the Mexican border that even many Republicans are leery of and that he has long insisted would be paid for by Mexico. He appeared to soften his demand late Monday, saying he would settle for additional funds for border security — potentially including at least part of the wall, according to a senior administration official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Suddenly, a spending bill that was meant to be a mere legislative grace note to much larger health care and tax policy bills has become the centerpiece of another down-to-the-wire battle.
“The Wall is a very important tool in stopping drugs from pouring into our country and poisoning our youth (and many others)!” Mr. Trump said Monday on Twitter.
The president’s habit of tossing hornets into Republican policy picnics has hampered his agenda and demonstrated the lack of experience among his staff in working with Capitol Hill to get things done. His lack of early engagement on the health care bill helped lead to its demise, and his early efforts at a tax bill were disorganized — he announced he had one even though critical staff members and congressional leaders knew nothing of it. Those stumbles and his current flirtation with a government shutdown demonstrate a continued pattern of playing to his base rather than governing.
On Monday, as senators returned to Washington from a two-week recess to confirm Sonny Perdue for secretary of agriculture, Republican congressional leaders were negotiating with White House officials, who have been pressing for wall funding and a mechanism to take some funding from the Affordable Care Act.
Later Monday, Mr. Trump told reporters from conservative news outlets that he was willing to compromise by pushing the deadline for the border wall funding to this fall, if he cannot get all of it now, according to the senior administration official.
The House returns on Tuesday.
Mr. Trump is hardly the first president to fight with his party over major policy matters. President Jimmy Carter’s fights with fellow Democrats over nearly everything prompted Senator Edward M. Kennedy to challenge him for the party’s nomination in 1980. President Barack Obama fought with coal-state Democrats who sunk his climate change bill and with war-weary members of his party over whether to launch airstrikes in Syria.
Counterproductive as his moves may appear, Mr. Trump is clearly eager for a victory, and funding for his wall would be one, at least with his base. His negotiating method appears to be to join the conversation late and pressure Congress via his beloved Twitter account, with references to campaign promises that were always long shots.
While many presidents bring advisers from their home state during their first term, they also tend to staff up with people wise to the ways of working with Congress. But like Mr. Carter’s, Mr. Trump’s inner circle is particularly full of close associates who have not spent time in Washington, and have learned the hard way — at the hands of lawmakers, often from their own party — about what is and is not possible.
Indeed, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, warned the Trump administration soon after the election that the best course of action was to accept a spending bill that would have gotten the government through the rest of the fiscal year without the bill’s being slowed or sidelined by tax and health care legislation. His counsel was not heeded.
As such, it is likely that Congress will try to come up with a bill that can please both parties and include new funding for the border with vague promises to work on the wall issue later in the year. To get to that point, it is also likely that a very short-term spending measure will have to be passed on Friday as a bridge to a final spending bill.
However, should Mr. Trump dig in, there could be a huge and largely needless fight that distracts from the rest of his agenda. “It is not going to happen in this bill, so I am not sure why they are making a sweat over it,” Mr. Lott said.
