New York real estate agents take on many roles, particularly when they’re shepherding first-time buyers. They’re accountants, educators (“Remember: The contract isn’t binding until both parties sign it”), decorators (“Just think how the foyer would look with a coat of Dorset Cream”), perhaps even stand-up comics (“A dishwasher? A washer and dryer? A walk-in closet? A second bedroom? Yes, all perfectly doable with your budget — but wait, does the apartment have to be above ground?”).
Sales agents whose résumés include jobs as mental health providers may be way ahead of the game. The skills they developed as counselors — how to listen, how to interpret, how to advocate and negotiate — couldn’t be better preparation, they say, for guiding clients through the thicket that is home-buying in New York City. The reasons for their career switch: burnout and the desire to make more money.
“Real estate is really just social work in a different arena: In both, you have to understand what’s being said and to interpret what’s not being said,” said Anna Hargraves Hall, 47, an agent at Stribling who has a Master of Social Work from Columbia. She did field work at a school for blind and low-vision children, followed by a stint with Big Brothers Big Sisters of New York City. “And there’s a need to understand what a huge decision it is to buy an apartment, not just financially but emotionally,” she added.
It’s a point of pride for Carey Larsen that she doesn’t have a sales pitch. “I think people often hard-sell in this business,” said Ms. Larsen, 42, an agent at Citi Habitats who spent seven years as a domestic violence counselor, an occupation, she said, that taught her the value of being a good listener. Ultimately, she decided that she wanted the flexibility of self-employment.
Hank Orenstein, 59, an associate broker at Corcoran, worked as a resident counselor for adults coming out of psychiatric facilities, and as a social services director at a family shelter in the South Bronx before deciding, 11 years ago, that it was time for a change — time for a more remunerative occupation. And after all, he had sort of grown up in the business: His father was a real estate tax assessor for the city.
Recently, Mr. Orenstein worked with a woman who was insistent on a doorman building in a specific part of the Upper East Side of Manhattan, at a specific price point, with a washer and dryer in the apartment. “I didn’t tell her, ‘That’s not going to happen,’” he said. “I told her the percentage of co-ops that had what she wanted, but that we would stick with the plan of finding such a place.” It took a year; the place was found.
During her 15 years as a private adoption consultant, Mary-Jean Gianquinto worked with many women who had made the decision to become single parents. She had always been interested in real estate, she said, and after investing successfully in several properties, she felt the time was right, last summer, to go into the profession full time. Now an agent at Halstead, Ms. Gianquinto, 56, who has an M.S.W. from the University at Buffalo, has made something of a subspecialty of working with single women looking to buy an apartment.
The client who finds fault with every property? The one who drags her feet about signing a contract? The fight over a sconce — “It’s staying!” “No, it’s going!” — that threatens to derail a closing? Who better than someone with clinical experience to get to the bottom of an issue without losing the client or the commission?
Joan Kagan, 48, the sales manager at TripleMint and a former counselor for developmentally disabled people and their families, recalls working with a woman whose recent divorce required her to vacate a grand apartment on Park Avenue. She was now downsizing to a co-op in the same neighborhood.
But the deal had stalled. Ms. Kagan’s client was upset about a small crack in the ceiling. She complained that the door handles were cheap and that there was a problem with one of the electrical outlets in the bathroom. It was a very nice, affordable apartment, and the seller was getting frustrated that the contract hadn’t been signed.
A background in counseling is hardly a guarantee of real estate success. And, obviously, many sales agents without such experience do just fine. Some may be excellent listeners by nature, with the empathy of Oprah.
Counselors-turned-brokers could lead a seminar of their own: Reassuring the First-Time Buyer.
Including your real estate agent?
