The Toronto Maple Leafs are believed to have the longest-serving ushers in the N.H.L., led by the 78-year-old Andy Mastoris, who has worked for the team for 53 years.
But across the league’s Original Six franchises, there is an abundance of experience and anecdotes.
In Boston, Dan McMorrow, who will be 81 in May, has served the Bruins for 48 years.
In Montreal, Claude Niding, 73, is the dean of the Canadiens, with 40 years under his belt.
In Detroit, Arthur Johnson, who did not disclose his age, is the elder statesman of the Red Wings staff, with 37 years of experience.
And, in Chicago, Deloris Watts, 72, has worked at the United Center for all 23 years of its existence.
Ushers have crossed paths with sports and music superstars and have outlived players, coaches and even buildings like Maple Leaf Gardens, the Montreal Forum and Boston Garden.
The ushers may be faceless and nameless to the outside world, but not necessarily in the world they inhabit.
Watts recalls how one of the N.B.A.’s giants made her feel special years ago. Before a game, she felt a hand on her shoulder.
McMorrow is an institution in Boston. He was on the job the day in 1970 when Bobby Orr flew through the air after scoring the Stanley Cup-winning goal — a moment that is immortalized in a statue outside TD Garden, the arena that replaced Boston Garden in 1995.
“I was working right in that corner where that goal was scored,” McMorrow said.
“I’m sure he wouldn’t know my name, but he knows my face,” said McMorrow, who works near the Bruins alumni room and sees a lot of the old faces.
A basketball player in his youth, McMorrow started out as more of a basketball fan, but over the years, he has swung to hockey.
“I loved sports my whole life, and you can’t find many places where they pay you to come in and watch a Bruins or a Celtics game,” he said.
The old Boston Garden, he recalls, had its charm, even though it was in rough shape in the end.
He got involved in ushering because of his wife, to whom he has been married for almost 57 years. Her father was the president of the ushers’ association.
Now, because of his age, McMorrow likes “to pick his spots,” he said, and works only when he wants for one or two events a week.
Johnson, now a ticket taker, feels privileged to have worked so long in Detroit. He began working at Joe Louis Arena a year after it opened in 1979, but he and the Red Wings will have a new home next season in Little Caesars Arena.
“I’m sad to see it go,” Johnson said.
Seeing the success of the Red Wings, who have won four Stanley Cups in Johnson’s tenure, and meeting performers like Fleetwood Mac and Prince made Johnson appreciate his access to the stars.
