Three retired police officers and a former Brooklyn prosecutor were charged on Tuesday in a widening federal corruption investigation into the New York Police Department and its gun-licensing division.
The charges revolve around a scheme in which so-called gun-licensing expediters bribed police officers in exchange for approval of hard-to-obtain gun permits, according to two criminal complaints unsealed on Tuesday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The complaints show that a former New York police sergeant, David Villanueva, and Frank Soohoo, a gun-license expediter who dealt frequently with the department’s license division, have pleaded guilty to bribery and other charges and are cooperating with the authorities.
Prosecutors have already said another former officer, Richard Ochetal, who worked in the licensing division for about five years, pleaded guilty and was also assisting investigators.
“The information they have provided, along with the other evidence we have gathered, paint a devastating picture of pervasive corruption at the licensing division,” Joon H. Kim, the acting United States attorney in Manhattan, said at a news conference on Tuesday.
Mr. Kim announced the charges alongside William F. Sweeney Jr., the head of the F.B.I.’s New York field office, and James P. O’Neill, the police commissioner, who said that he was “absolutely appalled” at the allegations and that the department had taken measures to prevent a recurrence of any such conduct.
Among the steps taken, Lawrence Byrne, the department’s deputy commissioner for legal matters, said later, is a rule that bars expediters from entering the gun-licensing division on behalf of an applicant; all applicants must now appear in person. Moreover, Mr. Byrne said, gun permit approvals may be made only by the unit’s top two officers.
The charges are the most significant development in the long-running police corruption inquiry since June, when two police commanders were arrested and accused of accepting expensive gifts from two politically connected businessmen in return for illicit favors. Sergeant Villanueva and Officer Ochetal were also charged at the time.
The retired officers charged on Tuesday were Paul Dean, a former lieutenant, and Robert Espinel; both had been assigned to the license division.
A third defendant, Gaetano Valastro, who retired as a detective in 1999, owned and operated a store in Queens that sold firearms and related equipment and provided firearms training courses, one complaint says.
All three men were charged with two counts of conspiracy to commit bribery; Mr. Dean and Mr. Espinel were also charged with one count of extortion, and Mr. Valastro with one count of making false statements.
Mr. Espinel’s lawyer, John T. Powers Jr., said his client had always maintained his innocence and had “never received any benefit” from the alleged gun-licensing schemes. “It’s a shame that the government chose to take Mr. Espinel out of his home at 5 a.m. and parade him as some sort of trophy,” Mr. Powers said.
Mr. Dean’s lawyer, Abe George, said his client had been “a dedicated public servant” for more than 20 years. “He is presumed innocent under the law and looks forward to his day in court,” Mr. George said.
Mr. Valastro’s lawyer declined to comment.
The former prosecutor who was charged is John Chambers, a lawyer who specialized in helping clients navigate the gun application process in New York City and Nassau County. Mr. Chambers, who was an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn in the 1980s, was charged with bribery and conspiracy.
Mr. Chambers gave Sergeant Villanueva tickets to Broadway shows, a Paul Picot watch valued at $8,000, tickets to sporting events, sports memorabilia and cash, according to a criminal complaint. In return, Sergeant Villanueva “ensured that renewals of N.Y.P.D. gun licenses for Chambers’s clients were approved significantly faster,” the complaint said.
The charges come weeks after a Brooklyn man, Alex Lichtenstein, was sentenced to 32 months in prison on charges that he paid police officials thousands of dollars in bribes to obtain expedited handgun licenses for his clients.
Mr. Lichtenstein was a member of the Shomrim, a neighborhood watch group in ultra-Orthodox Jewish communities in Brooklyn.
All four defendants were ordered released on bond.