To those who are not immersed in classical music, the way passionate listeners constantly compare performances and recordings of repertory staples must seem strangely obsessive. Are there that many ways to do Beethoven’s “Emperor” Concerto or Mahler’s First Symphony?
It’s actually amazing how different the takes on such works can be. And some masterpieces almost cry out for interpretive intervention, none more so than Bach’s “Goldberg” Variations. A performance of this monumental keyboard piece is always an event, especially for those who know it intimately and will inevitably be lining it up in their minds next to beloved versions from the past.
So it was no surprise that Alice Tully Hall was packed on Sunday afternoon for the German pianist Lars Vogt’s probing account of this demanding piece, an Aria theme and 30 variations on it. Mr. Vogt observed all the repeats indicated in the score, bringing his performance in at around 75 minutes.
There is a rich discography of the “Goldberg” Variations. Bach lovers should check out Mr. Vogt’s recording, which has already generated intense debate. There are several reasons this work in particular invites such wide-ranging interpretations. Though Bach wrote it for the harpsichord, pianists have also claimed it. This requires reconceiving the music for the modern piano in terms of sound, articulation, the use of the sustaining pedal and, especially, dynamics, since the piano has a far greater range of soft to loud than the harpsichord. Bach left few indications of tempos, phrasings and dynamics in his scores. He believed, perhaps, that his works were so completely realized that the music could be played in all manner of ways and still come through.
The brilliant, iconoclastic pianist Glenn Gould left us two classic, extremely different recordings of the piece. In 1955, his “Goldberg” recording, played with breathless tempos and an uncannily articulate, clipped touch, won him an international following. He was just 22. Then, in 1981, having decided that his first take was, he said, “just too fast for comfort,” Gould rerecorded it with more spacious tempos, taking a mellower, more reflective approach.
Mr. Vogt, 46, was not particularly known for his Bach when he recorded the “Goldberg” Variations in 2014. He has excelled in later music of Germanic weight and breadth, Brahms especially.
He brought that quality of breadth to his performance on Sunday. Playing strands of spiraling passagework with pristine clarity was not his primary goal. Instead, from his deeply lyrical yet intricately ornamented account of the opening Aria, Mr. Vogt seemed most concerned with revealing the music’s contrapuntal complexities and daring harmonic adventures, even if this resulted in passages that sounded brawny and rough. Often he seemed engrossed with the wondrous musical particulars of a given moment. If this lessened the dramatic arc of the variations as a structural whole, so be it.
I also liked the way he “orchestrated” the variations — that is, played lines and voices with different touches and colors, as in the first variation, when he suggested how the leaping bass line might sound played by low strings. Igor Levit, on his superb recent recording, highlighted the orchestral qualities of this variation, too, while bringing more flow and elegance to the music than Mr. Vogt. Gould’s two versions of this variation offer a head-spinning contrast: the first one manically fast, the later one playfully thumpy.
See? I can’t resist making my own comparisons.