Avgolemono rice.Credit...Gentl and Hyers for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Amy Wilson.
Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.
Good morning. Happy Easter, if you’re celebrating: “a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees,” as Isaiah put it, “of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.” Maybe that’s a ham for you, or a lamb, with magnums of Muscadet and a lemon angel food cake for dessert.
Probably you have your plans all wrapped up, like the eggs some will hide today in the garden and others under the couch, or on the windowsills overlooking the bodega. But if not, take a look at our collection of essential recipes for Easter, or read Gabrielle Hamilton’s latest “Eat” column in The Times Magazine, and cook her new recipe for avgolemono rice.
No Easter for you? “Resurrection” is just a TV show that never quite took off? How about a nice dinner this evening of Julia Moskin’s recipe for flattened chicken thighs with roasted lemon slices? I’d pair it, myself, with Pierre Franey’s rice pilaf and David Tanis’s butter-braised asparagus. That’d be a nice Sunday night feed.
Monday night, if you’re dealing with Easter leftovers, might benefit from a run through our collection of recipes for leftover ham for inspiration. Or you could tear up your leftover lamb, to make this fine dinner of Greek-style nachos.
Others, not having taken part in the holiday, may prefer a meatless option. Melissa Clark’s recipe for penne with roasted eggplant, chile and mint should answer. (If not, you’re due for a baked potato with fixin’s, and some time in front of a screen watching Louis C.K.’s new special, on Netflix.) Still others, eating in the final stretch of Passover, could maybe try Melissa Clark’s quinoa salad with roasted carrots and frizzled leeks.
For a Tuesday night meal, I’d like to eat Florence Fabricant’s fettuccine with asparagus and smoked salmon. In my fantasy life, I’d have time to put Samin Nosrat’s excellent “How to Make Pasta” guide to work in the morning, and make my own pasta before taking a long nap in a chair on the beach. Dinner’s at 6, right after spin class. But c’mon: It’s Tuesday, your taxes are due, and, anyway, you won’t be home till 8 because of traffic. Store-bought fresh pasta’s just fine for Tuesday night. I won’t tell Samin.
On Wednesday, you should turn to this excellent recipe for chicken curry that I learned how to make from the British food writer Meera Sodha, who learned it from her mom. I like it with basmati rice, some yogurt — and a lot of mango chutney, Major Grey’s.
Thursday. Surely you’re done with your ham by now! Use the bone to enliven a pot of Cuban black beans, or a straight-up hambone soup. But don’t eat it right away. Let that mixture mix and mingle and then put it in the fridge so you can eat it over the weekend. Instead, for dinner this night, hambone or no, take it easy: I like Melissa Clark’s Tuscan kale salad, and I love it alongside or underneath a few scallops seared in a tiny amount of oil and then basted in butter until glistening.
And then round out the week with burgers because burgers are fantastic and we have so many kinds to try: lamb burgers; salmon burgers (try that recipe with halibut if that’s what you’ve got); diner-style burgers; Balkan-style burgers; 11 different veggie burgers. Serve Mark Bittman’s tater tots to go with. They’re a revelation, Mark told us, and he hardly says that about anything.
Now, won’t you take a few minutes to read Mary Pols’s excellent new story in Down East, about aquaculture in Maine. (If you can find a hard copy, so much the better. Martha Stewart was the guest editor, and it shows.) I like, too, this Outside magazine profile of an Oklahoma game warden named Emily Long. And take a look at this new feature my next-door neighbors here at The Times’s books desk put together, “Match Book.” It’s an advice column for book lovers, and there are many here among us. Take part.
Finally, let me know what you think of what we’re doing here. Send darts or flowers to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| And I’ll be back tomorrow.