WASHINGTON — One by one, the senators shuffled to the lectern on Wednesday, explaining themselves grimly, reflecting on the specter of mutually assured destruction and wondering aloud how the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Neil M. Gorsuch had delivered the institution to this moment.
It was the eve of two seminal votes for the Capitol’s upper chamber: an expected Democratic filibuster of Judge Gorsuch on Thursday and a likely rule change pushed by Republicans — the so-called nuclear option — to bypass the filibuster and confirm President Trump’s selection with a simple majority vote.
On a few points, at least, bipartisan consensus seemed to have congealed: This is terrible for the Senate. This is terrible for the country. And this is happening.
Will Democrats Filibuster to Try to Block Gorsuch From the Supreme Court?
Which Democrats are attempting to block President Trump’s Supreme Court nominee.
And these were the “yes” votes on the nuclear option.
Yet as they have argued all week, from the moment Democrats secured the votes to block the nomination under current rules, Republicans insisted on Wednesday that they had no choice but to pursue this course.
The minority party has framed its opposition differently. Democrats have cited concerns over Judge Gorsuch’s record on workers’ rights and his degree of independence from Mr. Trump, among other issues.
They have also reminded the public of the treatment last year of Judge Merrick B. Garland, President Barack Obama’s nominee for the seat left vacant with the death of Justice Antonin Scalia. Republicans, led by Mr. McConnell, refused to even consider Judge Garland during a presidential election year.
What Is the ‘Nuclear Option’?
Republicans are threatening to “go nuclear” if Democrats filibuster Neil M. Gorsuch’s confirmation to the Supreme Court. It’s a term meant to evoke horror, because it would turn the Senate from a debate-friendly body into a more partisan chamber like the House.
Longstanding Senate rules allow a minority of 41 senators to filibuster a Supreme Court nominee by blocking a final confirmation vote. Under the “nuclear option, ” 51 senators would change the rules and abolish the filibuster.
But the remedy, Mr. Schumer argued, was not to bulldoze longstanding rules and traditions; it was to find a compromise nominee who could earn 60 votes.
No senator logged more speaking hours on Wednesday (and Tuesday) than Senator Jeff Merkley, Democrat of Oregon, who held the floor until midmorning after a more than 15-hour overnight talk-a-thon to protest the nomination.
It was not technically a proper filibuster, as no Senate business was being delayed. But it was certainly a feat of congressional stamina and C-Span content enhancement, with rousing flourishes, meandering detours and encouragement from his Democratic peers on social media.
In his remarks, Mr. Merkley argued that Judge Gorsuch’s rulings had disproportionately favored the privileged. He suggested that the Senate should not confirm a lifetime appointee of Mr. Trump’s amid investigations into ties between the president’s orbit and Russia. He quoted George Washington and lamented creeping commercialism and an erosion of civic participation.
Republicans have pointed to assorted moments of Democratic escalation, including attempts to block judicial nominees under President George W. Bush and the party’s choice in 2013, when Democrats controlled the Senate, to bar filibusters on lower judgeships and executive branch nominees.
Senator Tim Scott, Republican of South Carolina, said the week’s events owed to the “physics of politics,” framing the rule change as an inevitable outgrowth of a rare partisan filibuster of a Supreme Court pick whom conservatives view as plainly qualified and uncontroversial.
Still, several lawmakers sought to present themselves as pained, fueling an unusual dynamic on Capitol Hill. At least a handful of Republicans predicted that their votes would damage the country and the future of the judiciary, but described the alternative — letting Judge Gorsuch’s nomination die — as even less palatable.
Republicans have vowed that Judge Gorsuch will be confirmed on Friday.