There wasn’t a lot of happiness to go around in “The Americans” this week. And that was despite seeing Elizabeth and Philip score what may be the greatest triumph of their careers: stealing a stalk of super wheat from a Mississippi field and delivering it to Gabriel, who planned to take it with him back to Moscow where it could help feed the hungry Soviet masses.
“I feel like one of the guys in the posters,” Philip said as they squatted in the Mississippi mud — although, with his pony-tailed Southern-man disguise, he wasn’t looking very heroic.
The episode, titled “The Committee on Human Rights,” also began with a tender moment: the conclusion of Paige’s visit with Gabriel. She was pleased with his praise for her and her parents, and she saw that this spy thing wasn’t just business. “He’s like — your family,” she said to Philip. Her spy antennas were out, though — she noticed the lack of photographs and realized they were in a safe house.
Her meeting with Gabriel was warm and fuzzy, but its consequences weren’t. Feeling a stronger sense of duty than ever, she dropped the bomb on Matthew, telling him she couldn’t be his girlfriend anymore. It was a sad, awkward scene, with an emotional Paige flaring into anger and contradicting herself. Poor Matthew. It’s hard enough to understand a teenager in the first place, let alone one who says “You don’t know me” when she means “You don’t know I’m a Soviet spy in training.” When a distraught Matthew tried to grab her, Paige’s reaction — an Elizabeth-like hard shove — shocked her as well as him.
Leave it to Gabriel to see things clearly. As he left for Moscow, his last words to Philip were: “You were right about Paige. She should be kept out of all this.” And the episode closed on Philip’s shocked and alarmed expression.
Philip was clearly worried about present practices as well. Elizabeth had carried out her assignment at the psychiatrist’s office, stealing a document labeled “Committee on Human Rights.” Philip asked Gabriel about it, and Gabriel casually said that it was information about people who were part of “a well-organized opposition at home.” Philip looked apprehensive, presumably at the thought that their work was being used against innocent dissidents.
Nina’s spirit also hovered over Stan and Dennis’s second meeting with their potential recruit, Miss Kovalenko, who works at the Soviet news agency Tass. (The meeting took place at Rock Creek Park, so there were also associations with Martha Hanson’s great escape.) The contact was jumpy, and honest Stan told her that, yes, if things went south she might spend her life in a Soviet prison. She walked away without making a deal, and Dennis was not pleased with his partner. Later, Stan learned from Wolfe that the success of his Oleg gambit had accrued a cost: The bosses wanted Stan taken out of counterintellgence. Wolfe protected Stan by saying that their current assignment was too important, which could be bad news for Kovalenko: Whatever concern he’s shown so far, Stan has extra motivation to reel her in now.
We’ve probably seen the last of Mississippi, and there was some grim humor in our final looks at Deirdre and Ben, the Southern sexual dupes who weren’t dupes. Deirdre surprised Philip with her American free-mindedness — she just wants him for sex — but he got the last laugh, using his new expertise with Lotus to steal the information leading to the wheat field. And Ben had a surprise of his own: While he was being watched by the Jenningses, it became clear that he was two-timing Elizabeth.
The real comic relief of the episode, slight as it was, came from Stan, who decided to let his guard down a tiny bit and tried to explain to Renee what was bugging him at work, without giving anything away. After he told her about the “thing” that happened that almost got him fired, he seemed visibly relieved in a way no one else on this show is capable of being. “Thanks,” he said, the episode’s funniest line.
So we’re still left wondering what’s up with Renee. (Also, what was up with the stain on Philip’s shirt in Kansas?) The show has been so ominously suggestive in her regard that it seems she must have a secret — unless she’s the reddest of red herrings. In a gasp-inducing moment, Philip asked Gabriel flat-out whether she was “one of us.” Gabriel denied it, saying, “You’re losing it, Philip,” but he seemed to be protesting too much. Your rampant speculation is invited in the comments.