Big philanthropic donations garner big attention. And any criticism of them often comes long after the ribbon-cutting, and even then it can seem churlish. These megadonors are giving money to benefit the public good that they could be spending on jets, estates and club memberships — or in most cases, more of the above.
Think of John Paulson, the hedge fund manager, who gave $400 million to his alma mater Harvard University in 2015, a step up from the $100 million he gave to the Central Park Conservancy three years earlier. Stephen A. Schwarzman, the private equity executive, gave $100 million to the New York Public Library and got his name on the main branch in return.
Yet there are well-known examples of good intentions gone bad. Mark Zuckerberg’s $100 million gift to Newark public schools in 2010 is largely seen as a wasted opportunity, as much of the money was frittered away on consultants and other expenses, and the children of Newark were found to have benefited little. And the announcement by Mr. Zuckerberg and his wife, Priscilla Chan, after the birth of their first child that they would give the bulk of their fortune to charity — some $45 billion in 2015 — sounded great, but the devil was in the details: Their billions were going into a limited liability company, not a foundation, and they retained control over the money.
He adds to those questions some statistics he has marshaled. Those on the Forbes 400 list of the richest Americans — all billionaires, not counting the 100 or so billionaires who didn’t make the cut — have wealth greater than the bottom 61 percent of Americans. The billionaires who have signed the Giving Pledge, which asks them to donate at least half of their fortunes to charities, have wealth equal to all 90,000 foundations in the United States. And for all their donations, they receive healthy tax breaks that the United States Treasury estimated would cost $740 billion in lost tax revenue over the next decade.
For the most part, these megadonors — or super citizens, as Mr. Callahan, the editor of the website Inside Philanthropy and a founder of a think tank called Demos, calls them — can donate where they want and how much they want with little accountability and as much anonymity as they’d like.
Plus, with the New York City school system having an annual budget of close to $25 billion and more than one million students, a quick change isn’t realistic.
Mr. Callahan offers critiques of the leading approaches to giving today. And he does so in a way that is highly readable to people who may never have billions (or even millions) to donate to causes. He also shows why the rest of us need to be more skeptical about the praise heaped on big donors.
One big point is that philanthropy has changed greatly from the days when wealthy people donated to a museum or hospital and got their name on the wall (though that still happens). The big money now is going to a battle over ideas shaping political discourse, education policy, health care research and more.
“It would be one thing if all this philanthropy really reflected the full spectrum of American public opinion,” he added — but, he says, it doesn’t.
For instance, very little philanthropic money was spent on questioning free trade over the past 15 years — until Donald J. Trump focused on it in his campaign. And when it comes to education, Mr. Callahan said, a lot of dollars have been thrown around that do not address important structural issues.
He said that some of the smartest philanthropic money had gone after solvable problems. He singled out Michael R. Bloomberg for his donations aimed at reducing deaths from traffic accidents and tobacco and Mr. Gates for his focus on public health and vaccinations.
He took to task billionaires who say issues like climate change are important, but do not accelerate their giving to address the problem now. A private foundation is required to give away 5 percent each year, he noted, but could give a lot more.
Even if these super citizens were doing everything right with their giving, Mr. Callahan said he wouldn’t see that as an unalloyed good.
Mr. Callahan says he thinks there needs to be curbs on the philanthropic power of super citizens. First, their operations and giving need to be more transparent. An easy fix would be to make the grants listed on tax returns public more quickly.
Second, he calls for limits to be placed on the tax deductibility of political philanthropy. Whereas a donation made directly to a candidate is not tax deductible, donations to advocacy groups that back candidates and issues allow people to get tax deductions for the whole amount.
And third, he calls for greater accountability of foundations, which have enormous latitude with their giving and enjoy many tax benefits. One suggestion is to require boards to become more representative of the people the organizations serve if they want to maintain their tax advantages.
