Mayor Bill de Blasio announced on Monday that New York City would offer free, full-day preschool to all 3-year-olds within four years, saying that he was building on the success of the city’s prekindergarten program for 4-year-olds and that it was time to go further.
New York would be one of few cities in the country to offer free preschool to every 3-year-old, including Washington. But New York’s program would dwarf that city’s effort, which enrolls only 5,700 3-year-olds. In New York, officials expect to serve 62,000 children a year.
Implementing the universal prekindergarten program for 4-year-olds was the centerpiece of Mr. de Blasio’s campaign for mayor four years ago and is considered to be one of the biggest accomplishments of his first term. So it is not surprising that, with his re-election effort starting, he is seeking to amplify the achievement.
The announcement came shortly after Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo established a first-in-the-nation program offering free college tuition at the state’s public colleges and universities, eventually for families making up to $125,000.
In the often-divided world of education, the long-term benefit of early childhood education, particularly for low-income children, is one of the few things most experts agree on. Politicians on both the left and the right embrace the idea of expanding access to preschool, a rarity among educational initiatives. A number of states, including Florida, Georgia, Oklahoma and West Virginia, offer universal prekindergarten for 4-year-olds.
Studies have found the biggest effect when low-income children are put in high-quality education programs soon after birth. A study by James J. Heckman, an economist at the University of Chicago and a Nobel laureate, followed participants in two randomized experiments conducted in North Carolina in the 1970s through age 35. It found that youngsters who attended a high-quality early childhood program completed more years of education and had higher incomes as adults than did children in the control group, who either did not go to preschool or were in lower-quality programs. The men were less likely to use drugs or have high blood pressure.
Mr. de Blasio’s new plan, which he called 3-K for All, comes with many challenges, not least that the mayor said the city would need $700 million from the state and the federal government to be able to reach all children.
The rollout of the prekindergarten program has gone relatively smoothly, although some parents have complained that there are not enough seats available in certain neighborhoods, like the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
Experts have generally said the program is of good quality, considering that the initiative is still new. The city regularly evaluates its preschool providers using a nationally recognized scale for early childhood programs. The average scores from the city’s first two years were significantly below the average for classrooms in New Jersey’s Abbott Preschool Program, a highly regarded preschool effort. But they were similar to those of Abbott classrooms in that program’s early years.
While close to 70,000 children are enrolled in the city’s program for 4-year-olds, there are currently just 11,000 publicly financed seats for 3-year-olds in early childhood centers, and they are available only to families earning less than 200 percent of the federal poverty level, or $49,200 for a family of four.
In contrast to the program for 4-year-olds, which tripled the number of prekindergarten seats in two years, the new plan would be rolled out over four years. The program would start in two of the city’s lowest-income school districts, District 7 in the Bronx and District 23 in Brooklyn, and offer a seat to every 3-year-old in those districts by the fall of 2018. The city would expand the program to an additional six districts, still to be chosen, by the fall of 2020 and to all districts by 2021.
The mayor said that the city was putting $36 million in next year’s budget to finance the program and that it planned to spend $177 million annually on the program at full scale, on top of the $200 million it currently spends on seats for 3-year-olds from low-income families. But the program will cost much more than that — more than $1 billion — and Mr. de Blasio said he expected the state and federal governments to step up to help.
“We will build a coalition to put together whatever state and federal resources we need to bring this to full fruition,” the mayor said.
Whether those resources will be forthcoming is unclear. Betsy DeVos, the education secretary, has said little about early childhood education, and it was not a focus of hers as a philanthropist.
Mr. de Blasio’s effort to create a universal prekindergarten program for 4-year-olds led to one of his first conflicts with Mr. Cuomo. At the time, the city’s Education Department offered only 20,000 full-day prekindergarten seats. During his first election campaign, Mr. de Blasio proposed expanding the program to reach all children with a tax on high earners. Mr. Cuomo resisted that proposal and in the end financed it out of the state’s budget, without a tax, allowing him to claim some of the credit.
Finding enough teachers for new programs will also be a challenge. The city said it expected that roughly half of the seats would be in public schools, and roughly half in community-based centers and religious schools, and that an additional 4,500 teachers would eventually need to be hired. As the city has expanded its programs for 4-year-olds, community-based centers, which pay less than the public schools, have sometimes had trouble attracting teachers.
Many middle-class parents already enroll their 3-year-olds in private preschools. Asked why New York City should pay for them, Mr. de Blasio said he thought making the program universal promoted “fairness and equality” and also made it easier to achieve politically.
“I think it obviously creates maximum energy to get something like this done and supported here in the city and the state and federal level if it’s something that everyone benefits from,” he said.