When the Yankees had the 16th overall pick in the 2015 draft, their highest selection since they had taken Derek Jeter with the sixth pick in 1993, there was a tantalizing prospect still on the board.
Brady Aiken, a left-handed high school pitcher, had actually been the top overall pick in the draft the previous year. But the Houston Astros balked at signing him when his physical set off alarm bells, and nine months later he had Tommy John surgery.
Now Aiken was back in the draft again, but the Yankees, acting with some caution, decided that they would pass on him. Instead, they chose James Kaprielian, a right-handed pitcher from U.C.L.A. The Cleveland Indians selected Aiken with the next pick.
“The first thing we liked about James is he’s been a healthy pitcher,” the Yankees’ scouting director, Damon Oppenheimer, said at the time.
In the nearly two years since being selected, Kaprielian, 23, showed a glimpse of great promise and became the top pitching prospect in the organization. But the faith the Yankees placed in his health? It is now as fragile as the ligaments in his right elbow.
Kaprielian, who missed almost all of last season with a strained flexor tendon in his right forearm, will have Tommy John surgery next Tuesday. The Yankees expect him to be sidelined well into next season.
Kaprielian was evaluated by two doctors and then met with his father and his agent on Wednesday night. The decision seemed to have been made as much for his peace of mind as for his elbow.
While the Yankees have long treated their pitchers cautiously — when Joba Chamberlain quickly emerged as a sensation in the bullpen a decade ago, the team instituted the so-called Joba Rules innings restriction — Kaprielian’s case still ended up taking a distressingly familiar turn.
He will be at least the 15th pitcher in the organization to have Tommy John surgery in the past two years, according to a database kept by Jon Roegele, a baseball writer who catalogs use of the procedure through media reports. In addition, the Yankees’ ace, Masahiro Tanaka, has pitched the last two seasons with a tear in his elbow ligament after electing not to have surgery.
Only the Cleveland Indians, with 17, have had more pitchers undergo Tommy John surgery than the Yankees since the start of 2015, according to Roegele’s listings. The Mets have had 14.
The Yankees have had particularly bad luck with their top draft picks, going back to Andrew Brackman, who was signed for $3.5 million in 2007 and then almost immediately had Tommy John surgery. More recently, the top pitchers the Yankees selected in five consecutive drafts from 2011 through 2015 have had significant arm injuries.
Sam Safford, chosen 88th over all in 2011, never signed with the Yankees when they learned he needed shoulder surgery after a post-draft physical. Ty Hensley, the 30th overall pick in 2012, has undergone two Tommy John operations. Ian Clarkin, chosen 33rd over all in 2013, sat out the entire 2015 season with elbow inflammation. Jacob Lindgren, picked 55th over all in 2014, has undergone Tommy John surgery, too. And now Kaprielian, who received a $2.65 million signing bonus, will follow suit.
Besides Kaprielian, only Clarkin — who is pitching for Class A Tampa — remains in the Yankees organization.
Oppenheimer expressed frustration that in baseball — unlike basketball, football and hockey — there are no predraft physical examinations. Instituting one would have to be collectively bargained, something that the players have shown little appetite for doing. Instead, Oppenheimer said, the Yankees rely on scouts to be at every start that top pitching prospects make so the team can monitor innings, velocity, command and whether a start is missed, all of which might hint at an underlying problem.
Before the Yankees drafted Kaprielian, they also took comfort in knowing that Gary Denbo, the Yankees’ director of player development, had spent time with him as a coach on Team U.S.A. in the summer of 2014. But in the end, none of that mattered.
Once the Yankees draft a pitcher, he is given an extensive physical. After a pitcher signs with the team, Scott Lovekamp, who scouts every pitcher the club drafts, shares his assessment of his mechanics with the minor league pitching coordinators, Scott Aldred and Danny Borrell. They put together a development plan in conjunction with John Kremer, the organization’s sports science coordinator.
Oppenheimer said he did not think there was an answer.
As Oppenheimer and others are quick to note, the problem is not exclusive to the Yankees, even if it seems to have hit them harder than most.
The Mets, who have had their own trouble keeping pitchers healthy, were clearly chastened after three starters — Matt Harvey, Jacob deGrom and Steven Matz — who had previously undergone Tommy John surgery encountered new problems last season.
This year, the Mets limited how much throwing their starters did at the beginning of spring training — even it was just in infield drills.
Boras, who clashed with the Mets two years ago over how many innings Harvey should pitch in his return from Tommy John surgery, said he had no qualms over the Yankees’ handling of Kaprielian.
The Yankees have kept quiet on how Kaprielian was treated for his injury last year. Some pitchers, like Tanaka, have tried to rehabilitate their injuries through platelet-rich plasma treatment. The Angels pitcher Garrett Richards is taking a novel approach — stem cell therapy — to rehab a torn ulnar collateral ligament.
Boras, citing privacy rules, said only that Kaprielian followed traditional treatments for last season’s flexor muscle strain.
Kaprielian was allowed to return to the mound in the Arizona Fall League, where many top prospects play. And then came spring training, where Kaprielian talked of being “a caged bull.’’ Still, the Yankees allowed him to pitch only once in an exhibition game. Given that chance, he performed well, throwing two hitless innings against Toronto, striking out three batters and flashing a 96-mile-per-hour fastball.
When the Yankees sent Kaprielian to their minor league camp the next day, there was an expectation they would see him soon. That will not be the case.
