In the 40 years that Jack Thomson has been coaching high school baseball, he has seen a noticeable rise in the talent of players trying out for his team.
They scorch line drives, they hurl blazing fastballs.
But something is often missing.
In modern youth baseball, where the culture has been transformed by the pursuit of the holy grail, a college athletic scholarship, the fundamentals are falling by the wayside in favor of flashier skills like big-league-style hitting and pitching.
Private coaching and specialized camps are proliferating along with travel teams whose primary goal is putting players in a position to display their batting and pitching skills at college recruiting showcases. These events are cattle calls, with everyone trying to impress.
As a result, in the last decade or so, a generation of top ballplayers has, in most cases, spent little time learning how to accurately throw across the diamond; catch a fly ball; field a ground ball and turn a double play; run the bases effectively; make a tag at a base; or, God forbid, bunt.
Even some coaches of elite college teams — the very people who young players and their parents are trying to impress — are distressed by the deteriorating skill development of players. They say they often have to re-educate entire rosters, teaching rudiments of the game that used to be learned in middle school.
Five seasons ago, Louisville’s Dan McDonnell, who entered this season ranked sixth nationally in winning percentage among active college coaches, began dedicating dozens of hours during his spring practices to elemental fielding and throwing mechanics.
There is nothing new about a young player wanting to stand out on a team. And the skills that stand out most at youth showcases — raw power, on the mound and at the plate — are now showing up more prominently in the major league game, where strikeouts rise every season and home run rates are spiking again.
But the current burning desire to get noticed is driven almost exclusively by well-meaning parents of players who have become convinced it is the only way to contend for an athletic scholarship, or even a prized position on a quality high school team.
Parents have made time with a private coach a standard part of a young athlete’s week — and not just in baseball but throughout the overexcited, quasi-professional youth sports community.
Serious, aspiring baseball or softball players trudge into indoor training facilities around the country — charging $40 to $60 an hour — to refine their skills.
Those who operate and work at baseball instruction programs say they are simply responding to the demands of the marketplace.
Nate Headley, a former University of Tennessee assistant baseball coach who is also the brother of Yankees third baseman Chase Headley, owns two baseball and softball training facilities in Knoxville, Tenn.
Although Headley offers lessons in defensive play, it accounts for only 4 percent of the instruction he and his staff conduct. Hitting instruction accounts for 75 percent of the private lessons, and pitching lessons make up the remaining 21 percent.
Miguel Menendez, the baseball coach at Jesuit High School in Tampa, Fla., said specialized coaching had changed his job.
Some of Menendez’s best players — most of them on their way to play college baseball — said they would have had no shot of getting the attention of recruiters or performing at their current level without years of private instruction, which in most cases started when they were 10.
“There is only so much that the average dad can teach a kid,” said Jeffrey Hakanson, a senior pitcher who will attend the University of Central Florida in the fall.
All in all, the players said few recruiters took notice of routine skills.
The year-round specialization has other consequences beyond stunted baseball skills.
Overuse injuries, exemplified by the epidemic of serious elbow operations — known as Tommy John surgery — are rising among adolescent and preadolescent pitchers.
Major League Baseball has stepped forward with its own initiative hoping to broaden the scope of instruction and the appeal of the game by making youth baseball, well, more child’s play.
In 2015, it began a program, Play Ball, that promotes informal baseball- and softball-related games such as Wiffle ball and stickball. U.S.A. Baseball has devised a mobile coaching app with dozens of general baseball drills besides hitting and pitching.
A backlash against the showcase culture is beginning to gain momentum, at least among some college coaches who say they have changed recruiting methods to try to find more well-rounded young players.
Still, there is also nothing like an old-fashioned game of catch, when you can find it.
