To what lengths can a church go to protect its flock?
What if that church is big — very big — with schools, a seminary and membership the size of a small town? Does it deserve a police force of its own, even if that would be constitutionally questionable?
Supporters say the measure is necessary in increasingly dangerous times. Critics argue not only that it is gratuitous but also that it is unconstitutional. And on top of all that, the bill, if passed by the Alabama House of Representatives, would land on the desk of a brand new governor whose predecessor’s term came to a scandalous end just this week.
Briarwood is on the outskirts of Birmingham, straddling the border between Jefferson and Shelby Counties. It is a giant institution with more than 4,000 members and 40 ministries, including schools for students from preschool through grade 12.
A February news release from the church noted that under state law, private universities already have the right to hire police officers, a provision the church aims to “mirror” with this new legislation.
“After the shooting at Sandy Hook and in the wake of similar assaults at churches and schools, Briarwood recognized the need to provide qualified first responders to coordinate with local law enforcement who so heroically and effectively serve their communities,” the statement said.
Matthew Moore, the church administrator who emailed the news release, did not respond immediately to further questions.
This is not the first time state legislators have tried to give Briarwood the right to hire police officers. A similar bill passed in both the Senate and the House in 2015, but was left unsigned by the governor at the time, Robert Bentley. Another version died in the House last year.
He also predicted that the law authorizing the police force would, if enacted, quickly be struck down in federal courts.
The bill will have to pass through the State House of Representatives this month — where a near-identical version passed in 2015 — before it reaches the desk of Gov. Kay Ivey, a Republican who served as lieutenant to Mr. Bentley until he stepped down this week.
Mr. Bentley, a governor once known for being pious and approachable, resigned on Monday after pleading guilty to two misdemeanor charges. He had been at risk of impeachment for ethics violations related to an extramarital affair with his former political adviser, a scandal that has roiled Alabama politics for the past year.
A spokeswoman for Ms. Ivey said she would not comment on the Briarwood bill because it had not yet cleared the Legislature.
Mr. Johnston said he had high hopes for the measure this time around. He added that fears about the police force were overblown, saying it was unlikely that Briarwood would hire more than a few officers for full-time work.
Explaining the need for officers on the church campus, he referenced the Islamic State bombings at Coptic Christian churches in Egypt that killed dozens of people on Sunday, as well as “lone wolf” shootings like the one last year at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Fla., and in 2012 at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn.
“When you have a church the size of Briarwood, and what it involves, it becomes a likely target for that kind of thing,” he said.