The candidates for governor in the New Jersey Democratic primary pack impressive résumés: There is a former ambassador to Germany, a former under secretary of the Treasury, a state assemblyman with two decades of experience and a state senator with nearly four decades in Trenton.
Voters, however, have so far been underwhelmed, so the contest is off to a decidedly sleepy start.
Philip D. Murphy, the former ambassador, has emerged as the clear party favorite, having announced his candidacy nearly a year ago and locked up every county line and nearly every union endorsement in the state. Yet the most recent poll from Quinnipiac University, released in mid-March, shows him with the support of 23 percent of registered Democrats, trailing “don’t know,” which was chosen by 57 percent of those surveyed.
The lack of enthusiasm among voters, even though New Jersey is only one of two states to hold statewide elections this year, is a curious conundrum facing the candidates jockeying to replace Gov. Chris Christie, a Republican. The candidates are trying to inspire an electorate seemingly angry and desperate for change after the 2016 election, while also battling exhaustion and an extended hangover from the outcome.
Initially, the Democratic primary, on June 6, was shaping up to be a highly competitive race among three state heavyweights: Mr. Murphy; Steven Fulop, the mayor of Jersey City; and Stephen M. Sweeney, the State Senate president. But when Mr. Fulop announced that he would not run and immediately endorsed Mr. Murphy, and Mr. Sweeney followed suit, the anticipated battle sank to a simmer and the flooding of airwaves and mailboxes that usually accompanies a closely contested primary never even reached a drip.
Compounding the diminished battle is the long shadow of the 2016 election. On a recent overcast Saturday, about 100 people showed up in Plainfield, in northern New Jersey, as part of a nationwide protest to demand that President Trump release his taxes.
Their focus was on the president, not on any New Jersey officials, with chants and pun-filled signs that have become commonplace as the movement against Mr. Trump enters the fourth month of his presidency.
In interviews with about a dozen voters, only three knew that two candidates — Jim Johnson, the former under secretary, and Ray Lesniak, the state senator — would be speaking at the event.
Once a signature of Mr. Christie, town-hall meetings have become a hallmark of Mr. Murphy’s campaign as he spins around the room delivering a high-energy stump speech — complete with arm whips, finger-pointed shout-outs and even some air guitar inspired by his good friend Jon Bon Jovi — before taking written questions.
But like his campaign advertisements, which have been broadcast in New Jersey for nearly a year, Mr. Murphy has ignored his rivals and instead focused on the politician sucking the oxygen out of the political conversation: Mr. Trump.
Recently, Mr. Murphy has also upped his attacks on his New Jersey rivals, although not on the Democratic side. On Tuesday, he took to Twitter to criticize the transportation plans of Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno, one of two main candidates running in the Republican primary.
Mr. Murphy, a former Goldman Sachs banker, has marshaled much of his campaign around an economic message. He has called for the establishment of a public bank of New Jersey, an independent commercial enterprise “owned by the taxpayers,’’ to help spur investment in small business and infrastructure.
“I’ve been saying if we don’t get the economy right, we don’t get New Jersey right,” he said in a brief interview.
With Mr. Murphy’s candidacy ascendant, his rivals have been campaigning aggressively to chip into his lead.
Mr. Johnson was the first candidate to qualify for matching public funds — Mr. Murphy opted out of the program — and is the only other candidate advertising on television. He has received the largest amount of matching funds, nearly $2 million so far, and his campaign says it has spent about $1 million to advertise on cable television and digital media.
He has centered his campaign on ethics reform and is promoting himself as an outsider with a record of success, a point he emphasizes in his stump speech as he introduces himself to voters and makes the case for his candidacy.
As he made his way around the muddy fields, he posed for photos with supporters and greeted campaign volunteers, occasionally taking their picture himself. (Mr. Johnson runs the campaign’s Instagram account.) A 21-year-old woman handed him a résumé offering her help on his campaign.
Then he ran into another supporter, who had come with his dog. “The next governor just petted you,” Timothy Priano, 55, said to his dog, as Mr. Johnson tousled the animal’s ears and shook Mr. Priano’s hand.
Following Mr. Johnson at the event was Mr. Lesniak, who offered a somewhat rambling, off-the-cuff speech that showcased both his extended roots in the state (he makes references largely using just first names, like the first same-sex couple to be married in New Jersey, whose wedding was “in my house”) and his “from the heart” style.
“That is what distinguishes me from the rest of the candidates: I never have a prepared speech,” Mr. Lesniak said in a brief interview.
John Wisniewski, the state assemblyman, made a name for himself as the crusading force behind the investigation into the lane closings at the George Washington Bridge and as the chairman of the Bernie Sanders campaign in the state.
His embraces some of the most liberal positions among the Democratic contenders, including a single-payer health care system and tuition-free college for some students, echoes of Mr. Sanders though without the resonance. He is also the only Democratic candidate, besides Mr. Johnson, to qualify for matching state funds, having received nearly $700,000.
While Mr. Wisniewski may have been hoping for a proxy battle for the soul of the Democratic Party, Mr. Sanders lost the New Jersey primary last year by a large margin, his 37 percent dwarfed by Hillary Clinton’s 63 percent share, leaving Mr. Wisniewski with a smaller liberal base to build upon.
Nonetheless, Mr. Wisniewski does have the support of some Sanders voters, including Paula Friedman, a retired union activist, who turned out to see Mr. Murphy’s town-hall meeting to size up the crowd and the competition.
“This is all establishment stuff,” she said, waving her arm at the crowd, which she deemed as not having enough young people to qualify as progressive. Mr. Wisniewski, she said, is a “decent man,” adding that she was drawn to his single-payer health care proposal.
As the crowd arrived in Fort Lee, the energy in the room rose and the standing-room crowd shifted on their feet in anticipation. Though the crowd was largely older, they didn’t necessarily share Ms. Friedman’s concerns about Mr. Murphy’s liberal bona fides.
“My heart belongs to the liberal wing of the Democratic Party,” said Donna Campos, 72, from Fort Lee.
Whether that aligned with Mr. Murphy’s views did not seem to matter as she smiled when she talked about her preferred candidate.
