Does opening a gallery in a borough or a neighborhood not previously associated with the art market immediately lead to gentrification?
In the past, artists have been accused of being at the vanguard of unchecked real estate development in low-income areas. But it’s hardly the artists’ fault alone.
American cities have not acted to stave off what geographers and urban planners call “uneven development,” and the story, even in recent years of warp-speed real estate shifts, is much more complex. While artists look for affordable space to live and work in the city, they continue to mount exhibitions showcasing their own work and the work of their friends and associates.
In this roundup of Brooklyn galleries — pushing to the edges of Queens — I’ve highlighted art spaces that confront traditional gentrification and displacement or show how artists and others have responded to the changing geography of art in New York City.
ART IN GENERAL Just across the East River and nestled between the Brooklyn and Manhattan Bridges, Dumbo has been one of the most on-again-off-again art neighborhoods in the city. With the spike in tech and various creative companies occupying lofts in the area, it is on again. Janet Borden, Minus Space and Klompching have opened galleries; Smack Mellon remains a nonprofit stalwart; and Art in General, another alternative space showcasing emerging artists, moved from TriBeCa to Dumbo last year. Art in General’s current show features Postcommodity, a collective of three artists participating in the 2017 Whitney Biennial whose work focuses on the Mexican-American border. Here, closed-circuit video and sound installations offer a poetic, sometimes creepy rumination on what it’s like to cross borders and live under surveillance.
A.I.R. A landmark in feminist history (or herstory), A.I.R. Gallery was founded in 1972 by women for female artists. The gallery moved to Dumbo in 2008 and to its current location in 2015. It usually hosts three concurrent exhibitions. The present ones are, in the main space, fuzzy, poetic photographs by Maxine Henryson of mostly European locales; assemblages by MaryKate Maher that reference the environment and climate change; and Alison Owen’s works using postcards, correspondence and other ephemera through which people “connect” (her word) and communicate.
WE BUY GOLD A pop-up or roving gallery with an agenda, We Buy Gold is pushing back against gentrification in African-American neighborhoods like Harlem and Bedford-Stuyvesant. “One.,” the first show of three in this space, includes work by Torkwase Dyson, Renee Gladman and Harold Mendez. Like the gallery, Ms. Dyson’s paintings and sculptures are informed and inspired by black spatial politics, which considers how racialized institutions and policies, from slavery to real estate development, have affected minorities. Ms. Dyson explores this through abstract painting and sculpture, which in the past often ignored racial implications. Ms. Gladman is best known as a writer, but she makes drawings that reflect on space and landscape, while Mr. Mendez’s photographs and charred box “Untitled (Death Mask),” from 2015, consider the black body in physical space.
AMERICAN MEDIUM The current show at American Medium is a fitting representation of the gallery’s program, which mixes objects with performance, video — even parties, barbecues and other social gatherings. In her work, E. Jane, as her persona Mhysa, channels 1990s R&B divas and considers how black women were represented through their music and in photographs and videos. A statement accompanying the show argues that “Colorism determines who is allowed to be praised, acknowledged or exist in the ‘urban’ or non ‘urban’ popular imaginary.” Videos and digital prints on swaths of silk mounted on the wall pay homage to performers like Aaliyah, Brandy, Mary J. Blige, Whitney Houston and TLC.
MICROSCOPE You can hit three galleries in one small building at 1329 Willoughby, including Microscope, Transmitter and Tiger Strikes Asteroid (TSA). Microscope has the most consistent and robust program, showcasing artists working in film, video, photography and sound. Carver Audain started off in the sound world, but his first show at Microscope has sculptures that respond to the motions and movements of visitors, and found objects like a tattered American flag. Both a video of the flag, waving wanly in the wind on a gray New York day, and the same flag mounted in a metal frame in the gallery, comment on the current and (presumably) sorry state of American politics.
SIGNAL One of the sexiest postindustrial spaces in Bushwick — near Luhring Augustine, Clearing and Present Company — is occupied by Signal, which has hosted everything from performances to the Bushwick Art Book and Zine Fair. Current shows include Nikholis Planck and Elizabeth Karp-Evans’s sculptures and installation in the rear of the gallery, which comment on the gendered nature of the art world, among other things, and “Watchlist,” a program of films and videos from around the world whose title plays on the concept of government watch lists. Videos by Kate Cooper, Agnieszka Polska and Sable Elyse Smith are very much in line with Signal’s program, which features mostly young artists thinking in post-internet, technology-driven and posthuman terms, possibly within an intergalactic framework.
ORTEGA Y GASSET PROJECTS A veteran of the art real estate wars, Ortega y Gasset was started by a collective of artists evicted from 1717 Troutman Street in Bushwick, which housed numerous artist-run spaces. Their new Gowanus space is in the basement of the Old American Can Factory, a building similarly populated with artists’ studios and businesses. The gallery is showing a mini-retrospective of paintings by Rick Briggs, made mostly within the past five years. Mr. Briggs peppers his abstract canvases with objects and motifs from his day job as a scene painter, primarily using Benjamin Moore paints bought from a hardware store rather than an art supply store. The lively canvases include nods to Matisse cutouts, but also cut-up pieces of paint-roller sleeves, skins of dried paint and wooden paint stirrers.
106 GREEN Founded by the artists Mitchell Wright, Ridley Howard and Holly Coulis in 2009, 106 Green has become a stalwart in a neighborhood that also includes Cleopatra’s, the film and electronic arts space Light Industry, and Primary Information, a publisher of artists’ books. Amanda Baldwin is having her first gallery show here.  There are overlaps with Sascha Braunig’s mind-bending compositions, but Ms. Baldwin’s paintings have more texture and facture. Like many shows at 106 Green, this is an auspicious and accomplished debut.
BLACK BALL PROJECTS The descent (or ascent, depending on your viewpoint) of Williamsburg into an upscale, urban lifestyle hub seems complete with an Apple store and a Whole Foods near the nexus of Bedford and Metropolitan Avenues. A few blocks south, however — and not far from Southfirst, the alternative gallery that mounts consistently noteworthy and historical shows — is Black Ball Projects, a one-room art space started a year ago by artists who met as master’s students at Yale. “Poster,” their current exhibition, features placards, banners and other objects that address the American political scene, postelection. The show includes submissions by well-known artists like Amy Sillman, Laura Parnes and Marlene McCarty, but also contributions from friends, family and community members who responded to the gallery’s open call.