Even the air aches with mystery in Richard Maxwell’s “Samara,” a sense of life as a teasing and unresolvable riddle. The sounds that saturate this hypnotic fable of a play, which opened on Sunday in a Soho Rep production, suggest the music that fills your mind when you’ve been encased in silence for too long – the sort of noises your imagination might conjure if you were lost for days in a desert.
Such a landscape is the setting for this uncanny tale of nomads adrift, directed by Sarah Benson and featuring an exquisitely subliminal score by the country-rock eminence Steve Earle. And as is usual in recent works by Mr. Maxwell, one of the great original voices of experimental theater of the past several decades, “Samara” seems to be situated at the corner of the everyday and eternity, where the earth meets the sky and mortality is a force of gravity.
Now imagine those lines, if you can, being uttered by Clint Eastwood — the early-career edition, who appeared as the laconic Man With No Name in Sergio Leone movies of the 1960s. For though its title evokes the Middle East (and the John O’Hara novel “Appointment in Samarra,” about one man’s road to death), this “Samara” frequently brings to mind movies of the brutal Old West, where life was cheap and horizons endless.
Mr. Maxwell crossed similar terrain in 2007 in his deadpan riff on the horse opera, “Ode to the Man Who Kneels.” But “Samara” is a fuller and richer work, reflecting welcome new directions that its author has been pursuing of late.
Having become a downtown theater darling of the 1990s with poker-faced melodramas of willfully plodding dialogue, Mr. Maxwell has extended his artistic reach in his middle years. Recent works like “Neutral Hero” (which reimagines the Odyssey in Mr. Maxwell’s native Northwest) and “The Evening” (which begins with a description of the death of his father) have felt surprisingly personal, fully crossing the bridge between the playwright and his subjects.
He has also demonstrated a new willingness to stretch beyond the affectless line readings and self-consciously makeshift settings that were his early signature. “Samara” is unusual for a Maxwell production in that it is not directed by its author. And Ms. Benson, the inventive artistic director of Soho Rep, has coaxed her very affecting, very funny cast into almost naturalistic performances, while still celebrating Mr. Maxwell’s love of the artifice of theater.
The Mezzanine space of the A.R.T./New York Theaters has been converted into a monochromatic stretch of prairie and forest by the set designer Louisa Thompson. Mind you, the single color isn’t a shade of sand or wood; it’s the matte black of the milk-crate-like containers from which Ms. Thompson has fashioned not only the playing area but also the in-the-round (or square, to be precise) seating at stage level.
Yet we truly believe that when a young Messenger (the 14-year-old Jasper Newell) sets out on a fatal journey what he sees before him is “endless plain. Beyond that, valley and river. Beyond that, vast hills.” That description comes straight from the script’s stage directions, which are read aloud in a raspy voice by Mr. Earle, who observes and annotates the action from behind a music stand.
That isn’t the only way in which Mr. Earle helps frame the plot. He has also devised the music, both earthy and ethereal, that is performed by two musicians, crouched in corners in sepulchral lighting (beautifully rendered by Matt Frey). Ivan Goff plays the uilleann pipes and Anna Wray a range of strident percussion instruments, and the haunting noises they conjure are both lyrical and suspenseful.
The plot is shaped by journeys taken by people hoping to claim or pay off debts, or propelled by a need either to leave or to return home. None of these motives are mutually exclusive. The first of these itinerant figures is the Messenger, who embarks on his trek after killing his Supervisor (Roy Faudree) at an outpost.
His destination is a remote inn run by the Drunk (Paul Lazar) and the Manan, an ambiguously linked couple who live in a forsaken inn. They, too, leave the security of their provisional home to go a-wandering and meet a small familial tribe, made up of an oracular old woman (the sublime Vinie Burrows) and her feral sons (Modesto Flako Jimenez and Matthew Korahais).
Their encounters, which are as often violent as they are haphazard, evoke a heady host of classic American storytellers. The bleak, mythic vistas of the dramatist Sam Shepard and the novelist Cormac McCarthy come to mind, as well as films by Peckinpah and Ford.
It’s as if Mr. Maxwell had elicited the unspoken thoughts that throb within a vintage western, with his characters giving voice to the feelings you may experience when watching such entertainments in an abstracted, melancholy mood. This impeccably realized show — whose first-rate creative team includes Palmer Hefferan (sound), Junghyun Georgia Lee (the funky fairy-tale costumes) and Annie-B Parson (choreography) — gives us story and subtext in one breath.
And just so you know, this play does not conclude when its plot comes to its end. There’s a masque-like dance such as traditionally followed Elizabethan performances, and a subsequent postscript that’s both visual and verbal, a contemporary account of traveling through open spaces. Such is this show’s strange magic that you may well feel it’s your own memory that’s speaking.