Much to the relief of Wall Street executives, who feared and hated him in equal measure, Daniel K. Tarullo left his powerful perch on the Federal Reserve Board of Governors last week, but not before delivering one last lecture on how big banks should be regulated in his absence.
His swan song was pretty surprising, all things considered. It also went largely unnoticed, much like Mr. Tarullo himself during his eight years at the Federal Reserve. Many people have never heard of him, even though his decisions affected their lives in ways big and small.
Once described as the “Wizard of Oz,” for the power he wielded behind the scenes, Mr. Tarullo was appointed to the Federal Reserve by President Barack Obama in January 2009. At the Fed, Mr. Tarullo took over the important responsibility of regulating the big Wall Street banks, a job that, understandably, had been the purview of the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The oversight moved to Washington from New York in the wake of the financial crisis.
“It was obvious that a lot in the U.S. regulatory system had not worked particularly well before the crisis,” Mr. Tarullo said in a 2015 interview with The Wall Street Journal. “It was equally obvious that there was going to need to be a rethink and reorganization.” Mr. Tarullo’s term was to end in 2022, but he decided to leave early in the wake of President Trump’s election victory.
In a speech at the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University on April 4, his penultimate day in office, Mr. Tarullo reiterated the importance of many of his singular policy achievements — including requiring banks to have more capital and to undergo annual stress tests — and then he made some news.
First, he acknowledged that the Dodd-Frank Act, which re-regulated Wall Street at length (and to a fault) in 2010, was a compromise among those lawmakers who wanted to break up the big banks in the wake of the financial crisis and those who wanted to leave the status quo in place.
Instead, he said, Dodd-Frank “imposes a host of restrictions and requirements” on banks, including on counterparty credit limits, risk retention rules, incentive compensation restraints and wind-up resolution planning, while also requiring big banks to increase their capital and reduce their leverage.
Given the law’s complexity, he said, it is no surprise Dodd-Frank hasn’t worked exactly as planned and has caused continuing consternation at banks, both large and small, in trying to comply.
Normally, Congress would have passed another law, months later, correcting what Dodd-Frank got wrong, he said. But that did not happen because of “partisan divisions” in Congress.
His most unexpected statement, though, was to acknowledge that the Volcker Rule, named after Paul A. Volcker, the former Fed chairman, was a mistake. The Volcker Rule essentially seeks to prevent big banks from engaging in proprietary trading.
Mr. Tarullo also said that the rule could be having “a deleterious effect” on “market making” — the buying and selling of stocks and bonds on behalf of clients — “particularly for some less liquid issues.” He even conceded, albeit in a footnote to the written text of the speech, that the new capital requirements have “impinged somewhat on market liquidity” for Treasury securities, supposedly the most liquid security on Earth, causing the buying and selling of them to be less efficient and more costly. This has long been a complaint of the big players in the market for Treasury securities.
Some of his prescriptions, of course, remain dubious at best. He still seems to think that his stress tests — essentially war gaming for big banks — will be a useful Baedeker during the next, inevitable financial crisis. But if we’ve learned anything about financial crises, they do not follow any established playbook or resemble anything that has occurred previously.
A better solution to bad behavior on Wall Street, in my mind, is changing what bankers, traders and executives get rewarded to do. Make them have their full net worth on the line again, and their behavior will change in a hurry.
To his credit, however, as Mr. Tarullo leaves the stage, his parting wisdom is worth remembering as we head into a period where Mr. Trump will probably use a sledgehammer to blow up banking regulations instead of the scalpel that is more appropriate.
