Emily Hurwitz, an advertising supervisor who lives in San Francisco, doesn’t like buying cars from traditional dealerships. In fact, she recently bought a 2012 Volkswagen Tiguan through Shift, a start-up that arranges online sales of used cars. She is happy with her car, which the company brought directly to her apartment to try out. Shift financed the $18,000 vehicle.
A handful of nascent online used-car companies, including Shift, are capitalizing on sentiments like these. Although most online sites merely refer consumers to dealers, these companies are aiming to disrupt the industry by skirting dealer markups and promoting what they see as a better buying and selling experience.
As with most of the start-ups, Shift appraises cars and sets a price. For buyers, that means no negotiation. That’s fine for consumers like Ms. Hurwitz, who had already done cost comparisons online.
In the last three years, online used-car start-ups have grown rapidly, accruing more than $2 billion in funding, according to ABI Research.
Still, some say these companies underestimate the complexity of automotive retail and that upending a century-old business model may prove difficult.
By 2015, the year after it was founded, Shift had raised nearly $75 million in capital from Goldman Sachs, DFJ and Highland Capital Partners. Beyond that, it would not discuss its financials.
Mr. Banks said Internet-based car companies face the costs associated with advertising, product depreciation, repair, detailing, transportation and delivery.
“It’s very difficult to balance supply and demand with a marketplace business model,” he said.
Most of these fledgling e-commerce companies must contend with local and state licensing and regulations, particularly during expansions. Shift, for example, recently had to discontinue sales in the Washington area until it received dealer licensing, Mr. Arison said.
In a test for the used-car industry, Carvana, which lost $93 million last year, recently filed to go public. Bolstered by fast-growing sales, Carvana, a five-year-old Phoenix-based company, which is not yet profitable, is expanding to 21 markets.
The trend toward online sales isn’t going away anytime soon, especially among the set that came of age with smartphones. More than 55 percent of Shift’s customers are under 35.
Rachel Lutz, who owns the Peacock Room clothing boutique in Detroit, said she would not have known how relatively roomy the new Mini Cooper Clubman was had she shopped exclusively online, since the model didn’t show up in searches. She ended up buying one from a veteran salesman, she said.
Over all, traditional dealers have missed opportunities to attract and better serve customers, said Paul Hennessy, chief executive of the online car retailer Vroom. “There’s already an appetite for doing research online; now, the next step is actually quite small,” said Mr. Hennessy, the former chief executive of Priceline.com.
The industry is big business; more than 38.5 million used cars were sold last year at an average retail price of $19,189, according to an Edmunds report. By contrast, 17.2 million new vehicles are forecast to be sold this year.
Jonathan Collegio, senior vice president for public affairs of the National Automobile Dealers Association, said that while consumers had benefited from the competitive used-car market, new companies could encounter tough times.
