Updated, 9:22 a.m.
Good morning on this cloudy-to-clear Monday.
It’s Easter Monday, and residents of Little Poland in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, are celebrating Smigus-dyngus (pronounced SHMEE-goose DING-goose), also known as Wet Monday.
The spring celebration, held the day after Easter, includes a tradition of young men dousing water on women as part of a courting ritual, said Marek Skulimowski, president of the Kosciuszko Foundation, the American center for Polish culture based on the Upper East Side.
By the late 19th century, Greenpoint, a neighborhood of private farms, had been transformed by shipbuilding and other waterfront industries. Polish immigrants flocked to the area, bringing food, culture and language that can still be found at shops and churches scattered throughout the rapidly evolving community.
Today, New York hosts the largest population of people of Polish ancestry in the United States.
At Polonia Bookstore, shoppers can find Polish newspapers and books, along with plastic, egg-shaped squirt guns for today’s water fight. The walls are covered with photographs of Pope John Paul II, who was Polish and who visited the nearby St. Stanislaus Kostka Church in 1979.
At the Sikorski Meat Market on Manhattan Avenue, a neighborhood establishment for 40 years, meat is ground, mixed and stuffed into sausage casings on site to make kielbasa. Racks of dangling sausages, up to 1,000 pounds at a time, are smoked over sawdust in an aging iron smoker.
At the Old Poland Bakery, Daniel Banaszek, 24, a student at ASA College, was buying Polish sand babka and cheesecake.
As in other parts of our city, conversations in Little Poland often turn to gentrification. Faced with higher rents, many residents are leaving the neighborhood for other Polish enclaves in Ridgewood or Maspeth, both in Queens.
Here’s hoping they remain.
Wesolych Swiat (Happy Holidays).
We wouldn’t mind getting sprinkled (or squirted) with some water today.
The clouds you’ll see as you’re sipping your morning joe should soon make way for sunshine and a high of 75.
• Scoreboard: Yankees crush Cardinals, 9-3. Marlins mangle Mets, 4-2. Canadiens wrangle Rangers, 3-1.
• Yankees host White Sox, 7:05 p.m. (YES).
• Alternate-side parking: suspended for Passover.
One hundred years ago this month, Marcel Duchamp’s “Fountain” was rejected from the inaugural exhibition of the Society of Independent Artists in New York.
The white urinal, displayed on its back, was considered unoriginal and not a work of art.
Duchamp, who moved to New York from Paris, bought the urinal from the J. L. Mott Ironwork Company, a plumbing supply store on Fifth Avenue near 17th Street.
The artist had submitted it to the exhibition, which was founded on the principle that all submitted artwork would be displayed and “all will have an equal opportunity,” The New York Times reported, as long as the entrants paid a $6 fee.
The standard porcelain potty, which was deemed indecent and therefore left out, is now widely considered to be the cornerstone of conceptual art.
This week, you can see an exhibition of homages to the work from more than 30 artists, including Ai Weiwei and Saâdane Afif, at the Francis M. Naumann gallery in Midtown.
