SYRACUSE — Why have sightings of unidentified flying objects around the nation more than tripled since 2001? Why is July the busiest month for U.F.O. sightings? Why did they spike in Texas in 2008, or in New Mexico in September 2015?
The authors are Cheryl Costa, 65, a former military technician and aerospace analyst, and her wife, Linda Miller Costa, 62, a librarian at Le Moyne College and a former librarian at the National Academy of Sciences, NASA and the Environmental Protection Agency.
Working on PCs amid sewing tables in the upstairs parlor — the warmest room in their hundred-year-old house — the two spent weekends for the last 16 months extrapolating figures from sightings reports and laying out the graphics.
The Costas realize some might find this a strange way to spend weekends. But both say they have spotted U.F.O.s themselves and want to detoxify the subject.
She came to the collaboration roundabout, having served as a cable lineman in the Air Force in Vietnam, and afterward in the Navy’s submarine service, as a man before undergoing gender-reassignment surgery in the 1980s. Ordained as a Buddhist nun, she was running a theater group in Maryland when she met Linda. They wed in 2011.
U.F.O. trackers welcomed their publication.
“With this compendium, Cheryl and Linda Costa have reminded the public and the media the extraterrestrial phenomenon continues unabated,” said Stephen Bassett, founder and executive director of the Paradigm Research Group, which lobbies for disclosure of official U.F.O. records.
Rebutting a common perception that U.F.O. sightings are on the wane, the Costas’ book shows that sightings have risen in waves, to 11,868 nationwide in 2015 from 3,479 in 2001. Only a small fraction of sightings are actually reported to Mufon or Nuforc.
The Costas listed 426 sightings in New York County from 2001 to 2015, second in the state’s tallies only to Suffolk County, on the tip of Long Island, with 554. How so many sightings in the nation’s densest core and around its toniest beach resorts have escaped wider notoriety is just part of the mystery.
Population fails to explain the figures conclusively, the Costas said. Washington State, with 6.7 million people according to the 2010 census, ranks No. 4 in sightings, ahead of Pennsylvania, with 12.7 million people, and New York State, with 19 million.
Rather, the Costas theorize, the figures may reflect good West Coast weather, which draws more people outside where they may spot U.F.O.s. Nationwide sightings peak in July, they found, and drop off between December and February.
Still, in Mississippi, U.F.O. reports spike in January and November; in New Mexico, in September.
In the end, the Costas noted, the spikes may have a lot to do with media coverage.