Every Friday, pop critics for The New York Times weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing. You can listen to this playlist on Spotify here. Like this Playlist? Let us know at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and sign up for our Louder newsletter here.
Actress, the recording alias of Darren Cunningham, brings a deeply twisted nostalgia to the techno and house of decades past. His new album, “AZD,” uses vintage-sounding samples, beats and timbres in tracks that seem to be dissolving into bleary memories, eroding on the spot. They’re mixed inside-out, so the rhythm section is a subdued pulse while stray tones leap out of a thick haze. The title of “Dancing in the Smoke” is one way to sum up the sensation. Sampled voices intone, “Dance while the record spins” and announce “the future”; meanwhile, beats repeat and melt down, dissonances blip and collide in the high frequencies, and eventually the whole track implodes and collapses like an extended binge gone very wrong. J.P.
The best vintage Linkin Park songs always sounded as if they shouldn’t quite work, as if the hip-hop portions were chomping at the rock theatrics, fighting for primacy. Reassuringly, that’s the energy captured here, on this song from the band’s forthcoming album, “One More Light.” It’s helped by including actual rappers: Pusha T and Stormzy add gravitas and scorn to the band’s natural ache. J.C.
Band name caught your eye, didn’t it? Before the Bad Plus was doing rakish pop covers in a freak-jazz format, Sex Mob had a weekly gig at the Knitting Factory. The quartet played James Bond tunes and Prince anthems and pledged no particular allegiance. Led by the trumpeter Steven Bernstein, the group is going on 20 years now and has just released its first album without any covers. All the tunes are written by Mr. Bernstein. “Valentino” hints at the album’s range: an air of studied mystique, a groove happily caught between ’70s funk and ’60s spaghetti western, and some vaguely sultry asides from Mr. Bernstein. G.R.
The six-beat guitar-picking patterns in the South African musician Spoek Mathambo’s “I Found U” come from a popular rural Zulu folk style called maskandi music. But the rhymes, the poppy English lyrics (sung by the duo Kajamba), an insistent drumbeat that draws on both dancehall and Caribbean clave, and the vertiginous push-and-pull momentum of the entire song have more tangled, modern connections. As rapper, songwriter and producer, Mr. Mathambo has devoted himself to filtering Africa’s past and a history of international club beats through the electronic present; “I Found U” is just one illuminating, disorienting hybrid from his album out today, “Mzansi Beat Code.” J.P.
Lil Yachty puts a mean expression on his happy face and tag-teams this low, mean and throbbing track with the more naturally pugnacious Migos, like a young cousin puffing his chest to hang out with the bigger kids. J.C.
The Cuban rapper Individuo, whose group is called Con100cia (pronounced con-ci-EN-cia, or consciousness), places himself in a hemisphere-wide African-American tradition of resistance and rebellion in “Mi Raza,” from “AfroRazones,” a compilation of new Cuban music due on April 28. In a track that draws its hurtling urgency from frenetic Afro-Cuban percussion and its stubbornness from a snaky repeating synthesizer line, Individuo cites African roots, the Black Panther Party and Afrika Bambaataa alongside figures like Juan Gualberto Gómez, who strove for Cuban independence from Spain and racial equality. “Proud of my people — Afrodescendiente,” he declares. J.P.
Smoothed-out melodrama from one of the more theatrical voices in contemporary gospel, “Trust in You” is a showcase for Anthony Brown’s determined, forceful singing, while his choir delivers jolting, joyous, almost Wilson Phillips-esque harmonies behind him. J.C.
A stomping fury swarms up beneath Sofía Rei’s voice on her version of “Arriba Quemando el Sol,” a populist anthem by Violeta Parra. The song (which translates to “The Sun Shining Above”) elevates the struggles of the working poor in rural Chile. Ms. Rei’s declamations capture its pride and its lament, while the guitarist Marc Ribot builds a blazing, dystopian billow around her. This track comes from “El Gavilán,” Ms. Rei’s forthcoming album, composed of eight songs written by Ms. Parra, a leader of Chile’s mid-20th-century folk music revival. On the record Ms. Rei, who hails from Argentina but lives in New York, is joined by Mr. Ribot and no one else. Otherwise she accompanies herself: on percussion, various stringed instruments and vocal overdubs. G.R.
This elegiac number — clean, slow techno with a trip-hop haze atop it — combines the devotional and the sensual in uncommonly seamless fashion. It’s one of several excellent songs on the new EP, “Territory,” which is full of temperate, considered and quietly seismic dance music. J.C.