SAN ANTONIO — Matt Bonner prepared for his new gig by rummaging through his closet. He found 19 flannel shirts and seven pairs of corduroy pants. Based on his calculations, he had nearly 150 wardrobe combinations — more than enough to last an entire season.
“I’m good to go,” he told himself.
For 10 seasons, Bonner was a dependable member of the San Antonio Spurs. A 6-foot-10 power forward, he launched funky-looking 3-pointers, contributed to two championships and emerged as a fan favorite thanks to his lively personality, red hair and odd obsession with sandwiches.
But after he announced his retirement in January, he quickly moved into a new role as a studio analyst for the Spurs’ broadcasts, which are primarily on Fox Sports Southwest. From a safe remove, he offers insight: how to defend Zach Randolph, how to avoid fouling James Harden. He recently ordered a “bunch of cheap ties,” he said, to lend some gravitas. His wife, Nadia, wants him to wear makeup.
In many ways, Bonner, 37, is following a well-trod path. Broadcasting is a cottage industry for retired athletes. Tony Romo, the former quarterback, recently announced that he was jumping to the broadcast booth at CBS as an N.F.L. analyst. And consider TNT, which, however ill conceived the experiment, had a series of N.B.A. games this season that were broadcast solely by former players.
The transition can be challenging, said Sean Elliott, a Spurs forward who retired from the N.B.A. in 2001.
Bonner, who appears on the network’s pre- and postgame shows, said he did not miss playing basketball. Stuff hurts. The idea of running up and down the court no longer appeals to him. But he is learning to navigate unfamiliar terrain. His former teammates, whom he still considers close friends, give him a hard time about drifting to the dark side: the media.
It helps, Bonner said, that the Spurs are really good. He does not have much to criticize. San Antonio will enter the playoffs this weekend as the No. 2 seed in the Western Conference behind the Golden State Warriors. But for the first time in years, he will watch from a distance. It will be different.
Bonner’s perspective changed during the lockout in 2011, when he served on the executive committee of the players’ union. It was a valuable learning experience, he said. He even wore a suit.
Once the lockout ended, Bonner rejoined the Spurs. But he was already mulling his future. He consulted former teammates who had retired. And through the union, he participated in several off-season programs — coaching, broadcasting and front-office leadership — designed to help players prepare for the next phases of their lives.
With two young children at home, Bonner figured that broadcasting would be more conducive to family life. He also knew that he wanted to earn the job, he said. He thought about his dad, who delivered the mail for 35 years, and his mom, a teacher.
In recent seasons, Bonner supplemented his day job as a player by occasionally working, on off nights, as a color commentator for the Austin Spurs of the N.B.A. Development League. Ahead of his first broadcast, Bonner forgot that the team had changed its name.
Last season, Bonner played sparingly for the Spurs, appearing in just 30 games. He went into the off-season as a free agent. Hoping to latch on with another team, he returned to New Hampshire with his family and continued to train.
“I was just up there working out in the mountains ‘Rocky IV’ style,” he said.
Weeks passed, and then months. The season began without him. By January, Bonner was coping with the hard truth that his playing career was finished.
The Spurs, meanwhile, memorialized Bonner’s playing career by hanging a flannel shirt — with his name and number in masking tape on the back — in their locker room. It was not especially authentic (they used one of Mills’s shirts) or sentimental (Mills retrieved the shirt for future use), but Bonner was touched by the gesture all the same.
“I don’t know if this is sad or something, but that was actually special to me,” Bonner said.
Back when he was playing, Bonner would prepare for games by attending morning shootarounds. These days, he participates in 11 a.m. conference calls to map out a plan with his network colleagues. He likes to arrive at the arena about two hours before the tip.
He always tries to make time to visit with members of the team’s analytics department. “Those guys always have fun, interesting facts,” he said.
Bonner received two valuable pieces of advice. The first, he said, came from an executive at ESPN who told him that he needed to be his own worst critic.
The other piece of advice came from his sister, Becky, who urged him to commit to the job. He might not want to work in broadcasting forever, she told him. But for however long he does, he has to give it his all. With that in mind, Bonner still studies game film — much as he did during his playing career. He records his broadcasts and watches them with his wife.
“So I can go back and make notes of all the different mistakes I’ve made,” he said.
Not everyone is such an avid viewer. Coach Gregg Popovich was asked if he was familiar with any of Bonner’s recent work.
