254 pages. Random House. $27.
Anyone who’s ever experienced depression, even the tiniest mote, knows that there’s great power in relief. Certainly Olive Kitteridge, the protagonist of Elizabeth Strout’s Pulitzer Prize-winning novel of the same name, knew this. “Pleasure is the absence of pain,” Olive thought to herself at one point, recalling the words of a philosopher she’d read in college. (She couldn’t remember who. Epicurus.) She may as well have been speaking for any of Strout’s characters. The things they carry are heavy. Not to suffer would be more than enough.
And oh, how the characters suffer in Strout’s latest novel, “Anything Is Possible”! The title seems a mean joke, given the book’s army of hurting men and women, desperate for liberation from their wounds.
It is most useful to think about Strout’s work thematically. The same ideas continually preoccupy her, and her characters often behave in similar ways. They indulge in the petty comforts of gossip, their judgments disguised as concern, their desperation to reassure themselves of their luck — and virtue — disguised as pity. They throb with loneliness and fume with disappointment. (A lot of her characters are old, very old, and are bitter to discover where they have ended up.) Grown children defend parents who had done the indefensible, their mercy almost saintly in its bounty; or they do its opposite, clinging to righteous fury over parental infractions on a more human scale, driving their mothers wild with grief and remorse.
And many characters walk around with great satchels of unexpressed love.
Where this book sharply departs from Strout’s previous work is in its frank, unapologetic emphasis on forbidden desire. Not a chapter spins by, practically, without the unveiling of some sexual secret. There are stories of voyeurism. Prostitution.  We discover, to our horror, that the husband of one of the most tender, largehearted characters, Patty Nicely, was repeatedly raped as a child. When she was a child, Patty herself walked in on her mother in flagrante delicto — with Patty’s Spanish teacher, who was spanking her.
The trauma of the primal scene, which may or may not involve both parents, is central in “Anything Is Possible.” It misshapes the psychosexual futures of many innocents. The best they can hope for in adulthood is not to recapitulate the crimes that were done to them.
So where, you might ask, is the relief in such a book?
“Anything Is Possible” is certainly more grim than Strout’s previous work. It’s more audacious, too, and more merciless, daring you to walk away. “Little House on the Prairie” assumes a mythic status among some of its characters. This book is its terrible opposite. No chirping families to be found among the swaying golden fields here.
You read Strout, really, for the same reason you listen to a requiem: to experience the beauty in sadness.
For those who have read Strout’s previous novel, “My Name Is Lucy Barton,” this book also offers the pleasures of intertextual sport. “Anything Is Possible” takes place in Amgash, Ill., the town of Lucy’s birth. Though readers never actually went there — we only heard tales of it from Lucy’s mother, who prattled on about its beleaguered residents during a hospital visit with Lucy in New York — this new novel still feels like a homecoming of sorts, with familiar-sounding characters now earning chapters of their own. Like the “Pretty Nicely Girls,” whose mother’s affair liquidated the family. And Charlie Macauley, whose experience in Vietnam liquidated his soul. And of course, the Bartons.
The meta conceit of “My Name Is Lucy Barton,” which the reader only realizes partway in, is that the novel is meant to be the actual “published” memoir of Lucy, its author-narrator. “Anything Is Possible” is sly, too. Characters in the town of Amgash purchase Lucy’s book at the local bookstore; they quote from it; they make note of its cover (which looks like the real-life cover of “My Name Is Lucy Barton”).
But the most startling thing the reader discovers in this book is that “Lucy Barton” wasn’t the whole truth. You may think, having read it, that you know the Barton family. Trust me: You don’t. Those children suffered cruelty of an astounding magnitude, far worse than Strout originally conveyed. That their father couldn’t stop diddling himself in their presence, and on the job, is only the half of it. It was their mother who inflicted the most harm. Lucy was holding out on us — possibly willfully, or possibly because the complete truth, half-glimpsed, was all her adult self could tolerate.
“I don’t want to write that story,” Lucy replies.
“And who’d want to read it?” asks her brother.
We would. And we do.