LONDON — Hungary’s Parliament approved legislation on Tuesday that appeared to be written to force the closing of a university founded by the financier George Soros, the latest step in what observers see as a crackdown on free expression and liberal values.
New amendments to an existing higher education law — which received the support of 123 lawmakers, with 38 voting against and another 38 abstaining — ostensibly affect about two dozen universities, but they were widely believed to be aimed specifically at Central European University, based in Budapest.
The university, known as C.E.U., has been operating in Hungary partly as an American institution and relatively free of Hungarian oversight. But the amended law contains a provision that would most likely restrict the independence of universities that offer diplomas from countries where they do not have a campus or offer courses — a provision that would affect only Central European University.
Prime Minister Viktor Orban’s government, which has been accused of failing to uphold democratic values, has mounted vociferous attacks on nongovernmental organizations, many of them reliant on financing from Mr. Soros and critical of the administration.
In his weekly interview on state radio on Friday, Mr. Orban said that Central European University’s status, which allowed it to operate in Hungary while issuing American degrees, gave it an unfair advantage over Hungarian counterparts.
He called the way the university operated a “fraud,” adding that “in Hungary, one cannot be above the law — even if you’re a billionaire,” a clear reference to Mr. Soros.
The amendment was fast-tracked through Parliament on Tuesday. It is set to become law after the country’s president signs it, which is usually a formality.
Liviu Matei, the university’s provost, called the attacks on the institution “completely unfounded,” and he said the law was “an attack on academic freedom.” Mr. Matei said he hoped the United States government would weigh in.
Hungary received the lowest “democracy score” in Central Europe, the statement said.
Mr. Orban’s career — he made his name as a young opponent of the Communist regime, and once received a Soros scholarship — seemed to echo this trend.
Even before the vote, Mr. Orban’s conservative government had been accused of weakening academic freedom, a constitutional right, and the legislation approved on Tuesday amended a 2011 law that put government-appointed officials in charge of finances at state-funded universities.
Critics, including the government’s watchdog for fundamental rights, have repeatedly said that these officials were in a position to affect the cherished autonomy of universities.
“Influence in decisions on a university’s finances means indirect influence in the freedom of scientific research as well,” said Domokos Lazar, a legal expert at the Eotvos Karoly Institute, a research organization in Budapest.
Mr. Lazar said that the changes had left universities financially vulnerable and created serious concerns about educational independence among educators.
The leaders of Eotvos Lorand University, one of Hungary’s largest and most prominent universities, known as ELTE, were among dozens of voices from the education sector to speak out in support of Central European University.
“Political and ideological struggles should have nothing to do with the world of universities, scientific quality, free education and the centuries-old tradition of inviolable autonomy in research,” ELTE said in a statement on Monday.
Within the last week, support for Central European University has poured in from leaders and universities around the world. A petition to save it, started by a professor in the Netherlands, had gathered over 40,000 signatures by Tuesday.