LONDON — A 31-year-old Romanian architect who plunged into the River Thames when a terrorist plowed a vehicle into pedestrians in London became the fifth victim to die as a result of the attack last month, the police said on Friday.
The story of the Romanian woman, Andreea Cristea, captured the hearts of Londoners — and many people around the world — after the March 22 attack on Parliament, which also wounded more than 50 people.
Her boyfriend, Andrei Burnaz, had been planning to propose to her that day, according to Romanian news reports and officials, and the couple was in London to celebrate his birthday. The police said Ms. Cristea had received medical treatment in London but that life support had been withdrawn on Thursday.
An aerial view of the Westminster Bridge after a driver plowed through pedestrians and crashed outside the British Parliament.
It was not clear whether Ms. Cristea was thrown into the Thames after being hit by the vehicle the assailant, Khalid Masood, was driving, or if she leapt into the water to escape. She was rescued from the water by a lifeboat crew before being hospitalized.
During the attack, Mr. Masood, a British-born 52-year-old with a history of violence, rammed a rented Hyundai into pedestrians on Westminster Bridge. He then crashed the vehicle into a fence, burst through a gate of the Palace of Westminster and fatally stabbed an unarmed police officer. He was shot and killed by the police.
Keith Palmer, Aysha Frade, Kurt Cochran — an American — and a 75-year-old man, later identified as Leslie Rhodes, died in the terrorist attack in London.
The Islamic State claimed responsibility, although the extent of Mr. Masood’s links to the militant group remains unclear. The police have been investigating whether he acted alone.
The four others who died in the attack were Keith Palmer, 48, the unarmed police officer; Kurt Cochran, 54, an American tourist who was traveling with his wife to celebrate their 25th wedding anniversary; Aysha Frade, 43, a teacher who was on her way to pick up her two young daughters; and Leslie Rhodes, 75, a retired window cleaner from south London.
While ISIS has claimed responsibility for the London attack, it is too early to say what level of contact, if any, the attacker had with ISIS operatives.
Mr. Burnaz, who, like Ms. Cristea, is reportedly from the Black Sea port city of Constanta, was also hospitalized after the episode, in his case with a broken foot, but he was discharged.
“There are no words to even begin to describe the crushing pain and emptiness that is left in our hearts,” they said, adding that unused money that had been raised to finance her recovery would be donated to charity.
