Wichita, Kansas. Sodbusters, buffaloes, cowboys on long dusty cattle drives, Wyatt Earp’s jail. All that happened a long time ago. A hundred years later, I knew a landscape of tract houses, the IGA, Woolworth’s lunch counter and car lots, one after another, their boundaries marked by strings of colored flags. There were drive-in movies, Mexican restaurants and tall grain silos like sentinels along the railroad tracks. The straight black streets went on and on, stopping only at the wheat fields on the edge of town.
It was, by one measure, a classic midcentury American boyhood — I had a bicycle and a paper route, and an older brother with whom I shared a room. There was a downtown, where my father worked selling dresses, and where the Deco movie theater, the Orpheum, still had, well into the ’60s, an upper balcony roped off with a sign, “COLORED.” By the time I got to junior high, the action was at the Kings-X, a diner with bright yellow lights and red vinyl banquettes, with condensation on the plate-glass windows and a jukebox — a stage set for the theater of teenage lust and disappointment. In the parking lot I learned how to hold a cigarette as if I smoked, and also the technique of “palming” it in the presence of anyone who might rat us out. It’s now a vacant lot.
I returned to Wichita for the first time in almost 25 years this past winter, to see the Wichita Art Association, the place where, at age 9, I started to learn about drawing and painting, and beyond that, how to look at and think about art. In 1961, when I was first admitted, the school was in an old carriage house with an overgrown garden and high clerestory windows, like the Académie Julian on the Prairie. It later moved to a building designed along a Japanese theme; one crossed a footbridge over a small creek to reach the entrance. At 14, I thought it poetic. The school still occupies those now-aging pavilions, though it will shortly move into sleek new quarters courtesy, in part, of the Koch family. It has been renamed Mark Arts, in memory of Mary Koch, the family matriarch. I wanted to have a look at the old studios one last time. When I knew it, the school’s tone was set by the two artists who ran the place for close to 40 years, Bill and Betty Dickerson, or Mr. and Mrs. D, as they were known to their students. Together they defined the school’s mission: to foster a pragmatic working method that combined classical and Modernist aesthetics with direct observation. You could learn how to draw from the model, and for many people that was as far as it went, but the real emphasis was on composition and all that implies — a picture’s underlying architecture as both source and measure of its vitality. It was a serious place, and the first place I remember being truly happy.
Born in 1904, William Dickerson was a modest hero of the regionalist art movement in the early and middle years of the last century. A large man with a ruddy complexion and white hair, he dressed in khaki pants and shirt, often with a bolo tie or a Stetson hat; he could have passed for a rancher, or a plumber. Laconic and averse to theory, Bill taught by example, drawing alongside the students. His type of stripped-down, realist painting was advanced for its time. His range of subject matter — farmers leaning on fence posts, workmen and women, the rural American scene — recalled some of the homespun quality of Thomas Hart Benton, but without the stylization or melodrama.
Betty was also a native Kansan, but of a different temperament. Bright, fearless, ferociously verbal, she combined a pioneer’s ideal of self-reliance and suspicion of authority with an urbanite’s sophistication and style. Her uniform was a sweater and tweed skirt and a string of pearls at her throat, which she would sometimes finger as she was forming an idea, and in the opposite hand, a cigarette that accentuated her gestures. With stubbornness and idealism, and armed with a formal vocabulary held in common with her Modernist peers, the Dickersons sought to prove that an authentic pictorial sensibility could take root anywhere, even in the middle of the Great Plains.
I crossed the footbridge on a warm afternoon in February. The studio doors were all open to the balmy air, and I could see several classes in session. One group was at work on abstract paintings; in another, people were making watercolors, landscapes mostly. I was surprised to see that what had been Betty’s painting studio — the largest room at the end of a covered walkway — was now given over to sculpture, the space lined with tables at which people were laboring over terracotta busts. A few of the students — older people, retired, I guessed — looked at me with no more than mild curiosity.  I walked back to the abstraction classroom and there had a disorienting, time’s-accordion sensation that the instructor, an affable middle-aged man, looked familiar, though I couldn’t say why. He introduced himself; it was Jim Gross, who had also been one of Betty’s students back in the glory days. I couldn’t tell if what I felt was continuity or its opposite.
The Dickersons and their teaching style flourished at a time, mostly before the triumph of Abstract Expressionism and the rise of the university art department, when a lot of major American art was regional. Good art occurred wherever an artist happened to be, from Maine to Taos. Whatever its new incarnation, the school I had known, its distinctive personality and unlikely influence, could never be repeated. Bill retired from the directorship in 1971, looking forward to a good stretch of time in which to paint; he died the following year. Betty continued on at the school well into her 80s, but was increasingly isolated from the Art Association’s new leadership, and from the town itself. Even more than Bill, Betty gave everything she had to the school. What the Dickersons created as artists and teachers — it was a whole belief system — disappeared with them.
During the academic year, I spent every Saturday at the school, as well as Tuesday and Thursday evenings. Summers were passed almost entirely at the Art Association; drawing in the morning, painting in the afternoon. Sundays were often spent at a kind of salon at the Dickersons’ modest house in the older part of town, a neighborhood of streets running along a gently winding tributary of the Arkansas River, masses of cottonwood trees shading its banks. Several generations of people would crowd into the living room and talk about what they had been working on. Betty might continue a lecture that she had started in class, or she would translate from a French magazine or demystify the aesthetic winds blowing through the larger art world.
This was my life for the years when I was growing up in Kansas, in my parents’ ranch-style house in one of the newer subdivisions. I followed the Dickersons’ enthusiasms, their comings and goings, and the school’s ever-evolving society the way other people followed the rhythm of the seasons. My family considered itself part of the great middle class, but the reality was somewhat lower down on the aspirational scale. My father always wore a suit to work, my mother as well, but though they looked the part, my parents could afford only the basic elements of that life. The limitations, if that’s what they were, worked to my advantage, as nothing impinged on my freedom. Family vacations or summer camp or junior year abroad, had they been available, would only have distracted me from my real life, the one that took place at the Art Association and its school.
That life lasted more than eight years, until, at 17, I went away to art school in California. But it was much later before I realized the symbolic way I had separated the public and personal aspects of my life. Family, school, all my friends, the places one went to meet girls, were all in the newer part of town, on the east side, where the streets and rows of houses looked like someone had taken an enormous waffle iron and pressed its grid into the red-brown dirt. There was a newness, sometimes even a rawness to this part of town, with its skinny saplings here and there staked against the wind. It felt provisional, a promissory note.
The former studio of William and Betty Dickerson.
My life with the Dickersons took place on the town’s west side, with its modest houses shaded by old trees, and the river. One summer term, when I was 11 or 12 years old and the school was still located in the old carriage house, Betty created a tableau in the garden, a scene that, intentional or not, placed an image of erotic reverie so deeply within my psyche that it became a recurring motif.
Betty’s primary aesthetic principle was to locate the figure, not isolated on a neutral ground as in academic drawing, but integrated within an environment, in the here and now; the figure in the landscape was her mantra. On a warm June day, the light was beautiful, and it was decided we would work outside. The model that day was not one of the regulars; Betty occasionally liked to use local girls, sisters or nieces of someone in the class, or a neighbor, or just someone she liked the look of, a girl who had the right kind of face, or a youthful, lithe athleticism. That day, Betty brought out a very pretty girl of about 15 or 16, with brown hair to her shoulders. She wore a white, man-tailored shirt over blue jeans. Betty placed the girl on a brown leather chair set out under a tree, so that the dappled light fell onto her face and her white shirt. The colors swam together, like an image out of Bonnard. I placed my bench fairly close up, slightly off to one side, and I could see the girl’s lovely dark eyes under her bangs, the little hexagons of shadow cast by leaves swaying in the breeze. There were eight or 10 benches arrayed in a semicircle around the girl, who looked straight ahead, her thin arms resting on the chair.
That happened over 50 years ago. I’ve been revisiting that same scene, one way or another, ever since. I’m still painting it. We never spoke of it, but I have sometimes wondered if Betty knew just how deeply the image she created that day would lodge itself in my pictorial repertoire, if she knew she had given me a subject.