But there is no shortage of pedigreed art in the Paris apartment that Ms. Thompson, 75, who wrote and directed the just-released “Cézanne et Moi” — about the fraught friendship between that Post-Impressionist master and Émile Zola — shares with Albert Koski, her husband and the film’s producer.
In addition to works by Georges Braque and Raoul Dufy inherited from her father, the film director Gérard Oury, and her grandmother, an “artist groupie” who hobnobbed with the giants of the early-20th-century Paris art scene, Ms. Thompson’s collection includes canvases by David Salle, Tom Wesselmann, Jean-Michel Basquiat, Robert Combas and the art photographer-provocateur Marilyn Minter.
Your family was involved with some of France’s most storied artists.
My grandmother knew everybody in the art world in Paris: Chagall, Braque, Dufy, whom she actually had a long affair with. She took me everywhere with her — she’d call me and say, “You won’t go to school today, I’m taking you to see Braque.” So we’d go to the studio, and I’d sit in a little corner. She was good at teaching me that this was a very, very privileged moment, that I was actually looking at a genius.
How did you come to own one of Braque’s palettes, signed by the artist?
That was my grandmother’s. She’d go see these artists and say to them [coyly], “Oh, this is so beautiful, can I take it?” Then before leaving the studio, she’d say, “Can you sign this for me?” I have three or four of [the Cubist painter] Jacques Villon’s palettes, Marcel Duchamp’s brother. One of my greatest regrets was that when I first came to America, I was 18 years old — Jacques gave me a little piece of paper with his brother’s number and told me to call him. And I never did. I’ll never get over that.
You have several paintings by Tom Wesselmann with you as the subject.
My first husband and I moved from Paris to New York in the 1960s. One night we went to an opening at Sidney Janis, and it was Tom Wesselmann. He said, “I would love to do your portrait, would you pose nude?” I said yes.
You ended up in some of Wesselmann’s most famous paintings, including the “Mouth” series from 1965, which may have inspired the Rolling Stones’ lips-and-tongue logo.
He used me, if I may say this, in the nicest sense of the word. Pieces of me are scattered over a lot of his paintings. My red nails — I always wear red nails, I still do — my hands, my breasts. That series, the big red lips — well, those are my big red lips.
There are two Dufys in your apartment, a painting and a nude drawing.
My father had many, many Dufys, which, unfortunately, we had to sell when he died. The painting is from a series Dufy did on the 14th of July [Bastille Day], very small but so joyful and blue and white and red. The nude is a beautiful drawing — you recognize Dufy, and yet it’s very classical. And, probably, I didn’t want to be the only nude woman in the apartment.
You and your husband also collect artists from the New York downtown scene of the ’80s.
