Sixty years ago this month, jittery New Yorkers heaved a collective sigh of relief. George Metesky was on his way upstate to Matteawan State Hospital for the Criminally Insane. The Mad Bomber’s 17-year reign of random terror had finally ended, with a whimper.
“He was like a dream distortion of postwar disquiet — unhinged, unrelenting, perpetually hidden in city shadows,” Michael Cannell writes in “Incendiary: The Psychiatrist, the Mad Bomber and the Invention of Criminal Profiling” (Minotaur Books, $27), his gripping retelling of the search for the schizophrenic toxic avenger who nursed a decades-long grievance against his former employer, Consolidated Edison, by terrorizing the city.
Mr. Cannell, who stumbled across the case in an Argentine newspaper while researching an earlier book (he has written on the Grand Prix circuit and on I. M. Pei) spins a familiar tale in riveting TV-paced chapters with a novel twist.
Besides the bomber, the plot revolves around three men: Capt. Howard Finney, the highly professional but frustrated commanding officer of the New York Police Department bomb squad; Dr. James A. Brussel, an eccentric gun-toting psychiatrist and assistant commissioner of the New York State Department of Mental Hygiene, who is concerned about risking his career by predicting the bomber’s personality traits based on his crimes; and Seymour Berkson, the peripatetic publisher of The New York Journal-American, who is desperately seeking to spare his newspaper from the Hearst Corporation’s bean counters.
By Dec. 2, 1956, when a pipe bomb exploded in a Brooklyn theater during a showing of “War and Peace,” 32 incendiary devices that injured 15 bystanders had been attributed to the perpetrator, who identified himself in letters to newspapers (first to The New York Herald Tribune and later, after a front-page appeal by Mr. Berkson, to The Journal-American) only as F.P.
The bombing spree apparently began in 1940 with an unexploded device and a note in block letters threatening the “Con Edison crooks,” followed by a patriotic hiatus during World War II (Mr. Metesky was a Marine veteran and worked in a defense plant) that ended in 1951 when a bomb exploded in Grand Central Terminal.
Criminal profiling was largely the stuff of fiction (Edgar Allan Poe’s C. Auguste Dupin and later Sherlock Holmes), but Dr. Brussel publicly staked his reputation. He identified the perpetrator as “a Slav” (because he used a knife and a bomb) with Oedipal hangups (his pipe bombs were penis-shape and the w’s in his notes sagged like breasts or a scrotum) who was probably from Connecticut and so prim (that neat block printing) that he would be arrested wearing a buttoned double-breasted suit.
Dr. Brussel’s educated guesses were largely correct. Mr. Metesky would also live up to his nickname by wearing his signature demonic grin, although even if he started off sane, it’s not hard to understand how the bureaucracy drove him crazy. He had signed his letters F.P., which, it turned out, stood for Fair Play (which, arguably, he didn’t get).
Mr. Metesky had been injured while working at a Con Ed generating plant in the Bronx. The utility gave him 26 weeks partial pay and recommended he file a disability claim with the state. The Workmen’s Compensation Board rejected his claim because the statute of limitations had lapsed.
After he was committed to Matteawan as unfit to stand trial, he resubmitted his claim. His lawyers argued that he had been too mentally ill to file his original application on time. But the board ruled that his current state of incompetence was not sufficient proof that he was also mentally unfit when he filed late years ago.
Mr. Metesky had tuberculosis when he was arrested in 1957, and doctors gave him only a few weeks to live. He ended up lasting until 1994, outliving Captain Finney, Dr. Brussel and Mr. Berkson.