Being a clown is a sad business these days — instead of making ’em laugh, you’re often expected to make ’em cry or make ’em scream with fright. But Michaela Coel, the creator and writer of the British series “Chewing Gum,” is a clown in the best and most traditional sense: joyful, unfettered, unashamed, willing to go just about anywhere in search of laughter.
In “Chewing Gum,” whose second six-episode season is now available on Netflix, Ms. Coel plays Tracey, a 20-something resident of a London housing project. The title reflects the inclusiveness and warmth of the show’s vision of city life: The omnipresent gum that covers every paved surface is a gritty symbol of the way the project’s residents stick together and have one another’s backs.
“Chewing Gum” has a vaudevillian style and a winking, poke-in-the-ribs attitude, with Ms. Coel frequently turning to the camera to comment on the action and breaking into spastic dances of celebration (on the rare occasions when her wild schemes pan out). Through the first season and into the second, Tracey’s hymen — a frequent reference point in the show’s dialogue — remains intact despite multiple boyfriends (one gay), attempted threesomes, an inappropriately friendly cousin (named Boy Tracey) and a visit to an underground sex club.
The series is the outgrowth of a one-woman play, “Chewing Gum Dreams,” which Ms. Coel wrote in college, and it’s very much Tracey’s story. But for “Chewing Gum,” Ms. Coel invented some vivid secondary characters, and she gets crucial support from Shola Adewusi as Joy, Tracey’s sanctimonious mother, and particularly Susan Wokoma as Cynthia, her catastrophically jealous and equally sex-starved sister. Cynthia is in some ways an even more original creation than Tracey, and Ms. Wokoma steals every scene she’s in.
“Chewing Gum” runs on sheer inventiveness rather than story and structure, and in the last few episodes of the second season, Ms. Coel starts to run short of ideas and drift toward the shoals of up-with-people sentimentality.
But there are episodes and moments that are the equal of the tremendous first season, like Tracey’s liaison with a too-good-to-be-true guy who turns out to have an Africa fetish (“But where are you from from?”) and a photo shoot with a dachshund that takes an unsavory turn. As long as she keeps covering up her insecurities with bluster, fantastic lies and some of television’s funniest meltdowns, “Chewing Gum” will be worth a binge.