214 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $28.
In 2014, the brilliant poet and morbid eccentric Bill Knott had his lifelong death wish fulfilled. Knott began his career to acclaim and controversy with “The Naomi Poems: Corpse and Beans,” a 1968 collection he published under the pseudonym Saint Geraud. An ersatz author’s note described the poet as “a virgin and a suicide” who had lived from 1940 to 1966.
After going on to publish 11 other full-length books under his own name, Knott actually did die — not by his own hand, but of complications from heart surgery at the age of 74.
lottery tickets, what then?
Of their gentleness.
The tensions between lightness and seriousness, between the predictable and the unforeseen, weave themselves together constantly in Knott’s poems.
kick can dislodge. . . .
It goes on in that mesmerizing fashion for a full 11 pages, and if you read it out loud (as you should) it sounds almost like hip-hop.
Lux’s conversational and comprehensive introduction provides immense and balanced insight into Knott the person and Knott the poet, while giving the reader a sense of how monumental a task the selection process must have been. For not only was Knott steadily prolific for half a century, so too was he a restless experimenter, shapeshifting from surrealist to Oulipean to anti-poet to formalist.
Moreover, although one of his later books was called “The Unsubscriber,” Knott embraced and became a frenetic user of the internet. Starting in 2005 and continuing until his death, he circulated his poems — sometimes in edited or updated versions — on his blog and in handmade chapbooks (also available as PDF downloads).
Dying can be an effective path to attention if you’re an artist. People who didn’t know or care about your work rush to see what the fuss was about — what they missed. That’s probably partly why Knott opted to kill himself off with his very first book. Now that he’s really gone and this distilled treasury is in print, one of our best and most arresting poets might get the bigger audience he deserved. Bill Knott is dead. Long live Bill Knott.