After several admiring letters, and a few not entirely truculent jailhouse responses, Finkel shows up uninvited for visiting hours, and “The Stranger in the Woods” launches on its short, short, short way. You may have noticed some repetition in that sentence. That’s because “The Stranger in the Woods” started as a 2014 GQ magazine article, and its journey to a petite 200-page book is similar to the one a meatball takes on its way to becoming a meatloaf. There’s something tasty here. There’s also a good deal of filler.
At the jail, Finkel optimistically registers as a friend of the prisoner. He may as well be a torturer registering as a masseuse. Knight scowls through the partition glass at a point somewhere over the author’s shoulder, refusing eye contact or acknowledgment. “Rarely in my life have I witnessed someone less pleased to see me,” Finkel writes a little despondently. But what the hermit lacks in warmth he makes up for in self-awareness.
Knight also stole epic quantities of books, and he roars to life through his taste. He quotes Freud, Marx and Woody Allen, and recognizes himself in the narrator of Dostoyevsky’s “Notes From the Underground.” His fetish for stillness results in a fondness for Emily Dickinson. He hates Thoreau (“a dilettante”) and fans of Kerouac, and may be the first person to have followed through on a threat to use John Grisham novels as toilet paper. Through culture and his opinions of it, Knight stayed in touch with the world and categorized it, without the vulnerability of human engagement. He was the Holden Caulfield of the woods.
In one of their sweeter exchanges, relayed in a note on his reporting methods, Knight calls Finkel his Boswell and tells him he likes long books. Finkel admits that his will probably be short — and it should have been shorter. Only near the end of the account do we learn that author and subject had just nine one-hour prison meetings. It’s the kind of thing readers should know earlier, especially since the poverty of access leads to some bad decisions.
In a search for more motive and meaning than the hermit will provide, Finkel chats with psychologists who never met Knight, a seeming violation of psychiatry’s Goldwater Rule against diagnosing people from afar. There are also honkingly dull digressions into the spiritual meaning of becoming a hermit (“In Hindu philosophy, everyone ideally matures into a hermit”), some pseudoscience about solitude and brain function, and an unfortunate comparison with prisoners in solitary confinement, who hardly have the luxury of choosing their solitude.
All this seems like obvious padding, but to give Finkel the benefit of the doubt, it may simply be that his affinity for his amazing hermit got the best of him. He does a remarkable job persuading one of the world’s more recalcitrant individuals to open up, but Finkel wants more, and it’s strange that he doesn’t recognize Knight’s limitations. At one of their last meetings, when a wall no longer separates them, the journalist asks the hermit to shake hands. “I’d rather not,” Knight replies.