Regina Giddens is a flower of Southern womanhood. That flower is a Venus flytrap. In “The Little Foxes,” Manhattan Theater Club’s nimble, exhilarating revival of Lillian Hellman’s 1939 drama, Regina coerces, deceives, manipulates and maybe even murders. How graceful she is, how charming. And how carnivorous.
Hellman’s play, which sent the author bushwhacking through what she called “the giant tangled time-jungle” of childhood memory and family legend, has never quite held the stature it deserves. The Times review of its Broadway premiere ran with the dampening subhead, “Stinging Drama About Rugged Individualism Provides a Number of Good Acting Parts.” How nice. Is the play too tidy, too well made, too clear-cut in its morality to fight for a place in the first rank of American theater? Maybe. But it comes pretty close. And very well armed.
In Regina, whose individualism is refined rather than rugged, Hellman created one of the stage’s great antiheroines and a glide bomb of a role. Now, in Daniel Sullivan’s production at the Samuel J. Friedman Theater, two actresses get to detonate it. At alternating performances, Laura Linney (“Time Stands Still,” “The Big C”) and Cynthia Nixon (“Rabbit Hole,” “Sex and the City”) swap the roles of Regina and Birdie, Regina’s wilting sister-in-law. Regina’s is the flashy part, Birdie’s the devastating one.
Set in small-town Alabama in 1900, the play opens at the end of a dinner for a Yankee industrialist (David Alford). Regina and her brothers, Ben Hubbard (Michael McKean) and Oscar Hubbard (Darren Goldstein), are nouveau riche, but they’d like to be richer. Ben and Oscar have the necessary capital to partner in a new cotton mill, but Regina, who has been denied any money of her own, must persuade her ailing husband (Richard Thomas) to make the deal. So she sends her goody-goody daughter, Alexandra (Francesca Carpanini), up to Baltimore to trundle him home from the hospital.
Have you been told to smile by strangers on the street? So have Laura Linney and Cynthia Nixon. They explain how they smile at their enemies in real life and on Broadway, where they star in Lillian Hellman's "The Little Foxes."
The play grabs its title from a verse in the Song of Solomon about foxes despoiling vineyards, and Hellman fills the play with appropriately ravening characters: Ben (played with wicked pleasure by Mr. McKean), shrewd in his striving; Oscar, merely brutish; and Oscar’s son, Leo (Michael Benz), inept at just about everything, villainy included. When Ben gives a speech about how people like the Hubbards “will own this country some day,” unhappy gasps ripple through the audience.
Regina, however, has greater ambition and less opportunity to satisfy it than any of her kin. As she tells her husband, when she was a little girl “there was so little place for what I wanted. I wanted the world.” She still wants it.
But how can she get it? Her father cut her out of his will (the reasons are explained in Hellman’s unnecessary prequel, “Another Part of the Forest”) and her husband keeps his bankbook to himself. Yet she isn’t undefended. She has beauty and wit enough to turn her gifts against the men who limit and underestimate her.
“You’d get farther with a smile, Regina,” Ben says.
So Regina does smile. And that smile is weaponized. No wonder Tallulah Bankhead, Bette Davis and Elizabeth Taylor all clamored to play her.
By now you’re probably wondering which configuration you should see. With Ms. Nixon as Regina and Ms. Linney as Birdie, or the other way around? Well, you should see it twice. When top-drawer actors bestride the stage in a tremendous role and some truly killer gowns, it’s time to clear the calendar. But if your free time and disposable income are not exactly Hubbardesque, then see Ms. Linney as Regina and Ms. Nixon as Birdie, roles in which both actors are asked to play more against type and the performances are richer for it.
In most roles, Ms. Nixon has a steely quality; Ms. Linney’s affect is more yielding. Ms. Nixon plays Regina’s deviousness from the start, which is a treat, but Ms. Linney keeps it concealed for a while, which makes for a stinging surprise. When it comes to “melty mush silly” Birdie, bullied and beaten by her husband, Ms. Linney uses her sweetness to poignant effect, while Ms. Nixon’s heartbreaking trills and flutters layer Birdie’s pain with a complicating self-loathing.
Then again, the play doesn’t shift radically from one cast list to the next to the next. Mr. Sullivan’s confident production doesn’t deny melodrama, but it prefers psychological and social detail over Southern gothic fripperies. (Scott Pask’s fraying, elegant set and Jane Greenwood’s shrewd costumes, with ruffles for Birdie and a sleeker silhouette for Regina, also reflect this emphasis.) It asks both actresses to make the roles more than villain and victim, which the play allows. You might wish that Hellman had written the faithful retainer parts with greater breadth, but Charles Turner and particularly Caroline Stefanie Clay play them with nuance.
Why have the actors switch in the roles at all? Well, it’s a nifty marketing gimmick and a chance for each woman to display her collarbones and her range. (If meaner, more rivalrous motives are in play, let’s hope all will be revealed in a future season of “Feud.”) But maybe there’s a weightier idea at work here. Regina shows how wicked a woman can become when she steps out of line, Birdie how broken when she doesn’t. To have these actresses switch from night to night stresses that in a world like this, women can’t win.
Yet Regina does. Unlike her peers — the Heddas, the Clytemnestras, the Lady Macbeths — Regina is a woman whose comeuppance never comes. Yes, she has to sacrifice some essential femininity, rejecting wifely and maternal instincts. She doesn’t seem to mind. Alexandra suggests that Regina’s misdeeds will haunt her, but neither Ms. Linney nor Ms. Nixon plays her as especially hauntable. Loathe her politics and her methods — Hellman certainly did — but admire her flair and her grit and her second-act dress.
Regina is even magnanimous in victory, telling her disapproving daughter, “Do what you want; think what you want; go where you want.” Regina will. If the play leaves her alone, it also leaves her finally in command of her body and her fortune and her future. That’ll get her farther than a smile.