We’re trying something new: an occasional issue of What We’re Reading focused on recommendations from a single journalist at The Times, along with a selection of other great suggestions at the bottom. Let us know what you think at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Today, we talk with Executive Editor Dean Baquet.
I thought the Pulitzers showed the richness of The New York Times, and that our job is to show people things that are sometimes uncomfortable and unpleasant, but also that our job is to explain the world. All three of our winning pieces explain the world.
“Russia’s Dark Arts,” an investigative series on how Vladimir V. Putin projects power, including the back story of how he influenced the American election.
“The Fighter,” by C.J. Chivers, following a young combat veteran’s trouble with the law.
“They Are Slaughtering Us Like Animals,” Daniel Berehulak’s photographs of the Philippine war on drugs.
Outside of daily journalism, I try to mainly read fiction, and poetry.
It’s a relief. It nurtures the part of the brain that loves language for language’s sake as opposed to language that’s trying to inform. In the case of poetry and art, it’s a little bit of peace.
“Richard Nixon: The Life,” by John Aloysius Farrell.
It’s just sensational.
I was reluctant, because I read so little nonfiction. But our critic Jen Senior captured it so fabulously.
“The Virginia State Colony for Epileptics and Feebleminded: Poems,” by Molly McCully Brown.
It’s her first book of poetry. She imagines life inside an asylum that existed in Virginia through the ‘50s in which eugenics were practiced. It’s beautiful writing, and she really captures the cruelty. Our critic Dwight Garner’s review quotes extensively from it.
It’s an old collection of short shorts, vignettes, by a black writer Dwight also wrote about. One of these guys who had a burst of creativity as a young man, then flamed out.
The Whitney Biennial.
The controversial piece about Emmett Till, Dana Schutz’s “Open Casket,” is much more powerful when you’re up close. Very, very jarring.
There’s a painter who has tons of really remarkable work, Henry Taylor, large-scale figurative paintings of everyday life in California.
The film “Get Out,” directed by Jordan Peele.
I just thought it was a brilliant satire. Put down your computer and go see it right now.
Anna Dubenko, our senior digital strategist, invites you to take a break from the news, with stories of flirting ghostwriters, the high cost of testosterone, and wigs.
Or you can read about how the other side thinks, with partisan writing you may have missed. Today, arguments against intervention from the right and left, why it’s O.K. that Trump has no “doctrine,” and the case for liberals to defend the Second Amendment.
Edited by Andrea Kannapell.