Philip Glass’s “Madrigal Opera,” which received a rare performance at National Sawdust on Saturday, could have been born from a similar question. The hourlong work has no plot, no characters and no libretto, but features six singers, a violin and a viola. Can a composer still build an opera with them?
In principle, yes. Whether the result still tastes like an opera should remain a subject for debate.
What it sounds like is easier to answer. In the weightless reading by the violinist Johnny Gandelsman, the violist William Frampton and the vocal ensemble Choral Chameleon, the music unfolded in contemplative beauty, with the juxtaposition of the instruments’ throaty individuality and the even-tempered coolness of the voices creating just enough tension to sustain interest.
The music consists of a pointillist choral score over undulating arpeggios played on the violin in the first half of the piece, then on the viola. Streams of repeated motifs swirl and settle in ever new harmonic configurations like a murmuration of starlings. The singers intone the note names from the solfège system, creating a perfectly closed system of medium and message. You could say that the text determines the music, or that each note dictates the syllable that will convey it: Both statements are equally true. As such the work is both completely transparent and reveals nothing.
Mr. Glass, who wrote “Madrigal Opera” in 1979 for the Holland Festival, explains on his website that he wanted to create a work of music theater that would receive its specific meaning only through the touch of a stage director. At National Sawdust that role fell to R. B. Schlather, who responded by removing yet another traditionally vital element of opera: the proscenium.
On the flat floor of the performance space the singers sat in chairs scattered around and amid the audience. From the balcony where I was sitting only the slight rhythmic bobbing of a torso or head indicated a singer in action. The setup suggested that where there is unity of sound and content the division between performer and listener also blurs.
The other directorial invention was the projection, onto an entire wall of the space, of a street scene, fed from a live cam installed on the roof of the building that captured the day’s waning glow. That outdoor scene was the only light source in the room, so that as night fell, the room, too, slipped into darkness.
It was a lovely way to dissolve one further barrier, between inside and outside. It reinforced the sense of the piece as a perfectly closed loop, a spectacle as unconcerned with any message, and as oblivious to human attempts to nevertheless glean meaning from it, as a sunset. But though I had been quite content to give an hour of my time to its contemplation, the logical conclusion, after the last chord, seemed to be to withhold all applause.