Break out of the box. Forgo the traditional concert hall, and present artists in intimate, alternative spaces. Such experiments have long been brewing in classical music, with performances in clubs, lofts and salons.
It’s hard to imagine a space further removed from a concert hall than the basement crypt of Church of the Intercession in Harlem. Yet there on Wednesday night, the prodigiously gifted pianist and composer Conrad Tao, 22, played a recital for an audience of 50 people, the maximum the room can accommodate. This was the latest program of the Crypt Sessions, a popular series that began in late 2015 with a recital by none other than the adventurous Mr. Tao.
Wednesday’s session, preceded by a wine and food tasting, was to have been a recital by the brilliant pianist David Greilsammer, who is also the conductor of the Geneva Camerata in Switzerland. But early this week, Mr. Greilsammer was hospitalized in New York with a sudden illness. (He is now doing better.) Mr. Tao, who keeps a busy schedule (he is playing Grieg’s Piano Concerto with the Stamford Symphony in Connecticut on Saturday and Sunday), was in the area and able to step in on two days’ notice.
Mr. Tao’s hourlong program, titled “American Rage,” was a deeply personal statement from an American artist of an immigrant background at a time of tremendous political discord.
Mr. Rzewski is best known for teeming, percussive piano pieces inspired by leftist political themes and protest songs. Mr. Tao played two of the composer’s North American Ballads (from the late 1970s), based on songs of the labor movement.
Mr. Tao began by playing a recording of the Kentucky coal miners’ song “Which Side Are You On?” sung in a crackly old voice by Florence Patton Reece, who wrote it during a bitter strike in 1931 (and reprised it decades later in the documentary “Harlan County, U.S.A.”). There are passages in Rzewski’s long piano piece, based on the song, where the plaintive melody is enshrouded in clusters evocative of Ives, or in dreamy jazzy harmonies. Mostly, though, Mr. Rzewski puts the theme through episodes of sinewy agitation and pounding chords. In the crypt, the sheer volume of Mr. Tao’s sound during frenzied climaxes was near-deafening, yet exhilarating.
Before “Winnsboro Cotton Mills Blues,” based on the Pete Seeger song, Mr. Tao played a recording of Seeger singing it. The piece begins with a relentless two-note drone in the low register of the piano: the composer’s eerily effective mimicking of the clanking din of the mill machinery. Those two notes soon become chords, then thicker chords, and then clusters that Mr. Tao used both forearms to pound out. It builds to a cataclysmic climax with keyboard-spanning outbursts.
In between the Rzewski pieces, Mr. Tao played Copland’s 1941 Piano Sonata, which I’ve never thought of as expressing American rage — especially the fleet second movement, which darts around like some blend of American swing and atonal pointillist writing. Leonard Bernstein captures that quality vividly in a 1947 recording I love.
It was fascinating, though, to hear Mr. Tao draw out every dissonance-statured, vehement element of the sonata while also bringing affecting tranquillity to the pensive conclusion of the last movement.
