The Bronx district attorney’s office asked a judge on Monday to throw out a guilty verdict against a 31-year-old man convicted in the murder of a teenage boy because prosecutors had withheld crucial evidence from his defense lawyer.
The Bronx district attorney, Darcel D. Clark, created the Conviction Integrity Unit after taking office in 2016, a sharply different approach than her longtime predecessor, Robert T. Johnson, who insisted he did not need a special office to re-examine convictions. Manhattan and Brooklyn have set up similar offices in recent years. Brooklyn’s office has asked judges to vacate 22 wrongful convictions; Manhattan’s has asked that six verdicts be set aside.
Ms. Clark’s unit has reviewed 41 cases and has done 10 in-depth investigations. This was the second time the unit had asked a judge to vacate a guilty verdict in a murder case because of evidence that the defendant had not received a fair trial. The first came last year, when the office asked a judge to set aside a murder conviction against Richard Rosario, who had served 20 years for a 1996 killing, even though a dozen witnesses said he was 1,000 miles away in Florida at the time.
Mr. Odiase and his co-defendant, Daikwan Giles, were convicted of murder by a Bronx jury in 2013, and sentenced to 25 years to life in prison in the fatal shooting of 15-year-old Juan Jerez at Minerva Place and Creston Avenue on June 12, 2009.
Mr. Giles confessed to the murder and was identified by witnesses as being one of two shooters. The main evidence against Mr. Odiase came from a witness who cooperated with prosecutors in return for lighter sentences on other crimes. In July 2015, Mr. Odiase’s lawyers filed a motion asking for a new trial.
Prosecutors in the conviction integrity office agreed to re-examine the evidence, and found something odd: A detective’s report turned over to the defense had been redacted to omit key information from a second eyewitness.
In the original report, that witness was quoted as saying the second gunman was a tall, bearded man with dark skin. Mr. Odiase is short, has light brown skin and did not have a beard at the time. Yet that information was left out of the report the defense received, prosecutors said on Monday.
Ms. Clark said her office would also investigate to determine if the prosecutors at the trial had violated ethical rules and should face disciplinary measures.
The lead prosecutor at trial, Adam Oustatcher, who retired last year, said in an interview that he remembered handing two versions of the police report over to the defense, one redacted and one complete. The first one was redacted to protect the witness from gang reprisals, but the second was not, he said.
Mr. Odiase waved off reporters as he left court and climbed into a friend’s car. He went to his family’s house in the Williamsbridge section of the Bronx and took a long shower. Then he burned his prison uniform, one of his lawyers, Pierre Sussman, said.