Dermatologists say the lesions should prompt testing for the virus, even though many patients have no other symptoms.
Before the coronavirus outbreak, Dr. Lindy Fox, a dermatologist in San Francisco, used to see four or five patients a year with chilblains — painful red or purple lesions that typically emerge on fingers or toes in the winter.
Over the past few weeks, she has seen dozens.
It’s also not the time of year for chilblains, which are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions. “Usually, we see it in the dead of winter,” Dr. Fox said.
“The most important message to the public is not to panic — most of the patients we are seeing with these lesions are doing extremely well,” Dr. Freeman said.
Hannah Spitzer, 20, a sophomore at Lafayette College who is finishing the academic year remotely at her home in Westchester County, has lesions on all 10 of her toes, so uncomfortable — painful during the day, and itchy at night — that she can’t put anything on her feet, not even socks.
Dr. Amy Paller, chair of the department of dermatology at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, said one possible explanation is that these patients had such a mild disease and that viral replication was limited, making the virus undetectable.
Ms. Spitzer had a test shortly after developing the lesions, and the result was negative, but she is convinced the toe lesions are a delayed response to an earlier infection that was so mild she barely noticed it.
Most of the patients were teens or young adults, including one 15-year-old who found out he had Covid-19 pneumonia when he went to the emergency room seeking medical attention for his toes.
Other problems like hives have also been linked to the coronavirus, but Covid toes have been the most common and striking skin manifestation.
No one knows exactly why the new coronavirus might cause chilblain-like lesions. One hypothesis is that they are caused by inflammation, a prominent feature of Covid-19. Inflammation also causes one of the most serious syndromes associated with the coronavirus, acute respiratory distress syndrome.
The lesions seen in otherwise healthy people appear to be distinct from those that doctors are seeing in some critically ill Covid-19 patients in intensive care, who are prone to developing blood clots.
Some experts now believe Covid toe should be recognized as sufficient grounds for testing, even in the absence of other symptoms.
“This should be a criteria for testing, just like loss of smell, and shortness of breath and chest pain,” Dr. Fox said.