Politics|Trump Pushes Young Republicans Away. Abortion Pulls Them Back.
Trump Pushes Young Republicans Away. Abortion Pulls Them Back.
On everything from climate change to marijuana, the generational divide that is evident among Democrats is no less present on the other side of the aisle. It’s just less visible.
Jose Francisco Rodriguez supports a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants. Mary-Faith Martinez supports a public health care option. Ethan Lucky supports criminal justice reform. Autumn Crawford wants government action on climate change.
One thing they have in common? They’re all Republicans.
Like millennials, who are now in their mid-20s to 30s, members of Generation Z — born after 1996 — tend to lean left. But there are still plenty of young Republicans, and the generational divide that is so apparent between younger and older Democrats is no less present on the other side of the aisle. It’s just less visible.
While polling shows an age gap in opinions on abortion, it is smaller than the gaps on some other issues, and researchers say that for people who oppose abortion, that opposition has become more central to their political choices.
Even as young Republicans often accept the science of climate change and support L.G.B.T. rights, abortion remains a powerful force pulling them toward the Republican Party — and toward President Trump, whom many of them dislike.
Abortion is not the only issue on which young Republicans lean right: Most of those interviewed said they were economically conservative, too, and several emphasized their support for Republican immigration policies and gun rights. But abortion is, very often, the issue that is sacrosanct — the one that outweighs their concern about climate change, for instance, and their dislike for Mr. Trump.
“If it weren’t for that one issue, then I’d have no problem voting for a Democrat over Trump,” said Mr. Lucky, a college student in Newport News, Va., who rejects the president’s “America first” philosophy and believes the long-term health of the environment is more important than short-term economic growth. He plans to vote third-party.
Harvard University’s annual survey of 18- to 29-year-olds found in March that, while 82 percent of Republicans in that age group said they would vote for Mr. Trump over Joseph R. Biden Jr., only 30 percent were closely aligned with Mr. Trump based on an ideology and values questionnaire.
In interviews, young Republicans criticized Mr. Trump’s leadership, his personal conduct and his response to the coronavirus pandemic.
“He is not really the guy you want to be leading the ship through the storm,” said Rory Bosanko, 19, who said gun rights, border security and abortion were among his top issues. Mr. Bosanko, who lives in Salida, Colo., added that he was happier with how Gov. Jared Polis had handled the crisis even though he generally disagrees with Mr. Polis, a Democrat, on policy.
Both she and Mr. Robinson still plan to vote for Mr. Trump — a vote that Mr. Robinson emphasized was about Mr. Trump’s policy record, not his personality or conduct. Ms. Miller is still trying to decide.
The only subject that appears to rival abortion in terms of keeping young Republicans aligned with the party is economic policy: opposition to socialism and, as expressed in interviews before the recent crash, a belief that Mr. Trump has been a good steward of the economy.
Ms. Beaudoin, who is from Hawthorn Woods, Ill., and is also strongly motivated by abortion, said in a follow-up interview in late April that she still supported Mr. Trump. The economic fallout from the virus would be “a hard thing for anybody to deal with, because it’s something that you can’t control,” she said.
She added that she believed Mr. Trump had shown strong leadership by restricting travel to the United States.
Ms. Duerig also cited the economy in January as a reason to vote for Mr. Trump despite her reservations.
“My dad’s work depends on the economy and how things are going in the steel business, and under Trump he’s had a lot of work — more than he’s had my entirety of growing up,” Ms. Duerig said.
A few weeks ago, her father lost his job in the economic crash. But her vote hasn’t changed.
Part of it is her libertarian views: She believes that taxation “is not the price we have to pay to be in a civilized society,” and that helping people who are poor, uninsured or otherwise struggling should be the job of nonprofit groups, not the government. But part of it is personal.
Jose Rodriguez, 22, holds some views commonly associated with Democrats: He supports universal basic income and a public health insurance option, for instance, and unlike most other Republicans interviewed, he said he thought the party should stop trying to overturn Roe v. Wade.
Asked what drew him to the Republican Party, he said, “I can more describe what turns me off the Democratic Party.” Mainly, he believes that Democrats advocate government intervention even in situations where it isn’t needed.
He is undecided for November.
But some young Republicans are disaffected enough to commit to voting for Mr. Biden.
Ms. Martinez, 22, a student at the University of South Carolina Upstate, generally agrees with the Republican Party on fiscal issues, abortion and immigration. But she doesn’t feel Mr. Trump “has a lot of integrity.” She supports a public health care option, a view shaped by her own chronic illnesses. And while she disagrees with Mr. Biden on some issues, she likes him as a person.
Ms. Martinez said she was frustrated by the image of the Republican Party as “the party of old white men” — a product not of a lack of young conservatives, she said, but of party leaders’ not incorporating their ideas.
