There are times when government must curtail individual freedoms to protect the public. But those measures must end once the threat passes.
The tension between private liberty and public health in the United States is hardly new. Americans have demanded the latter in times of plague and prioritized the former in times of well-being since at least the Colonial Era. Politicians and business leaders have alternately manipulated and deferred to that tension for about as long.
In 1701, members of the Massachusetts Bay Colony fought a yearlong political battle to enact the nation’s first quarantine laws against opponents who said such measures were too severe. In 1918, during the flu pandemic, the mayor of Pittsburgh brought a ban on public gatherings to a swift — and premature — conclusion over concerns about a coming election.
Yet the same Mr. Barr, early in the outbreak, was seemingly so concerned about its impact that he proposed letting the government pause court proceedings and detain people indefinitely without trial during emergencies — effectively suspending the core constitutional right of habeas corpus.
Temporary limitations on some liberties don’t seem to concern most Americans at this moment. Polls show that 70 percent to 90 percent of the public support measures to slow the spread of the virus, even if those measures require temporarily yielding certain freedoms and allowing the economy to suffer in the short run.
In China, South Korea and Singapore, the authorities quickly established comprehensive testing, along with rigorous contact tracing, isolation and quarantine. In the United States, such efforts are still under construction and are proceeding at a snail’s pace; three-plus months into the crisis, just a tiny fraction of the needed tests, contact tracers and quarantine facilities are operational anywhere.
This is why it’s so important for the authorities to build that trust now, and to rely openly on scientific consensus when imposing — and lifting — bans on gatherings and other events.
Another area of concern is the government’s ability to know where we are and whom we’re with. In normal times, the authorities generally have to obtain a warrant to search your personal property, like a cellphone, or to retrieve its data to find your location.
Cellphones are particularly useful at this moment, when it’s crucial to know where infected people have been, and whom they’ve been close to. Several countries around the world, as well as some American states, have rolled out apps that either encourage or require their citizens to check in regularly and report their locations.
Apple and Google are in the process of producing an app that would use secret codes to track people through their phones, while leaving the location data on those phones. People who test positive would be given the choice of putting their phone on a list. Other people’s phones could automatically check that list, and if any were within range of the infected person, those people would be notified that they could be at risk.
Fine, in theory. But for a system like this to work, the public needs to buy into it. Enough people have to use these apps to make them effective — at least 60 percent of cellphone users, by some estimates — and no city or country is anywhere close to that level of adoption. In Norway, only 30 percent of people have downloaded this type of location app.
