A text from the Trump campaign usually LOOKS LIKE THIS, while Biden texts often go on and on and ….
If you’re like me, you’ve been getting about two or three text messages a day from the Biden and Trump presidential campaigns, with the anticipatory excitement that accompanies each incoming-text “ding” quickly dulled by yet another mass message.
OK, well, for those of you who receive only one candidate’s texts, or none at all, we’re going to take a trip down iMessage memory lane and look at some of the texts from President Trump and Joe Biden, and what they say about their campaigns’ messaging strategies.
The Trump campaign’s mass texting style adheres closely to Mr. Trump’s Twitter feed; not a single text goes out without some word in all capital letters, and the texts are rarely longer than a tweet. They also tend to follow the substance of the president’s social feeds, usually animated by grievances.
When the impeachment process began, a daily deluge of texts hit Trump supporters, repeatedly labeling the process a “HOAX” and “WITCH HUNT!” and “TOTAL SCAM,” all with links to donate.
For the Trump campaign, texting has become an essential way to monetize the outrage Mr. Trump can instill in his base, done right in the moment, with more urgency than mass emails. Within hours of the Senate’s voting to acquit Mr. Trump, the campaign sent out a text proclaiming him “VINDICATED!” and promising a “4X-MATCH” on donations.
Across the Trump campaign’s texts, Facebook ads and email blasts, the messaging is almost always in sync. When the campaign is advertising on Facebook to donate for a “gold card” or hawking St. Patrick’s Day campaign merchandise, the texting closely follows.
Texts from the Biden campaign are, unsurprisingly, markedly different.
The text-message version of Mr. Biden even apologizes if he corresponds late in the day. “Hey, it’s Joe Biden. Hope I didn’t catch you too late,” read a text from March 31, received at 8:28 p.m. on the East Coast.
And while the Trump campaign’s messages can be almost alarmingly direct with someone who hasn’t donated in a while — “LAPSED,” read one — the Biden campaign plays a bit more passive-aggressively: “Is this the right number?” a Biden text read in early January.
The campaign has also occasionally used the mass texts to collect data on its supporters. One text asked users to share their opinions of voting by mail (and as with the V.P. tease, didn’t ask for money). A text sent on Sunday asked voters to fill out a survey (with their emails, ZIP codes and cellphone numbers) indicating whether they would vote for Mr. Biden in the general election.
Clearly, both campaigns do their best to adhere to the style of their candidate — and they have to in order to be effective. Sliding into the text messages on a personal cellphone is among the most intimate forms of outreach in a campaign’s messaging arsenal. So it’s no surprise that the Trump campaign’s texting takes on the familiar tone of the president’s Twitter feed.
For the past 48 hours, the Trump campaign has been running a set of three attack ads attempting to tie two messages together. First, the ads try to blame China for the coronavirus outbreak. Then they blast Joe Biden for criticizing President Trump’s decision in January to restrict travel from China.
The campaign has spent about $420,000 so far on the ads, running them in swing states like Florida, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania. The ad with the most money behind it, “Responsible,” has aired 160 times in Florida markets over the past two days, as it becomes increasingly clear that the Trump campaign will continue with its xenophobic messaging on China.
Halfway through the ad, the message shifts to Mr. Biden, who the narrator claims “coddles China.” Black-and-white footage of Mr. Biden provides the visual contrast.
The takeaway: The ad dovetails with Mr. Trump’s strategy of assuming no responsibility for the severity of the outbreak in the United States and pinning the blame on China. It also seeks to highlight tenuous ties between Mr. Biden and China.
Over all, it illustrates the challenge facing Mr. Trump in the general election: Even as he goes on the offensive against Mr. Biden, he’ll have to continually defend his response to the pandemic as well.
Here are the live results from special elections in California and Wisconsin and primaries in Nebraska.
Polls close at 9 p.m. Eastern time in Wisconsin and Nebraska, and 11 p.m. Eastern time in California. Here’s what to watch for.
