How to shift your mind-set from giving so much of yourself to others.
As a perinatal psychiatrist who takes care of women coping with the transition to motherhood, I meet mothers who lean into their guilt like it’s a security blanket and hold up their self-sacrifice as a badge of honor. Adopting a martyr identity doesn’t always correlate to clinical depression or anxiety. It’s a role that women can inhabit even without a diagnosable mental health condition.
I don’t blame those mothers for shielding themselves under a cloak of suffering. Appearing too well adjusted can be a liability. Leaving your kids in the car for three minutes to get a coffee can be grounds for a call to Child Protective Services and daring to bottle-feed your baby without trying to breastfeed can lead to criticism from strangers.
In 1996 Sharon Hays, Ph.D., a sociologist, coined the term “intensive mothering” to describe parenting that is “child-centered, expert-guided, emotionally absorbing, labor-intensive and financially expensive.” Two decades later, the mental load describes the invisible labor that goes into running a family. We still find ourselves living in a world where most mothers, even while working outside the home, bear the brunt of household work. The coronavirus pandemic only seems to be intensifying that pressure.
Dr. Beck’s description of the paradox rings true in my work with patients. I see mothers twist themselves into knots to scale the professional ladder and to keep up with the unrelenting demands of mothering. All the while feeling like they’re not doing anything quite right, and resentful that this is their burden to bear. The research supports this as well. A 2016 study of 255 parents of toddlers from the greater Southern California area found that mothers had significantly higher levels of work-family guilt and work-interfering-with-family guilt compared to fathers.
Though I’m not a mother, I’m no stranger to the caretaker role and have experienced my own savior complex. In working with my own psychotherapist, I came to realize I had been swept up in a particular smugness that comes with giving myself until I was past the point of empty (spoiler alert: it’s a sugar high). I had never developed my capacity to set boundaries. What I see now as a psychiatrist who specializes in women’s mental health are mothers who don’t recognize the costs of their addiction to self-sacrifice and feel powerless to stop it. That women are rewarded for the suffering they endure adds to this cycle. On one hand being a martyr is about experiencing pain and destroying yourself for the sake of others. On the other hand it’s about seeking glory, and paradoxically, your glory is in your smallness.
If you’re a mother who finds herself flirting with martyrdom more often than you would like to be, what can you do?
