A majority of justices seemed skeptical of an effort by three House committees, but they seemed more sympathetic to the argument of the Manhattan district attorney.
Supreme Court justices and lawyers debated the merits of a case about whether President Trump can block the release of his financial records.
WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court heard more than three hours of arguments on Tuesday on the powers of the presidency and whether they protect President Trump from the prosecutors and House committees seeking to obtain troves of information about his business affairs.
The court considered two sets of cases, and there was a strong possibility of a split decision.
A majority of the justices appeared skeptical of Mr. Trump’s argument, in response to a subpoena from the Manhattan district attorney, that he was absolutely immune from criminal investigation while he remained in office. But the court seemed more receptive to Mr. Trump’s argument that the three House committees had asked for too much information for reasons unrelated to their legislative responsibilities.
Should the court order release of the president’s tax returns and other financial information in response to the House subpoenas, the records would almost certainly be made public and voters could consider them in deciding whether to re-elect him in November. The records may provide insight into Mr. Trump’s business practices, foreign entanglements and hush-money payments.
But if the Manhattan prosecutors prevail, the records would not immediately be made public under the secrecy rules that apply to grand juries.
Because of the coronavirus, the court heard the arguments by telephone, an experiment that started last week. The justices asked their questions one at a time, in order of seniority, which gave the arguments a stilted, halting quality and made them harder to assess than the free-for-alls that are commonplace when arguments are held in the courtroom.
The court’s ruling, expected by July, could require disclosure of information the president has gone to extraordinary lengths to protect. Or the justices could rule that Mr. Trump’s financial affairs are not legitimate subjects of inquiry.
But some of the justices’ questions raised a third possibility: that the court could return the cases to lower courts for reconsideration under stricter standards. That would have the incidental effect of deferring a final decision beyond the 2020 presidential election.
Michael C. Dorf, a law professor at Cornell, said the two sets of cases could have different outcomes.
Justice Breyer said that he was concerned about the presidency rather than a particular president, recalling Senator Joseph R. McCarthy’s investigations of supposed communist infiltration of the government in the 1950s.
“What I hold today will also apply to a future Senator McCarthy asking a future Franklin Roosevelt or Harry Truman,” Justice Breyer said.
There was no doubt that the questions before the court were momentous and consequential — for Mr. Trump, for the justices, for the separation of powers among the three branches of the federal government and for the relationship between local officials and the president.
“The subpoenas here are unprecedented in every sense,” said Patrick Strawbridge, the lawyer representing Mr. Trump in the cases on inquiries from Congress, Trump v. Mazars USA, No. 19-715, the case the court heard first.
Several justices disputed that, saying the Watergate investigation of President Richard M. Nixon and the Whitewater investigation of President Bill Clinton provided apt analogies. Both presidents lost unanimous Supreme Court cases in which they sought to withhold information.
“History and practice matter quite a bit in separation of powers cases,” Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh said.
The justices returned repeatedly to those precedents: United States v. Nixon in 1974 and Clinton v. Jones in 1997.
In the Nixon case, the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that he had to comply with a trial subpoena seeking tapes of his conversations in the Oval Office, rejecting claims of executive privilege. In the Clinton case, the court unanimously allowed a sexual harassment suit against the president to proceed, discounting concerns that it would distract him from his official responsibilities.
Several justices said those two cases posed problems for Mr. Trump’s position in the second case, Trump v. Vance, No. 19-635, resulting from the Manhattan district attorney’s request for business records in a criminal inquiry. If Nixon was required to turn over information about his official conduct in a criminal case, they said, why should Mr. Trump be able to shield records of his private conduct?
And if Mr. Clinton was required to provide a deposition in the sexual harassment case, several justices said, why should Mr. Trump be able to avoid the lesser burden of allowing third parties to provide information to prosecutors?
The first case, concerning subpoenas from the House committees, did not feature such obvious precedents, and the justices’ questions concerning them mostly reflected their usual inclinations. The more liberal members of the court for the most part were skeptical of Mr. Trump’s arguments, and the more conservative ones said they were worried about opening the door to partisan harassment of the president.
Justice Breyer, a member of the court’s liberal wing, also seemed inclined to strike a balance in the cases concerning the House subpoenas, expressing dismay at their breadth and the burdens they imposed.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor said congressional inquiries into foreign influence over American elections were doubtless proper. But she and Justice Kavanaugh indicated that a hypothetical subpoena for the president’s medical records would be out of bounds.
Justice Elena Kagan said there was a reason for the dearth of precedents relevant to the House subpoenas: Congress and the president had in the past worked out their differences through informal accommodations.
The arguments gave the public a rare chance to hear Justice Clarence Thomas, who ordinarily asks no questions from the bench and has criticized his colleagues for cutting off lawyers and each other in arguments held in the courtroom. But he seems to have found the court’s telephone arguments more congenial, and he has been a full participant in them.
The second argument began immediately after the first. It concerned a subpoena to Mr. Trump’s accounting firm from the office of the Manhattan district attorney — Cyrus R. Vance Jr., a Democrat — seeking eight years of business and personal tax records in connection with an investigation of the role that Mr. Trump and the Trump Organization played in hush-money payments made in the run-up to the 2016 election.
Both Mr. Trump and his company reimbursed the president’s former lawyer and fixer, Michael D. Cohen, for payments made to the pornographic film actress Stormy Daniels, who claimed that she had an affair with Mr. Trump.
Mr. Cohen was also involved in payments to Karen McDougal, a Playboy model who had also claimed she had a relationship with Mr. Trump. The president has denied the relationships.
Jay Sekulow, a lawyer for Mr. Trump, said his client was entitled to “temporary presidential immunity” from the subpoena while he remains in office. That sweeping argument did not appear to gain much traction.
Carey R. Dunne, the general counsel of the Manhattan district attorney’s office, said the case boiled down to a simple principle.
Some justices said they were looking for a middle ground.
Yesterday, the Supreme Court considered two sets of cases with potentially historic implications for presidential power — over the phone.
Today, in two historic cases on Tuesday, the Supreme Court debated the nature of presidential power, and who is entitled to Donald Trump’s personal records. My colleague, Adam Liptak, listened in.
It’s Wednesday, May 13.
Adam in a t-shirt — good lord.
What has the pandemic wrought? If I went to court, I’d be wearing a suit.
I have the distinct suspicion that there were no robes on the justices today.
Adam, set the scene for us on Tuesday at the Supreme Court. I’m not even sure it was at the Supreme Court, but set the scene.
The court has been hearing arguments by telephone conference call, which is a new experiment. This is only the second week of it. This was the fifth time they did it. So at 10 ‘o’ clock in the morning, I dialed in.
The honorable, the chief justice, and the associate justices of the Supreme Court of the United States.
And then she usually has a script admonishing people to draw near.
But she omitted that from the script because there’s nothing to draw near to. We were just listening in on a telephone conference call. Now, at the same time, this was quite a radical departure for the court, because there was live audio.
Which everyone in the country could listen to in real time.
Right. Usually, we have to wait days to get that audio?
Yeah, typically it comes out the Friday after the arguments which happen on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. So if we were still living in the pre-pandemic world, they would have not released audio till Friday. And that allowed us to listen into two cases, both involving subpoenas to President Trump, one from congressional committees, the other from prosecutors in Manhattan, both seeking his tax returns and all kinds of records concerning his business affairs. And that clash gave the public an opportunity, in real time, to see the justices in action.
OK, tell us about the first of these two cases. What’s the background?
The first case we will argue today is case 19-715, Donald Trump v. Mazars U.S.A.
The first case concerns three different sets of subpoenas from House committees — the House of Representatives of course controlled by Democrats — seeking a variety of business records about President Trump, his children, his dealings with his bank, his accountants, his tax returns. You know, large troves of information that the president is fighting hard to protect.
And what was the original rationale from these congressional committees in seeking these very sensitive documents?
They say they have oversight responsibilities. And they say that gathering this information will allow them to propose legislation on things like conflicts of interest.
So how do the oral arguments unfold?
Well, the first thing that happens, and this is also a recent innovation, the lawyers are given a couple of minutes of uninterrupted time to lay out their case.
The subpoenas at issue here are unprecedented in every sense. Before these cases, no court had ever upheld the use of Congress’s subpoena power to demand the personal records of a sitting president.
So President Trump’s lawyer in the House subpoenas case, Patrick Strawbridge, starts by saying that these are unprecedented subpoenas, and the court should block them.
The rule that the court applies here will affect not only this president but the presidency itself. The court should deny the committees the blank check they seek and reverse the decisions below.
His argument is that there’s no link between congressional responsibilities and what is being sought here.
The president’s personal papers are not related to anything having to do with the workings of government. And to empower the committees, to simply declare him a useful case study, is to open the door to all sorts of oppressive requests you could have.
That, sure, Congress has some power to investigate in order to enact wise legislation. But that this was partisan harassment, that they don’t need President Trump’s tax records to make tax law — they wouldn’t need his medical records to decide how to reform the Affordable Care Act — and that this is a kind of dragnet fishing expedition.
The threat, in this case, of subpoenaing decades worth of papers, not only of the president, but of the president’s family members, of his children, of his grandchildren, as the House has done in this case, poses an obvious problem with respect to harassment and infringement upon the ability of the executive to discharge his duties.
So the argument here from Trump’s lawyer is that the idea that these documents are needed for legislative affairs and legislative production is basically a fancy cover for just wanting embarrassing documents about the president.
That’s the argument, yeah.
And what is the response from the justices?
Well, the justices respond one by one. In this new way of questioning, the justices ask a couple questions each, in order of seniority.
Counsel, in so many of these prior cases, there was a cooperation. For example, tax returns. Every president voluntarily turned over his tax returns.
What it seems to me you’re asking us to do is to throw a 10 ton weight on the scales between the president and Congress.
— and avoid that kind of accommodation.
And some of the subpoenas that Congress — through history, as far back as 1792, have asked for personal papers of the president while being president.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor points out that there have been congressional subpoenas throughout our history, going back as far as Thomas Jefferson. This, she says, is different. This is easier.
We’re asking for his personal tax returns before he became president.
She’s saying that the current case doesn’t even ask for the documents of the official duties of a sitting president. This is old news. This is what the president, as a private citizen, did.
So that’s the liberal justices, who seem to be skeptical of the president’s arguments. What are the conservative justices getting at in their questioning?
Thank you, counsellor. Justice Thomas?
Following up on the chief justice’s question, what if it was clear from those statements that you reviewed that their intention was actually to remove the president from office?
But I think everyone has explored with you that just about everything can be characterized, in terms of a subpoena, as pertinent to a legislative purpose.
— that just about all information can somehow be said to be relevant to some piece of legislation.
And the question then boils down to, how can we both protect the House’s interests in obtaining information it needs to legislate, but also protect the presidency? How can the court balance those interests?
And so the conservative side of the court was sensitive — and not only the conservative side of the court, because Justice Breyer also had some qualms in this area — about whether these very broad, some say dragnet, subpoenas go too far in what could be said to be harassment of the president.
And what about the lawyer for Congress, for the people seeking these records? What is his argument for the legitimacy of these subpoenas?
So Doug Letter, the lawyer for the House, the House’s general counsel, says that they’ve laid out in great detail why they need these records. They say they’re investigating, for instance, President Trump’s foreign entanglements that might shed light on election interference.
There’s an obvious need to focus on the president’s financial records to determine if the president is subject to foreign leverage.
They say that the president’s business records and tax records could inform what kind of conflicts of interest legislation the House might want to propose.
Do we need better laws about conflicts of interests? Do we need better laws about, for example, a president dealing in contracts with government agencies?
And they say that they have general oversight responsibilities over the executive, including the president.
So at this point, there seem to be two debates going on. One argues that historical patterns show that these requests have happened all the time, and presidents have handed over these documents. The other is that Congress needs to really show that there’s a legislative purpose to have these documents. And I wonder if either of those questions is resolved, and what they tell us about the nature of the president’s power versus Congress’s?
So I don’t think we had anything like a resolution of the question. And I think there are multiple outcomes that are possible in the House subpoenas case. But it does illustrate just how important these questions are, because it’s quite rare for the Supreme Court to weigh in on the responsibilities, duties of the other two branches. So this is a big separation of powers case, where on the one hand, you have Congress saying, we need this information to do our job, to make laws and move society forward. And on the other hand, you have the president, who says, I’m the head of a branch of the federal government, and I can’t be made to cooperate in handing over all kinds of sensitive material from my private business affairs for what looks to me to be like a partisan witch hunt.
And from what you could gather during these oral arguments, how eager, or uneager, are these justices to resolve that major question between those two branches of our government?
You know, some are more eager than others. But the court as a whole didn’t seem to coalesce around any particular theory and may be looking for some kind of exit ramp. A likely scenario could be for the court to send it back down to the lower courts, to say, We’re not sure who’s right, but we think you lower courts were too sympathetic to Congress. Why don’t you have another cut at this using a stricter standard about whether Congress really needs these records?
Kicking it down to a lower court would be pretty anticlimactic for a major constitutional clash between Congress and the executive.
Yes, speaking only as a journalist, that’s not my preferred outcome.
But whatever happens on the House subpoenas, there’s a second case also argued on Tuesday and there, the coalitions look quite different.
We’ll hear argument next in case 19-635, Donald Trump vs. Cyrus Vance.
So Adam, tell us about this second case that was heard by the justices via conference call on Tuesday.
Well, they concern the same kinds of documents, but the subpoena comes from a different source. It comes from the Manhattan D.A., Cyrus Vance Jr., which is conducting a criminal inquiry. And it’s looking into the hush money payments that President Trump, through his lawyer and fixer Michael Cohen, paid to two women who said they had affairs with him, affairs he denies. It’s a more straightforward case.
And why is it more straightforward than a congressional subpoena?
There’s not a lot of precedent on congressional subpoenas, and particularly congressional subpoenas to the president. But there are leading precedents on criminal inquiries and civil lawsuits seeking information from the president.
I feel like you have mentioned those precedent cases in the past, and that they include, correct me if I’m wrong, President Clinton and President Nixon.
That’s right. And so in two cases, the Supreme Court, and both of them unanimously, ruled against presidents seeking to withhold information. And in many ways, those cases were more intrusive than what was at issue here. President Nixon was required to turn over Oval Office tapes about his official conduct. President Clinton was made to sit for a deposition in a sexual harassment lawsuit brought by Paula Jones. Here, the records sought are in the hands of third parties, and don’t seem to impose anything like the same kind of burden as those other two cases.
And a third party in the Trump case would be an accounting firm, for example?
So how did the oral arguments unfold in this case?
The president’s lawyer, Jay Sekulow, makes a very broad argument.
This court has long recognized that the president is not to be treated as an ordinary citizen. He has responsibilities. He is himself a branch of government. He is the only individual that is a branch of government in our federal system.
He says that the president enjoys temporary immunity from even being investigated.
Our position is that the Constitution itself, both in structure and text, supports the position that the president would be temporarily immune from this activity, from a state proceeding, while he is the president of the United States.
And Justice Thomas, the court’s most conservative member, seems unconvinced.
Yes. I’m interested in whether or not you can point us to some express language you think, at the founding, or during the ratification process, that provides for this immunity.
— asking Sekulow where that immunity appears in the Constitution.
And what is Sekulow’s answer?
Sekulow cites some materials from the founding era.
But they don’t seem to get him very far down the road.
So the more liberal justices really have no patience for Sekulow’s arguments.
We have said, in the grand jury context, that the public has a right to every man’s evidence. Is it your position that the grand jury right to every man’s evidence is exclusive of the president?
OK, so that argument does not seem to be succeeding. So what other defenses is Sekulow are making here?
Well, the fallback argument is that you should apply a really strict standard to subpoenas directed at the president’s records. And that you should only be able to do this if the information can’t be obtained any other way, if it’s critical to your decision about whether you’re going to charge the president or someone else with a crime. So that backup argument is almost certainly the ground on which the Supreme Court will decide the case, not the absolute immunity argument.
I listened to this hearing, and I recall Sekulow basically saying, if we’re not careful, every local prosecutor in the country might start coming at the president of an opposite party. And that would be a nightmare.
Right, but we do have some evidence that it hasn’t happened yet. The president has been in office for three years, and this is the one grand jury subpoena of this kind that I know of. And that local prosecutor in Nebraska would need to have some kind of jurisdiction over the president. But the Trump organization was not headquartered in Nebraska, it was headquartered in Manhattan.
So you’re saying, almost by definition, there will be very few local prosecutors with grounds to bring a case that involves a subpoena of the president.
Right. But Sekulow says that the president’s time is really valuable, and we shouldn’t lightly impinge on it.
No he would hire you. And he’d hire a lawyer to list what the burdens are. That wouldn’t take a lot of time.  And if you’re right, you win that case. They are saying, the other side, there are no burdens here. Well send it back and let them figure out what they are.
So he’s now making a very practical argument, not so much a constitutional one, that if the president is required to answer subpoenas from a prosecutor in Manhattan, that that could take up a lot of his time.
Yeah, so it’s both a practical and constitutional argument. The president, as the head of the executive branch, should deserve some protection so that his time is not wasted on nonsense. But the Bill Clinton case, in which he was made to sit for a deposition, certainly suggests that some impingement on the president’s time is allowed, where the justice system can’t work otherwise. Justice Gorsuch makes pretty much this exact point.
How is this more burdensome, though, than what took place in Clinton vs. Jones? I guess — I’m not sure I understand.
Let me stop you there. Yes, there, they sought the deposition of the president while he was serving. Here, they’re seeking records from third parties.
So I’m hearing a lot of skepticism, from all the justices, to these arguments. It doesn’t seem like the lawyer for Cy Vance in Manhattan had a ton of work to do, but what was his argument?
— important duties. The other principle is that under our constitution, when a president acts as a private individual, he or she has responsibilities like every other citizen, including compliance with legal process.
But it’s also true that no person is above the law. And you balance these things out. And a focused subpoena directed to, not the president himself, but to his accountants, in a legitimate criminal inquiry, is appropriate. And that message seemed to resonate with many of the justices.
It sounds like the court is leaning towards a ruling in this case, where Cy Vance, the Manhattan district attorney, will likely get the records he’s seeking from the president.
I think a split decision, Michael, is fairly likely, so that Trump loses the Manhattan D.A. case, wins or at least gets a timeout in the House subpoenas case. And that has implications, because interestingly, if the Manhattan D.A. wins, it’s a grand jury subpoena. It goes to a grand jury. Grand juries are secret. So it could be that although Trump has to turn over the records, they’ll be shielded from public view even so.
And in that case you just outlined, Adam, the president’s tax records would remain secret.
Yes, at least in the short term, yeah.
Adam, on a slightly more practical note, it occurs to me that the justices are going to be ruling in both of these cases at the end of their term. Typically, it’s June, July, which happens to be the height of the presidential campaign. And the presidential campaign involves the person at the center of these two cases, President Trump. If they side against the president, that would mean public release of pretty embarrassing documents. If they side for him, it means those documents are largely going to be shielded. I have to imagine the justices understand the context in which they’re going to be making these rulings.
Oh, I think they’re well aware of it, and they might have some reason to want to duck the issue in order not to be playing a role in the presidential election. I also think the court will be sensitive to charges that it’s acting in a partisan way, so it might like to have a split decision in which Trump wins one and loses one. And there are ways in which you could do that and send a message about the independence of the court, and hand Trump a loss in the grand jury case, but does not deliver to the American public information that some voters would like to have in deciding whether to vote for or against President Trump.
A really, potentially, very interesting outcome.
Yeah, it’s one of many, one of many. We’ll see in June or July how right these predictions proved to be.
Well, we really do enjoy holding you accountable for these predictions, so we will do that.
Well, you know what I hope to be? Right.
Well, Adam, thank you very much.
So I’d just like to hear your honest opinion. Do we have the coronavirus contained?
During a Senate hearing on Tuesday, two of the federal government’s top health officials painted a grim picture of the months ahead, warning that the U.S. has not contained the pandemic, and that reopening the country too quickly could lead to a new wave of infections.
If we do not respond in an adequate way when the fall comes, given that it is without a doubt that the infections will be in the community, then we run the risk of having a resurgence.
The two men, Dr. Anthony Fauci and Robert Redfield of the C.D.C., offered a far bleaker diagnosis than President Trump, who has called for a swift reopening, and has predicted a quick victory over the virus.
So I think we ought to have a little bit of humility in our belief that we know what’s best for the economy. And as much as I respect you, Dr. Fauci, I don’t think you’re the end all. I don’t think you’re the one person that gets to make a decision.
During the hearing, Republican Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky pressed Fauci on why the country should trust his judgment.
I have never made myself out to be the end all and only voice in this. I’m a scientist, a physician, and a public health official. I give advice according to the best scientific evidence. I don’t give advice about economic things. I don’t get advice about anything other than public health.