The U.S. sharply criticized the World Health Organization, while China pledged $2 billion to fight the pandemic. President Trump said he has been taking hydroxychloroquine, an unproven drug against Covid-19.
This briefing has ended. Read live global updates on the coronavirus here.
The virus has infected more than 5,690,000 people in at least 177 countries.
One month after a lockdown was lifted in Wuhan, China, once the center of the coronavirus outbreak, people are learning how to navigate life on the other side. This is one of their stories.
Moderna’s announcement came just a few days after President Trump named leaders for the American government’s effort to speed up development of a vaccine, and the company has said that it is proceeding on an accelerated timetable, with the second phase involving 600 people to begin soon, and a third phase to begin in July involving thousands of healthy people. The Food and Drug Administration gave Moderna the go-ahead for the second phase earlier this month.
Ecuador took early aggressive measures to stop the coronavirus, but ended up becoming an epicenter of the pandemic in Latin America. How? We revisit the first confirmed case and what led to the disease’s spread.
Outside a hospital in Guayaquil, Ecuador, a family seals the coffin of their father with plastic wrap. Many people in Guayaquil blame the government for failing to slow the spread of coronavirus, and to deal with the thousands of bodies that have piled up in the aftermath. Guayaquil has suffered arguably the worst Covid death toll in Latin America. The thing is, Ecuador had acted earlier than its neighbors to close borders and order strict quarantine. So what went wrong? From the start, the one-two punch of rapid contagion and the ensuing death toll caught local and national officials off guard. On Feb. 27, doctors in Guayaquil diagnosed the country’s first Covid-19 patient, Bella Lamilla, a 71-year-old retired teacher, otherwise known as “Patient Zero.” Dr. Esteban Ortiz-Prado is a medical investigator helping to advise the government on the pandemic. It took 13 days to diagnose Lamilla with coronavirus. And in that time, she infected many other people, including much of her family, pictured here in 2019. In all, three family members died, including Bella herself. After she arrived in Ecuador, Lamilla stayed in the home of her niece, Cassandra, in the town of Babahoyo. Bella Lamilla was certainly not the only case. There were at least six other flights from Madrid to Guayaquil between the time she arrived and when she was diagnosed. Other travelers later tested positive for Covid-19. Those lost weeks led to an out-of-control epidemic. Two and a half weeks after Bella Lamilla’s diagnosis, the country was on lockdown. Two weeks after that, Guayaquil was in the throes of the most aggressive outbreak in Latin America. “It is true that at the very beginning, it was a disaster. We are learning by mistake, by errors that we made.” This is Dr. Juan Carlos Zevallos. He was installed as Ecuador’s health minister in late March, after the former minister resigned. He admits the government should have tested and tracked patients. But he also blames residents for not following stay-at-home orders after Bella’s diagnosis. “Ecuador, as I said, was prepared. I mean, did all the measures in place and very early. Unfortunately, the people didn’t hear us. And they did not obey those restrictions.” Like a lot of cities in Latin America, a large segment of Guayaquil’s population lives day to day, working informal jobs. So to stay home means not eating. It was a perfect storm of factors that left Guayaquil’s hospitals and morgues overwhelmed. Now, the government of Ecuador has another dilemma: Just how to bury the thousands of bodies that have piled up in the weeks after Lamilla’s death? Ecuador’s official Covid death toll is several hundred. But forensic police have been working around the clock to collect and account for thousands more dead. And construction is now underway for various large burial sites around the city. Container trucks like this one transport corpses to one new site on the outskirts of Guayaquil, in the neighborhood of Pascuales. Local residents fearful of contamination are outraged. Officials in charge of handling the dead have promised that each body will have a separate resting place. We attempted to film drone footage of the new burial site. But Ecuadorean soldiers ordered our team to bring the drone down, and temporarily confiscated our footage. A human rights worker documented the incident. Since the first coronavirus diagnosis, distrust of the government’s handling of this crisis appears to have spread as fast as the contagion itself.
President Trump said Monday that he has been taking hydroxychloroquine, an antimalarial drug whose effectiveness against the coronavirus is unproven, for about a week and a half as a preventive measure, saying he had no symptoms of Covid-19.
“All I can tell you is, so far I seem to be OK,” he said, explaining that he takes a daily pill.
The Food and Drug Administration issued a safety warning in April about hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine, malaria prevention drugs that have been repeatedly promoted by Mr. Trump and widely used to treat virus patients despite the lack of evidence that they work.
And on Monday a doctor overseeing a national trial said that he agreed.
Several doctors questioned the wisdom of taking the unproven drug, given the possible risks.
Other doctors said they were alarmed that Mr. Trump was using the bully pulpit of the presidency to tell the public he takes a drug that has not been proven to be effective against the coronavirus, but which does have known risks.
Cyprus will pay the vacation cost for tourists who contract coronavirus.
The gradual reopening is being navigated across much of Europe as weeks of lockdowns make way for a return to public life. In most of Spain, restaurants also welcomed back customers on their terraces on Monday.
Paris, London and other European cities can now be toured. Just on a much smaller scale.
Eight weeks after the coronavirus forced shutdowns and derailed everyday life in countries around the world, people in Brussels can again enjoy famous European landmarks, including the Eiffel Tower in Paris and London’s Houses of Parliament all without breaking any lockdown rules.
The city’s Mini-Europe miniature theme park reopened on Monday, the Reuters news agency reported. Visitors hoping to visit the 350 model landmarks at the open-air park will need to prebook entry and follow stringent social distancing and hygiene guidelines.
Belgium, which has recorded more than 55,000 cases and more than 9,000 deaths from the virus, began lifting lockdown restrictions on May 4.
Some of the models at the park already reflect the new realities of life during the pandemic, with some figures even wearing masks.
The park, which opened in 1989, expects 150,000 visitors this year, down from last year’s almost half million.
In a normal season, as many as 300,000 migrant workers from Eastern Europe make their way to Germany to harvest asparagus, pick strawberries and plant late-season crops.
Mr. Ramaphosa has imposed one of the strictest lockdowns in the world — including continuing a ban on the sale of tobacco and alcohol. The country recently lifted some restrictions and is now on Alert Level 4, just below the highest level.
Despite their stoic selfies, they feel scared, grief-stricken, guilty they can’t do more. Here are their stories.
One popular choice, from Germany’s top soccer league to Taiwanese professional baseball, has been to fill seats with figures not subject to social distancing rules: cardboard cutouts that depict hometown supporters holding signs and smiling.
Over the weekend, a soccer team in South Korea opted for something a little more lifelike — to its deep embarrassment. The club F.C. Seoul apologized on Monday after placing what it believed were ordinary mannequins in the stands for a match against Gwangju F.C., but which were quickly recognized by many fans as sex dolls.
Some, like Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio in New York, have discouraged use of public transportation, while others are taking direct steps to thin out the crowds.
