WASHINGTON — A day after threatening to withhold federal funding from Michigan, President Trump visited a Ford plant in Ypsilanti and held his fire, delivering a re-election pitch for himself in a battleground state where his campaign advisers have become increasingly concerned that his support is declining.
After falsely claiming the state was engaged in voter fraud and had acted illegally by sending out absentee ballot applications to millions of voters, Mr. Trump dropped his criticism of Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat, and other state officials.
The president toured the factory, where the auto manufacturer has been producing ventilators and personal protective equipment, and then delivered remarks in front of red, white and blue Ford trucks. He told reporters he was “not going to discuss” what funds he was referring to.
Instead, Mr. Trump talked about the reopening of the country, promising an economic surge built on “pent-up demand.” He said he wanted to start holding campaign rallies again “sooner rather than later,” despite the thousands of new Covid-19 cases still being identified each day in the United States and the grim milestone of 100,000 deaths expected in the coming days.
In fact, some national polls show Mr. Trump trailing former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., the presumptive Democratic nominee, in Michigan by up to six points. And in a recent poll commissioned by the Detroit Regional Chamber, 63 percent of Michigan voters approved of Ms. Whitmer’s handling of the coronavirus crisis, compared with just 43 percent who approved of the job Mr. Trump is doing.
The split was on display outside the factory, where several hundred supporters and protesters gathered before the president’s visit.
He said he had spoken to Ms. Whitmer about the crisis earlier in the day. “At the appropriate time, I will go and see the area,” he said.
Mr. Trump toured the factory without wearing a face mask, despite the plant’s guidelines that required anyone on the site to have a face covering to protect from the spread of the coronavirus.
The admission was the latest sign that Mr. Trump is more concerned about the optics of wearing a face mask than with following the recommendation of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to wear one when in proximity to other people.
Kathleen Gray contributed reporting from Ypsilanti, Mich.