Investigators have uncovered a fraud ring that may have siphoned millions of dollars in unemployment payments. With more than two-thirds of states significantly relaxing restrictions, an uptick in cases is predicted.
This briefing has ended. Follow our latest coverage of the coronavirus pandemic.
Obama delivers pointed criticism in two graduation speeches.
Investigators uncover an effort to defraud U.S. unemployment systems.
The F.D.A.’s approval of a new test increases hope for detecting infections at home.
Trump’s Mar-a-Lago resort quietly reopens.
In North Carolina, churches are allowed to temporarily resume indoor services after federal ruling.
New York clears the way for some ‘low-risk’ activities to resume.
The speeches, aired hours apart, combined the inspirational advice given to graduates — build community, do what is right, be a leader — with pointed criticism of the handling of a public health crisis that has killed more than 87,000 Americans and crippled much of the economy.
Mr. Obama returned to that theme in his address to high school seniors in the evening.
Mr. Obama’s comments were rare public addresses by him to a national audience during the outbreak, and he said a leadership void had created a clear mandate for the graduates: “If the world’s going to get better, it’s going to be up to you,” he said.
The challenge of pre-empting fraudulent claims has increased as the pressure to get money into the hands of unemployed workers has grown. Unemployment offices accustomed to dealing with jobless claims in the thousands have been inundated with millions of claims during recent months.
The fraud attacks, which the Secret Service warned could conceivably target every state, could result in “potential losses in the hundreds of millions of dollars,” according to a memo obtained by The New York Times.
A new analysis of polling data suggests that the rapid rise in unemployment may be flattening, though not for everyone.
The Food and Drug Administration on Saturday granted emergency clearance for a coronavirus testing kit that will enable individuals to take a nasal sample at home and send it to a laboratory for diagnostic testing, the second such approval it has made.
The kit, made by Everlywell, will contain a swab used to take a sample from the nostrils, and a tube with a saline solution to put it in for sending to one of two private lab companies.
Some public health researchers have warned that at-home nasal swab tests can be less accurate than the specimen collection performed by health care providers, which involves inserting a long swab through the nose into the back of the throat.
Christina Song, an Everlywell spokeswoman, said consumers will first take an online survey to determine whether they meet federal guidelines for the test. The survey will be reviewed quickly by health care providers affiliated with PWNHealth, the company’s telemedicine partner. If a consumer qualifies for the test, one will be shipped out immediately. The entire process — from survey to order to results — is designed to be completed in three to five days, Ms. Song said.
The test kits will be available later this month, according to Ms. Song, and will cost $135.
The agency expressed hope that another kit would increase access to testing, as well as reduce the risks facing health care workers who administer tests in person.
In Maryland, new regulations allow retail stores to open at 50 percent capacity. Churches and other houses of worship were pressed to halve their capacity and offer outdoor services where possible. Salons and barbershops can only take appointments.
In Oregon, retail stores can reopen statewide, so long as they follow distancing guidelines. Thirty-one of the state’s 36 counties were approved for other, limited reopenings. Restaurants and bars can provide dine-in service until 10 p.m. Gyms must follow new social distancing guidelines, limit the size of fitness classes and consider holding classes and activities outdoors.
More states will continue to reopen in the coming weeks. Tennessee, which already allowed restaurants and retail stores in most counties to reopen last month, will allow businesses like theaters and amusement parks to reopen on May 22, with restrictions to limit contact between customers and employees. The new guidelines do not apply to counties that are developing their own plans.
Reopenings might ease the nation’s intense economic pain: More than 36 million people have filed unemployment claims in the past two months, and the Commerce Department reported that retail sales fell a record 16.4 percent in April.
Only about 3 percent of the population has been tested. More than 20,000 new cases are identified on most days. And almost every day this past week, more than 1,000 people in the United States died from the virus. The total death toll has surpassed 87,000.
President Trump’s resort in Palm Beach, Fla., the Mar-a-Lago Club, partially reopened this weekend, though the scene was much changed.
A grassy croquet area, where people often played on Saturday mornings, sat empty, and the tennis courts remained off-limits. At the entrance of The Beach Club, with access to the shoreline, a sign asked guests to use a provided bottle of hand sanitizer when entering.
Few, if any, of the club’s members wore masks, though all of the staff members did, and some greeted members with elbow bumps. Toddlers ran under the blazing sun, and adults ordered food at a poolside restaurant, although they had to eat outside because its seating area remained closed.
Palm Beach shut down in mid-March and is now under a curfew from 11 p.m. to 6 a.m. Like the rest of Florida, it is now reopening, although business has been slow. At lunchtime on Saturday, only a few shoppers were visible along the Worth Avenue shopping strip, gawking at the Gucci, Louis Vuitton, and Chanel boutiques. Most shops were empty. The Louis Vuitton and Gucci stores required customers to wear masks.
All 50 states are reopening in some way, though some are going further than others. The Washington, D.C., area remains locked down.
Churches in North Carolina will be allowed to reopen their doors after a federal judge on Saturday temporarily blocked a state order that was intended to slow the spread of the coronavirus by capping attendance at indoor religious services.
On Saturday, the judge, James C. Dever III of United States District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina, temporarily blocked the order, siding with several Christian groups that had argued that the restriction violated their First Amendment right to the free exercise of religion.
Judge Dever noted that the order allowed stores to open at 50 percent capacity and up to 50 people to gather for funerals.
“The record, at this admittedly early stage of the case, reveals that the governor appears to trust citizens to perform non-religious activities indoors (such as shopping or working or selling merchandise) but does not trust them to do the same when they worship indoors together,” the judge wrote.
The judge said his ruling temporarily blocking the restriction on indoor church services will remain in place for no longer than 14 days. Another hearing in the case is scheduled for later this month.
Mr. Cooper, a Democrat, said he disagreed with the decision, but would not appeal it.
But city dwellers hoping for a refreshing dip in the ocean at Coney Island will have to go without relief.
Estimating how many residents left New York City, neighborhood by neighborhood.
As unemployment climbs, many turn to food banks for the first time.
Defying state rules, Atwater, Calif., declares itself a ‘sanctuary city’ for businesses.
The City of Atwater, Calif., declared itself a “sanctuary city for all businesses” at a special meeting on Friday, openly defying the state’s coronavirus orders, after business owners showed up to voice their support for the measure.
“It’s not the government’s job to protect my health, it’s their job to protect my rights, and they’re being taken away, so thank you for giving them back to us,” Ron Danel, who owns a company that makes gravestones, said to the City Council.
Even before the general public was allowed to speak, the pastor tasked by the city with giving a pre-meeting prayer used his time at the lectern to assert, as heads bowed, that he had great support for the bill.
With that, about a dozen business owners in Atwater, a city of about 30,000 people two hours southeast of San Francisco, marched up to a lectern one by one and urged their mayor and council members to let them decide when to reopen.
And the Council did — unanimously — pledging to not enforce the state’s orders that many businesses remain shut, and earning vigorous applause from the mostly maskless crowd. Mayor Paul Creighton, a Republican, said the “sanctuary” order meant city police and code enforcement officers would not enforce any of the state’s stay-at-home orders, although he warned that businesses with state business licenses may want to be cautious.
“We have to take bold measures and save ourselves,” Mr. Creighton said. He added that the crowd at the City Council meeting was so large that the city set up two televisions outside of City Hall to broadcast the meeting for those who could not get inside.
Edith Duran quickly found herself in a difficult spot as the pandemic crippled the local businesses she counts as clients. She could not draw her full salary in February, and by March, she was seeking relief on her mortgage.
She was allowed to pause her payments for three months starting in April, but the company that handles her mortgage made a seemingly impossible request: Pay back the $4,450 in skipped payments on July 1.
World leaders encourage solidarity amid the race to develop a vaccine.
The World Health Organization, along with the presidents of Chile and Costa Rica, announced plans on Friday to pool data and intellectual property that could be used to develop drugs and other treatments to stop the coronavirus.
The pool, which the W.H.O. said is scheduled to debut on May 29, is intended to attract other governments and organizations as well, and seemed designed to address the concerns that geopolitical rivalries and nationalism could affect which countries gain access to a vaccine or other promising drugs as they become available.
President Trump insisted on Friday that international cooperation was certain even if another country developed a vaccine before the United States. “Whoever gets it, we think it’s great and we’re going to work with them,” he said.
Behind the scenes, however, efforts to understand the virus have been intensely competitive, and secrets have been jealously guarded.
In March, the Trump administration sought to pressure a German firm into moving its vaccine research to U.S. shores. And last week, the F.B.I. and the Department of Homeland Security moved to accuse Chinese hackers of attempting to steal U.S. data related to vaccine development.
On Thursday, President Emmanuel Macron of France also took to task the head of a French multinational pharmaceutical company after the C.E.O. suggested the U.S. should have priority access to a vaccine because of its investment in the company’s research and development.
Health experts have advised that controlling the pandemic requires all countries having access to a vaccine, warning that in past outbreaks, like the H1N1 pandemic, nationalistic export policies and intellectual property disputes resulted in wealthy nations gaining disproportionate access.
The doctor to Congress and the Supreme Court is struggling to sidestep reopening debates.
Dr. Brian P. Monahan has been a calm and professional voice of reason during the pandemic, according to interviews with more than two dozen lawmakers, Capitol officials and medical professionals who know him. They say he has taken a personal interest in his influential clientele, which also includes the nine Supreme Court justices, even as he fields politically charged questions about reopening, testing and precautionary measures.
But as government doctors have emerged as trusted public voices and political figures in the face of a fearsome pandemic — appearing in White House news conferences and as witnesses at marquee hearings — Dr. Monahan has maintained an uncommonly low profile.
His approach shows him working to stay out of the political fray, and he is known in the halls of the Capitol as much for his meticulous attention to medical detail as he is for his efforts to stay completely out of politics.
The authorities say that at least 100 babies are stranded already and that as many as 1,000 may be born before Ukraine’s travel ban for foreigners is lifted.
Reporting was contributed by Mike Baker, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, Julie Bosman, Chris Buckley, Audra D.S. Burch, Emily Cochrane, Julia Echikson, John Eligon, Nicholas Fandos, Annie Flanagan, Amy Harmon, Julia Jacobs, Sheila Kaplan, Corey Kilgannon, Zach Montague, Steven Lee Myers, Sarah Maslin Nir, Kwame Opam, Campbell Robertson, Mitch Smith and James Wagner.