A sharp escalation of tensions over the handling of the pandemic has raised the specter of a new Cold War.
“Evil.” “Lunacy.” “Shameless.” “Sick and twisted.” China has hit back at American criticism over its handling of the coronavirus pandemic with an outpouring of vitriol as acrid as anything seen in decades.
A cycle of statements and actions is solidifying longstanding suspicions in Beijing that the United States and its allies are bent on stifling China’s rise as an economic, diplomatic and military power.
The clash with the United States over the pandemic is fanning broader tensions on trade, technology, espionage and other fronts — disputes that could intensify as President Trump makes his contest with Beijing a theme of his re-election campaign.
“We could cut off the whole relationship,” Mr. Trump said in an interview on Fox Business on Thursday.
While the hostility has so far been mostly confined to words, there are warning signs the relationship could worsen. The trade truce that Mr. Trump and his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, reached in January could fall apart, despite recent pledges to keep to its terms. Other tensions, including those over Taiwan and the South China Sea, are also flaring.
In its first months, the outbreak delivered a political blow to Mr. Xi, after officials held back information and discouraged doctors from reporting cases. Mr. Trump appeared confident that the United States had little to fear, and he praised Mr. Xi’s handling of the crisis.
Only weeks ago, Mr. Xi and Mr. Trump spoke by telephone and proclaimed their unity in the face of the coronavirus. Mr. Trump declared his “respect” for Mr. Xi, and Mr. Xi told him that countries had to “respond in unison” against a global health emergency.
The backlash, in turn, has reignited the battle over trade, technology, and other issues, with the United States on Friday issuing rules that would bar the Chinese telecom giant Huawei from using American machinery and software. Public sentiment in the United States and other countries has also hardened against China, according to recent polls.
“I have a very good relationship, but I just — right now I don’t want to speak to him,” Mr. Trump said of Mr. Xi on Thursday. A spokesman for China’s foreign ministry, Zhao Lijian, brushed aside Mr. Trump’s threat to sever relations, saying on Friday that the two countries should cooperate.
“In Chinese eyes, the Trump administration is trying to delegitimize Communist Party rule, and also stigmatize not just China but also China’s top leaders,” Zhu Feng, a professor of international relations at Nanjing University in eastern China, said in a telephone interview.
Communist Party-run news outlets have lashed out specifically at Mr. Pompeo for arguing that the outbreak might have leaked from a Chinese lab.
The editor of The Global Times, Hu Xijin, has called for China to expand its nuclear arsenal in response to American actions. “We are facing an increasingly irrational U.S., which only believes in strength,” he wrote last week.
Other hawks have warned that China needs to be prepared to deal with clashes over Taiwan and the South China Sea, where American warships have stepped up patrols this year. Some hard-liners have gone further, warning of war.
The bellicose voices in Beijing have been subtly challenged by proponents of a more moderate approach, and the Chinese foreign ministry distanced itself from Mr. Hu’s comments on nuclear weapons. Despite the ill-will, both governments have pushed ahead with the partial deal to ease trade tensions.
“China is also highly polarized,” said Professor Zhu, the Nanjing University scholar.
For Mr. Xi, jousting with the United States may help rally domestic support after China’s missteps in the early stages of the outbreak. But he appears to have no appetite for all-out confrontation, especially as he tries to restore the Chinese economy.
Since 2012, Mr. Xi has expanded China’s military hold on the South China Sea, promoted industrial programs that irked American companies, and authorized mass detentions of Muslim minorities in China’s far west, all the while wagering that he could keep in check recriminations from Washington.
After a trade war that dominated 2019, Mr. Xi had seemed confident that he had reined in tensions, and, according to a White House adviser, remarked late last year that he would rather deal with Mr. Trump than Democrats who dwelled on human rights.
Mr. Xi has not spoken to Mr. Trump since their call in March.
How Mr. Xi plays his hand against the United States could reverberate for years — for his political fortunes and for China’s standing in the world.
While Mr. Trump will take into account the presidential election, Mr. Xi too must consider his prospects for a third term from 2022. Mr. Xi has no clear heir-apparent, and in 2018 he abolished a term limit on the presidency, opening the way to an indefinite time in power as both president and Communist Party leader.
Mr. Xi does not want to seem weak in the face of foreign demands, nor does he want to risk an extended economic downturn, said Yun Sun, the director of the China Program at the Stimson Center.
Rick Gladstone contributed reporting. Amber Wang and Claire Fu contributed research.