Dr. Rick Bright testified that he made early appeals that the Trump administration prepare for the coronavirus. President Trump and his health secretary snapped back.
WASHINGTON — The whistle-blower who was ousted as the head of a federal medical research agency charged on Thursday that top Trump administration officials failed to heed his early warnings to stock up on masks and other supplies to combat the coronavirus, and that Americans died as a result.
After holding back for nearly a month, President Trump; his health secretary, Alex M. Azar II; and his trade adviser, Peter Navarro, all hit back at Dr. Bright, in a three-pronged assault that elevated the confrontation. Mr. Trump dismissed Dr. Bright as a “disgruntled employee” and Mr. Navarro, whom Mr. Bright considered an ally in the White House, called him a “deserter in the war on the China virus.” Mr. Azar insisted officials followed through on the scientist’s ideas.
Mr. Azar and Dr. Bright’s immediate supervisor at the Department of Health and Human Services, Robert Kadlec, declined invitations to testify, as did Mr. Navarro. Representative Anna G. Eshoo, Democrat of California, who led the hearing, said later in an interview that she did not intend to subpoena them.
In an 89-page complaint filed with the Office of Special Counsel this month, Dr. Bright said he was reassigned to a narrower job at the National Institutes of Health as retaliation for his objections to the widespread distribution of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, malaria drugs that Mr. Trump was promoting as a treatment for Covid-19. He accused top officials of “cronyism” in awarding contracts — a charge health and human services has strongly denied.
On Thursday, shortly before Dr. Bright took the witness stand, his lawyers disclosed that the Office of Special Counsel, which is investigating Dr. Bright’s complaint, had made a preliminary determination of a “substantial likelihood of wrongdoing” regarding the cronyism allegation and had asked Mr. Azar to investigate.
Last week, the special counsel found “reasonable grounds” that Dr. Bright had been retaliated against and requested that Mr. Azar reinstate him at the research agency for 45 days while the office investigated. Health and human services officials have not replied to either request, said Debra S. Katz, a lawyer for Dr. Bright.
But Mr. Azar suggested that Dr. Bright was being derelict in his refusal, so far, to take his new assignment at the National Institutes of Health — a sentiment Mr. Navarro echoed in a brief interview on Thursday night. Health and human services officials initially said Dr. Bright would lead a new “shark tank”-type effort to develop coronavirus therapeutics, but Mr. Azar said he was supposed to be helping with a crash effort to develop a coronavirus vaccine, called Operation Warp Speed.
Representative Markwayne Mullin, Republican of Oklahoma, echoed Mr. Azar. He hit Dr. Bright for taking a medical leave for hypertension as his complaint went public, then taking vacation time to rest, but having the strength to show for a hearing on Capitol Hill. The congressman noted that Dr. Bright’s job paid $285,000 a year.
“You’re too sick to come into work, but you’re well enough to come here?” Mr. Mullin said.
Dr. Bright told lawmakers he was testifying in his “personal capacity” and not as a government employee. He was calm and measured throughout, pushing back on Republicans who, at various points, also complained he had not shown up for his National Institutes of Health job and suggested he should have brought his concerns to an inspector general (he said he did) instead of putting them in a whistle-blower complaint.
Representative Susan W. Brooks, Republican of Indiana, reminded Dr. Bright that the Trump administration had engaged in pandemic planning, and that he was a part of it.
Such tension marked the hearing, as did a flash of profanity when Dr. Bright described his email exchanges with Mike Bowen, the executive vice president of Prestige Ameritech, a Texas-based company that makes protective masks. Mr. Bowen, who has been warning for more than a decade that the United States was too dependent on masks from China, emailed Dr. Bright in January, warning of a shortage.
In addition to buying masks, Dr. Bright recommended that the federal government stock up on remdesivir, a drug that has since been shown to shorten hospital stays for Covid-19 and has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration as a treatment.
Dr. Bright also told the panel that he asked the Pentagon for a plane to bring in nasal swabs, which were in short supply and needed for coronavirus testing, from Italy. After Dr. Kadlec “rebuffed” him, he said he called Mr. Navarro, who got permission from Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper within hours.
Republicans, though, tried to discredit Dr. Bright, suggesting his performance was lacking. Representative Richard Hudson, Republican of North Carolina, told Dr. Bright that Congress should examine “serious allegations that have been made against you,” without elaborating. He cited a Politico article that said his whistle-blower complaint left out context and that his colleagues gave him “mixed” reviews.
Dr. Bright said he finally appealed to the public after he tried to put limits on the distribution of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. Representative Gus Bilirakis, Republican of Florida, told Dr. Bright he knew of a veteran who was “cured” by hydroxychloroquine. Representative Buddy Carter, Republican of Georgia, noted that Dr. Bright had shown initial enthusiasm for the drugs and pushed him on whether he “soured” on them because Mr. Trump was promoting them.
Dr. Bright said he was not opposed to testing the drugs but had safety concerns and wanted to wait for the results of clinical trials. He said he assented to the F.D.A.’s “emergency use authorization” for chloroquine, which is unapproved in the United States, because the F.D.A. limited its use to hospital patients under close medical supervision.
