As states begin to loosen restrictions, the act of reopening will be carried out not by governors or the president, but the millions of individuals being asked to do it.
When Maine finally announced this week that hair salons could reopen, Sarah Kyllonen, a stylist in Lewiston, stayed up late wondering what to do, feeling overwhelmed.
The virus still scared her. It seemed too soon to open up. Then again, her bills had not stopped and her unemployment benefits had not started, and she was starting to worry about next month’s rent.
 But she woke an hour later, and did not sleep much after that.
As states begin to loosen restrictions on their economies, the act of reopening has come down not to governors or even to President Trump, but to millions of individual Americans who are being asked to go back to work.
It is not an easy decision. In homes across the country this week, Americans whose governors said it was time to reopen wrestled with what to do, weighing what felt like an impossible choice.
 If they refuse, will they lose their jobs? What if they work on tips and there are no customers? What happens to their unemployment benefits?
Until recently, only those designated as essential workers had to face such dilemmas. On Friday, as at least 10 additional states, including Texas, began to lift stay-at-home orders or reopen some businesses, more Americans ventured out of their doors to work, but often with a sense of dread — that they were being forced to choose between their health and their livelihood.
Large majorities still approve of shutdown orders as a way to protect public health, but the tremendous surge of jobless claims since mid-March has created a crosscurrent: an urgent need for income.
The hyperpartisan wrangling between Mr. Trump and governors over whether to reopen has obscured the way many Americans are thinking about the issue. They are not always neatly dividing into two political tribes, with Republicans wanting to see restrictions lifted and Democrats wanting to remain shut down. Even within each person there can be conflicting instincts.
Andrea Pinson has not been paid since March 18, the last day she worked at a bingo hall in Fort Worth, taking customers’ orders and cooking and serving their meals. But earlier this week, she received a short text from her boss, telling her to show up for work on Friday, when Texas reopened restaurants, shops, churches and other gathering places.
On Friday afternoon, less than five hours before her shift was to begin, Ms. Pinson was relieved when her boss texted her again, saying the bingo hall was not allowed to reopen after all.
Unemployment benefits through states are tied to employment, and workers cannot keep their benefits once their bosses call them back, even if they believe it is unsafe to go to work. There are some exceptions, granted by the federal relief package known as the CARES Act: They include those who are sick with the virus or who are caring for children whose schools or day care centers remain closed.
Republican leaders in Iowa and Oklahoma have threatened to withhold unemployment benefits from people who refuse to return to their jobs. In both states, employers whose workers do not show up have been asked to report them to state authorities so they can stop providing them with the benefits.
As Americans have started receiving unemployment benefits and stimulus checks, freeing some of them from having to worry as much about paying for food and rent, they have been able to shift their focus toward protecting their health.
Bianca, a dental assistant in Denver, said she was dreading getting called back to work. She and her wife are getting by on $600 in weekly unemployment, supplemented by an extra $600 approved for workers weathering the current crisis.
But her practice began seeing routine patients again this week as Colorado’s stay-at-home order expired. And she is concerned her clinic does not have enough protective gear to go around.
“Most of us are afraid to go back, but dentists are like, ‘I’ve got a business to run,’” said Bianca, who asked to be identified only by her first name, for fear that she would get fired for speaking up.
Bianca cleans teeth inches away from people’s faces, and even before the coronavirus struck, she picked up colds and flus regularly from patients. She said she was petrified of getting infected at work or spreading the disease to her family, especially her father, whose immune system has been battered after he underwent six months of chemotherapy.
In Ohio, the authorities said manufacturers could begin operating on Monday. But Kim Rinehart, a worker at a transmission plant in Toledo, said she had heard nothing from her union or her company about when she might return to work. She is collecting unemployment and the additional $600 in benefits, and is feeling fine about staying home, particularly given the state’s limited testing capacity and the virus’s stealth.
“If you had a murderer in the plant, and you didn’t know where but you knew he was there, would you go back into that plant?” she said.
In Georgia, Gov. Brian Kemp allowed restaurants to start dine-in service on Monday. But a large group of restaurateurs and chefs have pledged to remain closed for the time being, because it was safer.
One of the chefs, Craig Richards, the co-owner of Lyla Lila in Atlanta, said he did not want anyone to get sick as a result of his decisions. And he is not excited about opening a place that is depressing to visit, with workers in masks.
To some degree, governors are leaving choices to individuals by design.
“It is the people themselves that are primarily responsible for their safety,” Gov. Kristi Noem of South Dakota said this week, announcing a “back to normal” plan.
But for many people trying to protect themselves in cities and towns that were reopening, the effort mostly felt clumsy and frantic.
Morgan Bard has spent hours driving from supermarket to supermarket across Northern Colorado, scrounging the empty shelves for gloves, sanitizer, wipes and other supplies that are now required for retailers as they reopen to the public.
Ms. Bard and her father were reopening their business selling Celtic jewelry, crafts and art in the mountain tourist town of Estes Park, Colo., on Friday.
“It’s hard to find anything,” she said. She has enough hand sanitizer for herself, but not enough to set out for customers. She is low on disposable gloves.
After agonizing over what to do, Ms. Kyllonen, the Maine hairstylist, has decided to brave it. The salon opened on Friday, but her first day back is not until Wednesday because social distancing means only five hairdressers can work at once.
She will follow pages of state guidelines. Wear a mask, and a face shield. Have customers wait in their cars. Ask them about symptoms. Take their temperature. Disinfect seats and surfaces and change towels and gloves.
Richard Fausset, Emily Badger and Sarah Mervosh contributed reporting.