Dr. James A. Mahoney, who had spent his whole career at a poorly financed public hospital, went to extraordinary lengths to help patients.
In the first weeks after the coronavirus pandemic hit New York, Dr. James A. Mahoney barely slept.
He would run from crashing patient to crashing patient, always at the bedside where it was most dangerous. He rushed in to help when his boss, Dr. Robert F. Foronjy, was struggling with a patient sick with the virus, doing chest compressions and switching out a blocked endotracheal tube. Then he was off again.
After nearly 40 years as a physician, Dr. Mahoney, 62, could have retired. Others his age, including his older brother, also a doctor, stopped seeing hospital patients as the pandemic loomed, worried that age or health issues put them in greater danger than younger colleagues.
Friends, family and fellow physicians begged Dr. Mahoney to do the same. He had been on the front lines for AIDS, the crack epidemic, the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, Hurricane Sandy. Why not skip this one, they asked. Take a break, save yourself.
He would not do it. Dr. Mahoney belonged on the floor, and that is where he would stay, until the end. On April 27, he succumbed to the virus he had fought so vigorously.
The pandemic has devastated the ranks of New York’s health care workers. While the city has not released comprehensive data on infection and mortality rates among hospital staffers, doctors and nurses have said there were times during the surge last month when hundreds were out sick. The head nurse at Kings County Hospital’s emergency room, Maria Guia Cabillon, died just a day before Dr. Mahoney.
Numbers alone cannot convey the full extent of the loss when doctors, nurses and paramedics die from Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus.
“One of the sad stories of this pandemic is that we’re losing people that we couldn’t afford to lose,” Dr. Foronjy said.
Though he was raised by a military father and spent his childhood on Air Force bases, Dr. Mahoney had no patience for the strict hierarchy of the hospital. He preferred eating lunch with his nurses or assistants, and once chided his sister for reserving all the best tables at one of his birthday parties for physicians. Each year, he used his own money for Christmas bonuses he gave to all of his staff.
To his friends, he was known as Charlie, a nickname one of his father’s buddies gave him as a child. He was a large, intimidating man to look at, but would always crack a joke to put people at ease. Residents, typically fearful of approaching senior physicians with rookie questions, had no problems coming to Dr. Mahoney.
Dr. Julien J. Cavanagh said on one of his first nights as a resident, he was anxious about summoning Dr. Mahoney at 3 a.m. for help with a young stroke victim. Most senior physicians would have dismissed their subordinates and finished the procedure themselves, he said.
Black doctors are still uncommon enough that Dr. Mahoney would sometimes be mistaken for someone else. Even when he was a senior physician, residents would sometimes contradict him, a huge breach of protocol. Once, another doctor, mistaking him for a local resident in Brooklyn, admonished him for parking in the physicians’ lot. Such slights rankled him, friends and colleagues said.
His patients, though, adored him, colleagues said. He gave them his pager number and his cellphone number. If patients were too sick or too busy to come to the hospital for routine checkups, he would make house calls. Even after he got sick, he would call longtime patients to monitor them, said Michelle King, who was his officer manager for two decades.
On the rare occasions that he took time off, he and his three children would often join his two brothers and two sisters on cruises in the tropics. He and his wife divorced about a decade ago.
When reports about the new coronavirus began to circulate among doctors, everyone knew it would be bad. Dr. Melvin Mahoney, who had retired in 2014 but was still seeing patients, decided it was time to leave.
It was the second week of April, the height of the surge in New York City, when Dr. Mahoney sent a text to his boss with the news that he had a fever.
Dr. Mahoney fared well initially and continued to consult with patients while isolating at home. His condition worsened after Easter. He began to have difficulty breathing. By the time he decided to come into University Hospital’s emergency room, on April 20, he could barely walk.
What makes the coronavirus pandemic especially heartbreaking is that most of its victims die alone. To limit the spread of the disease, all visitors are barred from entering hospitals. Families rarely get to say goodbye.
Dr.  Propped up on his bed, a large oxygen mask obscuring his toothy smile, he would greet a stream of well-wishers. Ms. King, his assistant, stopped by. So did Dr. Cavanagh, now the chief resident for neurology at University Hospital.
He always insisted that he was feeling better.
By the following Sunday, Dr. Mahoney was crashing.
In a desperate effort to save his life, his colleagues loaded him onto an ambulance and rushed him to Tisch Hospital, a wealthier institution with a sophisticated blood oxygenation machine that University Hospital did not possess.
Five colleagues, a kind of honor guard, followed the ambulance as it rode from Brooklyn to Manhattan. They escorted him to the hospital and were with him, at his bedside, when he died.