I hadn’t been in a restaurant since March 15, a few days before Atlanta’s mayor ordered all dining rooms to close. On April 27, Georgia became the second state, after Alaska, to allow restaurants to reopen since the pandemic hit. Chops, a 31-year-old temple of expense-account dining in the city’s Buckhead neighborhood, was one of the first to jump back into business.
In fits and starts around the country, restaurants are beginning to reopen, guided by a hodgepodge of federal, state and local laws and recommendations that seems to shift daily. Restaurant owners are left to devise their own practices, puzzling out how to minimize the health risk, and reassure some customers without alienating others.
Masks can be a political flash point. On Mother’s Day, hundreds of people without masks crowded into C & C Breakfast & Korean Kitchen in Castle Rock, Colo., south of Denver, for a protest party organized by the owners, who said the state government had overstepped by limiting restaurants to takeout and delivery, and requiring workers to wear face masks. The state health department closed the restaurant the next day.
Rick Davis, a chief executive at the accounting firm Elliott Davis, would prefer his waiter not wear a mask. He secured the very first reservation at Soby’s New South Cuisine, in Greensville, S.C., when it reopened on May 11. He couldn’t wait to eat an order of the restaurant’s signature fried green tomatoes. He only wished he could have seen the face of the person who served it to him.
She had worn a mask when she walked in, and was glad that Ola Garcia, her server, wore one, too. Both had their temperatures checked when they arrived, Ms. Garcia before she started her shift and Ms. Wilson at the door.
Restaurants are experimenting with a number of ways to keep diners and employees safe, and signal that sanitation is taken seriously. An Ohio breakfast spot hung washable clear plastic shower curtains between tables. One Atlanta restaurant requires servers to change into different-colored gloves each time they head back to a table, to assure diners that the gloves are fresh.
The most obvious reminder, at least for now, is the mask. Restaurant owners are pondering whether they should be surgical-style paper coverings, which are relatively plentiful, inexpensive and can be changed with each new group of diners, or a clear plastic shield worn like a necklace. Some are considering adding the restaurant’s logo, or looking for more stylized options, like the soft organic cotton masks being manufactured by the designer Natalie Chanin in Alabama.
