I had to find new ways to compartmentalize my depression and process my emotions without denying my mental health needs.
I’m watching my toddler as she plays with her toys, and I feel nothing. I’m not sad or happy. I’m just there. She hands me the book du jour, “Tickle Time,” and signals for me to read it. I freeze, filled with dread. The hardest thing about reading “Tickle Time” isn’t the silly voice I have to adopt, or the ginned up enthusiasm or even the pièce de résistance: the tickling. It’s the fact that I want to do all these things, but my mind makes me feel like I can’t. Thankfully, by now I’m well-versed at performative happiness. My brain uses an emergency generator that powers the backup mom memory, which allows me to appear human and somewhat entertaining to my child. I am a Westworld mom, only lazier and less homicidal.
Six years ago, I was diagnosed with bipolar II. And while living with a mental illness is incredibly tough, I am lucky and privileged to be able to afford both therapy and medication, which makes everything more manageable. When I decided I wanted to get pregnant, my therapist and I put together a plan for my medication, my moods and the inevitable postpartum depression. But of course, nothing works out the way you plan, especially when it comes to pregnancy and childbirth. Instead of P.P.D., I developed a form of postpartum psychosis. After seven months, the psychosis lifted, but instead of going back to “normal,” I was now a new mom with old depression, and there wasn’t a plan for that.
I read “Tickle Time,” and the sound of my “silly” voice bounces off the walls. My daughter laughs, and I laugh louder — it’s a reflex, muscle memory from a better mental state. And even though I’m numb, I can feel my heart breaking. I assumed I could skate by on high-functioning depression, which used to work when I was on my own steady and accommodating schedule. Now I’m on a child’s schedule — a nightmare combination of both rigidity and unpredictability. My old coping mechanisms could not be applied to this new system. I had to find other ways to compartmentalize my depression and process my emotions.
For me, it’s easier to detach during playtime since it’s not high-risk. I come away from myself, giving my mind some time to darken. More focused activities like feeding, changing and bathing are, of course, non-negotiable. But when you’re depressed, all three of those tasks sound like the title of the devil’s podcast. In my pre-parenthood depression, I could barely change, feed or wash myself, let alone someone else. Luckily, you don’t need to be super engaged when feeding a baby. You can check out while changing a diaper. You have to be present and alert during bath time, but that doesn’t mean you can’t feel empty; all that matters is that you do it.
Since having a kid, my depression has been compounded by two things — less time and higher stakes. Before, when I couldn’t get out of bed, it would affect only me and my work, which is nowhere near as important as the well-being of a helpless human, whom I love more than life itself and for whom I’m responsible. So I get out of bed, not because I’m not depressed, but because if I don’t function, neither does the kid. Before my daughter, I had the time and space to sit with myself. I could take a quick break or walk whenever I wanted. If I needed to process my feelings or melt down, I could lock myself away for an hour or so. But as any parent knows, you can’t even go to the bathroom alone, let alone have a meltdown.
 But depression doesn’t work like that. Depression doesn’t care about your situation; it is stubborn, demanding and rarely open to compromise — depression is a toddler.  I forced myself to be “happy” because if you’re a new mom and not “so grateful” and “truly blessed,” then you’re a raw-sewage demon. Of course, that’s not true. But depression has a way of isolating you from rational thought, and being a new mom exacerbated my loneliness.
On top of feeling alone, I was scared. I needed reassurance from those who had “been there, done that.” So naturally, I went to the one place where I knew I’d feel worse — Instagram. I scrolled through endless posts from momfluencers with “messy” hair and “no makeup” holding letterboards that said things like, “Motherhood is like a walk in the park … Jurassic Park!” I remember seeing one that said, “My mental illness makes me a strong mom, not a bad one.” I winced. Was I a bad mom? No. But was I strong? Also no.
I was so ashamed by these depressive episodes that I decided to do the one thing I knew I shouldn’t — push through. For me, “pushing through” is a particularly cruel piece of advice for the mentally ill because: 1) it doesn’t work, and 2) we’re tired. “Pushing through” can feel like “pushing past” or “pushing away.” The only way I can get through a depressive episode is by acknowledging that it’s happening and processing the accompanying feelings.  So there I was, pushing through. It depleted my already limited energy supply so fast that by 10 a.m., I’d have nothing left to give.
It was clear neither my depression nor my toddler was going to budge. I had to find a way of molding myself around them. The first thing I did was reframe how I expend and harness my energy. Instead of pushing myself to be “happy” and wearing myself out, I experimented with going from a frenzied 10 to averaging a mollified six on the Enthusiastic Mom Scale. Calibrating my emotions — performative or not — gave me the mental stamina to be a little more present for longer. I reminded myself that, even though sometimes it doesn’t feel like it, I am here. And although my depression will always run in the background, these episodes I experience around my daughter are blips, demoralizing but fleeting. These moments do not define me as a mother, but strangely, they’ve shown me I’m capable of more than I ever thought possible.
Having a child hasn’t stopped my depression, intrusive thoughts or manic episodes, and it never will. But it has helped me be more flexible, understanding and aware of my moods. As my daughter grows, I know I’ll have to keep adjusting and rolling with the mental punches. 
Amanda Rosenberg is an author and screenwriter. Her book “That’s Mental: Painfully Funny Things That Drive Me Crazy About Being Mentally Ill” is out now.