Another person on the video conference called 911, and the son was arrested. He pleaded not guilty after he had confessed, the authorities said.
A 32-year-old Long Island man was arrested and charged with murder on Thursday after fatally stabbing his father more than a dozen times while he was on a Zoom video chat with about 20 people, the authorities said.
The father, Dwight Powers, 72, had been participating in the Zoom call at his home on Dixon Avenue in Amityville, N.Y., when he was attacked by his son Thomas Scully-Powers, just after noon on Thursday, the Suffolk County Police Department said.
On Friday, prosecutors said Mr. Scully-Powers entered the room and began beating his father, then returned with a knife, prompting one of the participants in the Zoom meeting to call 911.
People on the call reported seeing Mr. Powers in the meeting and then suddenly realizing that he was no longer onscreen, the police said. Some participants in the meeting gave the police a description of the son.
Mr. Scully-Powers stabbed his father in his back, neck and torso with several knives, eventually killing him, the Suffolk County district attorney’s office said on Friday.
In statements to investigators, the son admitted having stabbed his father about 15 times and having used different kitchen-style knives because the blades kept bending, the office said. According to a medical examiner’s report, Mr. Powers was nearly decapitated in the attack, prosecutors said.
Mr. Scully-Powers pleaded not guilty to a murder charge on Friday, appearing before a judge on a video-conference call because of the pandemic, the district attorney’s office said. He was ordered held at the Riverhead Correctional Facility without bail and faces a maximum sentence of 25 years to life in prison, if convicted. A preliminary hearing will be held on Tuesday.
When officers arrived at the apartment on Thursday afternoon, Mr. Scully-Powers tried to flee by jumping out of a window on the second story of the residence where he and his father lived, the authorities said.
Though injured in the fall, Mr. Scully-Powers ran across a highway and into a deli, where he took several bottles of Dr Pepper and tried to use the beverage to wash blood off his body, the authorities said. The police found and arrested Mr. Scully-Powers less than an hour after he fled.
It had taken officers longer to locate the apartment because the people in the Zoom meeting did not know where Mr. Powers lived. Online records indicate that Mr. Powers’s home is in a senior living community in Amityville, about 40 miles east of Manhattan.
The authorities executed a search warrant on the apartment and found several knives, as well as what prosecutors said was evidence that Mr. Scully-Powers had tried to clean up the crime scene: a mop and bucket in the bathroom, and a blood-saturated bedsheet in a garbage bag.
Lieutenant Beyrer told Newsday on Thursday that the motive for the stabbing was being investigated but that there was no indication that it was related to the coronavirus pandemic.
Prosecutors said on Friday that they were trying to determine the motive. They said Mr. Scully-Powers had at one point told the police that his father had tried to slit his wrist with a knife. But they said a physical inspection revealed what they characterized as only a slight mark on Mr. Scully-Powers’s wrist.
Steve and Mary Englert, both 67, said they have been friends with Mr. Powers for more than 40 years. They said he was very close to his family, but seldom talked about his son. Ms. Englert said Mr. Scully-Powers “had struggles” and would move in with his father during tough stretches.
“When his son needed him, he was there,” she said of Mr. Powers.
Mr. Englert, who grew up with Mr. Powers in Levittown, N.Y., said he had been stunned to hear of his friend’s death and had initially thought it could not have happened. The pair spoke on a regular basis and had connected a couple of weeks ago for Mr. Powers’s birthday.
Mr. Powers had served as a Marine in Vietnam and then worked as a customs agent, Mr. Englert said. Later in life, he joined a rock band and volunteered for Habitat for Humanity. He enjoyed watching reruns of “The Three Stooges,” the Englerts said.
He was a fan of President John F. Kennedy and had been named after another president, Dwight D. Eisenhower, Mr. Englert said. He enjoyed Memorial Day celebrations and would march in the parades.
