U.S.|What Happens if a Hurricane Hits During the Pandemic?
What Happens if a Hurricane Hits During the Pandemic?
Florida is trying to figure out the daunting prospect of asking residents to evacuate for their safety during a storm after asking them to stay at home for the coronavirus.
MIAMI — It’s deep into the summer and a massive hurricane looms off the Florida coast, threatening enormous destruction and widespread power blackouts. In normal times, in such a scenario, the orders would come down for millions of coastal residents: Evacuate.
But in the middle of a pandemic, the most consequential of disaster decisions become complicated by fears of contagion.
This is the planning dilemma now facing emergency managers across the Southeast ahead of June 1, the official start of a hurricane season that meteorologists expect to be quite active. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has forecast as many as six storms rated Category 3 or higher. A named system, Tropical Storm Arthur, already formed in May.
There is plenty of hurricane fatigue in Florida, which has endured hits or brushes with at least five hurricanes over the past four years, including Hurricane Irma in 2017, Hurricane Michael in 2018 and Hurricane Dorian in 2019. The prospect of another busy storm season felt exhausting even before the arrival of Covid-19, which has led to 50,000 cases and more than 2,000 deaths since the beginning of March.
A mild storm might not require many evacuations. People with newer homes built to withstand strong winds could be safer sheltering in place than leaving their homes, Mr. Moskowitz said, as long as they do not live in a low-lying area prone to storm surge.
To find alternatives where evacuees might be more spread out, Mr. Moskowitz’s team created a map of hotels — along with their wind rating and whether they have a power generator — that might be commandeered as shelters. The division of emergency management also developed an app that counties could use to assign evacuees to those hotels.
Traditional school shelters will be unavoidable, at least in densely populated areas, said Frank K. Rollason, the emergency management director for Miami-Dade County. Only 20 hotels in Miami-Dade are outside of a storm evacuation zone, he said, and many might be booked with guests evacuated from coastal hotels or with crews deployed in advance to restore electricity or phone service after the storm.
Mr. Rollason is not counting on rapid testing to become widely available to reliably determine which evacuees are sick. Those entering shelters will have their temperatures taken and be asked questions about symptoms and exposure when they arrive, he said — preferably indoors in some sort of anteroom so that they do not have to stand in line outside being pelted by rain.
Volunteers to work in the shelters alongside county employees would be difficult to come by. The state may assign its own workers or temporarily hire unemployed people, Mr. Moskowitz said. Florida has set aside 10 million masks for use during hurricanes, he added.
To send evacuees to other counties — out of the vulnerable Keys, for example — emergency managers might have to rent more buses so passengers can sit at a safe distance from each other. Mr. Moskowitz said the state is in talks with Uber to possibly provide individual rides if needed.
Florida ordered all nursing homes and assisted living facilities to install generators for cooling systems after as many as 12 people died from the sweltering heat in a Broward County nursing home during Hurricane Irma. Some homes with temporary generators were granted variances as they work toward installing permanent ones, but almost all are in at least basic compliance, said Mary C. Mayhew, who runs the Agency for Health Care Administration, which oversees long-term care facilities.
But nursing homes in evacuation zones might have to send residents to facilities out of the storm’s path that have extra beds, she said, or to one of the various sites that have been set up recently to relieve overcrowded hospitals in the event of a Covid-19 surge.
