A Princeton graduate and a human rights lawyer were both charged in an attack that left a police car dashboard charred. No one was injured.
The attack during the Brooklyn protests left the dashboard of a blue-and-white police car charred after a night of violent clashes between protesters and police, a symbol of the chaos wrought over a weekend of sometimes peaceful and sometimes violent demonstrations.
Colinford King Mattis at his graduation from NYU law school.
The police saw Ms. Rahman throw the Molotov cocktail and followed the two lawyers as they tried to get away, officials said. 
Mr. Mattis began working in July 2018 as an associate in the corporate group at Pryor Cashman, where, according to his profile on the firm’s website, he advises public and private companies, their executives and boards on mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures, financing and corporate governance, among other matters.
He also served on the community board in East New York, the Brooklyn neighborhood where he lives.
Pryor Cashman, in a statement from Managing Partner Ronald H. Shechtman, said Mr. Mattis had been furloughed from the firm in April and that his status would be reviewed by the firm this week.
“As we confront critical issues around historic and ongoing racism and inequity in our society, I am saddened to see this young man allegedly involved in the worst kind of reaction to our shared outrage over what had occurred,” the statement said.
The picture on his LinkedIn profile shows a smiling young man in a business suit, white shirt and striped red tie, and the profile says he graduated from Princeton University in 2010 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in sociology and earned a law degree from New York University Law School in 2016.
The criminal complaint charging the lawyers, filed late Saturday in United States District Court in Brooklyn, was sworn out by an F.B.I. agent assigned to the Joint Terrorist Task Force.
Ms. Shader, like the two lawyers, was charged with causing damage to a police vehicle by fire and explosives, according to the criminal complaint in her case. She was arrested shortly after the attack, the complaint said. Her sister, Darian Shader, 21, was also taken into custody after attempting to interfere with her arrest, the police said.
Relatives and friends of the Shader sisters could not be reached for comment.
In 2017, a local newspaper based in Kingston, N.Y., reported Samantha Shader, then 24, and an unidentified 18-year-old woman, both of Catskill, were arrested by state police in Ulster County. Ms. Shader was charged with assault and menacing with a weapon, the local paper reported. She was released with a desk appearance ticket.