The vote to accept a $13.5 billion deal will help the California utility resolve its bankruptcy in time to qualify for a state wildfire fund.
Pacific Gas & Electric said Monday that thousands of homeowners and businesses had overwhelmingly approved a $13.5 billion settlement for wildfires caused by the utility’s equipment, an important victory in its effort to resolve its bankruptcy.
The deal requires the power company to begin compensating, as early as August, those who lost homes, businesses and other property. About 70,000 wildfire victims filed claims. For the deal to win approval, at least two-thirds of those voting had to support it.
Facing an estimated $30 billion in wildfire liabilities, PG&E sought bankruptcy protection last year. Its equipment has set scores of fires in recent years, including the most devastating wildfire in California history, the Camp Fire in 2018, which killed 85 people and destroyed the town of Paradise. PG&E has agreed to plead guilty to unlawfully causing a fire and involuntary manslaughter in that case and will be sentenced on June 16.
Critics wanted an all-cash settlement, something PG&E has agreed to in a separate deal with a group of investors and businesses that own insurance claims against the utility. The company will pay that group $11 billion.
The contentious voting process, which began in March and ended Friday, pitted groups of victims and lawyers against one another, with some raising questions about potential conflicts of interest involving a lawyer who represents 16,000 wildfire victims. The lawyer, Mikal Watts, has a $100 million line of credit that was funded in part by funds that had invested in PG&E’s stock and bonds. Mr. Watts supported the agreement.
Mr. Watts said homeowners could now rest assured that they would be compensated for their losses and that PG&E would come out of bankruptcy a better company. “I think collectively we can take an old troubled bad company and convert it to a new utility that can safely deliver electricity to the citizens of Northern California,” Mr. Watts said.
But Bonnie Kane, a San Diego lawyer who along with her husband, Steven, represents some wildfire victims who opposed the agreement, said that some victims did not receive ballots in time to cast a vote and that others received them with little time to spare.
PG&E still has to gain approval for its bankruptcy plan from the California Public Utilities Commission, which is scheduled to vote Thursday on the plan. The commission this month imposed a record penalty of almost $2 billion against the utility for the wildfires it caused.
