Mr. Cooper then produced dog treats, he said.
“I pull out the dog treats I carry for just for such intransigence,” he wrote. “That’s when I started video recording with my iPhone, and when her inner Karen fully emerged and took a dark turn,” he said, using the name that has become slang for an entitled white woman.
“Please tell them whatever you like,” Mr. Cooper said off-camera.
She proceeded to call.
“I’m in the Ramble, there is a man, African-American, he has a bicycle helmet and he is recording me and threatening me and my dog,” she said to the 911 operator as she gripped her pet’s collar tightly.
“Thank you,” Mr. Cooper said after she put her dog on a leash, just before the video ends.
On Tuesday afternoon, he said in an interview, “I was quite adamant that I was going to tape her as long as the scofflaw behavior was continuing,” despite the threats.
The police said they had responded to the report of an assault in Central Park on Monday morning.
“Upon arrival, police determined two individuals had engaged in a verbal dispute,” said Sgt. Mary Frances O’Donnell, a police spokeswoman. No summons were issued and there was no arrest made.
Shortly after the video was posted on Monday, someone who said they had been the white woman’s dog walker identified her. Her name soon began trending on Twitter.
Internet sleuths digging into Ms. Cooper’s life found an Instagram profile of her dog, Henry, and began sharing old photos documenting injuries he had suffered.
By nightfall, she had surrendered Henry to the cocker spaniel rescue group she had adopted him from two years before, according to a Facebook post by the group.
On Tuesday night, Ms. Cooper publicly apologized in a statement and sought to explain her response.
On Monday evening, Ms. Cooper’s employer, Franklin Templeton said she had been placed on leave while the incident was being investigated.
Ms. Cooper had been a head of insurance portfolio management at Franklin Templeton, according to her LinkedIn page, and graduated from the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Ms. Cooper did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
Adding to the fractiousness of the exchange are longstanding tensions between birders and dog walkers in Central Park, magnified by the fraught climate of the pandemic lockdown.
At one point, Ms. Cooper, wearing a face mask, lunged toward Mr. Cooper, a behavior that some who viewed the video have called an assault, because of the violation of social- distancing rules that occurs.
But even without the pandemic and the location, the legacy of these kinds of confrontations looms large, according to Professor Katheryn Russell-Brown, director of the Center for the Study of Race and Race Relations at the University of Florida’s Levin College of Law.
Professor Russell-Brown is the author of “The Color of Crime,” in which she explores the phenomenon of the “racial hoax” in which people fabricate crimes perpetrated by people of another race.
