In coronavirus-themed commercials, consumption is reframed as a public service performed by heroes, for heroes.
It’s jarring how easily the virus has been fused with branding and processed into the optimistic language of advertising. Every crisis begets its own corporate public service announcements — remember the Budweiser Clydesdale tribute to 9/11? — but rarely with such speed and ubiquity. Dozens of TV and online ads have angled to position brands within the pandemic experience, deploying inspirational pop music and gravelly voice-over artists to assure us that in “these unprecedented times” (Buick), that “in times as uncertain as these” (Chick fil A), “we’re all living a new normal” (State Farm), but “even now, some things never change” (Target) because “our spirit is what unites us” (Dodge).
Often missing from these ads are the products themselves. Instead they feature pat metaphors that stuff the crisis into the various receptacles affiliated with the products. There are no Cokes in “To the Human Race,” just this note: “Thank you for filling the glass with kindness and hope.” Cadbury ends its Covid-19 commercial by saying: “There’s a glass & a half in everyone,” a reference to the purported milk content of its chocolate bars. Dunkin’ talks about “raising a cup” and Post Cereals discusses “filling the bowl.” Hefty’s message — “Stay strong: Hefty” — analogizes the human spirit to a bag of trash.
Modern ads typically work to obscure labor. Commercials banish the drudgery of work in favor of the pure sensuality of consumption. In her 1983 documentary, “A Sign Is a Fine Investment,” Judith Williamson traced how the advertising industry, which once highlighted images of manufacturing and industry, shifted to a landscape where products “miraculously appear out of the sky.” The coronavirus ads mark a return to grit. They show cranes valiantly lifting cargo onto FedEx planes, slo-mo clips of Fareway workers striding through stockrooms, and packages racing down Amazon conveyor belts.
These ads smartly capitalize on the trend of anointing all essential workers as heroes. Over the strains of David Bowie’s “Heroes,” Doug McMillon, the CEO of Walmart, speaks as the faces of his company’s associates appear: “Thank you for keeping us safe, and for being our light.” An Amazon ad, “Delivering Rainbows,” spins delivering packages during the pandemic into a twee, heartwarming pursuit.
These ads have reimagined their ideal consumers, too. Doctors and nurses have swiftly been elevated into unwitting corporate spokesmodels, creating a fantasy where all consumption is reframed as a public service performed by heroes, for heroes. A FedEx ad shows packages that are delivered straight into the gloved hands of hospital workers. Dove’s “Courage Is Beautiful” ad dwells on the indentations left by personal protective equipment on health care workers’ faces. Dunkin’ and McDonald’s have styled themselves as canteens on the front lines of the virus response, arranging montages of masked nurses clutching their doughnuts and fries.
Few brands have advertised more doggedly through the crisis than Facebook, which has staked a claim to everything from people sewing masks to clapping for essential workers to still having babies. In these ads, even our most stultifying quarantine distractions are reframed as testimonies to the human spirit. One ad serves up a cavalcade of grief — empty retail shelves, a man doubled over near an A.T.M., a woman crying in an N-95 mask — before offering relief in the form of posting to friends on Facebook. “We’re never lost if we can find each other,” the ad says. If you’re lucky enough to experience the coronavirus not as a medical emergency or occupational hazard but a source of existential despair, there is a cure, and the cure is Facebook.
