The Chinese leader hopes to rally national pride as his People’s Congress begins. Mexican officials will investigate why the official death toll is far smaller than the figures compiled in the capital.
China’s leader sees the crisis as a crucible to strengthen his rule.
A vast discrepancy in Mexico’s death toll will be investigated.
A Nigerian doctors group called for a strike to protest harassment by police officers enforcing a curfew.
Brazil authorizes using hydroxychloroquine for Covid-19 patients amid a debate over its efficacy and dangers.
Infections are down as Paris tiptoes toward normalcy, but fear and anger remain potent.
Qatar Airways crews will don full protective gear on flights, as airlines try to entice nervous passengers.
Cyclone slams into India and Bangladesh, sending millions into shelters amid coronavirus worries.
President Xi Jinping of China has seized on the pandemic as an opportunity in disguise — a chance to redeem the party after early mistakes let infections slip out of control, and to rally national pride in the face of international ire over those mistakes.
He is pushing to restore the pre-pandemic agenda, including his pledge to eradicate extreme poverty by this year, while cautioning against complacency that could let a second wave of infections spread.
So far, Mr. Xi has largely succeeded in rewriting the narrative in China. The disarray in other countries, especially the United States, has given him a reprieve from domestic political pressure by allowing officials to highlight China’s lower death toll, despite questions about the accuracy of the numbers.
The Trump administration’s withholding of funds from the World Health Organization also handed Mr. Xi a chance to appear munificent when he pledged $2 billion in assistance.
It is a dramatic turnaround from only months ago, when Mr. Xi faced a shaken and skeptical public.
The government of Mexico City has acknowledged that its count of deaths related to the coronavirus is higher than federal data show, and it has named a special commission to review all fatalities in the capital connected to Covid-19.
“This team will evaluate, based on each death certificate and medical report, how many confirmed Covid deaths there are, how many suspicious Covid deaths and how many probable Covid deaths there are,” said Mexico City’s mayor, Claudia Sheinbaum.
The New York Times first reported a discrepancy between city and federal data on May 8, citing a private database maintained by local officials that showed the death toll in the capital was more than three times higher than what the federal government reported to the public.
That data, which city officials gather by placing calls to every public hospital in the city on a daily basis, includes both confirmed Covid deaths and those where doctors determine the virus was the most likely cause.
The federal data counts only confirmed cases. That number is exceptionally low, however, because Mexico has conducted fewer tests than almost any other developed nation.
Federal officials did not, however, deny the existence of the database or the veracity of the numbers published by The Times. Instead, officials claimed that coordination between the city and federal government was excellent.
Several days later, government officials announced the creation of the new commission to review Covid-related deaths in Mexico City. And shortly after, Ms. Sheinbaum, the mayor, acknowledged the death toll tabulated by city officials was higher than that published by the federal government.
Nigeria’s largest medical union called on doctors in the city of Lagos to go on strike starting Wednesday evening to protect medical workers who say they are being harassed by the police.
The Nigerian Medical Association said it had been “inundated” with reports of its members being targeted by officers enforcing an overnight curfew that does not apply to medical personnel.
“Even ambulances carrying patients with emergency cases were impounded,” the group said in a statement.
The association accused police officials of issuing conflicting directives about whether medical personnel were exempt from the curfew. A police spokesman told Reuters that was untrue.
On Tuesday, Nigeria’s national inspector-general of police had ordered his subordinates across the country to ensure that they were strict in enforcing the curfew, which was imposed at the beginning of May and takes effect at 8 p.m. nightly.
Dozens of essential workers including doctors were arrested, despite being exempt, according to local media reports.
Most of Nigeria’s 6,400 confirmed coronavirus cases have been in Lagos, although it may not be the West African nation’s worst-affected city, as the official figures do not always reflect reality. Lagos is testing many more people than other cities. In the northern commercial hub of Kano, doctors and health experts have said there is an uncontrolled outbreak.
Brazil’s government on Wednesday encouraged doctors in the public health care system to treat coronavirus patients with hydroxychloroquine — a move the country’s two recently departed health ministers refused to sign off on because the drug can cause dangerous side effects.
In written guidance, the ministry encouraged medical professionals to administer the anti-malaria drug to treat patients with Covid-19 regardless of the severity of their symptoms. The guidance was issued five days after health minister Nelson Teich resigned, having lasted less than a month on the job.
Over the weekend, Mr. Mandetta warned that several Covid-19 patients who took hydroxychloroquine developed dangerous heart conditions. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration issued a warning in April limiting the use of the drug to hospitalized patients in clinical trials who can be closely monitored for heart irregularities.
Mr. Bolsonaro and President Trump’s promotion of hydroxychloroquine has confounded medical experts who noted that the drug has shown no real benefit for hospitalized coronavirus patients. The controversy intensified Monday when Mr. Trump said that he had begun taking the drug daily as a preventive measure, a move several doctors called irresponsible, citing the potential side effects.
Mr. Bolsonaro has been widely criticized for his chaotic response to the pandemic.
Brazil has reported 271,628 diagnosed cases of the coronavirus, lagging behind only Russia and the United States. The official death toll, 17,971, has been climbing rapidly, with a record 1,179 newly confirmed fatalities on Tuesday.
Mr. Bolsonaro ordered the armed forces to mass produce hydroxychloroquine in March.
Last week he issued an executive order that shields government officials from legal and administrative accountability for missteps related to the coronavirus response. Legal experts have criticized the measure as unconstitutional.
Coronavirus infections have dropped sharply in Paris following a strict two-month lockdown and a growing contact tracing effort, health officials say, and they have remained in check since the city began a halting return to life nearly two weeks ago.
The decline has been sharpest in what were the city’s viral hot spots, in the less affluent northern neighborhoods.
“The drop is pretty spectacular,” said Renaud Piarroux, head of parasitology at one of the main Paris hospitals and organizer of the city’s mobile contact tracing teams.
But if the initial signs are hopeful, the reopening of Paris has been muted, in keeping with the national mood: fearful of what lies ahead, and angry at the government over its handling of the outbreak.
“People are being very timid,” said Philippe Bonaventure, a leather-work artisan hanging out in the normally buoyant food-shopping neighborhood around the Place d’Aligre. Shoppers crept about as if they didn’t quite believe their new freedom.
“Personally, I find this situation absolutely sketchy,” said Mr. Bonaventure. “Sad. Desperate,” he added, explaining that he remained “pessimistic” about the future.
“Half my existence is in the cafes,” he said. And the cafes remained closed.
As the pandemic continues to decimate global air travel, airlines are going to extraordinary lengths to reassure nervous travelers that everything is being done to make flying as safe as it can be.
On a Qatar Airways flight, that means passengers will be greeted by a cabin crew not only wearing safety goggles, masks and gloves, but also donning full protective suits over their uniforms, the airline said this week.
The Doha-based airline, which flew to 150 international destinations before the pandemic, said the measures would be in place for “a number of weeks.” The airlines will also soon require passengers to wear face coverings. Social areas on planes will be closed. Large bottles of hand sanitizer will be available in the galleys.
Around the world, airlines are scrambling to keep planes from becoming coronavirus hot beds and demonstrate to customers that they are taking safety seriously.
Philippines Airlines and AirAsia also plan to use new uniforms that incorporate personal protective equipment. Other airlines have ramped up cleaning, kept middle seats on planes empty and retooled boarding procedures. Some flight hubs, like Hong Kong International Airport, are using temperature checks and antimicrobial booths to disinfect people’s clothes and skin before boarding.
On Wednesday, United Airlines said it was partnering with Clorox and the Cleveland Clinic to bolster its disinfection practices and hold the airline’s policies to high safety standards.
A dreaded cyclone tore through eastern India and Bangladesh on Wednesday, knocking down trees, smashing countless shacks and killing at least several people, but, it appeared, causing less devastation than initially feared.
Still, by Wednesday evening, more than three million people had been whisked from their homes along the Bay of Bengal and were staying in shelters.
One of the worst-hit cities was Kolkata, once the capital of British India, which is home to many fragile buildings hundreds of years old. The eye of the cyclone passed close to the city, bringing with it 100-mile-per-hour winds and ropes of rain.
The lockdown threatens the future of Shakespeare’s Globe.
Latest in science: Cautious optimism that a coronavirus vaccine could be ready next year.
Companies like Inovio and Pfizer have begun early tests in people to determine whether their vaccine candidates are safe. Researchers at the University of Oxford in England say they could have a vaccine ready for emergency use as soon as September.
Moderna on Monday announced encouraging results of a safety trial of its vaccine in eight volunteers. There were no published data, but the news alone sent hopes soaring.
Animal studies have raised expectations, too. Researchers at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center on Wednesday published research showing that a prototype vaccine effectively protected monkeys from infection with the virus.
An effective vaccine will be crucial to ending the pandemic, which has sickened at least 4.8 million worldwide and killed at least 323,000. And just creating it won’t be enough: manufacturers will need to dramatically scale up production and distribution.
Health experts are warning that stagnant plumbing systems in emptied office buildings could pose a threat when employees return. Bacteria — including the type that causes the respiratory condition Legionnaires’ disease — can build up if not properly addressed.
Death sentence via Zoom? Courts under lockdown deliver verdicts by video call.
A spokesperson for Singapore’s Supreme Court confirmed to Amnesty that a Malaysian national received the sentence this month after his conviction on drug-trafficking charges. Reuters reported that the man, Punithan Genasan, 37, was told on Friday that he would be hanged for masterminding a 2011 heroin transaction, court documents showed.
Mr. Genasan’s lawyer, Peter Fernando, told Reuters that he did not object to the judgment being delivered on Zoom. But rights groups criticized the proceedings.
The Singapore decision was the second known case of capital punishment being handed down by video link, according to the criminal justice watchdog group Fair Trials. The group reported that a man in Nigeria was found guilty of murder and sentenced to death earlier this month. It noted there were “grave concerns” about the fairness of such proceedings.
Schools are back in session worldwide, but the restart varies by country and city.
Schools and universities around the world are struggling with how best to reopen. As students in some parts of Asia return to class, many of their peers in North America and Europe remain months away from being educated together.
Cambridge University said on Tuesday that it would become the first university in Britain to move all student lectures online for the entire upcoming academic year.
In North America, McGill University in Montreal, the California State University System and other institutions have said they will offer most fall courses online. Others plan to bring students back with pledges to test them for the virus and track infections.
Even in South Korea, where most universities opened this month, not all education officials were rushing to reopen secondary schools. Prime Minister Chung Sye-kyun has said the reopening of schools is one of the last tests of the country’s ability to sustain a new kind of daily life under Covid-19.
In the city of Incheon, west of Seoul, for example, students from 66 high schools were turned away and told to go home on Wednesday after two seniors tested positive for the virus. They were believed to have contracted it at a karaoke parlor that had been visited by a recent patient linked to an outbreak in Itaewon, a popular nightlife district in Seoul.
But on the same day at Shinhyeon High School in Seoul, hundreds of seniors were among the nearly half-million high school students who returned to their classrooms nationwide after a monthslong absence.
Teachers at Shinhyeon greeted students by spraying their hands with sanitizer.
Hong Kong was one of the first places outside mainland China to be hit by the coronavirus, and the landscape of the city changed immediately.
Four months later, those signs are still around. But the city is humming back to life.
Travel changes are on the horizon as Europe attempts to jump-start tourism.
As summer draws near, many who have spent months at home under lockdown are yearning for a break and wondering if a vacation is possible. And some countries where tourism is a vital part of the economy are determined to open back up soon.
Hotels in Greece, where tourism accounts for at least 25 percent of gross domestic product, are scheduled to open by June 15, and some international flights are to restart on July 1. Anyone arriving from abroad is currently required to go through a two-week quarantine upon arrival even if a diagnostic test is negative, a measure that has been extended until May 31.
He added that if the country did not impose quarantine on British tourists, Greece would like its citizens to also be exempt from the quarantine that Britain is set to impose on arriving passengers starting early next month. Grant Shapps, the British transport minister, said this week that the government was considering the creation of “air bridges” between Britain and low-risk countries.
Spain, which is also financially dependent on tourism, is expected to open its borders to tourists in late June, while Portugal plans to reopen its beaches on June 6, though social distancing measures will be in place.
Italy is to start welcoming tourists on June 3, and no one will have to self-isolate upon arriving in the country. The British government has urged Britons against all but essential travel to Italy, which, with 32,169 coronavirus-related deaths, has been one of the hardest hit places in Europe.
One feature of Burundi’s presidential campaign? Stadium rallies.
The campaign to replace Burundi’s long-reigning president has been marred by arrests and alleged killings of political opponents. But during a time of a pandemic, it has also featured rallies in packed stadiums.
Burundi’s citizens will on Wednesday elect a successor to President Pierre Nkurunziza, a former rebel leader who has ruled the country with impunity for the last 15 years, evading international efforts to call him to account for human rights abuses.
More than five million people were expected to vote at about 1,500 polling stations, and experts said that it could be the first competitive election since a civil war that began in 1993 and ended in 2005.
But the risk of contracting the coronavirus adds a critical dimension. From the outbreak’s onset, the authorities cited divine protection for keeping the country open and for holding large rallies.
Tsai Ing-wen was sworn in for a second term as president of Taiwan on Wednesday, riding a wave of international recognition for her government’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic.
The inauguration was swiftly met with condemnation from Beijing, which considers the island part of its territory and has accused Ms. Tsai’s party of seeking to use the pandemic as cover for a push for formal independence.
“Taiwan separatist forces and their actions are contrary to national justice and will surely be nailed to the column of shame in history,” the Chinese Defense Ministry said in a statement. The ministry warned that China would take “all necessary measures” to safeguard its sovereignty.
During her speech, Ms. Tsai praised the Taiwanese people and health officials, many of whom were in attendance, for successfully facing the pandemic. “In recent months, Taiwan’s name has appeared in headlines around the world, thanks to our successful containment of the coronavirus outbreak,” she said.
In the neighboring city of Bogor, where shopping streets were also crowded, officials complained that some shoppers were using government coronavirus aid to buy new holiday clothes, local news outlets reported.
Indonesia, the world’s fourth most populous nation, is 90 percent Muslim.
Trump says he is “considering” hosting G7 summit at Camp David.
President Trump said on Wednesday that he may try to host the annual Group of 7 summit of world leaders at Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland, as originally planned before concerns about the coronavirus turned it into a virtual gathering scheduled for next month.
Reporting was contributed by Aurelien Breeden, Adam Nossiter, Azam Ahmed, Ruth Maclean, Ian Austen, Ernesto Londoño, Carl Zimmer, Knvul Sheikh, Noah Weiland, Michael Crowley, Mihir Zaveri, Karen Zraick, Ben Dooley, Jennifer Jett, Hannah Beech, Iliana Magra, Jack Ewing, Abdi Latif Dahir, Raphael Minder, Megan Specia, Yonette Joseph, Tariro Mzezewa, Mark Landler, Richard C. Paddock, Dera Menra Sijabat, Lou Stoppard, Choe Sang-Hun, Mike Ives, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, Richard Pérez-Peña, Derrick Bryson Taylor, Donald G. McNeil Jr., Sarah Mervosh, Mike Baker, Steven Erlanger, Chris Horton, Vivian Wang, Stephen Castle, Sameer Yasir, Jeffrey Gettleman, Kai Schultz and Hari Kumar. Claire Fu contributed research.