The U.S. dropped its criminal case against President Trump’s first national security adviser. It was the latest reversal in a case full of them.
Hosted by Michael Barbaro, produced by Austin Mitchell, Luke Vander Ploeg and Eric Krupke; with help from Sydney Harper; and edited by MJ Davis Lin.
Today: Federal prosecutors are asking a court to throw out their own criminal case against former national security adviser Michael Flynn. Mark Mazzetti on what led to that decision.
It’s Thursday, May 14.
Mark, remind us where the Michael Flynn story starts.
We do not need a reckless president who believes she is above the law.

Of “lock her up,” meaning to Hillary Clinton.
If I did a tenth of what she did, I would be in jail today.
And after Trump is elected, he announces that he’s going to make Flynn his national security adviser. So it’s during this time when there’s a series of events that get Michael Flynn into trouble.
— on the same day the Obama sanctions were announced, which raised questions about whether the incoming Trump administration was trying to meddle with the Obama administration’s foreign policy.
They did not discuss anything having to do with the United States’ decision to impose a censure against Russia.
Pence says that Flynn had told him the sanctions never came up on the call. But the Justice Department had transcripts of the calls in which Flynn had actually urged the ambassador not to overreact to the Obama administration’s sanctions.
So F.B.I. agents are sent to the White House to interview Flynn.
What has he told investigators?
He tells them that the sanctions never came up on the call.
Right, he’s lying to the F.B.I.
General Michael Flynn suddenly resigned late last night.
— Flynn is forced to resign.
He is the shortest serving national security adviser now in modern history.
And what happens to Flynn once he’s pushed out of the White House?
The F.B.I. continues to investigate Flynn, but very little is heard from him for a number of months. And during this time, President Trump starts leaning on James Comey, the F.B.I. director, in essence, to drop the Flynn investigation.
And that raised this idea that the President of the United States was trying to obstruct justice. And that’s this kind of cataclysmic moment that ultimately sets off a chain of events that leads to not only Comey being fired, but also the appointment of Mueller as the special counsel.
Right. In many ways, the Flynn saga is the beginning of the Mueller saga, and the beginning of a very dark chapter for the Trump administration.
What ends up happening to Michael Flynn?
Flynn pled guilty to repeatedly lying to the F.B.I.
Flynn ends up pleading guilty to lying to the F.B.I.
Becomes a cooperating witness in the Mueller investigation. He’s awaiting sentence.
Court documents make clear that Flynn was not acting alone.
And the significance was that he was the first top White House official to plead guilty as part of the Mueller investigation.
Mark, I feel like, for many people, that is where the Michael Flynn story pretty much ends, right? I mean, you have this three-star general, national security adviser who just totally falls from grace after lying to his bosses and the F.B.I., and now he’s headed to prison.
Breaking news right now. Bob Mueller’s office is recommending to the judge that Michael Flynn actually not receive any prison time.
— and says Flynn’s been a good witness.
Michael Flynn cooperated plenty with the special counsel.
They recommend very little, if any, jail time.
The defendant provided firsthand information about the content and context of interactions between the transition team and Russian government officials.
And something curious happens then, where Flynn’s legal team, which had been very cooperative towards the Mueller investigation, clearly — they cut what seemed to be a pretty good deal with the Mueller team — decide to take a more combative stance. They enter into the public record this idea that maybe Flynn had been railroaded, that the F.B.I. may have set him up. So this angers the judge. He really reads Flynn and his team the riot act, saying, are you now saying you’re not remorseful? And why are you now accusing the F.B.I. of misconduct? And basically says, let’s take a pause. We’re going to put this off for a few months and come back to me when you’ve found some remorse. In the intervening time, the ground starts to shift.
William Barr has just been sworn in as the new attorney general, gaining broad control of the special counsel, Robert Mueller’s, Russia investigation.
William Barr takes over as attorney general.
I believe it is vitally important that the special counsel be allowed to complete his investigation.
He, during his confirmation hearing, pledges that he’s not going to interfere with the Mueller investigation. So Mueller famously then delivers his report to Barr in March of 2019.
The deputy attorney general and I concluded that the evidence developed by the special counsel is not sufficient to establish that the president committed an obstruction of justice offense.
And Barr writes a very short summary of sorts that he says summarizes Mueller’s findings, which we now know misinterprets the Mueller report. It’s quite clear starting at that point that Barr has great issues with not only the Mueller investigation, but how this all began — how the Russia investigation began at the F.B.I. and whether there was real misconduct.
So he makes no secret of the fact that he’s going to start investigating the investigation. He is going to launch a campaign to get to the bottom of what happened and whether there really was a political effort to go after Donald J. Trump and his advisers.
And what does that mean for Michael Flynn awaiting sentencing for lying to the F.B.I.?
As the ground shifts, and as it’s clear that Barr is going to look at the predicate for the entire investigation, Flynn decides to get a new lawyer.
Nothing about this case was done right. They violated every rule, every protocol.
Who is not only a lawyer, but also a pundit of sorts.
The entire prosecution was false. It must be dismissed.
This is a Texas lawyer named Sidney Powell who has made no secret of the fact that she thinks the entire thing is a witch hunt.
Their prosecution of General Flynn was needed to keep the obstruction hoax going against the president, because they already knew the Russia hoax had fallen apart.
Very much in line with what the President of the United States has said.
So the whole thing was orchestrated and set up within the F.B.I.
Wow. So you’re saying Flynn recognizes the winds are changing, recognizing that there’s literally a new sheriff, attorney general in town, who’s skeptical of the entire Russia investigation, and so Flynn hires a lawyer who fits quite nicely into that dynamic.
Yes. And during that period of time, Attorney General Barr decides to appoint another prosecutor who’s going to examine the case and see whether there had been any misconduct that had taken place.
So just to be clear, in addition to examining the roots of the Russia investigation broadly, Barr appoints a specific prosecutor inside the Department of Justice just to examine the Flynn case?
And that leads to the release of a number of documents to the public in recent weeks that have led both Flynn’s lawyers and the president to make the case that Michael Flynn was indeed railroaded and set up by the F.B.I.
Mark, tell us what’s inside these documents.
Some of that language is quite potentially inflammatory, the idea that the person running the investigation is wondering if their goal might be to get the national security adviser fired — essentially, to get him in trouble.
It raises this question of whether Sidney Powell, Flynn’s lawyers, had a point, that they were trying to set him up, right? And finally, there’s also interesting divide that is revealed between the F.B.I. and the Justice Department, and what some of the documents show is that there was some concern of Justice Department about what the F.B.I. was up to.
So there’s some concern about whether or not interviewing Flynn is at all a good idea.
Right. And we find out that the F.B.I. only tells the Justice Department they’re going to go do this while the agents are on their way to the White House.
Huh. Mark, what happens once these internal F.B.I. documents are released? What’s the reaction?
This unleashes a torrent of criticism.
He should dismiss the case for egregious government misconduct without a doubt.
— that the government has been hiding this evidence that shows their own crimes while they were accusing Mr. Flynn falsely of any crimes because they made it all up.
A lot of people close to this feel like Michael Flynn was setup, never lied.
Instead, it looks like two systems of justice in terms of how the F.B.I. handled Hillary Clinton and how they handled Donald Trump.
When I looked at what they did to him, they tormented him. Dirty cops tormented General Flynn.
— making the case that Flynn should never have been interviewed, and the case should now be dropped.
And what would be the legal basis for that argument? What in the documents do Flynn’s lawyers seize on and say makes his prosecution illegitimate?
Well, they’re saying that these documents reveal that there was real concern in the F.B.I. about whether the interview should have taken place in the first place.
And if the interview doesn’t take place, then there’s no lies to worry about. And if there’s no lies, then there’s nothing to prosecute Flynn on. And therefore, there is no case period, and Michael Flynn should walk free. You have no predicate to be there in the beginning, then whatever you find is immaterial to the investigation. And this is what Barr seizes on when he makes this incredibly dramatic decision last week.
Just in this afternoon, the Justice Department is dropping its criminal case against President Trump’s former national security adviser, retired General Michael Flynn.
To drop the charges against Michael Flynn.
The Justice Department today is holding that there was not a legitimate basis to do an investigation of Flynn.
Barr said there was never any good reason to interview Michael Flynn in the first place, and so whatever Flynn said during the interview was irrelevant. And Barr even goes further than that.
Attorney General Barr, thank you for speaking first to CBS news.
— but he also goes to bat for Flynn going all the way back to Flynn’s phone calls with the Russian ambassador.
And it is very typical and very common for the national security team of the incoming president to communicate with foreign leaders. And that call, there was nothing wrong with it whatever. In fact, it was laudable. And it was nothing inconsistent with the Obama administration’s policies, and it was in U.S. interest. He was saying to the Russians, don’t escalate.
He actually says that the phone calls were laudable, and that it was perfectly understandable that Flynn would talk to the Russian ambassador to try to lower tensions in a very tense environment.
When history looks back on this decision, how do you think it will be written?
Well, history is written by the winners, so it largely depends on who’s writing the history.
I mean, what’s fascinating about what Barr is doing is that it does not feel like every day when the Department of Justice sides with a defendant in a criminal prosecution over its own prosecutors who have successfully gone after that defendant.
And it’s in keeping with what William Barr has done for a year. From the time that Robert Mueller presented his report to barr, Barr has questioned the legitimacy of the investigation and any fruits of that investigation. He has questioned whether those prosecuted were done so fairly, or whether the F.B.I. overreached. He has also backed decisions to lower sentences of others.
Mark, is Barr’s legal analysis in the Flynn case sound? Is it in dispute?
Barr’s decision has been widely criticized. Plenty of legal experts say that prosecutors in general have wide discretion to decide which aspects of the investigation they want to pursue, what is germane to the case, and in this specific instance, the fact that there was an ongoing investigation into contact between Trump aides and the Russians would make Flynn’s calls germane to this particular investigation. That is not to say that now looking back, there haven’t been instances of F.B.I. abuse over the course of the Russia investigation.
Mark, given everything you’ve just said, and reading these documents that have been released from the Department of Justice about the debate that went on inside the F.B.I. — these notes from an agent about how to conduct this interview, whether they might, basically, trap Flynn in a lie and get him fired — I mean, is there a version of this where what Bill Barr has done is exactly what any justice system should do when there are serious questions about the legitimacy of a prosecution, which is kind of give the benefit of the doubt to the defendant?
You always want greater transparency when it comes to how an investigation was conducted. That’s true if the target is Michael Flynn, or if the target is someone far less famous. The concern, of course, is whether there is abuse going on in the other direction.
That what the attorney general is doing is, in effect, launching a campaign to discredit the investigation, to discredit the Mueller probe, to discredit its results in a way that will ultimately benefit his boss, President Trump. Remember, President Trump, who’s been railing against the quote unquote “witch hunt” for years, will be using this for his re-election campaign. So the concern, of course, is that Bill Barr is kind of acting as a proxy warrior for the president.
But Mark, is it possible that both things can be true — that the Attorney General Bill Barr may be trying to discredit the entire Russia investigation, and in the process, very much oversimplify things, and that the prosecution of Michael Flynn might be flawed?
Yes, both of those things can be true.
And this is why the passions are so intense on this issue, because both sides want to control the narrative, and because of that, can’t allow, necessarily, any gray area in this argument. Either Michael Flynn is a hero or he’s a traitor. Either the Mueller investigation was a just pursuit, or it was a witch hunt. And of course, there is a lot of space between those characterizations and nuance that gets lost because the political debate is black and white.
So Mark, what’s going to happen to Michael Flynn now?
Well, of course, given what William Barr decided, there is a very likely scenario that Michael Flynn soon is a free man and he is brought back into the fold, and in the coming months, we see him once again campaigning for Donald Trump.
On Wednesday night, The Times reported that before the Department of Justice sought to throw out the case against Michael Flynn, it had interviewed the F.B.I. official whose notes have been interpreted as potentially seeking to entrap Flynn. In that interview, the official, Bill Priestap, said that his notes had been misconstrued and that there was no effort to set Flynn up.
In a speech on Wednesday, the chairman of the Federal Reserve warned that the pandemic could permanently damage the American economy if Congress does not act to prevent a wave of bankruptcies and prolonged unemployment.
Long stretches of unemployment can damage or end workers’ careers as their skills lose value and professional networks dry up and leave families in greater debt.
The message from Jerome Powell suggested that the trillions of dollars that Congress has already pumped into the economy may not be enough.
Additional fiscal support could be costly, but worth it if it helps avoid long-term damage and leaves us with a stronger recovery.
And the House of Representatives is poised to temporarily change its rules to allow lawmakers to vote and hold committee hearings remotely, so that they can avoid traveling to Washington during the pandemic. The rules, expected to pass tomorrow, would mark a major change for a body long defined by the tradition of meeting and voting in person.
The department’s decision to drop the Flynn case was a stunning reversal, widely regarded as part of an effort by Mr. Barr to undermine the Russia investigation. The prosecutor who led the case, Brandon L. Van Grack, withdrew from it, and only the interim U.S. attorney in Washington, Timothy Shea, a longtime adviser to Mr. Barr, signed the motion.
Both Mr. Van Grack and Jocelyn Ballantine, another prosecutor on the case, were upset with Mr. Barr’s decision to drop the charge and his overall handling of the Flynn review, according to people familiar with their thinking.
Mr. Barr, who has long said that he had misgivings about the decision to prosecute Mr. Flynn, asked the top federal prosecutor in St. Louis, Jeff Jensen, earlier this year to scrub the case for any mistakes or improprieties.
Mr. Priestap’s notes were among the documents that Mr. Jensen found. The prosecutors already on the case, Mr. Jensen’s team and the F.B.I. disagreed about whether they were exculpatory and should be given to Mr. Flynn’s lawyer, Sidney Powell. Mr. Jensen prevailed and gave them to Ms. Powell, who declared that they would exonerate her client, people familiar with the events said.
Mr. Priestap played a central role in the F.B.I. investigation into Russian interference in the presidential election and was involved in high-level discussions about whether to question Mr. Flynn, whose phone calls to the Russian ambassador at the time, Sergey I. Kislyak, had aroused investigators’ suspicions.
Mr. Jensen and Ms. Ballantine, herself a veteran prosecutor, interviewed Mr. Priestap along with another prosecutor, Sayler Fleming, and an F.B.I. agent from St. Louis who was there to memorialize the encounter.
Justice Department investigators spoke with Mr. Priestap while they were embroiled in a debate that began last month about whether to drop the Flynn case.
Mr. Jensen and officials in Mr. Shea’s office pushed to give Mr. Flynn’s lawyers copies of the notes and other documents they had recently found. Mr. Van Grack and Dana Boente, the F.B.I. general counsel, argued against disclosing them.
Eventually the F.B.I. agreed to release the documents because they contained no classified or sensitive material, even though they believed they were not required to share them with the defense, according to an email from lawyers in Mr. Boente’s office on April 23.
By the beginning of May, Mr. Jensen recommended to Mr. Barr that the charge be dropped, and the team began to draft the motion to dismiss it.
Mr. Van Grack and Ms. Ballantine, the prosecutors on the case, acknowledged the facts but vociferously disagreed with Mr. Jensen’s legal argument that Mr. Flynn’s lies were immaterial to the larger investigation into Russian election interference, according to department lawyers familiar with their conversations.
As the lawyers digested the interview with Mr. Priestap, some prosecutors expressed concern that they were moving too fast. But other officials pointed out that in less than a week the department was due to respond to Mr. Flynn’s motion to dismiss the case, and argued against proceeding in that matter if they were about to drop the entire case.
Mr. Jensen agreed, as did Mr. Barr, and they filed their request. Even though they knew it was coming, some prosecutors on the case expressed shock, associates said.
Mr. Flynn’s case grew out of phone calls he made to Mr. Kislyak in the final days of 2016, asking that Moscow refrain from retaliating after the Obama administration imposed sanctions on Russia as punishment for interfering in the election. The conversations were captured on routine wiretaps of Mr. Kislyak and prompted concern among the F.B.I. agents investigating Mr. Flynn once they learned of them.
Then the incoming vice president, Mike Pence, publicly denied that Mr. Flynn had asked Russia to hold off on sanctions. Agents began to suspect that Mr. Flynn was lying to other Trump officials about the phone calls and were concerned that he was a blackmail risk because Russia knew the truth of the calls.
Mr. Priestap’s notes, taken hours before agents questioned Mr. Flynn on Jan. 24, 2017, showed that F.B.I. officials were debating how to proceed and trying to determine the objective of questioning Mr. Flynn.
The notes also showed that the F.B.I. softened its interview strategy with Mr. Flynn. Officials decided that agents would be allowed to read back portions of the highly classified phone call transcripts to refresh Mr. Flynn’s memory. F.B.I. investigators felt at the time it was important to figure out whether Mr. Flynn would tell the truth in an interview.
Though Mr. Flynn was told ahead of time about the interview, the F.B.I. director at the time, James B. Comey, unilaterally decided to go forward with it, angering Justice Department officials who said the bureau should have coordinated closely with them and notified the White House Counsel’s Office.
Mr. Flynn later agreed to plead guilty, entering a plea twice before he later reversed himself, hiring new lawyers and asking Judge Sullivan to allow him to withdraw it.
After the notes and other documents were made public, Ms. Powell seized on them to declare that they cast doubt on the F.B.I.’s decision to question Mr. Flynn and to charge him with lying. She accused the bureau of framing her client.
Mr. Shea also argued that the F.B.I. had no legitimate reason to interview Mr. Flynn. He said that the bureau’s counterintelligence investigation into Mr. Flynn had essentially ended and agents had insufficient reason to keep it open and were trying to entrap him.
The interview with Mr. Flynn “seems to have been undertaken only to elicit those very false statements and thereby criminalize Mr. Flynn,” Mr. Shea wrote.
Mr. Barr has called Mr. Flynn’s conversations with Mr. Kislyak “laudable” and said that his lies were immaterial to the Russia investigation, rejecting the view of the prosecutors who had said that Mr. Flynn hurt the inquiry by misleading the F.B.I. agents. Judge Sullivan has also said the lies were material.