The move by the nation’s largest four-year public university system comes as many other schools insist they will find a way to bring students back to campus despite the coronavirus.
SACRAMENTO — In the most sweeping sign yet of the long-term impact of the coronavirus on American higher education, California State University, the nation’s largest four-year public university system, said on Tuesday that classes at its 23 campuses would be canceled for the fall semester, with instruction taking place almost exclusively online.
But the chancellor of the California State University system, Timothy P. White, told the board of trustees on Tuesday that the risks were too great for the more than 480,000 undergraduates enrolled at the Cal States, as they are known, to return to campus in the fall. Classes will continue virtually, as they have since March.
McGill University in Montreal, one of Canada’s most prestigious universities, made a similar announcement on Monday, saying it will offer most of its courses online in September.
Mr. White allowed for the possibility of exceptions. If health and safety precautions permit, clinical classes in the nursing program could be held in person, he said, as could certain science labs and other essential instruction.
Size, location and population density could play a big role in what universities decide, Mr. Hartle said.
Cal State’s announcement came as Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, told a Senate panel on Tuesday that needless “suffering and death” could result if states move too quickly to reopen schools and businesses.
Mr. White, the Cal State chancellor, noted that academic researchers and public health experts were predicting a “second, smaller wave” of the coronavirus this summer, “followed by a very significant wave” in the fall and another wave in the first quarter of next year.
With no vaccine on the immediate horizon, Mr. White told the system’s trustees that “it would be irresponsible” to postpone a decision on in-person classes until summer, only to be forced to retreat hastily to remote learning in the fall.
Anemona Hartocollis contributed reporting from New York.