In early March, German government officials said they believed that Mr. Trump had tried to lure a company based in southwestern Germany that was known to be working on a vaccine to move its research work to the United States.
The officials said the United States was already working closely with European leaders to coordinate those efforts, and called Monday’s conference a welcome step to encourage more funding. But they declined to say why American officials did not participate.
Jim Richardson, the State Department’s director of foreign assistance, said American companies had also provided $7 billion so far toward a coronavirus vaccine and treatment.
Also participating in Monday’s European fund-raiser were key American allies like Saudi Arabia and the United Kingdom, as well as Canada and Mexico.
“We will not be safe until we can share it with the rest of the world,” said Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, referring to a vaccine.
The fund-raiser included people and organizations that have come into friction with Mr. Trump and his administration over his handling of the pandemic, including the World Health Organization and its director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, and Melinda Gates, a co-founder with her husband, Bill, of one of the world’s largest charitable foundations.
“So long as Covid-19 is somewhere, Covid-19 can spread anywhere,” Mrs. Gates said.
“The pandemic won’t end until people everywhere can be immunized against it, until everyone can benefit from the world’s science, regardless of where they live,” she said. The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation will contribute $100 million to research for a vaccine.
Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, who has received Mr. Trump’s indirect praise for her handling of the pandemic, pledged €525 million, or $573 million.
“I am very happy to represent Germany at this conference today, because it sends a signal of hope in such difficult times for many countries and shows us that the pandemic is a global challenge and, consequently, we can only defeat it globally,” Ms. Merkel said.
And the United States was not the world’s only major power to be absent. Russia, too, did not participate.
Matina Stevis-Gridneff reported from Brussels and Lara Jakes from Washington. Monika Pronczuk contributed reporting from Brussels, Melissa Eddy from Berlin and Aurelien Breeden from Paris.