As museums around the country prepare to reopen, the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, is going first with safety protocols in place.
You won’t be able to use the drinking fountains, check your coat or eat in the cafe. You will have to wear a mask, submit to a temperature check and agree to leave if you show signs of illness. These are the requirements set by the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, when it reopens on Saturday, the first major arts institution in the country to welcome the public back since the outbreak of the pandemic.
Their plans have been devised in consultation with state officials as well as in conversation with other museums. The Association of Art Museum Directors has helped connect institutions that have shared documents on reopening plans. Museums have broken out into working groups by region to strategize.
The unpredictability of the coronavirus trajectory has made reopening dates something of a moving target. Wichita was originally going to reopen June 1, then pushed the date three weeks. The Metropolitan Museum of Art said in March that it would reopen in July; then on Tuesday it announced that the date had moved to mid-August, or possibly later.
The Met is due to turn its Breuer building over to the Frick in July, so the short-lived Gerhard Richter show may well not reopen.
Some museums have reopened in Europe, where coronavirus infections are declining. Museums in the United States are reopening even in states where infections are on the rise.
The museum, which will have timed-entry ticketing to ensure that the number of visitors is capped below 25 percent, also coordinated with other institutions in the area, namely the Houston Museum of Natural Science, which opened on May 15 and the Holocaust Museum, which is reopening May 26.
The Children’s Museum of Houston plans to open June 1 without 48 interactive components, including a three-story climbing structure; with attendance limited to 560 a day, compared with its typical 5,000 to 6,000; and with a face mask requirement enforced by a uniformed off-duty officer.
Although Ohio’s bars and restaurants were permitted to reopen Thursday for dine-in service, the Cleveland Museum of Art is looking to state officials for guidance before determining an opening date. “There isn’t much we can say until after Ohio Governor Mike DeWine gives us a green light and issues his order making it clear exactly what we may and may not do,” said William M. Griswold, the museum’s director.
The Whitney is considering changing the traffic flow in its staircases (there will be one for people going up; one for those going down) and its elevators (the small one will be reserved for elderly visitors; the large one will require social distancing).
Mr. Weinberg predicts that museums, where possible, will emphasize outdoor sculpture (the Whitney is proceeding with a public art project by David Hammons on a reclaimed pier facing the museum) and at first expects to serve visitors from surrounding neighborhoods. Tourists aren’t expected back anytime soon.
Although the Whitney is projecting a deficit, his first in his 17 years as director, Mr. Weinberg said he is considering making the museum pay-what-you-wish for all New Yorkers.
The Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, which has performing arts and cinema spaces, is planning a phased reopening, starting with indoor galleries sometime this summer. “Once we can gather more people, we will see how things go,” said Mary Ceruti, its executive director.
But museums also see their role as a place to gather when people begin to venture out of their homes. “Hopefully, the arts are going to lead the way,” Mr. Weinberg said. “People are really isolated right now and they want community. Museums are a place where they can at least be in spaces with people, but not right next to or on top of people.
These days, weaknesses can also become a strength. Mr. Tinterow — who used to work as a Met curator — does not have to worry about social distancing for droves of returning visitors, given his museum’s limited tourist traffic.
