Opinion|We Work in an Amazon Warehouse. We Didn’t Sign Up to Be Heroes.
My typical morning, my cat usually jumps on my face. Then my alarm goes off about 4 o’clock. I cry for about a good three minutes. Usually during the day, I am numb. I am on autopilot. So I give myself that three minutes to let everything out. So that way I don’t you know, have a breakdown. I grocery shop for thousands, maybe millions of people a day. I don’t know. We’re the back, legs, arms. We are the body of Amazon. We don’t need your thank you commercials. We need better protections and to be paid what we deserve. “Amazon has reportedly confirmed it’s going to stop paying its warehouse workers that extra $2 an hour in coronavirus hazard pay.” “Amazon’s unlimited unpaid-leave policy ended on May 1.” “That means if you have coronavirus, you are expected to still show up to work even after two weeks have passed.” I have lupus nephritis, which means my immune system is weak. So if I even get the mild condition of just getting corona, I would end up in critical condition because that’s how weak my body is. They’re still getting cases every other day or every other week, and not just our warehouse on Staten Island but across the United States. I’m home now scared to go to work. They ended the UPT policy. My leave of absence ended May 9. I requested a new leave, and Amazon denied it. This is my source of income for the past two years. I don’t want to give up the job, but in this pandemic, they’re making me choose between my life or a customer’s order. Amazon is acting like the pandemic is over and everything is back to normal. They call us essential. They call us heroes. But I’m just going to say it. We are expendable. You have 30 million-plus people on unemployment in the country. Hazard pay would actually help because a lot of people are the sole breadwinners now in their household— especially too because we’re risking our lives. Bring the unlimited UPT back. That keeps us safe versus coming in, walking around, not knowing whether they have the virus or not. Business is phenomenal for them right now. Even as unrest builds, it has done nothing to knock Amazon’s share price off the perch, even hitting new record highs. A decent amount of people that I work with have quit. I thought about it. I want to, but I can’t. Me and my sister work hard for everything. We were homeless. You know, my biggest fear is going back to that. “Amazon is facing questions about its initial response to employees who complained about safety.” “Two former Amazon employees say they were fired for their activism.” Definitely not scared of them. My mother was a Marine, and I was in the Navy. But am I scared of losing what keeps a roof over my head and food in my stomach? Yeah, that I’m scared of. We didn’t sign up to come in and risk our lives. We didn’t sign up to be someone’s hero. It’s a shitty choice. In these uncertain times, I just want to remind you that it’s still an uncertain time. Don’t let these policies expire before the pandemic is over.
While Amazon may glorify its workers with sentimental commercials, thanking them for their heroic bravery, it has also rolled back some policies designed to keep those very workers safe during this pandemic. And on June 1, it’s getting rid of hazard pay too, even though its facilities continue to see outbreaks of the coronavirus.
In the video above, two warehouse workers ask Amazon to put its money where its mouth is by extending its pro-worker policies through the pandemic. After all, Amazon couldn’t do it without them.