Dr. Eric Topol, the director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, who is not involved in the Seattle group, said it had “emerged as leading lights in this whole Covid-19 crisis.” He said it was “bizarre” that the F.D.A. would halt such a project.
“Not only will it help improve our understanding of the outbreak in Seattle, it will also provide valuable information about the virus for other communities around the world,” Mr. Gates wrote.
Private companies have also rushed to promote at-home test kits, and the F.D.A. approved the first one available for purchase in April.
Dr. Topol said it would not make sense to have people swab their noses and then not give them their test results.
“To withhold that information from people is downright absurd,” Dr. Topol said.
At-home testing kits have been praised as a valuable alternative to in-office or drive-through testing because they do not require a clinician to risk exposure when swabbing a patient’s nose. They have also emerged at a time when public health leaders are looking for ways to rapidly expand testing to look for hot spots and trends.
A Harvard Global Health Institute report last week estimated that the United States needed to be conducting at least 900,000 tests daily, but tracking reports indicate the country is doing about one-third that amount.
Dr. Topol said the country probably needed to ramp up to do millions of tests daily. The infrastructure needed for expansive drive-through testing would be difficult to achieve, he said, and could miss people who do not want to leave their home to drive to a site.
“Home testing is really the only way we can get massive testing in the United States,” he said.
The Seattle testing group said it had been in conversation with the F.D.A. since the beginning of March and initiated the process to obtain federal approval on March 23. That process included submitting data from testing so far on April 13.
The group said F.D.A. officials had requested data regarding the program’s use of nasal swabs. Researchers submitted data validating both the safety and reliability of the swabs in home-based collection, they said. They provided studies demonstrating that any coronavirus samples would remain stable for more than a week at the full range of temperatures typical in the Seattle area. They also provided information about internal controls that allow the organization to determine whether a sufficient specimen was collected to guarantee accurate test results.
The testing group said the F.D.A. had also asked for more information about the program’s effort to test people who did not have symptoms.