A storied actor, he starred opposite Brigitte Bardot and Catherine Deneuve and worked with many of the giants of European filmmaking.
Michel Piccoli, an actor whose quiet intensity and mature sensuality made him a fixture of French cinema for more than a half-century, died on May 12, it was announced on Monday. He was 94.
The cause was a stroke, according to his wife, Ludivine Clerc, who confirmed his death in a short statement issued on her behalf by Gilles Jacob, former president of the Cannes Film Festival.
A veteran of the French stage, Mr. Piccoli also had more than 40 feature films and television movies on his résumé. He was in his late 30s when he starred in Jean-Luc Godard’s acclaimed drama “Contempt” (“Le Mépris”) in 1963, playing Brigitte Bardot’s unhappy husband, a screenwriter who sells out his talent and loses his wife to an American producer.
French audiences had largely discovered Mr. Piccoli a year earlier, in “Le Doulos,” a gangster film noir in which his character is shot dead. American cineastes came to know him from the films of the great European directors, particularly Luis Buñuel.
His work with Mr. Buñuel included “Belle de Jour” (1967), in which Mr. Piccoli played a sinister, lecherous aristocrat who encourages a bored young Catherine Deneuve to go into prostitution and become a gangster’s lover by day while remaining the prim housewife of a handsome, young physician by night.
Mr. Piccoli also collaborated with Mr. Buñuel on “Diary of a Chambermaid” (1964), “The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie” (1972) and “The Phantom of Liberty” (1974).
Across his long career he worked with directors like Claude Chabrol, Jacques Demy, Costa-Gavras, Alain Resnais and Agnès Varda. “La Grande Bouffe” (“The Big Feast,” 1973), directed by Marco Ferreri, was probably one of Mr. Piccoli’s best-known films to American moviegoers. The movie was a satire about four men determined to eat themselves to death during an orgiastic villa weekend.
In addition to Ms. Bardot and Ms. Deneuve, Mr. Piccoli’s list of co-stars included Anouk Aimée, Stéphane Audran, Leslie Caron, Jeanne Moreau, Natasha Parry, Dominique Sanda and Romy Schneider.
He occasionally appeared in American films, albeit in projects in which he played characters with French accents. He was a Soviet spy in France who commits suicide in Alfred Hitchcock’s “Topaz” (1969), and an opera-loving croupier in Louis Malle’s “Atlantic City” (1980).
“The urbane Michel Piccoli appears in a tiny role that he turns into a memorable cameo, that of a casino manager who, on the side, runs the croupier school,” Vincent Canby wrote in his review in The New York Times.
Mr. Piccoli’s career barely slowed in later life. Even as the likes of Alain Delon and Jean-Paul Belmondo — French actors a decade younger than he — began to work less, Mr. Piccoli seemed to pick up his pace. He appeared in three films and a mini-series in 2012, when he was 86, and he was named best actor at the 2012 David di Donatello awards, the Italian equivalent of the Oscars, for his performance in Nanni Moretti’s “We Have a Pope” (“Habemus Papam”), in which he portrayed a cardinal reluctant to accept the ultimate promotion.
That award joined his numerous film festival honors, including best actor awards at Cannes for “Salto nel Vuoto” (“Leap Into the Void,” 1980), in which he played a judge inconvenienced by his mentally disturbed sister; and at Berlin for “Une Étrange Affaire” (“Strange Affair,” 1981), for his role as a department store manager who leads an employee astray. He also received a 1997 best film award at Venice for “Alors Voilà,” a black comedy about a dysfunctional family, which he wrote with Thomas Cheysson and directed.
Mr. Piccoli was nominated four times for the César Award, the French equivalent of the Oscars, for his performances in “Strange Affair”; “Dangerous Moves” (1984), the story of an aging chess master; “May Fools” (1990), about a widowed vineyard manager at the time of the Paris student riots; and “La Belle Noiseuse” (1991), playing a painter with a creative block, in which he stars alongside Emmanuelle Béart.
Jacques Daniel Michel Piccoli was born on Dec. 27, 1925, in Paris into a musical family. His mother, Marcelle (Expert-Bezançon) Piccoli, was a French pianist, and his father, Henri Piccoli, was an Italian violinist. Michel Piccoli attended high school at the Collège Sainte-Barbe in Paris.
In the decade after World War II, he made a stage career for himself as an actor and manager, primarily with Théâtre Babylone and with the Reynauld-Barrault company. In the same period, he made his film acting debut, as a villager in “Sortilèges” (1945), a horror-crime drama. But it was four years until he made his second film, “Le Point du Jour” (“The Mark of the Day”), in which he had a small role. And he was still primarily a stage actor when he appeared as a wealthy farmer in a 1957 French film version of “The Crucible” (“Les Sorcières de Salem”), starring Yves Montand and Simone Signoret.
His final film appearances were in “Lines of Wellington,” a 2012 French-Portuguese production that starred John Malkovich as the Duke of Wellington, and “Le Goût des Myrtilles” (“The Taste of Blueberries”), a drama about an older couple in a fantasy world, released in 2014.
Whenever he could break away from his heavy film schedule, Mr. Piccoli retreated to his house on the Île de Ré, an island off the west coast of France, where he enjoyed bicycling down country roads.
He married three times and divorced twice. He and his first wife, the actress Eléonore Hirt, married in 1954 and had a daughter. His second wife was the singer and actress Juliette Gréco; the marriage lasted from 1966 to 1977. He married Ms. Clerc in 1980. In addition to her, survivors include a son, Inor; and two daughters, Anne-Cordélia and Missia.
“I like extremely discreet actors, who thus open up the imagination,” Mr. Piccoli said in a 2005 interview with the French film journal Cahiers du Cinéma, praising the midcentury American movie star Robert Mitchum as well as Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin.
Jonathan Kandell contributed reporting.