They were all nightmare celebrity patients.
Well, well. The president says he’s spent the last week and a half enjoying his hydroxychloroquine, presumably neat. It’s impossible to say whether it’s true; as doctors on Twitter were quick to note, Sean Conley, the White House physician, said in a memo that he discussed the drug with Trump, not prescribed it, though together he and the president concluded it was worth the risk.
But if you take the president at his word — something I admittedly almost never do, but let’s just say — it does make perfect sense. In Donald Trump, you have the patient perfect storm: a science denier, a devotee of medical quackery, and — above all else, I cannot emphasize this part enough — a powerful and narcissistic celebrity. This is what happens when your rich and famous V.I.P. client (think Michael Jackson, but with nuclear codes) also has a nutty perspective on medicine and an even nuttier one on facts. You get a statin-taking, extravagantly overweight man demanding a drug that increases the risk of cardiac arrest.
Time and time again, we’ve seen it: celebrities nagging their physicians to administer questionable and risky therapies, sometimes with tragic consequences. (Elvis being the most obvious example, but also, yes, Michael Jackson). In 1964, A Maryland psychiatrist named Walter Weintraub even coined a term for this problem: V.I.P. Syndrome.
So now consider the case of Donald Trump. He is already a germaphobe. He has no grasp of science, singing the praises of bleach elixirs for covid-19. He rejects or cherry-picks his facts, at best viewing them through a political prism: He said the data showing the hazards of hydroxychloroquine came from his detractors — “it was a Trump enemy statement” — when in fact they came from his own Food and Drug Administration. To bolster his case, Trump’s campaign manager, Brad Parscale, tweeted an endorsement of the drug by the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons.
This happens against a larger backdrop still, in which radical individualism has been extended to our health, with Americans often deciding they know better than doctors what’s best for them; our trust in mainstream medicine has eroded right along with our trust in the media, government, our fellow countrymen. You see it with alternative medicine on the left (Gwyneth, sigh). You see it with the hawking of nutritional supplements by Alex Jones and Mike Cernovich on the right. You see it in the Oval Office.
