Aimee Stephens, whose potentially groundbreaking case before the Supreme Court could have major implications for the fight for civil rights for transgender people, died on Tuesday at her home in Redford, Mich., outside Detroit. She was 59.
The cause was complications of kidney failure, according to the American Civil Liberties Union, which represented Ms. Stephens. She had been on dialysis for some time and entered hospice care in late April, the A.C.L.U. said.
Ms. Stephens filed a complaint with the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, which sued the funeral homes, saying her employer had violated the Civil Rights Act of 1964. But a district court ruled in the employer’s favor. Ms. Stephens then won in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati.
That decision was challenged by the funeral home, represented by the Alliance Defending Freedom, a conservative nonprofit group, and in April 2019 the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case on the question of whether the Civil Rights Act protects transgender people from workplace discrimination.
The case is one of three now before the court that are expected to provide the first indications of how its new conservative majority will approach L.G.B.T. rights.
Ms. Stephens was born on Dec. 7, 1960, in Fayetteville, N.C. She graduated from Mars Hill University in 1984 with a degree in religious education and obtained a degree in mortuary science from Fayetteville Technical Community College in 1988, according to the A.C.L.U. She started working at R.G. & G.R. Harris in 2008.
Ms. Stephens’s survivors include her wife, Donna Stephens, and the couple’s daughter, Elizabeth.
“Aimee was fired for being transgender, and she chose to stand up for herself and for all transgender people,” she said.
“All of us in the L.G.B.T.Q. community owe her immense gratitude for her bravery in standing up for the right of L.G.B.T.Q. people to live as ourselves at work and in every aspect of our lives,” he said in a statement.
