All 50 states have begun to reopen to some degree, but rules vary. Scientists say they see progress on the path to developing a vaccine by next year.
This briefing has ended. Follow our latest coverage of the coronavirus pandemic.
All 50 states have reopened in some way, though some are pausing their plans or backtracking amid a rise in cases.
Michigan, one of the states hardest hit by the coronavirus pandemic, was left reeling again on Wednesday after days of torrential rainfall breached two privately owned dams the night before. Thousands of residents were forced to flee their homes, and much of Midland, the home of Dow Chemical and some of its plants, was submerged in murky floodwaters.
Mr. Cohen, 53, who pleaded guilty in 2018 to campaign finance violations and other crimes, had been serving his sentence at a minimum-security camp in Otisville, N.Y., about 75 miles northwest of New York City.
Mr. Cohen’s projected release date was November 2021, according to the bureau’s website, but he had sought to be released sooner because of medical issues and the risk that they would be exacerbated by the virus’s spread at the prison.
Mr. Trump has repeatedly criticized Baltimore — once calling it a “disgusting, rat and rodent infested mess” — and picked fights with Representative Elijah E. Cummings, the Democrat who represented much of the city for two decades until his death in October.
In April, speeding tickets nearly doubled in New York City and also increased in California. Taking advantage of the decline in traffic, a team of three drivers easily broke the record for driving from New York to Los Angeles, a sprint known as the Cannonball Run.
The biggest worry is Legionella pneumophila, a bacteria that can cause Legionnaires’ disease, a respiratory condition. It leads to death in about one in 10 cases, according to the C.D.C. The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine estimates that over 52,000 Americans are affected annually.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention quietly released more detailed guidance for schools, businesses, transit systems and other industries hoping to reopen safely during the pandemic after fear that the White House had shelved the guidelines.
The 60-page document, which a C.D.C. spokesman said was uploaded over the weekend, but which received little notice, adds great detail to six charts that the C.D.C. had released last week. The guidance provides specific instructions for different sectors to detect and trace the virus based on exposure and risk after the pandemic.
Mr. Trump said on Wednesday that he might try to convene world leaders at Camp David for the annual Group of 7 meeting as a further sign of “normalization” as the United States and many other countries begin to reopen.
Mr. Trump agreed to hold the summit at his presidential retreat in Maryland after initially saying the gathering would happen at the Trump National Doral resort near Miami. Critics said it was inappropriate for him to host a diplomatic event at one of his properties.
A handful of colleges recently announced plans to bring students back to campus this fall, including the University of South Carolina, Notre Dame, Rice and Creighton.
Businesses are beginning to reopen and new coronavirus cases are declining, but Americans don’t expect life — or the economy — to return to normal any time soon.
Consumers have reason for that pessimism. Economists now say unemployment is likely to remain elevated for years, and two of the president’s top financial advisers have warned that further job losses are likely.
