A burgeoning number of literary novelists are caught in a creative paradox: How do we write about the climate crisis? Flaubert’s dictum about a global scourge of his own time — “Depict it: That’s enough” — doesn’t seem to apply, because the evidence is already in front of readers’ eyes every day, and they refuse to engage with it. Many of the traditional effects of literature — resolution, or individual heroism, or catharsis, or hope — seem like phony comforts, misleading interior transformations that only feel like, rather than constitute, actual change. Most kneecapping of all, perhaps, is the knowledge that even the best novel is not a form of direct action. It alters nothing, its effects are isolate and random, the voice in which it preaches can’t carry past the choir.
Lydia Millet has O.G. status among these writers. She holds a master’s degree in environmental policy, and lives and writes far from the usual literary precincts, in the desert outside Tucson, where she works for the nonprofit Center for Biological Diversity. Though her literary productivity has remained impressive, one has the sense that it has moved into the background for her in some way, that, like all the best writers, she doesn’t really write because she wants to but because she can’t not.
Her 13th book of adult fiction is called “A Children’s Bible” — a clever self-undercutting that suggests an all-encompassing theory of everything while also promising simplicity, reduced scale, even a certain bowdlerizing. For a while the novel sustains a deceptively timeless, children’s-treasury vibe, with its old-fashioned flipping of speech tags (“said a mother” instead of “a mother said”) and its concentration on common nouns without modifiers: “Once we lived in a summer country,” it begins. “In the woods there were tree houses, and on the lake there were boats.” But before long, signifiers of contemporary life seep in: cellphones, Fendi, Amazon Prime.
The setting — a massive summer house, with multiple families vacationing in it — calls to mind that of Susan Minot’s novel “Monkeys” turned to account as metaphor: an abundance of children, a lazy hedonism, an air of uneasily inherited and vaguely threatened privilege. The house itself, we are told, was built by robber barons in the 19th century. There’s never any mention of whom it actually belongs to: Though nominally a rental, it seems more like the parents’ common heritage, and they do not interrogate it.
Our narrator is an adolescent named Evie, though she avails herself mostly of the first-person plural. The summer days she describes are made anarchic by a kind of parental economy of scale; there are simply so many kids that they cannot be kept track of, so they formulate their own plans while the adults lounge around and, mostly, drink. The children have a summer-long contest to conceal from one another which of the parents are actually theirs, because there is no way the answer will not be embarrassing. They seem estranged, self-generated, like children in a Joy Williams story. What they fear most is growing up, turning into adults, the helpless slide into valuing whatever the hell it is that these adults value.
Evie has a little brother, Jack, wholly unsupervised except by her. Jack is a reader, and one day Evie sees that he is carrying around an unfamiliar book, “A Child’s Bible: Stories From the Old and New Testaments.” One of the mothers gave it to him, he says; he isn’t quite sure which. Jack has no sort of religious consciousness or instruction, no context for making sense of this Bible as anything other than a book of stories. He becomes quite fond of it (though still ranking it behind his other favorite books, like the “Frog and Toad Treasury” and “Laugh-Out-Loud Jokes”), and soon he starts noticing odd little concordances between the stories in this book and what is happening in the world around him.
After a brief interlude in which the kids camp out by the ocean and meet some handsome children of the 1 percent (who talk with WASPish modesty about their parents’ expensively outfitted bunkers for surviving the end of the world), the children return to the house, which is then all but leveled by a storm. The grounds are flooded, the electricity goes out. The adults respond to the crisis by breaking out the Ecstasy and pairing off adulterously. Disgusted, the children (along with as many local animals as Jack can save) commandeer a car and set off for the home of one of them — “a 10-bedroom house in Rye” — but they don’t make it, winding up instead on a farm somewhere in Pennsylvania (“west is Bethlehem”) run by a caretaker and owned by an absentee rich lady. It’s on a hill, which means they can get a cell signal, and thus they learn that the storm was not just local: It has caused death and destruction as far away as New York and Boston.
Jack keeps noticing — and duly pointing out, to the uninterested others — parallels between current events and the stories in “my book.” There are more, even, than he catches: There’s a birth in a barn, a plague, a Moses, a Cain and an Abel, even a crucifixion. But part of the novel’s genius is that these allusions never really lead anywhere — they don’t coalesce into some superstructure of metaphor. The baby born in the manger is just a baby. The allusions aren’t symbols or clues; they’re just faint echoes, like puzzle pieces too few to fit together. They don’t mean what we’re used to them meaning.
Science can still save us if we believe in it. That knowledge doesn’t exactly hit the other characters with the force of a revelation. It doesn’t change the outcome of events. But it’s there, Jack insists; it’s in his book. And now it’s in Millet’s book too, for those with ears to hear.
On the farm, the children find a shaky but peaceful equilibrium, for a while. Even in the Bible, of course, there are bad guys; and they come here in the form of looters, heavily armed and sadistic, whose base of operations is a nearby former McDonald’s. The children have nothing with which to fight back. But, as in the Bible, every disaster story is also an origin story.
To Jack, the Bible is an old book found in a decaying summer house, an artifact to try to make sense of, a missive from some lost world. With brilliant restraint, Millet conceives her own low-key “bible” the same way. It’s not a history, not a tract or a jeremiad; the truth it bears is not going to overwrite the future. It’s a tale in which whoever or whatever comes after us might recognize, however imperfectly, a certain continuity: an exotic but still decodable shred of evidence from the lost world that is the world we are living in right now.