Dolly Parton, Meryl Streep and Jon Bon Jovi in a star-studded benefit concert; a play written specially for Zoom; Shakespeare on YouTube; and more.
If there is a sign that theater is settling into a sort-of-normal, it is the emergence of hits like the Richard Nelson play “What Do We Need to Talk About?,” written specifically for Zoom and which the Public Theater is making available again through June 28.
Also proving popular is the series “The 24 Hour Plays: Viral Monologues,” where some of America’s finest playwrights write short solo pieces for some of America’s finest actors — and the whole process, from conception to execution, happens in 24 hours. There are near-weekly installments, with the next landing Tuesday at 6 p.m.
Here are more live performances, readings and recordings of productions to stream this week.
As producers get better at that darn videoconferencing thingumajig, fund-raising concerts featuring a cavalcade of stars have become a favored format. Monday at 8 p.m., 50 performers gather to support the charity for homeless youth Covenant House, with stage luminaries mingling with under-the-radar up-and-comers like Meryl Streep, Dolly Parton and Jon Bon Jovi. The event is available on several platforms, including Amazon Prime, Facebook, Twitch, YouTube and the new Broadway On Demand.
On a smaller scale but with a heart just as big is the New York-based Play-PerView, which has put on 11 play readings since its premiere on March 26. This thriving little operation raises money for various organizations and specializes in remounting Off and Off Off Broadway shows with stellar casts. Monday at 7 p.m., you can enjoy a newly revised version of the subversive comedy “Permission” by Robert Askins (“Hand to God”), starring William Jackson Harper and Steven Boyer. Friday at 8 p.m., Jonathan Spector’s bracing, very funny “Eureka Day,” about a private school dealing with a mumps outbreak, returns with its original cast.
St. Ann’s Warehouse jumps into the streaming game to present Simon McBurney’s solo tour de force with the Complicité company. In “The Encounter,” which Ben Brantley of The New York Times described as “astonishing” when it ran on Broadway in 2016, McBurney recounts an American photojournalist’s 1969 trip to the Amazon via full auditory immersion. For maximum impact, audiences should listen on headphones — as live theatergoers did at the time, a device that eerily anticipated our current isolated reality. Available for free through Friday.
This 2015 David Lindsay-Abaire comedy is a tasty, very funny morsel into which older actresses can truly sink their teeth — it’s about two women in a retirement home locked in a ferocious turf war. The stream costs $20 and runs through May 31, courtesy of the Creede Repertory Theater, which has been thriving from its perch in the Colorado mountains since 1966.
Available for free through June 7, this Repertorio Espanõl production (in Spanish with English subtitles) tells the story of a group of men who attempt to get into the United States from Mexico in a sealed boxcar, and the border guard who crosses their path. Silvia González’s play was directed by Repertorio’s co-founder René Buch, a New York theater fixture who died in April at 94.
Few plays are as suited to the age of quarantine as A.R. Gurney’s two-hander from 1988, in which a pair of actors sitting side by side read from the 50-year correspondence between their characters. The relationship endures, overcoming hardships and separation. On Thursday at 8 p.m. and 11 p.m., Broadway’s Best Shows presents a one-night-only reading by Bryan Cranston and Sally Field, directed by Jerry Zaks. Not too shabby.
The writer and performer Penny Arcade has spent more than five decades onstage, and unlike many of her brethren on the Off Off circuit, she had the foresight to record a lot of her work. Now she is making her archive available to her Patreon subscribers, with memberships starting at $1 a month. Arcade regularly adds to the treasure trove, which so far includes interviews pulled from her oral history Lower East Side Biography Project and full-length pieces including “La Miseria” and “Longing Lasts Longer.” She also draws from archived streams of the show she presents on Facebook Live every Thursday and Sunday at 5 p.m., in which she interviews front-line workers and scientists alongside cultural figures.
On Saturday at 8 p.m., the Labyrinth Theater Company is reviving this raucous Stephen Adly Guirgis play from 2002 with a free (but donations are welcome) reading directed by Elizabeth Rodriguez. Bobby Cannavale and Laurence Fishburne join eight original cast members, including the mighty Elizabeth Canavan and Liza Colón-Zayas, and they all should have great fun with Guirgis’s spitfire dialogue. The show will be available for 24 hours.
Theater for the New City is an East Village fixture, and Friday through Sunday, its annual festival’s 25th edition is proudly letting its virtual freak flag fly with 150 participants cranking out theater, dance, poetry, music and puppet shows. (What’s the East Village without puppets?) Of particular note: a “sit-around” featuring, among others, F. Murray Abraham, Charles Busch, Phoebe Legere and Austin Pendleton on Saturday at 8 p.m.
One of the spring’s most exciting events is a show that never opened on Broadway. Or anywhere else, for that matter: “Bombshell” exists only in the universe of the NBC series “Smash.” But while the musical is fictional, its songs, by Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman (“Hairspray”), are very real and very good. Original cast members are expected to pop up and belt them for this Actors Fund benefit, which will stream Wednesday at 8 p.m. on people.com.
Does this count as a transfer? On Friday, Sunday and May 27, Theater for a New Audience is bringing back this production of Caryl Churchill’s “Mad Forest,” which played Bard College in April. The director Ashley Tata quickly adapted from the physical realm to the virtual one, mixing live performance and video for this surreal, uneasy play about the Romanian revolution of 1989.
What is a theater roundup without Shakespeare? The London-based Cheek by Jowl, helmed by the director Declan Donnellan and the designer Nick Ormerod, has brought several of its visually sophisticated and muscular, yet probing, productions to New York — including two that are now streaming for free on the company’s YouTube channel through Saturday: “The Winter’s Tale” and a Russian-language, subtitled “Measure for Measure” in collaboration with Moscow’s Pushkin Theater.
