The class of 2020 has no idea what the future holds — and neither do we. Here’s a look back at some icons starting on their paths to renown.
The artist Glenn Ligon, 31, with several of his pieces, which The Times called “lush yet quietly confrontational paintings” in June 1991.
Ruth Bader Ginsburg, 38, joined the faculty of Columbia University in 1972 as the first female full professor in the law school’s 114-year history.
The Times film critic Bosley Crowther singled out 24-year-old Rita Moreno’s performance in “The King and I.” Six years later, she won the Academy Award for best supporting actress for her role in another musical film, “West Side Story.” Moreno, who is Puerto Rican, was the first Latina to win an Oscar in any category.
In just three years, Eddie Murphy, 19, went from being a high school student performing unpaid gigs at Long Island comedy clubs to a breakout star of “Saturday Night Live,” The Times reported in 1981.
In a 1991 review of Sandra Cisneros’s “Woman Hollering Creek,” The Times praised the Mexican-American writer’s “radiant first collection of stories,” “The House on Mango Street,” which had “promised wonders to come” from the author. One thing the reviewer neglected to mention: Radiant though it was, when “The House on Mango Street” was published in 1984, the paper had not acknowledged it with a review.
“Although cooking has become an ardent pastime in the life of Madhur Jaffrey, her interest in cooking with a certain panache came about, as it has for many another young New Yorker, through necessity,” The Times reported in 1966.
Barack Obama, 28, first appeared in The Times in 1990, when he was elected the first black president in the 104-year history of the Harvard Law Review. The rising senior told The Times that he planned to spend some time in private law practice and then return to Chicago to do community work, either in local organizing or in politics.
In its first review of Yayoi Kusama, in 1961, The Times praised the 32-year-old Japanese artist’s work. “His typical picture is capable of infinite enlargement,” the critic Stuart Preston wrote — assuming, erroneously, that the artist must be a man.
Clint Eastwood appeared in The Times as early as 1958, in several articles about the television show “Rawhide.” But it wasn’t until 1966 that the actor, 35, earned more than a brief mention, when he emerged as the rangy anti-hero at the heart of Sergio Leone’s “Dollars” trilogy.
Eastwood worked at a logging mill and as an Army swimming instructor before landing his role on “Rawhide.” After spending several years and “250 TV hours” on the show, The Times reported, “he had about as much desire to make another Western as cattle have for the branding iron.” But when “A Fistful of Dollars” came along, it was too good to pass up. It would make the actor, seen here in 1965, a star.
“First novels often come and go without notice,” The Times said in 1984, “but ‘The House of the Spirits’ by Isabel Allende has been an incredible success in Europe.” The following year, American readers got their chance to dive into the 42-year-old former journalist’s debut.
Read our original coverage of Patti Smith, Maya Lin, David Byrne, Glenn Ligon, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Rita Moreno, Eddie Murphy, Meryl Streep, Sandra Cisneros, Nathan Lane, Spike Lee, Julie Andrews, Madhur Jaffrey, Barack Obama, Yayoi Kusama, Clint Eastwood, Quincy Jones and Isabel Allende.