This briefing has ended. Follow our latest coverage of the coronavirus pandemic.
Health experts warn of dangers of reopening the country too soon.
Cal State will not hold in-person classes this fall.
Testing, vaccines and delayed guidance: highlights from Tuesday’s Senate testimony.
Even when New York reopens, workers may permanently stay home.
California said her shop could reopen. Doing so on the fly wasn’t that simple.
Virus models are nearing a consensus, but reopening could throw them off again.
Leaders of the Trump administration’s coronavirus response testified to a Senate panel, and emphasized life-threatening consequences of reopening the country too early.
The officials — Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, and Dr. Robert R. Redfield, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — predicted dire consequences if the nation reopened its economy too soon, noting that the United States still lacked critical testing capacity and the ability to trace the contacts of those infected.
Dr. Fauci’s remarks, along with those of Dr. Redfield, contradicted Mr. Trump’s growing insistence that the nation has put the coronavirus behind it.
The comments appeared to rattle the markets, driving the S&P 500 down as investors weighed the potential of a second wave of infections against Mr. Trump’s promises that the economy would bounce back once stay-at-home restrictions were lifted. Worrisome reports of spikes in infections in countries like China, South Korea and Germany, where lockdowns had been lifted, seemed to confirm the American officials’ fears.
The doctors’ downbeat assessments came as the death toll in the United States surpassed 82,000, and on a day when all three branches of government continued to adapt to new realities brought about by the virus.
Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee, who like Dr. Fauci and Dr. Redfield is in quarantine after being exposed to the coronavirus, presided as the committee’s chairman from his home in Maryville, Tenn.
At the same time, the Supreme Court’s justices were gathering by telephone to referee a constitutional dispute between the president and Congress. At the White House, aides and reporters wearing masks were tested for the virus, and Vice President Mike Pence kept away from the president.
It seemed that managing risk was the order of the day. Dr. Fauci told senators that coronavirus therapeutics and a vaccine would almost certainly not be ready in time for the new school year, and that outbreaks in other parts of the world would surely reach the United States. Dr. Redfield pleaded with senators to build up the nation’s public health infrastructure.
In the most sweeping sign yet of the effect of the pandemic on American higher education, the chancellor of California State University, the nation’s largest four-year public university system, said on Tuesday that classes at its 23 campuses would be canceled for the fall semester, with instruction taking place almost exclusively online.
Most of the nation’s colleges and universities have gone out of their way to say that they intend to reopen with in-person classes in the fall. But they are also making backup plans for online classes, and some could announce in the weeks to come that they are following Cal State’s lead.
Addressing a meeting of the system’s board of trustees, the chancellor, Timothy P. White, allowed for the possibility of exceptions. If health and safety precautions permit, clinical classes in the nursing program could be held in person, he said, as could certain science labs and other essential instruction.
But for most undergraduate students enrolled at the Cal States, as they are known, classes will continue virtually, as they have since campuses closed.
As California has slowly started to reopen, the state has achieved relatively low infection rates and a milestone of one million tests despite previously sluggish efforts. But infections and deaths have stabilized at a steady rate. In Los Angeles County, stay-at-home orders in some form will continue for another three months, the public health director said on Tuesday.
The Chronicle of Higher Education has been keeping a tally of colleges’ plans. Only a handful have said they are leaning toward online-only classes, including Wayne State University in Detroit, a virus hot spot, and Sierra College in California.
Clockwise from top left: Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, Dr. Robert R. Redfield and Senators Patty Murray and Lamar Alexander were among those participating virtually in the hearing on Tuesday.
The senators and witnesses who participated in Tuesday’s hearing of the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions did so from dens, offices and a mostly empty committee room. But while their homes — and even their dogs — created an unusual backdrop for the proceedings, the hearing produced the customary array of partisan talking points, dire warnings and even the occasional flash of anger.
Brett P. Giroir, the assistant secretary for health at the Department of Health and Human Services, who is overseeing the government’s testing response, testified that the country would have the ability to conduct 40 million to 50 million tests per month by September.
Dr. Fauci emphasized the importance of having “multiple winners,” meaning more than one vaccine available, to provide “global availability.” He repeated his cautious optimism that an effective vaccine would be developed but said there was no guarantee that would happen.
SCHOOL REOPENINGS The closing of schools and universities has represented one of the biggest upheavals in the outbreak, and Dr. Fauci and others said that the answer might be that schools would reopen differently throughout the country, depending on the state of the local outbreak.
Balancing the decision of whether to keep schools closed for safety reasons or to reopen them to allow parents to return to work — a major factor in any economic recovery — is a difficult question.
“If we keep kids out of school for another year, what’s going to happen is the poor and underprivileged kids who don’t have a parent that’s able to teach them at home will not get to learn for a full year,” said Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky.
Dr. Fauci pushed back, saying that the virus’s effect on children is still not well understood, and that recent cases of children who have tested positive and developed a serious inflammatory syndrome was worrisome. “We really better be very careful, particularly when it comes to children,” he said.
In a tense exchange, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci and Senator Rand Paul argued over the impact of the coronavirus on children and the decision to reopen schools.
Dr. Fauci warned that in making decisions about school openings, officials should not be “cavalier in thinking that children are completely immune to the deleterious effects” of Covid-19.
C.D.C. GUIDANCE Dr. Redfield said that an expansive new set of C.D.C. guidelines for states to reopen schools, businesses and religious institutions would be released “soon,” but he would not specify another White House effort to revise or scuttle them.
More recently, White House and senior health officials rejected the C.D.C. recommendations over concerns that they were overly prescriptive, infringed on religious rights and risked further damaging the economy.
Manhattan has the largest business district in the country, and its office towers have long been a symbol of the city’s global dominance. With hundreds of thousands of office workers, the commercial tenants have given rise to a vast ecosystem, from public transit to restaurants to shops. They have also funneled huge amounts of taxes into state and city coffers.
But now, as the pandemic eases its grip, companies are considering not just how to safely bring back employees, but whether all of them need to come back at all. They were forced by the crisis to figure out how to function productively with workers operating from home — and realized unexpectedly that it was not all bad.
If that’s the case, they are now wondering whether it’s worth continuing to spend as much money on Manhattan’s exorbitant commercial rents. They are also mindful that public health considerations might make the packed workplaces of the recent past less viable.
Once the dust settles, and companies make their decisions, New York City could face a real estate reckoning.
Shutting down a business for a public health emergency seven weeks ago, it turned out, was a fairly straightforward thing. Reopening one? That has turned out to be a lot trickier.
Like thousands of other small business owners, Elizabeth Wardman had to reinvent her small California flower shop on the fly when, on the eve of Mother’s Day, the state loosened some of the restrictions that had forced her to close. She is hoping to reach enough customers to keep at least a tiny portion of her operation alive, but to do so she has had to navigate health rules that aren’t always easy to follow, and can feel more than a little arbitrary.
A flood of delivery orders came in, but by Wednesday she had to stop accepting them; the store had furloughed its employees and didn’t have enough people to do the work. For the rest of the week, the phone rang unanswered.
There is growing consensus among modelers estimating the number of cases and deaths from the virus in the next few weeks. But this convergence of estimates — 31,000 to 42,000 additional deaths through mid-June, for roughly 120,000 total deaths in the United States — comes as shifts in public policy are likely to create new uncertainty about the path of the pandemic after that.
Three weeks ago, predictions from five popular models were widely divergent. Now, their outputs look far more similar.
The researchers who created them say that they are getting better at understanding the dynamics of the pandemic as Americans largely shelter in place, and that improved knowledge could explain the growing consensus of the models. The near-term future of the pandemic is also a little easier to imagine, with deaths flattening instead of growing rapidly.
But politicians are starting to ease restrictions on public gatherings and business activities, which is likely to lead to changes in behavior and to increased transmission of the disease. By how much is still unclear.
Jack Dorsey, the chief executive of Twitter, told employees on Tuesday that they would not be expected to return to the company’s offices and could work from home forever if they wanted.
Twitter will reopen its offices no sooner than September, said Jennifer Christie, a vice president of human resources.
Maxine Waters says her sister died from Covid-19.
Representative Maxine Waters, Democrat of California, said she recently lost a sister to Covid-19, framing it as a reminder of the lethal nature of the virus for African-Americans.
Ms. Waters, 81, a member and the former head of the Congressional Black Caucus, announced her sister’s death in a recent interview with the African-American news website theGrio.
Ms. Waters, who grew up in St. Louis and was the fifth of 13 children, raised largely by a single mother, did not elaborate on the name or age of her sister who died.
Ms. Waters’s office did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Tuesday.
Ms. Waters, the chairwoman of the House Financial Services Committee, told theGrio that African-Americans had been acutely affected by the virus and warned that they needed to protect themselves.
A disproportionate number of black Americans have been infected and killed by the coronavirus, according to data released by several states and cities. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advised health care professionals to be aware of the disparity and to not let bias influence treatment options for patients.
Ms. Waters is not the only member of Congress to lose a sibling to Covid-19. Last month, Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, announced that her eldest brother, Donald Reed Herring, 86, had died in Oklahoma after contracting the virus.
People defying mask mandates have been arrested in some states.
Guidelines introduced by many states, cities and businesses mandating that store customers wear masks have led to violent confrontations across the country, with some customers who have refused to comply arrested in California, Georgia and Pennsylvania.
In Michigan, the authorities said one dispute over a mask escalated into a fatality, with three people charged in the killing of a security guard who was shot on May 1 after asking a customer to wear a mask at a Family Dollar store in Flint.
Some people say they oppose any mask order on ideological grounds as government overreach; some find the masks uncomfortable, and some just get angry.
In one of the latest episodes, two men were arrested on Monday after a melee at a Target in Van Nuys, Calif., that left one employee with a broken arm.
In some places, including Ohio and Stillwater, Okla., the level of threats and anger prompted officials to rescind their orders, even though the C.D.C. recommends wearing face coverings in many instances to help slow the spread of the virus.
Though some may bristle at the imposition of wearing a mask, confrontations driven by the concept of liberty are misguided, legal experts said, overlooking the fact that the guidelines are designed to protect the public.
“I never had a right to do something that could injure the health of my neighbors,” said Wendy Parmet, the director of the Center for Health Policy and Law at Northeastern University.
Recent flyovers by the Blue Angels to honor medical workers have drawn large crowds flouting social-distancing recommendations in New York, Philadelphia and Washington, D.C., causing the Navy to actively discourage Midwesterners from gathering to watch the spectacle over their skies on Tuesday.
The squad flew over Chicago, Detroit and Indianapolis, where many residents seemed to take that advice to heart, with social media filled with videos shot from backyards, apartments and parking lots. Still, there was some evidence of people clustering to stare at the skies.
Furloughed or laid-off immigrants could face deportation.
The lives of tens of thousands of foreign nationals on skilled-worker visas, such as H-1Bs, have been upended by the economic fallout of the pandemic. Many have been waiting in a backlog for several years to obtain permanent legal residency through their employer. Now, they face the prospect of swift deportation if they are furloughed or laid off from their jobs.
The Trump administration is expected within the next few weeks to halt the issuance of new H-1Bs and the H-2B, the visa for seasonal employment. The new measures under review, according to two current and two former government immigration officials, would also eliminate a program that enables foreign graduates of American universities to remain in the country and work.
The tightening work rules come as unemployment in the U.S. soared last month to 14.7 percent, the highest level on record, and as calls escalated in Congress for Americans to be given priority for jobs.
“Given the extreme lack of available jobs for American job-seekers as portions of our economy begin to reopen, it defies common sense to admit additional foreign guest workers to compete for such limited employment,” a group of Republican senators said this week in a letter calling for a suspension of new visas to guest workers who have not yet entered the country.
Watch their story: 30 pastors in Georgia have united to keep their churches closed.
Churches in Albany, Ga., have been devastated by the coronavirus. As the state reopens, pastors are uniting to keep people home.
Albany, a city of 75,000 in southwest Georgia, emerged as a virus hot spot after a pair of funerals led to hundreds of cases. In response to a push by Gov. Brian Kemp, a Republican, to reopen the state, pastors across Albany have united to keep their doors closed.
Mr. Burton is on a mission to keep people at home, through door-to-door visits and online sermons. He has joined a coalition of about 30 pastors who have decided to keep their churches closed out of fears that they will be hit with a second wave of the virus.
Their effort is backed by the city’s elected leaders — who passed a resolution encouraging people to continue staying at home — and by doctors at Phoebe Putney Memorial Hospital, the only hospital in the Albany region.
“It could happen again in a heartbeat,” said Dr. James Black, the head of the emergency department at the hospital.
About 100 children in New York are believed to have a rare illness tied to the virus.
New York State health officials are investigating about 100 cases of a rare and dangerous inflammatory syndrome that afflicts children and appears to be connected to the virus, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Tuesday.
So far, three deaths in the state have been linked to the illness, which is known as pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome and causes life-threatening inflammation in critical organs, he said.
More than half of the state’s pediatric inflammatory syndrome cases — 57 percent — involved children ages 5 to 14.
The dead included a 5-year-old boy who died last week in New York City, a 7-year-old boy and an 18-year-old girl, Mr. Cuomo said.
Mayor Bill de Blasio said that 52 cases of the syndrome had been reported in New York City, with 10 potential cases also being evaluated.
The pediatric illness began to appear in the region in recent weeks, and doctors and researchers are investigating how and why it affects children. Connecticut reported its first cases on Monday. As of Tuesday, six children in the state were being treated for the ailment, officials said. As of Monday, health officials in New Jersey said they were investigating eight potential cases of the syndrome.
California’s community college system sues the Education Department over relief to undocumented students.
California’s system of community colleges has sued the Education Department, seeking to overturn guidelines issued by Education Secretary Betsy DeVos that would deny virus relief to undocumented students, including those under federal protection who are known as Dreamers.
The lawsuit, which was filed on Monday, says that Ms. DeVos’s guidance about distributing more than $6 billion in emergency relief for students was in violation of the intent of Congress.
The guidance was issued by the department last month, after Congress passed the $2 trillion CARES Act to help Americans recoup financial damages caused by the pandemic.
The Education Department said that only students who were eligible for federal financial aid could share in the $6.25 billion pot — a restriction that effectively excludes more than half of the 1.5 million students enrolled in California’s 115 community colleges for the spring semester, said Eloy Ortiz Oakley, the system’s chancellor.
Among them, Mr. Oakley said in a statement, are veterans, citizens who never completed a financial aid application, students who lacked high school diplomas and some 70,000 undocumented students.
House Democrats propose $3 trillion in new relief; Senate Republicans immediately reject it.
House Democrats on Tuesday unveiled a $3 trillion pandemic relief measure, an ambitious package with aid for struggling states and another round of direct payments to Americans that Republicans instantly dismissed as an exorbitantly priced and overreaching response to the coronavirus crisis.
The proposal, which spanned 1,815 pages, would add a fifth installment to an already sweeping assistance effort from the federal government, although its cost totaled more than the four previous measures combined. And unlike those packages, which were the product of intense bipartisan negotiations among lawmakers and administration officials who agreed generally on the need for rapid and robust action, the House bill represents an opening gambit in what is likely to be a bracing fight over what is needed to counter the public health and economic tolls of the pandemic.
It included nearly $1 trillion for state, local and tribal governments and territories, an extension of unemployment benefits and another round of $1,200 direct payments to American families. The measure would also provide a $25 billion bailout for the Postal Service and $3.6 billion to bolster election security.
Senate Republicans immediately rejected the measure.
Stocks on Wall Street drift after a mixed day in global markets.
U.S. stocks were flat and global markets mixed on Tuesday as reports from China, South Korea and the United States offered sobering reminders to investors of how long and difficult the coronavirus recovery is likely to be.
The S&P 500 rose about half a percent in early trading before paring gains. European markets were broadly higher after a drop in the Asia-Pacific region.
The U.S. government also released fresh data on consumer prices that showed that the Labor Department’s index fell 0.8 percent in April, the largest monthly decline since December 2008. The index was weighed down by the collapse in oil prices as airlines canceled flights and drivers stayed home.
Oil prices rose slightly on Tuesday, after Saudi Arabia said it had instructed Saudi Aramco, the world’s largest oil company, to deepen production cuts to help with the world’s glut of crude. Brent, the international benchmark, was up about 1 percent to over $30 a barrel. West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. standard, was up more than 4 percent to a little over $25.60 a barrel.
There is always room for a little bit of nature indoors, no matter how small your space is. And if all else fails, opt for some fake plants. Here are some tips if you want to add a splash of green to your surroundings.
Officials in Wuhan, China — where the virus emerged last year — ordered that all residents be tested after six new cases were found.
Reporting was contributed by Tim Arango, Alan Blinder, Quoctrung Bui, Nicholas Casey, Catie Edmondson, Thomas Fuller, Michael Gold, Maggie Haberman, Anemona Hartocollis, Shawn Hubler, Miriam Jordan, Sheila Kaplan, Annie Karni, Josh Katz, Neil MacFarquhar, Alicia Parlapiano, Michael Paulson, Robin Pogrebin, Linda Qiu, Alan Rappeport, Margot Sanger-Katz, Marc Santora, Noam Scheiber, Michael D. Shear, Liam Stack, Matt Stevens, Sheryl Gay Stolberg, Eileen Sullivan, Vanessa Swales, Katie Thomas, Neil Vigdor, David Waldstein and Noah Weiland.