The outcome left the United States isolated as officials from China, Russia and the European Union chided Mr. Trump over his heated threats.
WASHINGTON — President Trump’s angry demands for punitive action against the World Health Organization were rebuffed on Tuesday by the organization’s other member nations, which decided instead to conduct an “impartial, independent” examination of the W.H.O.’s response to the coronavirus pandemic.
In a four-page letter late Monday, Mr. Trump had threatened to permanently cut off United States funding of the W.H.O. unless it committed to “major, substantive improvements” within 30 days. It was a major escalation of his repeated attempts to blame the W.H.O. and China for the spread of the virus and deflect responsibility for his handling of a worldwide public health crisis that has killed more than 90,000 people in the United States.
But representatives of the organization’s member nations rallied around the W.H.O. at its annual meeting in Geneva, largely ignoring Mr. Trump’s demand for an overhaul and calling for a global show of support in the face of a deadly pandemic.
Public health experts noted that Mr. Trump’s threats to withdraw from the organization and halt funding ignored the reality that any such moves would require the consent of Congress, something many analysts said was unlikely.
But the president’s continued attacks on the W.H.O., experts said, threatened to hobble the organization at a critical moment and seriously damage international efforts to combat the virus, especially in poorer countries that depend heavily on the agency.
In a statement, the White House sought to claim victory, suggesting that the resolution amounted to a mandate to investigate Mr. Trump’s concerns about the origins of the virus.
“As the source of the outbreak, China has a special responsibility to pay more and to give more,” John Ullyot, a spokesman for Mr. Trump’s National Security Council, said in a statement before the meeting.
The president accuses the global health group of failing to act quickly and aggressively enough against the virus, in effect denouncing the organization for the very missteps and failures that have been leveled at him and his administration. Public health experts have said the president’s public denials of the virus’s dangers slowed the American response, which included delayed testing and a failure to stockpile protective gear.
Foreign policy experts said Mr. Trump’s attacks on the W.H.O. provided a strategic opening for China, which announced on Monday that it would spend $2 billion in the global fight against the pandemic, and served mainly to undercut the interests of the United States by angering its closest allies.
Mr. Trump’s criticism about the W.H.O.’s coziness with China was particularly ironic given his praise for the country early in the pandemic, when he was trying to complete negotiations on a trade deal.
But in a statement Tuesday morning, The Lancet pointed out that the journal “published no report in December 2019 referring to a virus or outbreak in Wuhan or anywhere else in China.” The journal said its first reports about the virus were published on Jan. 24, just six days before the W.H.O. declared an international emergency.
Mr. Trump’s attacks on the W.H.O. are at the center of the president’s appeal to his core supporters — a message that his political advisers intend to highlight as Mr. Trump fights for a second term this November. To many of the president’s supporters, the W.H.O. and other international organizations are to blame for lost jobs, low wages and economic uncertainty.
And as Mr. Trump seeks re-election, he will need to convince a broad part of the electorate that he is not responsible for the tens of thousands of deaths and economic calamity caused by the virus. Creating enemies out of the W.H.O. and the Chinese government could be an effective way of blunting what is sure to be fierce criticism from Democrats this fall about his handling of the pandemic.
The W.H.O. resolution approved on Tuesday did not provide specific direction to investigate one of Mr. Trump’s central allegations against the global health group: that it was too credulous in believing China’s assertions about the virus and its leaders’ denials that it was not created in a Chinese lab.
Scientists who have studied the genetics of the virus say that the overwhelming probability is that it leapt from animal to human in a non-laboratory setting, as was the case with H.I.V., Ebola and SARS.
China did not object to the resolution, but Mr. Xi said on Monday that any such inquiry should wait until the health crisis is brought under control.
In a closing statement on Tuesday that marked the end of the two-day assembly, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the director general of the W.H.O., reiterated his support for an investigation into the organization’s handling of its response to the virus and highlighted the need for cooperation.
Michael D. Shear reported from Washington, and Andrew Jacobs from New York.