Unfortunately, the virus doesn’t care about political spin.
On Tuesday, the U.S. government’s top experts warned that Covid-19 was by no means under control, and that premature easing of social distancing could have disastrous consequences. As far as I can tell, their view is shared by almost all epidemiologists.
Indeed, virus trutherism — insisting that Covid-19 deaths are greatly exaggerated and may reflect a vast medical conspiracy — is already widespread on the right. We can expect to see much more of it in the months ahead.
As many people have pointed out, the emerging right-wing strategy for dealing with this pandemic — or, more accurately, not dealing with it — closely follows the Republican Party’s longstanding approach to climate change: It’s not happening, it’s a hoax perpetrated by liberal scientists, and besides, doing anything about it would destroy the economy.
Indeed, the antilockdown demonstrations of recent weeks appear to have been organized in part by the same people and groups that have spent decades denying climate change.
But making false claims about the Obama-era economy didn’t come with any political price. Neither, sadly, has climate-change denial: The consequences of that denial unfold too slowly for voters to focus on the immense damage it will do over time.
In fact, in some ways that has already happened. Thanks to the rally-around-the-flag effect, many world leaders saw their approval ratings soar as the seriousness of the Covid-19 crisis became apparent; Trump, who spent many weeks in denial, saw only a slight bump, which has now receded. Within the United States, governors who have taken tough measures to control the pandemic have been rewarded with very high approval, while those who minimized the threat and are pushing to reopen fare much worse.
Now imagine the blowback — especially, by the way, among senior citizens — if an attempt to restart the economy leads to a new wave of infections.
One answer is that thousands of Americans may be about to die for the Dow. We know that Trump is obsessed with the stock market, and his long refusal to take Covid-19 seriously reportedly had a lot to do with his belief that doing otherwise would hurt stock prices. He may now believe that pretending that the crisis is over will boost stocks, and that that’s all that matters.
Another answer is that Republicans may actually believe that the gun-waving, red-hatted anti-social-distancing demonstrators represent the “real America.” And there are indeed Americans who fly into a rage when asked to bear any inconvenience on behalf of the public good. Polls suggest that they’re a small minority, but the G.O.P. may consider such polls fake news.
But the G.O.P. doesn’t like experts, and it doesn’t have policy ideas beyond tax cuts and deregulation. So it doesn’t know how to respond to crises that don’t fit its usual agenda. Trump, in particular, can do policy theater — sending Jared Kushner out to make noises about dealing with problems — but has no idea how to do it for real.
Given this sense of inadequacy, it was probably foreordained that Trump and his allies, after a brief period of seeming to take Covid-19 seriously, would pivot back to insisting that everything is fine. And they may, for a while, even convince some voters. But the coronavirus, which doesn’t care about political spin, will have the last word.