A sample taken on Dec. 27 from a French patient with pneumonia has tested positive for coronavirus, nearly a month before the disease was first officially acknowledged to have emerged in France.
PARIS — Weeks before Chinese authorities acknowledged that the coronavirus could be transmitted by humans, and nearly a month before the first officially recorded cases in Europe, a 42-year-old fishmonger showed up at a hospital in suburban Paris coughing, feverish and having trouble breathing. It was Dec. 27.
The French government says it is looking at the report. The doctors who made the finding said that they are confident in it, and that they tested the patient’s old sample twice to avoid false positives. But they acknowledged that they could not completely rule out that possibility.
That, in turn, would help explain the rapidly developing catastrophe that has since unfurled in France and Europe. There have been thousands of cases, hospitalizations and deaths, in numbers that only in recent weeks have begun to abate somewhat, as a result of the French government’s rigid confinement measures.
France alone has recorded over 25,000 coronavirus deaths.
“If confirmed, what this case does highlight is the speed at which an infection starting in a seemingly remote part of the world, can quickly seed infections elsewhere,” said Prof. Rowland Kao, the Sir Timothy O’Shea Professor of Veterinary Epidemiology and Data Science at the University of Edinburgh, in an interview for Britain’s Science Media Centre.
What is not clear is how the patient, Mr. Hammar, got it. Apart from a trip to Algeria last summer, he had not traveled. His wife, however, briefly exhibited some of the symptoms — coughing, principally — of the coronavirus, Dr. Cohen said.
Mr. Hammar’s wife, Fatiha, who works in a supermarket near Charles de Gaulle airport in Paris, told French television this week that she serves customers who come directly from the airport, “with their suitcases,” she said.
Mr. Alizon said it was common for epidemics imported from abroad into a given country to undergo several false starts, with transmission chains that died down on their own before one of the imported cases led to an actual epidemic.
Dr. Olivier Bouchaud, an infectious disease specialist at the same hospital as Dr. Cohen, told the LCI news channel on Tuesday that it was common to keep frozen samples from patients with lung infections for later testing.
“It isn’t very surprising,” Dr. Bouchaud said of the Dec. 27 positive case, noting that in China the virus also circulated under the radar for weeks before the first official cases were detected.
“We never really know when an epidemic starts,” Mr. Keck said.
Mr. Hammar, who lives in Bobigny, a northern suburb of Paris, said in an interview with BFM TV that he drove himself to the emergency ward at 5 a.m. on Dec. 27 after several days of coughing, difficulty breathing and chest pains.
Mr. Hammar, who has a history of asthma and diabetes, was diagnosed with a pulmonary infection but quickly recovered and was discharged two days later.
“I was surprised, given the devastation that the illness is causing,” Mr. Hammar said of learning, months later, that he had been tested positive for Covid-19.
