David Eric Lambert, 40, lurked in stores and followed women around, pointing his phone at their breasts and buttocks, but because he was in public, he committed no crime, an appeals court concluded.
He followed women around a Dollar Tree, a Hobby Lobby and a Walmart, each time holding a camera clearly trained on their breasts or buttocks, Tennessee prosecutors said.
At one store, David Eric Lambert also pinched a woman’s buttocks, according to court documents.
He later told detectives he knew his actions were wrong.
“I am very sorry for all of this and want the women I videoed to know I never meant any harm and I apologize for my actions,” Mr. Lambert told the Kingsport, Tenn., police in 2016. Over the next two years he was convicted in Sullivan County of unlawful photography and attempted sexual battery.
But late last month, three separate Tennessee appeals court judges, all men, threw out all three of Mr. Lambert’s convictions for unlawful photography and dismissed the charges. They concluded that even if the evidence were clear that Mr. Lambert had filmed the women, his actions would not have been illegal because the women were in public places. The conviction for attempted battery was affirmed.
William B. Harper, a prosecutor with the Sullivan County District Attorney’s Office, said his office was discussing whether to appeal the decision to the State Supreme Court, a call that is ultimately the Tennessee attorney general’s to make.
Lesley Anne Tiller, who represented Mr. Lambert, 40, during one of his trials and his appellate case, said the juries were never shown any of the actual photos or videos of the women.
“All the state ever had was speculation that he may have taken a photo,” she said on Tuesday.
During the trials, the women said that Mr. Lambert appeared to be filming or photographing them.
In his appeal, Mr. Lambert argued that his statement to the police, which was not recorded, should not have been admitted at trial because it was a general admission of “filming women,” not a specific confession about the incidents at three stores.
Mr. Harper said his office was discussing how to tighten that law even further to say that people do not need to prove they had an expectation of privacy to show an unlawful photograph was taken of them.
“If you’re taking a picture of someone’s intimate parts, that’s not something that society is willing to accept,” he said.
At separate trials, all three women testified to how uncomfortable Mr. Lambert had made them feel.
Ms. Grizzel testified that at the Dollar Tree, he followed her around with a “really creepy grin,” came within a foot of her and filmed her buttocks. He then pinched them and made a lewd comment.
The trial court judge noted that “even if you’re in public, you’ve got an expectation of privacy that you’re not going to be photographed or filmed in your crotch or your rear end or your breasts.” Mr. Lambert, who had a history of convictions for misdemeanors including masturbating in public, was sentenced to more than three and a half years.
In his statement to the police, Mr. Lambert said he had begun videotaping women in public after his father died of cancer.
He argued that prosecutors were unable to prove that the photographs were taken to offend the women or for sexual arousal or gratification.
He also argued that “the victim could not have had any reasonable expectation of privacy in any of the locations where photographs were allegedly taken,” according to one of the rulings.
Prosecutors pointed to Mr. Lambert’s statements to the police in which he said he knew he had “crossed moral boundaries” and admitted he had a problem that required treatment.
This, prosecutors argued, “was indicative of motive, intent and sexual gratification,” according to one of the rulings.
The appeals court agreed with Mr. Lambert.
