The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have advised health professionals to be on the lookout for medical bias.
Long dissatisfied with the doctor treating his diabetes, Reginald Relf decided to fight through whatever was causing his nagging cough. But then his temperature spiked and his breathing became so labored that he reluctantly took his sister’s advice to visit a doctor.
The staff at an urgent care clinic in suburban Chicago sent him home, without testing him for Covid-19 but after advising him to quarantine.
So Mr. Relf, a 50-year-old African-American engineer, settled into his mother’s basement. A week later, after he was found dead, his sister, Ami Relf, was left shaken.
The coronavirus has left tens of thousands of grief-stricken American families struggling to make sense of the seemingly random terror it inflicts, sickening many but only taking some lives.
But for many black families, mourning coronavirus deaths brings an added burden as they wonder whether racial bias may have played a role.
Decades of research shows that black patients receive inferior medical care to white patients. A long history of experimentation, exploitation and mistreatment has left many African-Americans deeply suspicious of the medical establishment. Now comes Covid-19, and the fear among many families, social scientists and public health experts that racial bias might be contributing to the disproportionately high rate at which the novel coronavirus is killing African-Americans.
Acknowledging a history of implicit bias in medical care, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently advised health care professionals to be careful not to let bias influence their treatment during this pandemic.
Preliminary research by a Boston-based biotech firm suggests that treatment may not be consistent across the board. The study found that black people who visited hospitals with Covid-19 symptoms in February and March were less likely to get tested or treated than white patients.
Americans of all races may have experienced less than ideal care in recent months in an overwhelmed health care system, and it is not uncommon to hear stories of people who visited health professionals for treatment, only to be turned away.
But African-American patients enter the health care system with distinct disadvantages, experts say. There is less access to quality health care in many black communities, research shows, and black people are more likely to suffer from diabetes, hypertension and other underlying conditions that make Covid-19 particularly fatal.
So, should providers misinterpret or ignore coronavirus symptoms in black patients, there is a higher likelihood that the results could be grave, experts say.
The country’s largest professional organization representing black doctors is calling on federal health agencies to study the role bias may have played in the testing and treatment of African-Americans for Covid-19.
“I think what we will find is race is a factor,” said Dr. Oliver Brooks, president of the organization, the National Medical Association.
In previous studies, doctors have been found to have downplayed African-Americans’ complaints of pain, given them weaker pain medication for broken bones and withheld cardiac treatments from black patients who needed them. Research suggests that the decisions are the result of ingrained assumptions, cultural ignorance and hostile attitudes toward African-Americans.
When Ms. Relf made an appointment for her brother at the Loyola Center for Immediate Care in River Forest, Ill., in late March, she said she was hopeful that the clinic would be able to test and treat him for the coronavirus. He had become extremely lethargic with persistent coughs and chills, she said.
Before Mr. Relf left the clinic, he called his sister complaining that the staff would not test him because he did not have a fever. He sounded defeated, Ms. Relf said.
Listen to ‘The Daily’: Why Is the Pandemic Killing So Many Black Americans?
 My colleague, Times Magazine writer Linda Villarosa, on the myth of the pandemic as the great equalizer.
It’s Wednesday, May 20.
Hello. Hi, my name’s Linda Villarosa. I’m from The New York Times Magazine.
How are you, Miss Linda?
I’m OK. How are you?
I’m just OK, too.
Yeah. I think we should just accept that we’re, like, OK. And listen, I’m — I’ve been hearing stories about your husband all morning and, you know, wish I had gotten to meet him. What a wonderful person he sounds like.
Oh, yes he was. That’s what he was.
Linda, tell me about Cornell Charles.
Cornell Charles, who goes by the nickname Dickey, was born and raised in New Orleans. He still lived in the house where he grew up. He was a family man who had two daughters. He was married for decades to Nicole Charles, his wife, who I got to speak to recently.
My husband loved to cook. Every Sunday my husband would cook — you would think he was cooking for the military.
Dickey was the king of the kitchen. Every Sunday after church, friends and family gathered at Nicole and Dickey’s house.
You didn’t have to have an invite to come in. Everybody knew it — I want to eat something, I’m going by Cornell and Nicole’s.
People knew you could just go there. The door was open.
And what were his best dishes?
Oh, my god, Miss Linda. His gumbo was number one. He was definitely a seafood boiler.
He cooked seafood. He cooked gumbo.
He also was a master of spaghetti salad.
He also made meatballs.
He would cook meatballs the size of a baseball. So everybody would call them miniature meatloaves, because they were so big.
And as a community man, he was also part of this club called the Zulu Club.
Tell me about what the Zulu group meant to your husband.
It was — let met see how I can — it was in his blood. If I can — that kind of sums it up.
And what is the Zulu Club?
So the Zulu Club is an organization of mostly black men in New Orleans.
He first got involved in Zulu in around 2004. My dad was Zulu governor that year. And my husband began to deal with Zulu.
And it was started in 1909. Black people were still reeling from the end of slavery. And also, it was during the years of Jim Crow, when black people and other people couldn’t afford funerals. And so the Zulu Club members came together to pool their money together to bury their dead in a dignified manner.
He was passionate about it. And he would give his all. Zulu was definitely something he enjoyed. It was a respectable organization of men.
The King of Zulu.
It’s the symbol of black New Orleans. And it involves festivals, and balls, and all kinds of different events.
The event that Dickey Charles was the most involved with was the Governor’s Ball. And there were thousands of people at that event. It’s a party. People bring their own food. You have to wear formal clothes or else you can’t get in. People are elbow to elbow. They’re dancing. And it lasts all night. It’s really fun.
But as this was happening, behind the scenes coronavirus was also building.
He came home from work.
10 days after Mardi Gras ended, Dickey Charles didn’t feel well.
So that was March 14.
They checked him in to the hospital, and by the following day, it was clear that something was wrong.
Sunday, when the medical doctor came in, she said, I want you to see the chest X-rays. So I said OK. She put it up on the screen. She said, “Well, you see where his left lung is clear?” Left lung is fine. She said, “But you see this little cloud over his right lung?” I said, yes, ma’am. She said, well, this could be pneumonia. But she said, “But I’m going to start him on some antibiotics. In case that’s what it is, I want to beat it.” In a matter of hours — in a matter of hours, they come back, and they tell me how bad his lungs are.
And that was a clue that they needed to test him for the coronavirus, even though it would take 10 days for the results to come back.
I was like, he really is — my husband really is sick, which I didn’t realize it was to that extent. If they’re telling me he needs to be on a ventilator. I don’t want to say no and not give him a chance. Do you know what I’m saying?
So I’m like, OK. All right, let’s do it.
So for the next three days, Nicole was at the hospital. Dickey’s on the ventilator. He was in a coma-like state, so he’s not responding.
What were you saying to him?
Oh, my god, how much I love him. I miss him. You know, pray. I need you to pray. You know, I was telling him, “You may not can speak, but God can hear your prayer.” And that was basically my conversation for him every day in I.C.U. You know, and we would listen to gospel music. I would pray for him anyway. And I was in the midst of praying for him — which is what I did all the time. I would touch him from his head to his toe, and I would pray over his body. I was at his feet, and I was coming back up towards his head, and he opened his eyes for me.
And that was the last time I saw my husband with his eyes open.
I kept talking to him and just — telling him how much we loved him. And how much we’re going to miss him.  He looked really, really peaceful. He did. Yes.
He died that afternoon. And he was only 51 years old.
The next day, as Nicole was grieving, she finally got the results of Dickey’s Covid test and found out that, yes, he was positive. He did die of the coronavirus.
The phone calls that I have gotten from Zulu members have been overwhelming. They have reached out via text, via phone call, sending cards. It’s just so much, you know Miss Linda, and I didn’t realize the magnitude of the people my husband touched until his passing.
And I’ve gotten so many phone calls to tell me, you know, he motivated me to do this, or he encouraged me to do that, or he was my mentor. I mean, I can just stand so proud and say he was my husband. I can stand tall and just brag that that was my husband, you know what I mean?
It’s so funny, because being his wife, and as much as he used to go — and when I say “go,” he went with a purpose. Baby, I’m going to — I’ve got to go practice this team at this time. I have to practice this team at that time. When I leave there, I have to go to this meeting, or whatever, whatever.
And to realize what his purpose was now gives me such a sense of joy.
Well, Since Mardi Gras Day, it has been a devastating couple of weeks for Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club.
But he wasn’t the only member of the Zulu Club to get sick.
Several of their members tested positive for coronavirus.
At the time I finished my reporting, 30 members of the Zulu Club had been infected with the virus, and of those 30, eight had died.
I looked at the Facebook page yesterday and saw that on May 4 another one of them died.
Linda, what did you, and what did the members of the Zulu Club, make of the number of members who were dying?
Nationwide, cities have been releasing Covid-19 data showing racial disparities in diagnosis and in death.
It confirmed what many in public health knew.
Those numbers show a disturbing trend.
But it was still very scary.
Black people are dying at a much higher rate than any other race right now.
Of the more than 500 people whose final breaths were stolen by this disease, the state says that more than two thirds of them were black.
Black people comprise 30 percent of the population but 70 percent of those who have died of Covid. Then other states started to roll out their data.
A thousand more cases of Covid-19 confirmed here in Illinois just today.
More than half of all cases in Chicago are in the African-American community.
38 percent of Missourians who died from Covid-19 were black, but African-Americans only make up 12 percent of Missouri’s population.
The reports are startling — in North Carolina, Connecticut, and Michigan, too.
So at that point, it begged the question why. Why was this killing so many black people? 
Linda, how do we explain this extraordinarily higher death rate in the black community from the coronavirus?
Everyone — everyone — is subject to this virus. It is the great equalizer.
People started saying, oh, Covid is the great equalizer, or, the virus doesn’t discriminate.
From the moment the coronavirus outbreak began, health officials have preached that Covid-19 doesn’t discriminate, that it’s an equal opportunity killer.
But those of us who have studied public health know that that wasn’t true. And in fact, we say it a different way. We say, when America sneezes the black community gets pneumonia. And for me, I’m really passionate about racial health disparities. I’ve been studying it for 30 years. I was a young editor at Essence magazine, and I started first writing about this. I’m writing a book about it now. And we have long known that all kinds of diseases do discriminate. It’s not equal.
And how does Covid-19 discriminate against black America?
Covid-19 is more serious in black Americans. So we’re more likely to be hospitalized, to have a serious case, and to also die from it. And there are three main reasons for this disparity.
OK. And what is the first of those reasons?
The first reason is simple. It’s proximity to the virus. Black Americans are more likely to be employed in essential jobs, in frontline jobs, in jobs where they are more commonly exposed to the virus itself.
I’m thinking of Dickey Charles. He continued working. He was a courier for a medical company. I think of the Zulu members. One of the men who died was a postal worker. He was a mail carrier. One was a police officer who contracted Covid.
Another was a security guard. And look, we don’t know whether these members of the Zulu Club contracted the virus at Mardi Gras or on their jobs. But we do know that the majority of black people in this country have jobs that put them at risk.
So that’s the first reason black Americans are dying at such disproportionate rates. The second factor is discrimination that is embedded in the health care system itself.
Linda, this is something you and I first talked about over a year ago when we did an episode of “The Daily” about black women and their mortality rates when giving birth. And you explained this concept that, essentially, racism — conscious or deeply unconscious — influences the kind of medical care delivered to black patients.
Yes. And I believe that it’s unconscious. And it’s not just white doctors, it’s also black doctors we — or doctors of other races. Because we all live in this society that has discrimination and racist images embedded in our culture. It’s baked in. Thousands of studies have shown over decades that black people get unequal treatment in our health care system.
I wonder if you can walk me through a scenario that people in public health say could or has happened when it comes to this pandemic that explains this.
Well, you can imagine being a health care provider, specifically being a physician, and you’re having to make life-or-death decisions — who should get tested? Who should be admitted to the hospital? Who needs to be put on a ventilator? Who needs to be taken off a ventilator?  Medical providers don’t go into medicine to harm people, but that harm may show up, especially during a very stressed out moment, which is the essence of this moment and coronavirus.
So, Linda, what is the third major factor here in why something like the coronavirus discriminates against black Americans?
So the third reason is that black Americans have more of the underlying conditions that make Covid-19 worse. Some of these are hypertension and heart disease, diabetes, stroke, and asthma. So if you have these underlying conditions, you’re more likely to be quite sick. That was the case with Dickey Charles. He had high blood pressure. He had diabetes. He had kidney disease. And that is also the case with so many other black Americans.
And why is that? Why is there such a disproportionate level of these pre-existing underlying conditions?
So at first glance, it seems like, well, if everyone just takes better care of themselves, you can avoid these kinds of conditions.
But that tilts toward a kind of irresponsibility among black people that really isn’t fair. So a study in early April found out that people who have been subjected to long term exposure to air pollution are more likely to have serious cases of Covid than people who don’t. And black people are more likely to live in areas that are polluted.
New Orleans is part of “cancer alley,” which is an 85-mile stretch along the highway in Louisiana where there’s the largest concentration of petrochemical factories in the country. 
And this is where the Zulus live. This is where Dickey Charles and Nicole Charles live. So the environment is one factor that drives the underlying conditions that black Americans are disproportionately more likely to face. But a second factor is the concept of weathering.
And weathering is the concept that racism takes a physical toll on the black body and leaves it more vulnerable to all kinds of illness.
That’s exactly right. And it’s best to think of it as a kind of accelerated aging. So adversity comes in the form of discrimination.
It could be discrimination in housing. It could be discrimination by police. It could be discrimination in employment. It could just be the stress of having to struggle every day. It changes the systems of the body at a cellular level. So if you are faced with a kind of adverse event, your blood pressure goes up, your heart rate goes up, your breathing becomes more rapid. And this is all part of the fight-or-flight syndrome. But it shouldn’t be made to happen over and over and over again.
But if you’re facing that kind of adversity, that’s what happens, and it wears away the body. It ages the body. So that would make sense why black people are more likely to have these kind of underlying conditions and why we get them at younger ages.
So, Linda, putting all of this together, all these factors, you have a black population at a higher risk of exposure, just given the nature of their work; a population that already has higher rates of underlying conditions; on top of that, there is this weathering phenomenon that deepens those conditions, literally seems to age this already-not-well, vulnerable body; and finally, a medical system inclined to undertreat these people when they come in to a hospital or a doctor’s office.
Yes. And that is what has created this perfect and terrible storm when it comes to the coronavirus and black people in America.
Linda, it sounds like the public health experts you talked to, that they knew these death rates, these infection rates, this kind of disproportionateness, was going to play out with this pandemic. And now that it has, how are they thinking about it?
I think this is a difficult moment, but it’s also a moment where a tragedy can be turned into something else. So those in public health have known that there are racial disparities in health. I mean, we’ve known since 1899 when W.E.B. Du Bois was calling it a crisis. And some of the people that I interviewed in my story have been studying this for decades and have added up the price. And so they’re hoping that now is a moment of reckoning to say, this is a horrible moment, please don’t turn away. Do something about this.
I’m curious what the government’s response to this pandemic, which is widely acknowledged, was slow, what that has meant for this particular group of Americans.
So the government’s slow and uncoordinated and confusing response hurt everyone. It hurt all Americans. It harmed us. But it hurt this group — black people, black Americans — worse. Because we were already more vulnerable to many of these health problems that make Covid-19 worse. And sometimes when I think of it, I think specifically about the men in the Zulu Club and how they were harmed by this federal response. And it had this terrible sad trickle-down effect to them on the ground.
Right. Well, how are members of the Zulu Club and their families doing at this point?
The entire group is reeling from what happened. I mean, they’re a brotherhood, so they’re trying to support and take care of each other. But they’re in pain.
And you’re good? You’re feeling OK?
I also checked in with Nicole, Dickey Charles’s wife, just to see how she was doing.
I’m feeling as good as I can be. God didn’t choose me, so I have to find a way to maneuver my new life.
This is a very hard time for her. She’s grieving this man that she was married to for three decades.
But it’s going to be a huge, huge adjustment. I tell people my life did a 180-degree turn within a matter of 10 days, you know.
And I sorely miss my husband. Out of 30 years, Miss Linda, I’ve never not slept next to him for longer than two days. In 30 years.
More than a week after Dickey Charles died, she arranged his funeral.
It was at their church. There were 10 people there — 10 family members and an organist.
It was also live streamed. Six hundred people tuned in. I tuned in.
(SINGING) Oh, I feel trust in the Lord.
I found it sad and hard, because I was thinking about someone like Dickey and many of the other Zulus would have gotten a different kind of sendoff. Would have gotten a second line funeral, where, you know, it happens in the street, and all those 600 people would be right there in person. People would be dressed up. There would be music.
And that is the legacy of the Zulu Club. It was formed to help people send off their dead in a graceful, in a respectful, in a dignified way, and in a way that celebrated their life.
Linda, thank you very much. We appreciate it.
Thank you. And please take care of yourself.
I will. I will. I will. Thank you so much. OK.
Here’s what else you need to know today. The death toll from the coronavirus in the U.S. has reached a new milestone, surpassing 90,000 people. Nearly a third of those deaths occurred in New York State. As of Tuesday, there have been more than 1.5 million infections across the U.S.
And a major new study found an unprecedented decline in global carbon emissions during the pandemic as demand for major sources of carbon dioxide, like flying and driving, have sharply declined. During March and April, carbon emissions fell by 1 billion tons or 17 percent, a decline that was cheered by those studying climate change. But scientists expect those emissions to rebound as economies around the world begin to reopen.
The clinic set up an appointment for him to see his regular doctor 11 days later. Mr. Relf never made it. One of his brothers went to check on him after he stopped answering his phone and found his lifeless body crumpled in front of a couch. A posthumous test confirmed that Mr. Relf had Covid-19.
It is difficult to know if any individual medical decision was affected by bias.
A pilot study by Rubix Life Sciences, the biotech research firm, compared the severity of Covid-19 symptoms exhibited by more than 27,000 patients during hospital visits in seven states with the treatment they received.
The study, which has not gone through peer review, showed that black patients were six times less likely to get treatment or testing than white patients, said Reginald Swift, the founder of Rubix.
Gary Fowler’s family believes that the minimizing of his symptoms by doctors ultimately cost him his life.
Mr. Fowler, 56, who is black, had developed a deep, worrying cough, a fever and labored breathing, said one of his sons, Keith Gambrell. Over the course of five days, Mr. Fowler was sent home by three hospitals in metro Detroit, Mr. Gambrell said. A week later, Mr. Fowler died sitting in a blue recliner in his bedroom. He tested positive for the coronavirus after his death.
The three hospitals where his family said he sought care disagreed with the family’s account. A spokesman from one of the hospitals, Detroit Receiving Hospital, said, “there is no record of this individual coming to Detroit Receiving Hospital for any type of treatment.” The other two hospitals disputed that Mr. Fowler was denied care.
Mr. Fowler’s death added to the grim tally of deaths in Detroit, a city with a majority African-American population that has come to tragically symbolize the virus’s devastation of black America.
Kaila Corrothers believed that her mother, Deborah Gatewood, did not have to be part of that tally.
Ms. Gatewood, 63, developed a high fever in mid March. But in four visits over six days, she was sent home with nothing more than Tylenol and cough medicine from the suburban Detroit hospital where she worked as a phlebotomist for 31 years, her daughter said.
Days after that last visit, Ms. Gatewood became so weak at home that her daughter insisted she go to the hospital again.
“No, they’re not going to take me,” Ms. Corrothers recalled her mother saying.
But Ms. Gatewood collapsed and an ambulance rushed her to a different hospital, where she tested positive for the coronavirus and was placed on a ventilator.
On April 17, three weeks after being admitted, her heart, kidney and lungs failed, and she died.
Ms. Corrothers said she could not say whether the fact that her mother was African-American played a role in her treatment.
In her visits to the emergency room of her employer, Beaumont Hospital in Farmington Hills, Mich., Ms. Gatewood never presented with symptoms severe enough to warrant admission, a hospital spokesman said in a statement. Given the shortage of testing supplies, patients with mild symptoms were not tested and told to quarantine at home, but return if their condition deteriorated, the statement said.
The lack of resources in some hospitals and the overwhelming number of cases likely have played more of a role than bias in the negative outcomes for African-Americans, some public health experts said.
But, in another case that has raised concern of medical bias, the family of Robert Johnson Jr. cannot help but think that doctors could have done more for him.
He seemed to embody many coronavirus risk factors: 49 and black, he had diabetes, hypertension, a low-functioning kidney and a double amputation.
The day before Easter, he woke up too weak to leave his bed, eat, or tell his mother what precisely hurt.
The next morning, Mr. Johnson’s fever soared to 103.3 degrees. He was rushed to the emergency room at Yale New Haven Hospital. His mother, Gloria Johnson, 71, called the hospital hours later and was told her son had been given “the green light” to return home after receiving a chest X-ray that showed signs of pneumonia. The hospital did not test him for the coronavirus.
Ms. Johnson brought her son Easter dinner that night after his discharge. He had no appetite but she insisted he taste a few spoonfuls of yams. When she called the following morning to check on him, he didn’t answer.
She hurried to his apartment only to find him unresponsive in his bed. Ms. Johnson watched as emergency responders tried to revive him.
“I thought, ‘Oh my God, what if they had given him the Covid-19 test or even kept him overnight for observation? What would the outcome be?’” she said.
The medical examiner confirmed that Mr. Johnson had died of complications from the coronavirus and diabetes, Ms. Johnson said.
A spokesman for Yale New Haven Health said in a statement that they “understand the family’s concern.” The hospital was confident in the care provided to Mr. Johnson, but his case was under review, the spokesman said.
After Mr. Johnson’s burial in a graveside service in New Haven, his mother was preparing to have his old apartment packed and cleaned when she received one last call from the Yale hospital.
They were calling, she said, to schedule Mr. Johnson’s Covid-19 test.
