How can Trump opponents take on people who will stop at nothing?
Back in the other world, before all was stilled, a neighbor in Colorado would tell me it was time for liberals to “gun up.” The other side was armed, he argued, and would stop at nothing. What would we tell our grandchildren when Ivanka Trump took office as the 46th president of the United States in 2025 and term limits were abolished? That we tried words, all manner of them, he scoffed, but they had the rifles.
I waved him away. American democracy was not Hungarian democracy, now dead. Its checks and balances were resilient. Too many guns are an American scourge. No, he insisted, you will see by June 2020. Civil war, or something like it, is coming. Gun up, dude, before it’s too late.
My neighbor did not predict the uniforms of America’s warring factions. How masks would become normative in Democratic strongholds like Telluride or Ridgway but be scorned in Colorado Trump country as the giveaway dress of the liberal egghead terrorized by the virus. The responsible crowd, with face half-hidden, confronting the unmasked live-free-or-die crowd across the vastness and fracture of an unled country.
For Trump, this disaster is no more than a deep state conspiracy like the Mueller investigation or the impeachment proceedings. All of it: the virus death toll, surely inflated by officials as a means to defeat him; the dented Dow; the highest unemployment numbers since the Great Depression; the collapse of his “spectacular” economy; the dire scientific predictions of the consequences of premature economic reopening. It’s all about him because everything is.
Followers of Qanon, a far-right conspiracy movement, provide fodder for the president’s paranoia, as reported by my colleagues Matthew Rosenberg and Jim Rutenberg. I hear that the letter Q now appears on T-shirts at far-right protests in Germany. Signs at a recent demonstration in Stuttgart listed the “worst dictators” in history: Bill Gates followed by Angela Merkel and, down the list, Hitler.
Some German protesters wear yellow stars. They claim that Anne Frank would have been among them, protesting the “corona dictatorship” that unnecessarily shut down Europe’s largest economy. Christian Drosten, a top German virologist with a popular podcast, receives death threats, like Anthony Fauci, America’s top infectious disease expert. History, science, truth, the Enlightenment are under siege. Anything could happen in America between now and November.
I mean, anything. This month, Trump’s Department of Justice dropped charges against former national security adviser Michael Flynn, who had twice pleaded guilty to lying to federal investigators in the Russia inquiry. A more flagrant demonstration of Trump’s political cronies at the Department of Justice, led by Attorney General William Barr, bending to the president’s diktat rather than fulfilling their oath to the Constitution is hard to imagine. No wonder more than 2,000 former Department of Justice officials have called in a letter for Barr’s resignation. He is a disgrace.
