After the police broke up a demonstration in New York City on Sunday, activists expressed concern that safety orders were being used to curtail free speech.
But Ms. Northrop still showed up to a small protest on Sunday to criticize New York officials for allowing a religious organization that opposes gay rights to treat coronavirus patients. She felt safe, she said, because her fellow protesters wore face coverings and stood several feet apart.
The police, however, did not see it that way. Officers ordered the protesters at First Avenue and 16th Street to disband and gave Ms. Northrop a summons, saying the demonstrators had violated social distancing rules laid out in executive orders from the mayor and the governor.
“They are trying to shut down this message,” Ms. Northrop said into a microphone after the police arrived.
The episode highlighted a challenge for activists participating in traditional protests: how to gather, and draw attention, while keeping a safe distance from one another and onlookers?
Some civil rights lawyers fear that social distancing rules could also be used as an excuse to curtail free speech.
Similar issues have been raised with other recent protests across the country, many involving demonstrators who refuse to wear masks or to maintain social distancing.
In New York, enforcement has not been uniform. In early April, a handful of nurses gathered outside Harlem Hospital to protest a lack of personal protective equipment, standing six apart. In Albany, protesters have routinely gathered outside the capital to protest Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s refusal to open up New York’s economy without being told to disperse.
“So while we greatly, greatly respect the right of people to protest, there should not be protests taking place in the middle of a pandemic by gathering outside and putting people at risk,” he said on Monday.
Mayor Bill de Blasio also said on Monday that dispersing the protesters was necessary to protect lives.
The news conference and demonstration on Sunday took place near Mount Sinai Beth Israel hospital and lasted 15 minutes. It was organized by the Reclaim Pride Coalition, and members of a second group, Rise and Resist, also participated. About a dozen people took part.
They were criticizing the mayor, governor and Mount Sinai Health Systems for welcoming Samaritan’s Purse, a evangelical organization that had operated a field hospital in Central Park for Covid-19 patients, into New York.
The coronavirus outbreak has sickened more than 171,000 people in New York City and has killed at least 13,000 of them. To limit the spread of the disease, Mr. Cuomo and Mr. de Blasio have taken draconian steps, closing schools and “non-essential” businesses.
The governor also has ordered New York City’s subway system be closed for several hours each night for cleaning and to offer help to homeless people who have taken refuge in the transit system.
Mr. Cuomo also signed an executive order in late March banning “non-essential gatherings of individuals of any size for any reason.” Those included “parties, celebrations or other social events.” On March 25, Mr. de Blasio signed a similar order.
For activists like Bill Dobbs, an attorney and member of Reclaim Pride, the order to disperse was unconstitutional because people were allowed to be in the street as long as they remained six feet apart. “If people can move around on the sidewalk, the First Amendment in still intact,” he said.
Norman Siegel, a veteran civil rights lawyer, sent a letter Tuesday to Mr. Cuomo and Mr. de Blasio urging them to rescind parts of their executive orders that curtail news conferences and protests where participants wear face coverings and maintain appropriate distances.
In the letter, Mr. Siegel wrote that government officials “have a strong interest in protecting the health and safety of New Yorkers” but cannot constitutionally ban or suspend freedom of speech and assembly.
“This could set a very alarming trend around the country,” he said in an interview.
