The moves prompted accusations that President Trump’s allies were disclosing the information for his political benefit.
WASHINGTON — Republican senators on Wednesday released the names of some Obama administration officials who made requests during the presidential transition to see fuller versions of classified intelligence reports, immediately prompting accusations that President Trump’s allies were wielding the information for his political benefit.
The list compiles the names of officials who had inquired about the identity of an American in National Security Agency intelligence reports that initially concealed it, on those occasions when the masked name turned out to be that of Michael T. Flynn, then Mr. Trump’s incoming national security adviser.
The list did not say what the intelligence reports were about. They could have included surveillance of foreign officials who were talking about Mr. Flynn, as well as surveillance of intelligence targets who were picked up talking to him.
The list, recently declassified by the acting director of national intelligence, Richard Grenell, reads as who’s who of the top officials working at the time on Russia policy, sanctions and intelligence collection. Among them are John O. Brennan, the C.I.A. director; Samantha Power, the ambassador to the United Nations; James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national intelligence; James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director; and Douglas E. Lute, the American ambassador to NATO.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., Mr. Trump’s likely opponent in November’s election, was also on the list. He asked for the identity of someone who turned out to be Mr. Flynn on Jan. 12, 2017 — the day The Washington Post had published a column about Mr. Flynn’s calls with the Russian ambassador that were at the heart of the false-statements criminal case against him that Attorney General William P. Barr abruptly moved to drop last week despite his guilty plea.
Mr. Trump and his allies have intensified their assaults on the Justice Department’s Russia investigation in the days since Mr. Barr moved to end Mr. Flynn’s case. Some conservatives have sought to paint the inquiry and the so-called unmasking requests by Obama administration officials as part of an effort to undermine Mr. Trump while trying to ascertain how Russia was interfering in American politics.
Government rules intended to minimize invasions of Americans’ privacy in intelligence work generally require “masking,” or obscuring, Americans’ identities and information about them in reports based on foreign intelligence surveillance.
But the rules also permit recipients of such reports to request an unmasking if the identity is necessary to understand the information, and that step is routine: The National Security Agency handled about 10,000 unmasking requests in 2019 and nearly 17,000 in 2018.
His formulation elided that officials requesting an unmasking in an intelligence report generally cannot know who it will turn out to be at the time they make the request. They would have been asking to learn more about an intelligence report with a generic reference to an unnamed American.
The time frame included requests both before and after Mr. Flynn’s late December 2016 phone calls with the Russian ambassador to the United States at the time, Sergey I. Kislyak.
The list also includes the ambassador to Turkey. Mr. Flynn was separately of interest to Turkish officials, as he was being paid to lobby for the extradition of a cleric in Pennsylvania whom the Turkish government blamed for a coup. As part of Mr. Flynn’s now-scuttled plea deal, he also admitted lying in belatedly filed forms registering as a foreign agent for Turkey.
Under the rules, the National Security Agency had to agree that an American’s identity was necessary for understanding information before the agency would provide it. The unmasking requests that landed former officials on the list also may not all have turned out to be about Mr. Flynn specifically. One former intelligence official familiar with unmaskings said often requests come asking to be told all the identities in a particular report, which could reveal more than one American.
As part of their own look into Russian interference, Senate investigators reviewed the list and did not find that anyone had improperly sought access to the information, according to other officials.
Most of the requests that resulted in the revelation about Mr. Flynn’s identity came in early to mid-December, before his calls later in the month with Mr. Kislyak.
Unmasking is acceptable as long as it is used for national security purposes, said Michael Morell, a former acting C.I.A. director who now hosts a podcast.
Not all the officials on the list may have made the request directly, according to Mr. Morell. Sometimes an intelligence officer briefing a senior official makes the request, but those are logged as coming from the senior official.
The list could be incomplete because it appears to contain only requests to the National Security Agency. Some of Mr. Flynn’s conversations with Mr. Kislyak could have been intercepted by the F.B.I.