Gov. Murphy, in an interview with CNN, suggested that beaches would open by Memorial Day, subject to rules governing parks.
Murphy suggests N.J. beaches could open by summer.
Police commissioner denies bias in social-distancing enforcement.
102 children in N.Y. are thought to have a rare illness tied to the virus.
Another upstate N.Y. area can start a limited reopening.
Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey suggested late Wednesday that the state’s popular beaches, a major tourist draw, would open in a limited way by Memorial Day, the traditional start of summer.
Mr. Murphy, in an interview on CNN, said he planned to make an official announcement Thursday about the rules governing beach openings, but that they would resemble those put in place when officials reopened parks and golf courses two weeks ago after steady declines in new virus cases and hospitalizations.
“Folks should expect to see something of a similar vein as we did with county and state parks, which is mandating social distance, for sure, and finding some ways to limit capacity,” the governor said.
That beaches appeared set to open by summer was the second sign of progress on Wednesday for a state that has been ravaged by the coronavirus outbreak.
At a news briefing earlier, Mr. Murphy said that all retail stores in the state could begin curbside pickup on Monday and that nonessential construction could also resume.
“The data shows us we are ready for this step,” Mr. Murphy said at his daily news briefing.
Drive-in events for movies and religious gatherings will also be permitted starting Monday, but people must stay inside cars, the governor said. Those in convertibles must keep the tops up.
The state’s progress in containing the virus means that other types of businesses and activities might soon return to life, Mr. Murphy said. Officials could soon provide guidance on when elective surgeries might resume and how elections will proceed, he added.
The key, Mr. Murphy said, was to proceed with caution.
New York City’s top police official on Wednesday defended his department’s application of social-distancing rules after enforcement data and videos of recent arrests fueled complaints that black and Latino New Yorkers were being unfairly targeted.
Police Commissioner Dermot F. Shea disputed assertions by some elected officials and community leaders that the arrest data and videos showed a racist double standard for social distancing that was reminiscent of the “stop and frisk” policy.
Commissioner Shea, who, like Mr. de Blasio, had previously dismissed the comparison, said the videos were “incredibly disheartening” and that officers would be held accountable if investigations found that they had engaged in misconduct.
But he rejected the idea that the police were engaged in “racist policing,” saying the accusations “could not be anything further from the truth.” He noted that most of the city’s officers were not white and that overall arrests and summonses had dropped to low levels even before the pandemic hit.
Public defenders, community groups and several public officials have urged the mayor to curtail the department’s role in enforcing rules against large gatherings and people standing too close to one another.
The calls came after videos and photos surfaced showing some officers handing out masks to mostly white visitors in parks while others used force to arrest people in black and Hispanic neighborhoods.
The chorus grew louder after the police released data covering the past week that showed more than 90 percent of those who were arrested and 82 percent of those who received summonses for pandemic-related offenses were black or Hispanic.
Letitia James, New York’s attorney general, stepped into the fray on Wednesday, calling the disparities “deeply troubling” and warning they could deepen a divide between police officers and the people they are supposed to protect.
New York State health officials are investigating 102 cases of a rare and dangerous inflammatory syndrome that afflicts children and appears to be connected to the coronavirus, Mr. Cuomo said on Wednesday.
So far, three deaths in the state have been linked to the illness, which is known as pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome and causes life-threatening inflammation in critical organs, including the heart.
Of the cases being investigated by the state, 71 percent resulted in children being admitted to intensive care units, and 43 percent of patients remained hospitalized, Mr. Cuomo said.
The governor said that 60 percent of the children showing symptoms of the syndrome had tested positive for the virus; 40 percent had tested positive for antibodies.
Health officials believe the children may have been exposed to the virus weeks before they became sick, the governor said.
Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Wednesday that 82 cases of the syndrome had been reported in New York City, an increase of 30 since Tuesday.
In New Jersey, officials reported 18 cases of the syndrome in children on Wednesday, with four of them having tested positive for the virus. Connecticut officials said on Tuesday that they were investigating six cases of the illness.
A fourth region of upstate New York has now met the criteria to start gradually reopening, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Wednesday.
The North Country, the sparsely populated northern region of the state that includes the Adirondack Mountains, has now achieved the seven benchmarks required to partially reopen construction, manufacturing and curbside retail by Friday.
On Monday, Mr. Cuomo said three other regions — the Finger Lakes, including Rochester; the Southern Tier, which borders Pennsylvania; and the Mohawk Valley, west of Albany — could also take those steps.
The announcement that a fourth section of the state was poised to reopen came as Mr. Cuomo reported 166 new virus-related deaths, the third straight day the figure was under 200.
The number of new hospitalizations statewide has also continued to stay at the levels that preceded Mr. Cuomo’s statewide stay-at-home orders. The governor reported 416 new virus-related hospitalizations and 2,176 new confirmed cases.
The governor’s emergency orders are set to expire on Friday, and he has focused on taking steps toward restarting New York’s battered and shuttered economy, including getting some residents back to work.
So far, New York has paid out $7.4 billion in unemployment benefits to 1.7 million New Yorkers since the start of the crisis, said Melissa De Rosa, a top aide to Mr. Cuomo.
The governor also announced that elective treatments and surgeries would be allowed to resume in parts of the state where hospital capacity was no longer needed.
Hospitals in and around New York City will still be closed to elective surgery, as will those in Erie County, which includes Buffalo and its suburbs, Mr. Cuomo said.
Polly Trottenberg, the city’s transportation commissioner, shared that sliver of good news on Tuesday at a City Council committee hearing about her department’s budget and capital plans.
According to a transcript of her prepared remarks, Ms. Trottenberg said there had not been a pedestrian death for 58 days and she linked the lack of fatalities to a decrease in traffic in that time, when many aspects of life in the city have been halted.
On Wednesday, a Transportation Department spokesman clarified that the 58-day stretch Ms. Trottenberg was referring to began March 14 — six days before Mr. Cuomo said the state would go on “pause” in an effort to slow the coronavirus’s spread and eight days before he required all nonessential businesses to close.
The period Ms. Trottenberg cited ran through Monday. A department spokeswoman said that no pedestrian deaths had been recorded on Tuesday, extending the streak to 59 days.
The Times has previously reported one data point that supports her statement: The city’s automated speed cameras issued 24,765 speeding tickets citywide on March 27, nearly double the 12,672 tickets in a day a month earlier.
City will cap app-based delivery services’ fees.
The New York City Council, throwing a lifeline to an industry decimated by the coronavirus outbreak and ensuing lockdown, voted on Wednesday to limit the fees that app-based services like Grubhub can charge restaurants for making deliveries.
In an emergency bill that was among several pandemic-relief measures on its agenda, the Council set a 5 percent cap on how much such services can collect from restaurants for taking orders and a 15 percent cap on delivery fees.
Grubhub and rivals like Doordash and Ubereats have previously reaped commissions of up to 30 percent on orders they fulfill and deliver, and restaurant owners had pushed for the fees to be reined in even before the virus outbreak.
Those calls grew more urgent as the business was reduced to takeout and delivery, increasing restaurants’ reliance on delivery services, squeezing already tight profit margins even further and leading to layoffs and closings.
Mark Gjonaj, a council member from the Bronx and a sponsor of the bill, said the relief was probably coming too late for some smaller restaurants.
The restrictions will be in effect as long as the current prohibition against on-premises dining is in place, and for up to three months after restaurants are allowed to begin serving patrons indoors again. Services that violate the restrictions face fines of up to $1,000 a day per restaurant.
John Collins, a spokesman for Grubhub, said the legislation was misguided and would hurt restaurants and delivery workers.
“Any arbitrary cap, regardless of the duration, will lower order volume to locally owned restaurants, increase costs for small business owners and raise costs on customers,” he said in a statement.
Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Tuesday that he supported the fee limits and would sign the bill including them once the Council approved it. The restrictions are expected to take effect about a week after the mayor signs the bill.
N.Y.C. is closing more streets to cars and creating new bike lanes.
New York City will ban traffic from nearly a dozen more miles of streets starting on Thursday, a move that comes as residents enticed by warm weather and weary of isolation have begun to flock outside in large numbers.
Worried that New Yorkers seeking fresh air would violate social-distancing guidelines, the city has been closing some streets to car traffic. They have also taken steps to limit crowds at popular parks in Brooklyn and Manhattan.
The city will open 7.6 miles of streets in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan and Queens, and 2.8 miles of streets adjacent to parks in Brooklyn, Manhattan and Queens and on Staten Island, Mr. de Blasio said at his daily news briefing on Wednesday.
An additional 1.3 miles will be opened in Brooklyn, Manhattan and Queens in partnership with community groups, he said.
Throughout May, 9.2 miles of additional protected bike lanes will be created in Brooklyn, Manhattan and Queens, Mr. de Blasio said. The first lane is set to open on Thursday, on Broadway in Manhattan.
A proposed coronavirus plan that would send $17 billion in federal aid to New York City and $34 billion to New York State over two years is “actually the kind of assistance that we need,” Mr. de Blasio said. The measure, which is backed by House Democrats, requires Senate approval, which is far from guaranteed.
Data shows that the city is reducing the spread of the virus, but the progress is still “not what we’re looking for,” the mayor said. Hospitals admitted 78 patients, up from 51 the day before; 561 patients were in intensive care units, up from 550.
A Brooklyn company shifts its focus to social distancing and contact tracing.
As dozens of workers reported to the New Lab building at the Brooklyn Navy Yard early this week, many chose to be outfitted with a device that, its creators hope, can be among the tools that help lift the economy.
The cellphone-size gadget, known as a FUSE Sensor, is worn around the chest via a fabric harness. It was invented by StrongArm Technologies, which is based at the Navy Yard, to help warehouse workers avoid injury by alerting them with buzzing sounds and flashing lights about possible hazards.
Amid the coronavirus pandemic, the company modified the device to help contain the virus’s spread in two ways.
First, when two people wearing sensors come closer than six feet from each other, the strobe lights flash, effectively enforcing social distancing.
The device was also rejiggered to track those with whom a wearer comes into contact on the job, the kind of information that is critical in tracing whom a sick person may have exposed to the virus.
“It’s a noninvasive way to keep you safe,” Sean Petterson, StrongArm’s chief executive, said.
The workers who opted to try the sensors on Tuesday visited a table filled with rows of the black devices mounted in charging stations. StrongArm workers in face masks handed out sensors, harnesses and fitting instructions.
Vlad Preoteasa, New Lab’s director of information technology, was among those who strapped on a sensor. He said that although he did not consider it a “security blanket,” he was eager to take part in a program that might benefit others.
The sensors can track not just whom a wearer came into contact with, but how close they came and for how long, as well as being able to pinpoint parts of a building that required a deep cleaning, said Shaun Stewart, New Lab’s chief executive.
Those who have been exposed are told privately by email, and an online dashboard that is widely viewable displays instances of exposure, anonymously.
Workers return the sensors when their shifts end.
Reporting was contributed by Maria Cramer, Michael Gold, Jeffery C. Mays, Jesse McKinley, Azi Paybarah, Nate Schweber, Ashley Southall, Matt Stevens and Nilo Tabrizy.