Gregory McMichael and Travis McMichael were arrested in connection with the killing of Mr. Arbery, which had led to protests in Georgia.
ATLANTA — The two white men who were seen on a widely shared video as one of them fatally shot Ahmaud Arbery, a 25-year-old black man, were arrested and charged on Thursday in connection with the shooting — two days after the graphic footage became public and more than two months after the killing itself.
The men, Gregory McMichael, 64, and his son Travis McMichael, 34, were each charged with murder and aggravated assault and booked into a jail in coastal Glynn County, Ga., where the killing took place, the Georgia Bureau of Investigation said.
Public pressure for an arrest intensified on Tuesday with the release of the video that showed Mr. Arbery running toward a truck, engaging in a struggle with a man holding a shotgun, and then falling to the ground.
The Georgia Bureau of Investigation, in a news release, stated that it was Travis McMichael who shot and killed Mr. Arbery on Feb. 23.
Mr. Arbery was killed in Satilla Shores, a quiet middle-class enclave about 15 minutes from downtown Brunswick and a short jog from Mr. Arbery’s neighborhood. His friends and family have said they believed that Mr. Arbery, who was wearing a white T-shirt, khaki shorts, Nike sneakers and a bandanna when he was killed, had been out exercising.
A police report said the McMichaels had grabbed two guns and followed Mr. Arbery in a truck after he ran past them. Gregory McMichael later told the police that Mr. Arbery looked like the suspect in a string of nearby break-ins.
The video of the shooting, taken from inside a vehicle, shows Mr. Arbery running along a shaded two-lane residential road when he comes upon a white truck, with a man standing beside its open driver’s-side door. Another man is in the bed of the pickup. Mr. Arbery runs around the truck and disappears briefly from view. Muffled shouting can be heard before Mr. Arbery emerges, tussling with the man outside the truck as three shotgun blasts echo.
The prosecutor, George E. Barnhill of Georgia’s Waycross Judicial Circuit, noted that the McMichaels were carrying their weapons legally under Georgia law. He also cited the state’s citizen’s arrest law, and the statute on self-defense.
Before the arrests, a protest organized by the local chapter of the N.A.A.C.P. had been scheduled for Friday morning — on what would have been Mr. Arbery’s 26th birthday — outside the courthouse in Brunswick, Ga. The hashtag #IRunWithMaud has also spread widely on social media, with celebrities and prominent activists pledging to join others on Friday by running 2.23 miles, marking the date when Mr. Arbery was fatally shot.
Gerald Griggs, the chapter’s vice president, said the rally would continue as planned.
S. Lee Merritt, a lawyer representing Mr. Arbery’s family, said that Mr. Arbery’s mother, Wanda Cooper, was grateful the police had made the arrests.
Rick Rojas contributed reporting from Atlanta and Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs from New York.