Annoyed by the city’s decision to keep its shoreline closed, officials in nearby areas are limiting beach access to keep outsiders at bay.
Since the coronavirus pandemic began, tensions have repeatedly flared over whether too many New York City residents have decamped to outlying vacation areas, potentially taking the virus with them. But now the region appears on the brink of a full-fledged (and nasty) battle over beaches, touched off by the city’s decision to keep its shoreline closed.
In normal times, the Memorial Day weekend start of beach season sparks a mass migration from the city to Long Island, the Jersey Shore and, to a lesser extent, Connecticut. But Mr. de Blasio’s delay in opening the city’s beaches for swimming — on Friday, his office suggested they could reopen in June — has led to a backlash from local officials in those areas.
The officials say they fear that their shorelines will be overwhelmed by an exodus of sun-starved New Yorkers blocked from their own beaches, which can in normal times attract a million people a day.
To maintain social distancing, beaches across the region are moving to limit access to everyone. On the Jersey Shore, some towns are reducing parking and keeping their iconic boardwalks closed, with seaside restaurants providing takeout and delivery service only. In Spring Lake, beachgoers must now buy daily beach badges in advance; nearby Asbury Park is limiting sales of beach badges and selling them only through an online app.
In Connecticut, state beaches are allowing people to gather in groups of five people or fewer, with 15 feet between beach blankets.
But special rules have also been adopted to keep outsiders away. Westchester County, just north of the city, has restricted its beaches at Playland in Rye and Croton Point Park to county residents. In Groton, Conn., only residents can use Eastern Point Beach on weekends and holidays.
The most sweeping rebuke of outsiders, however, seems to be coming from Long Island, many of whose beaches are convenient to New York City. Officials in Long Beach, whose oceanfront is particularly popular, said that turning away nonresidents was a “lifesaving” measure.
“It’s a shame Long Island has to turn away city beachgoers to protect its residents and ensure safe beaches, but until the mayor gets his act together and makes his own beaches safe, that’s the only responsible move,” said State Senator Todd Kaminsky, a Democrat on Long Island who helped lead the charge for such restrictions.
“As soon as New York City does the right thing, Long Island should welcome back its neighbors as long as safe volumes can be maintained,” he said.
“This isn’t about ‘ill feelings’ — there is reduced capacity,” Mr. Bellone tweeted.
Oyster Bay, Hempstead and Brookhaven, all on Long Island, have also moved to limit access. Farther east, the Town of East Hampton suspended the sale of nonresident parking permits and began enforcing summer beach parking regulations early this year.
These kinds of restrictions do not apply to state-run beaches like Jones Beach and Robert Moses State Park, mileslong expanses that Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced would be open to all, at a reduced capacity, starting on Friday.
Mr. de Blasio, however, has warned that opening the city’s 14 miles of public beaches may pose risks to the strict social-distancing rules that city health officials have credited with helping to ease the peak virus infection rates seen in April.
It is part of a difficult balance Mr. de Blasio has tried to strike between providing critical cooling options without squandering the city’s hard-fought gains in bringing case numbers down.
City lifeguards have been called into pools for their annual training and testing, said Henry Garrido of the lifeguards’ union, District Council 37. “They’re being trained to get ready to open the beach early in June,” Mr. Garrido said.
Laura Curran, the Nassau executive, has since had conciliatory discussions with Mr. de Blasio. Still, she signed a measure on Wednesday to restrict access to Nickerson Beach, just east of Long Beach — specifically until New York City beaches reopen.
The measure noted the need to “protect the health, safety and welfare” of residents from outsiders who could “crowd out access” at Nickerson.
Jane Meyer, a spokeswoman for the mayor, said Long Island would benefit from the city’s decision to keep its beaches closed for now. “The fate of our whole region rests on New York City’s ability to continue to drive down this virus,” she said.
The political back and forth continued with at least two city councilmen calling for retribution, suggesting sardonically that suburbanites be excluded from Manhattan events like SantaCon and the St. Patrick’s Day Parade and that New York City tax commuters.
Donovan Richards, a councilman who represents much of the Rockaways, noted that Queens had long welcomed the Long Islanders who park on city streets to go to Rockaway Beach.
“They come to our city and enjoy what our tax dollars pay for, and now we can’t go to their beaches?” he said.
New York City has had roughly 200,000 confirmed cases of the coronavirus and more than 20,000 deaths, a toll that exceeds those in most countries around the world.
Long Island has also been a hot spot in the outbreak, with roughly 78,000 cases and roughly 4,400 deaths.
The difficulty in keeping beachgoers out of the water was exemplified on Friday afternoon, when a 24-year-old man drowned in the ocean off Rockaway Beach while trying to swim.
Corey Johnson, the New York City Council speaker, said that not having lifeguards on duty would create dangerous situations at beaches.
