Being an astronaut’s wife thrust her into the spotlight, but a stutter left her struggling for words until she found help.
Annie Glenn, who in a high-profile life as the wife of John Glenn, the astronaut and senator, became an inspiration to many who, like her, stuttered severely, advocating on behalf of people with communication disorders of all kinds, died on Tuesday at a nursing home near St. Paul, Minn. She was 100.
Hank Wilson, director of communications at the John Glenn College of Public Affairs at the Ohio State University, said the cause was complications of the Covid-19 virus.
Mrs. Glenn, too, was thrust into the national spotlight in 1962, when Mr. Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth. At the time, though, speaking or even using the telephone was an agony for her because of her stutter.
But in 1973, in her 50s, she decided to address her stuttering by participating in a fluency-shaping program developed by Dr. Ronald Webster at Hollins College (now Hollins University) in Virginia.
She immersed herself in Dr. Webster’s intensive, three-week program. By the end of it, she said, she could do things that had been beyond her before, like go to a mall and comfortably ask a store clerk where to find something.
“Those three weeks, we weren’t allowed at all to see our family, or to call, or anything,” she said.
“Annie Glenn remains a hero to many of us who in various periods of our lives couldn’t get a word, a thought, or a sentiment past our lips,” David M. Shribman, executive editor emeritus of The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, wrote in February in The Boston Globe on the occasion of Mrs. Glenn’s 100th birthday.
Anna Margaret Castor was born in Columbus, Ohio, on Feb. 17, 1920, to Homer and Margaret Castor. When she was 3 the family moved to New Concord, Ohio, about 70 miles east of Columbus, where Mr. Glenn’s family lived. She and her future husband were childhood playmates.
“I think I was the only stutterer in town at that time,” she added.
She graduated from Muskingum College in 1942, majoring in music and education. She and Mr. Glenn married in 1943, the same year that he was commissioned in the Marine Corps.
As her husband became an American hero, Mrs. Glenn was seen but, necessarily, not often heard.
A stutter, she would often explain in later years, affected aspects of life both large and small.
The program at Hollins changed all that.
“People just couldn’t believe that I could really talk like I am talking now,” she said in the videotape, recalling the reaction of friends and family members. She went back for a refresher course in 1979, and shortly after made a half-hour speech in front of 300 women in Canton, Ohio.
She campaigned for her husband throughout his political career, beginning with his first race for the Senate in 1974. He served 24 years representing Ohio. When Mr. Glenn made an unsuccessful bid to be the Democratic nominee for president in 1984, Mrs. Glenn enjoyed being a visible part of his campaign.
Mrs. Glenn served on the advisory boards of numerous child-abuse and speech and hearing organizations. Her husband died in 2016 at 95.
Mrs. Glenn is survived by two children, John David Glenn and Carolyn Ann Glenn, and two grandchildren.
In 1982, a reporter for The Globe asked Mr. Glenn, who was then considering a presidential run, whether marrying someone with such a severe stutter had given him pause.
d. Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
d. Patchogue, N.Y.
d. Manhattan, N.Y.
d. Bay Shore, N.Y.
d. Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
