The Boston Marathon was canceled for the first time in its 124-year history, officials announced on Thursday, as the spread of the coronavirus made clear that earlier plans to postpone the race until September were too optimistic.
The race — the most prestigious marathon in the United States — has been held annually since 1897, even amid world wars, periods of domestic tension and in snow and rainstorms.
But with experts saying mass events remain a danger throughout the country while the coronavirus persists, the Boston Athletic Association and Mayor Martin J. Walsh of Boston announced that the marathon would not take place in 2020 as a “traditional, one-day event,” even as several North American sports leagues were making plans to return to play.
Organizers intend to hold a virtual marathon instead, with people running the 26.2 miles remotely.
“It’s really saddening to have to largely call off what is one of the best weekends of the year in Boston, but with the 100,000 people dead around the country, one could not do something as irresponsible as the holding of a large event,” said Tom Grilk, the chief executive of the B.A.A.
The marathon, originally scheduled for April 20, was initially postponed in March and rescheduled for Sept. 14.
But as the severity of the pandemic grew, it became clear that September was not realistic for a race that regularly brings hundreds of thousands of people together.
“While our goal and our hope is to make progress in containing the virus and recovering our economy, this kind of event would not be responsible or realistic on September 14 or any time this year,” Walsh said on Twitter.
The pandemic has brought the sports world to a halt, and leagues coming back to play are largely doing so without fans.
The race, which follows a course from Boston’s western suburbs to its downtown, usually takes place on Patriots’ Day, a state holiday in Massachusetts celebrating the start of the Revolutionary War. It serves as one of the major civic events for Massachusetts and the rest of New England.
Grilk said runners who had signed up for this year would receive a refund, whether or not they participate in this year’s event virtually. Also, the qualifying window for the 2021 marathon has been extended, so anyone who has run a qualifying time since September 2018 will be able to apply for next year’s race.
“I’m sad to miss out on an opportunity to compete this year, but the Boston Marathon as an event is as resilient as its participants,” added Linden, who is planning to compete next year.
The cancellation of the Boston race heightened uncertainty surrounding the fall road racing season. The London Marathon, another race among the six Abbott World Marathon Majors, was also postponed, from its original run date of April 26 to Oct. 4. It is still on the calendar. The Berlin Marathon, scheduled for late September, will not take place on that date, though organizers have yet to officially announce a complete cancellation.
With the Boston cancellation, the question now becomes whether major marathons will take place, including Chicago in October and New York in November. Asked recently during a news conference about a decision regarding the New York City Marathon, the country’s largest marathon, Mayor Bill de Blasio said such large events were “the last piece of the puzzle” in terms of reopening.
“I think it’s fair to say it’s going to be a while before we’re comfortable with any large gathering,” de Blasio said.