For stuck-at-homes feeling like submerging into the existential depths of no-exit theater, here’s a list of works to read and to watch.
Sometimes, when all lighter diversions have failed, what a person who’s been in confinement needs is a wallow in the pitch-black mud. You know, the kind of indulgent plunge into art that salts all the chafed places in your psyche, encourages you to imagine the worst and — ideally — releases you into the light with a sense of catharsis from having confronted your nightmares.
During the past several months, I’ve gratefully consumed my share of comforting escapist fare — moldy murder mysteries, Barbara Pym’s wise novels of resignation, the hilarious royal soap opera “The Windsors” on Netflix. But there have also been times, when my mood has turned ashen, that I’ve counterintuitively searched my bookcases for my favorite plays about life as a claustrophobic room from which there is no escape.
The drama is singularly well suited to depicting the nightmare of endless entrapment. It is a form usually written, after all, to take place within a confined space, hemming in the players who strut and fret upon the stage.
But what really seems pertinent now — and had me consulting the script recently — is Beckett’s presentation of an end-of-days existence in an airless crypt of a home, occupied by a splenetic man eternally confined to an armchair, his stiff-jointed and resentful attendant, and his ancient parents, who reside in separate dust bins. It is a place where time feels endless — something to kill, waste, mark and drown in — and what day or hour it may be is never entirely certain.
“Endgame” is a deeply, achingly funny play. I was starting to say, “For a cosmic tragedy.” But it’s because it’s a cosmic tragedy that it’s so funny. Rereading it again the other day, I laughed boisterously and felt much relieved. So it tops my list of plays of eternal confinement that provide perverse satisfaction when you’re in the right mood. Here is a glancing list of some others.
Many works by Pinter — the master artist of power games in close quarters — might be included here, such as his little-known but deliciously malevolent radio drama “A Slight Ache.” But I’m going with this prickly 1960 evergreen in which two hired assassins wait for orders to kill in a clammy basement room. Also, doesn’t the title kind of suggest the way you see yourself right now?
Zoe Kazan’s spooky futurist drama imagines a tomorrow of endless confinement. The world has been rendered so toxic by its human inhabitants that everyone is forced to live in a sealed underground. Reality as we once knew it — which includes flavorful food and visiting the seashore — can be experienced only virtually, via an implanted chip. The idea of that little micro-device really disturbed me when I saw this play several years ago at Lincoln Center Theater. Now I’m wondering how to get my hands on one.
Back to Beckett, for the ultimate rendering of life as a confining trap from which no one escapes. This is the one in which an extremely chatty woman named Winnie is buried in an ever-rising mound of sand. And yet as she monologues blithely on — and on and on — with her chipper banalities, she emerges as a rather heroic figure, making the best of a bad lot, which happens to be everyone’s lot. I always leave “Happy Days” feeling oddly cheered.