Hosted by Cheryl Strayed, produced by Kelly Prime and edited by Sara Sarasohn. Editorial oversight by Wendy Dorr.
Cheryl Strayed talks with the poet Billy Collins about memorization, “picture language” and the power of collective silence.
I’m going to call the poet Billy Collins. I love his poetry so much, and I know I’m not alone in that. He’s that rare thing in America, a bestselling poet. He was the U.S. Poet Laureate from 2001 to 2003 as well. He said that poetry is the home of ambiguity, ambivalence, and uncertainty, and I think that wraps up quite succinctly what a lot of us are living in right now. I thought it would be a great time to talk to Billy Collins.
Billy, it’s so nice to talk to you!
I sort of knew it was you.
You knew it was me?
Yeah. I can’t say I wasn’t expecting your call.
You’re just hanging out waiting for Cheryl to call.
Where am I calling you, Billy Collins?
I’m in my study in our house in a little town in Florida called Winter Park. The streetside wall is all windows, so I got a good view of tropical or subtropical vegetation. I mean, there’s like pygmy palms and, I think, two queen palms. And there’s this red bougainvillea.
And very few cars are going up and down that street these days. More common to see families bicycling, or dad taking his son down to the lake to fish, and stuff like that. It’s like going back to the ‘50s.
Are you just alone in the house with Suzannah, just the two of you?
Well, there are two cats, Francis, a boy, and Audrey, a girl.
OK, so two couples, Francis and Audrey, and Suzannah and Billy.
Yes. Well, Suzannah and I get along a lot better than Francis and Audrey. Thank god.
Perhaps because you guys are still newlyweds, right? You just got married last summer.
Well, it’s true. We’re still — not to get too sentimental, but we still celebrate our monthly anniversary on the 21st of the month.
I think that we’re losing track of that.
Oh. I’d love that. So what do you do on your monthly anniversary? Like what have you done historically?
Well, we used to go out to dinner, but now Suzannah just cooks another dinner. We’ve been very, very careful, very assiduous about going out only when necessary, and wash your hands all the time. And I usually say, if you say two Hail Marys, that’s about 20 seconds of handwashing. And there could be an added benefit. You never know.
So I’m 79 years old. And it sounds insane to say that, but it’s the truth, and I’m pretty sure if I caught it, it would kill me. And Suzannah shares that view. So she’s pretty willful about keeping me in the house.
Uh-huh. Do you even go out for walks?
I go out for a walk almost every day. Not quite as far as you, but it’s 2 miles. And it’s very clarifying, though. I’ve always liked walking, and there’s a Latin expression, solvitur ambulando, which means it is solved by walking. You probably know that.
I do, I do. As you know, my memoir “Wild” is all about walking. I walked 1,100 miles on the Pacific Crest Trail. A lot is solved by walking.
I would say after a thousand miles, you’ve got yourself together.
I’m sad to report that the walk goes on. The journey continues even after that. But I do think that that’s one of the things that you see over and over, is that power of a sort of walking meditation, where the classic journey one takes by foot, that is always enlightening. And I think we see that even on a micro scale on those 2-mile walks.
Well, I’m not as adventurous as you are, but it’s the same walk. But it’s never the same walk. It’s like putting yourself and putting your foot in the same river twice. And, often, just when I get back to the house, I might start a poem just about what I saw on the walk, which is — sometimes that goes nowhere, but other times it develops into something. So I find it very clarifying and — I mean, the English romantic poets, particularly Wordsworth, the way we would watch television, they would go for walks. And Wordsworth said that he composed a number of his poems on this walk, which would kind of give him the rhythm of the poem maybe. I don’t know. If you walked iambically, like thu-dud thu-dud, you’d probably be skipping. But I guess just the pacing provides a kind of steady rhythm. Did you listen — let me ask you a question. Did you listen to music on your walk?
No. But the reason I didn’t listen to music on my walk is it was 1995, and so I would have had to carry a Walkman, and cassette tapes, and so forth.
But, Billy, what was so utterly fascinating to me about my experience with music on the Pacific Crest Trail is I could not keep music out of my mind. And I call it in “Wild” like — that my mind was like the transistor radio station in my head, because I kept having songs come to me. And, many times, it would be songs I couldn’t — I didn’t want to have in my head, like jingles for, like, gum, or things like this from my youth. Sometimes Bob Dylan songs that I couldn’t remember all the lyrics. And so I was constantly singing in my head, and the thing I missed, I would say, almost as much as food. I really ached for music in a way that surprised me. I didn’t realize how deep that was.
Well, that’s your little internal jukebox that got activated.
Yeah. I wrote a poem about getting a bad song stuck in your head, because they seem to be stickier than most. And I titled the poem “More Than a Woman,” but I say to other people that you can call it any song. You can call it “Dancing Queen” or any song.
That’s a great song.
And sometimes just mentioning the title is enough to activate the song in other people’s heads, so you have to be careful.
Well, have you — there’s this documentary that I’m forgetting the title of it now, but it’s about people who have really deep, profound dementia, or are at the very end of their lives, and they can’t really communicate even any more. But they asked their kids, like, well, what were their favorite songs when they were young? And they put headphones on these people who are so inside themselves, and suddenly they would come awake, and they would even sometimes be able to sing along with the songs. I think it’s an ancient kind of knowing.
And I know you do that with — I was reading about your mother, who would recite poetry to you. I wonder if you have that relationship with poetry because you were hearing it so young.
Well, I think I got — I mean, who knows in these things. If you look back on your life and try to make sense of it, you’re looking through a kind of distorted rear view mirror. But I do have early memories of my being a toddler, or advanced toddler stage, and my mother would say lines of poetry that she memorized as a school girl in rural Ontario, Canada. And if it was very cold out, she’d have a line from Shakespeare about the coldness of the weather and not as sharp as man’s ingratitude to man, or something like that. And when I was a kid, I remember hearing my mother talking in two different ways. One was when she was regular talking, and one when she was reciting poetry. And I didn’t know it was poetry. I’d never heard the word. As I said, I was sort of a pre-literate toddler. But I knew that the poetry sounded nicer.
And if we believe in really early suggestions on our consciousness, that might account from the fact that’s where I am today.
Right. That’s — so where did your mom get that? Was she asked as a student to memorize these poems?
Well, she and my father were both born in 1901. So when she was a schoolgirl, this would be 1907 or ‘14, or something in there, memorization was not only an acceptable way of teaching poetry, it was — I believe it was the only way.
I mean, they weren’t — this was 100 miles or so north of Toronto. They weren’t analyzing poetry up there in the schoolhouse. They were having kids memorize it. And I try to get my students to memorize a little bit of poetry, and it’s interesting because their reaction is they groan. But once they get a sonnet in their head, or even a little poem by Emily Dickinson, they line up outside my office ready to recite it for me.
That’s so interesting. No. I think I’m absolutely fascinated by this, because when I started school in the mid ‘70s, this idea was that memorization was this rote learning that didn’t at all feed the spirit, and it was sort of oppressive.
Very old fashioned, yeah.
Yeah, yeah. And yet, I wish that people had made me memorize poems. Because it is kind of like those jingles. They become part of you, and you can call upon them when you need them then, right? They’re with you.
You could have carried these poems up the Pacific Crest Trail.
You know, it’s interesting that one of the most rewarding instances I ever had as a teacher, it was on a New York subway. There was a guy, a grown guy, across on the other side of the aisle there, or whatever. And he was looking at me. And, of course, in this New York subway, avoid eye contact is the main rule. Anyway, he got up and approached me, and he sat down. And over the roar of the subway, he said, Professor Collins, I was your student. And he was then a doctor, an oncologist, working at Mount Sinai Hospital. And he said you made us memorize a poem, and I want to say it for you.
Again, over the roar of the subway, he recited this Emily Dickinson poem. And it was just so amazing that I’d done something.
Right. It’s so measurable, right? That guy has Emily Dickinson in him forever because of you.
It’s stored there. And I also think, if they don’t remember anything I’ve said, they’ll remember 10 lines of Shakespeare or whatever.
Yeah. Well, and what’s interesting to ponder about that is that we are, in some sort of brute way, just forcing ourselves to remember this arrangement of words. And I’m curious, will this doctor, 50 years from now on his deathbed, will he be able to say that poem because it is part of him. And it reminds me, when I was hiking on the Pacific Crest Trail, I realized that I remembered the names of flowers that — my mom was a wonderful gardener and really knew everything about plants, and she would always teach me the names of wildflowers. And there was a point on the trail where I stepped into this meadow and I saw all these flowers, and I realized I knew their names. And I said them to myself in my mind as I walked past them, and I felt the presence of my mother so strongly. And it was a kind of poem embedded in me. It was a memorization that I didn’t know I had received until then.
Well, and I also think that you really internalize this series of lines and bring it into you for yourself. And it’s a part of you then. And once the student realizes the power of that — they’re now walking around with these lines in them, and they can summon them up at any moment — they find that pretty thrilling, actually.
It’s a powerful thing. And I think even in cases where you don’t necessarily memorize the lines, that poems can stay with you in another way. That you remember them, or you remember the way that they made you feel. And one of your poems that did that for me, Bill, is “The Names.” You were asked by the librarian of Congress to write it for the first anniversary of 9/11. And the reason it stuck with me is it made real to me this tragedy that was this grand scale — many, many deaths that seemed kind of abstract until I heard you read that poem. And it wasn’t then just numbers, it was names. And I thought of it now because we are hearing numbers every day. The number of people who die of Covid-19 climbs day by day. I would love for you to read “The Names” to me.
“Yesterday, I lay awake in the palm of the night. A fine rain stole in, unhelped by any breeze. And when I saw the silver glaze on the windows, I started with A, with Ackerman, as it happened, then Baxter and Calabro, Davis and Eberling, names falling into place as droplets fell through the dark. Names printed on the ceiling of the night. Names slipping around a watery bend. Twenty-six willows on the banks of a stream.
In the morning, I walked out barefoot among thousands of flowers, heavy with dew, like the eyes of tears, and each had a name. Fiore inscribed on a yellow petal, then Gonzalez and Hon, Ishikawa and Jenkins. Names written in the air and stitched into the cloth of the day. A name under a photograph taped to a mailbox. Monogram on a torn shirt. I see you spelled out on storefront windows and on the bright unfurled awnings of this city. I say the names as I turn a corner — Kelly and Lee, Medina, Nardella, and O’Connor.
When I peer into the woods, I see a thick tangle where letters are hidden, as in a puzzle concocted for children. Parker and Quigley in the twigs of an ash. Rizzo, Schubert, Torres, and Upton, secrets in the boughs of an ancient maple. Names written in the pale sky. Names rising in the updraft amid buildings. Silent names in stone, or cried out behind a door. Names blown over the earth and out to sea.
In the evening — weakening light, the last swallows, a boy on a lake lifts his oars, a woman by a window puts a match to a candle, and then the names are outlined on the rose clouds — Vanacore and Wallace. Let X, if it can, stand for the ones unfound. Then Young and Ziminsky, the final jolt of Z. Names etched on the head of a pin. One name spanning a bridge, another undergoing a tunnel. A blue name needled into the skin.
  And it was pretty nerve-racking really in front of a joint session of Congress, I can tell you.
So you’re called to this joint session, and are other people doing other things?
Well, yes, lots of other people. It was one of the first times in history that both houses of Congress met outside of Washington. They met in New York, where it took place. And there were many speeches. And I must say something, not in praise of my poem but to make a point about poetry, that when I started reading the poem, and it starts lying there in the middle of the night with the rain against the windows, et cetera, many people were looking up at me the way a Cocker Spaniel would cock his head, like, what?
It was not political language. It was not using generalities. It was not using the recycled language, including a history, heroism, tragedy, the common words that kept popping up in these talks. It was imagery. It was picture language, as Emerson calls it. It was the language of the world, of rain, and windows, and reality. And it demonstrated the difference between poetic language and, for lack of a better word, other language.
And I think that that’s — I mean, you’ve just expressed why, in my mind, poetry is so necessary, poetry and really all literature. But poetry, in particular, to me it speaks to the heart. It speaks beyond the intellect, beyond information.
Oh, I think poetry takes us inward, right? Poetry privileges our subjectivity. A poem tends to start out in the world and describing something, but it usually ends up going down and in inside us. But it works in images.  Just that one thing might be enough to tell the whole story, in a sense, just that one image, instead of a larger but probably less effective rhetoric.
Right. That’s what art does. And I think too, just the ordinary stories, whenever — my favorite parts of all of Ken Burns’s documentaries are those, the journals that people kept, that weren’t saying, here is the objective news of the day. It’s rather here’s what happened on my farm on this day. Here’s what I saw. Here’s what I witnessed. Here’s what I felt, and feared, and loved, and treasured. And those are the kinds of things that poetry shows us and offers us.
And those letters, I mean, I can’t believe how articulate everybody was in the middle of the 19th century. The letters are — not only the penmanship is beautiful, but the letters are so articulate, at least the ones that we’re exposed to.
Well, those are the ones that made the cut.
Yeah, that’s right. That’s the cream of the crop.
I don’t keep a — I have in the past. I don’t — I’m not very good at it. But I keep notebooks, and I always keep a little notebook in my pocket, and a pen. And thinking about our talk today, I have a page here of things to talk about or points we might — so anything can go into these journals. They’re kind of catch-alls, but — and poems too.
What have you written down that we haven’t talked about yet? Let’s talk about it.
That’s good. Well, I wrote down the name of a poem that’s very short that I’d love to read before we’re done by — not by me.
Please read it to me. Please read it to me, yes.
— she said, “Poetry begins where certitude leaves off.” Like poetry deals with ambivalence and ambiguity. And if you’re certain about a thing, you don’t need to write a poem about it. But you’ll see the word, about halfway through, the word “although,” and that’s when he — the tone of the poem changes. So I’ll read it if you like. It’s titled “When,” by John O’Donnell.
“And when this ends we will emerge, shyly and then all at once, dazed, long-haired as we embrace loved ones the shadow spared, and weep for those it gathered in its shroud. A kind of rapture, this longed-for laying on of hands, high cries as we nuzzle, leaning in to kiss, and whisper that now things will be different.
So interesting that he sees the distancing as being a courtesy, and the quietness and the kindness of things left on doorsteps, and the idleness and the drifting. This really talks about the horror of people lost, but he says that — it’s like people talk about. There’s a quiet all over the world. The whole globe has quieted down. There are no sports. There’s no concerts. There’s no people cheering. A friend of mine said you can hear a birdsong in New York City.
And another — in The Times last week, this guy writing from Paris said you could hear ducks quacking on the Seine. I have a friend, if one of us says something, the other one often says, and other poems. And I’m sure that would get it — ducks quacking on the Seine, and other poems.
That’s your next book, Billy.
It could be. But that’s, I mean, amazing, like being back in the ‘50s. It’s quieter. It’s slower. And, also, nature is healing herself. Fish are coming back into these grounds where they were, where there’s too much pollution. Maybe we should take one month off a year and just let the Earth lick its wounds for a month before we continue to ravish it.
Yeah, I thought of that. In that poem, when he says although, he’s saying, but we’re going to also forget all this, right?
Yeah, yeah. We’ll forget the curves and all that. But we might even miss — we’ll forget, and we might even be nostalgic about the time when we stayed indoors with our spouses or whatever, or maybe a friend, sheltering in place. I was on the phone with my friend in New York City last night about — well, I know it’s about 2 minutes to 7. He said, well, at 7 o’clock, I have to get my pot and my spoon and bang it out the window. Everybody does that at 7 o’clock in New York.
Mh-hm. In Portland too.
Yeah, for the responders. And maybe people will miss that. I guess the big question is, will this — I mean, people banter around the word globalization, and global this, and global that. And that’s primarily an economic term, I think. It meant the globalization of business. But this is something that’s happening all over the world, and maybe this will give people a sense of being Earthlings, in the way that the blue marble did. Remember that first picture of Earth? That was the first time man had ever seen the planet.
And there was some sense of optimism — it became the symbol of Earth Day — that a global event like that, or the globe made visible, might tie people together. I’m not too optimistic about that, but it’s going to be very interesting to see what happens.  But do you want to hear another poem by another poet?
This is a poem by Wislawa Szymborska, the Polish poet. And it’s a poem about the war, and what happens after the war, and then what happens when people forget about the war.
And it’s about World War II?
It’s about World War II, yeah. But I think it applies today. Anyway, it’s not long. It’s called “The End and the Beginning,” by Wislawa Szymborska.
“After every war, someone has to pick up. Things won’t pick themselves up, after all. Someone has to shove the rubble to the roadsides so the carts loaded with corpses can get by. Someone has to trudge through the sludge and ashes, through the sofa springs and shards of glass, the bloody rags. Someone has to lug the post to prop the wall. Someone has to glaze the windows, set the door in its frame. No sound bites, no photo opportunities, and it takes years. All the cameras have gone to other wars.
The bridges need to be rebuilt. The railroad stations too. Shirtsleeves will be rolled up to shreds. Someone, broom in hand, still remembers how it was. Someone else listens, nodding his unshattered head. But others are bound to be bustling nearby who will find all that quite boring. From time to time, someone still must dig up a rusted argument from underneath a bush and haul it off to the dump.
Wow. I love that poem. What a great poem. That poem so aptly describes not just things like a world war and its aftermath, and the way that time changes it. It’s even — like, I was just thinking of the most intimate thing, like a broken heart. Like it’s so painful at first, and then it gets slowly cleaned up, and then it slowly disappears. And then it’s like that love was never even in existence.
It becomes history.
And there’s a test on it.
And there’s no great sorrow. I mean, I think that, obviously, about big things, like a war or a virus, and so many of us are revisiting things like — I’ve never heard so much conversation about the Spanish influenza epidemic as I have in the last month or two. And it’s because we’re saying, Oh, this thing that we all had the luxury of not remembering, or not really caring much about, suddenly might be the thing that teaches us about now.
In her poem, after all the destruction, to end with that figure lying on the grass with a corn stalk in his teeth, just looking up at clouds, that little personal individual moment of being alone. And Robert Frost said anybody can start a poem, but it takes a real poet to end one. And that’s such a beautiful ending, gawking at clouds.
Yeah. Is there anything that I didn’t ask you that you want to talk about?
I don’t know. I mean, I did spend one day in this monastery in Big Sur, the Camaldolese order of the Benedictines. They were, I think, like a 12th century breakaway from the Benedictines. And someone said they make the Benedictines look like Hells Angels, because they’re a deeply reclusive order. None of them speak. There are about 30 of them there. And when they have meals, there are readings from the Bible, from whatever. But I had heard that my poems were being read. So when I was in California, I made a visit to the monastery and spent one day in one of these rooms. It’s kind of a cell or a dorm room. And I had this experience of silence I’d never quite had before.  And, gradually, after like an hour or so, I was aware that there are 30 other men right around me in these other buildings or rooms who have devoted their life to silence. They’re professionals, professional quiet people. And I felt like this little droplet of my silence just dropping into this river of silence they were creating. And communal silence, I realized, is such a powerful thing. And when I think about the quieter world that the virus has put us into, it just reminded me of that deep experience of silence.
What about it felt profound to you? I mean, can you identify what that particular silence does for you or for us?
Well, it’s very cleansing, I think. I was very comfortable with it, knowing, as I said, the presence of these professional men around me keeping their silence so as to be less ensnared by the ways of the world. And when I was at the monastery in Big Sur, they referred very reverentially to two of the monks who had achieved, achieved what they call permanent reclusion. There are two monks who never see anybody. They’re not only silent. They never talk during the year. There’s no break, and they never go to communal meals. They’re like prisoners of their silence. And that just blew my mind. They got in the cell and locked the door, and they loved it. They wouldn’t have it any other way.
It’s astounding to me, really.
My first reaction when I was hearing you talk about this place — and I know this place, and I have to say, what you’ve contributed most powerfully to the world is the opposite of silence. It is that we find some truth in the words you share with us. And yet there is something about poetry and art that is about the deepest silence, right? That it’s not about isolation. It’s not about distance. It’s about connection, I think, when silence is most profound and powerful.
Mm-hm. I think another way to connect them is to say that the — a poem takes up a certain amount of space on a page. It doesn’t fill the page. Most people would recognize a poem as being a poem by seeing that it just occupies this discrete place on the poem — on the page, rather. And I get my students to think of the white space around the poem as silence, and so that the poem is an interruption of silence. And so it takes silence into a place. I knew a nun — well, she was a crazy high school friend of mine, but she became a nun, and she was — ended up in a little convent in Rome on the Appian Way there, and they were a reclusive order of nuns. And we had corresponded, but when she corresponded to me in letters, she would only talk about the love of God and all that. She never said what she was doing or anything, or if she was planting corn or something. And when I was in Italy, I called her — I called the convent, and I said, Susan — that was her old name — I said, I’m coming into Rome, and can we take you out to lunch? Do you go out? And she said, Cheryl, she said, Fortunately, I can’t.
No irony — yes. No irony at all. Fortunately, Billy, I can’t.
— we who can’t go out, to turn that into a blessing rather than a curse is something, I think.
Yes, yeah. I think it’s the difference between people who will rush back into their jobs and can’t wait to get back to normal who are enjoying, on some level, this quiet time, this traveling back in time, in a way, to where you can hear — you can hear ducks quacking on the Seine, for god’s sake.
Well, it has been such a delight to speak to you.
Well, great. I’ve been looking forward to this a lot. So great to talk to you too.
Bye bye. Take care.
I’m Cheryl Strayed. This is “Sugar Calling.” Next week, Joy Harjo.
Today, Cheryl calls Billy Collins, a former poet laureate of the United States, at his home in Florida. Billy shares the poem he wrote for the first anniversary of 9/11, “The Names,” and his experience reading it before a rare joint session of Congress in New York.
Billy and Cheryl reflect on the quietness — and slowness — that has befallen the world, and they discuss the unexpected comfort in memorizing poetry: “You really internalize this series of lines and bring it into yourself. And it’s a part of you then,” Billy tells Cheryl.
Billy Collins is one of America’s best-known poets. He has written 15 books of poetry, including “Sailing Alone Around the Room,” a poetry megaseller. Collins served as poet laureate of the United States from 2001 to 2003, and poet laureate of New York from 2004 to 2006. His latest book, “Whale Day,” is set to be published in Sept. 2020.
“Sugar Calling” is produced by Kelly Prime and edited by Sara Sarasohn, with editorial oversight by Wendy Dorr. This episode was mixed by Jamie Collazo. Our theme music is by Dan Powell.