A university review found that the disgraced financier, who killed himself last year, visited Harvard more than 40 times after he was convicted of sex charges involving a minor in Florida.
He had no official Harvard affiliation, yet Jeffrey Epstein had his own office, key card and Harvard phone line. He would often swing by on weekends to host dinners with academics he wanted to meet.
According to a university report released on Friday, Mr. Epstein, the disgraced financier who killed himself in jail last year, visited Harvard more than 40 times after he was convicted of sex charges involving a minor in 2008.
The report documented more extensive ties than had been previously known between Mr. Epstein and the university, which was one of a number of powerful institutions that he used to help burnish his image. Harvard said it had placed one professor, Martin A. Nowak, on paid administrative leave in response to the findings.
In a letter to the Harvard community, the university’s president, Lawrence S. Bacow, said the university had also donated $200,937 in unspent gifts from Mr. Epstein to organizations that support victims of human trafficking and sexual assault.
Mr. Bacow said that a review had confirmed that the university accepted a total of $9.1 million from Mr. Epstein from 1998 to 2008 to support research and faculty activities. That is about $200,000 more than had been disclosed by Mr. Bacow in September after an initial review.
Drew G. Faust, who was then the president of Harvard, had ruled in 2008 that the university should no longer accept gifts from him, the report said.
From 2010 to 2018, the report said, Mr. Epstein made more than 40 visits to the university’s Program for Evolutionary Dynamics, which Mr. Epstein helped establish with a $6.5 million donation in 2003. Despite having no Harvard affiliation, Mr. Epstein had key-card access to the program’s offices in Harvard Square and was given his own office space within the program until 2018, the report said. It was known as “Jeffrey’s Office,” the report said.
Mr. Epstein had cultivated a close relationship with Professor Nowak, the director of the program, who “permitted Epstein to have unrestricted access to Harvard offices,” despite knowing he was a registered sex offender, the report said.
Professor Nowak also allowed Mr. Epstein to create a page on the program’s website that featured his photograph and links to his own website, the report said. The page was taken down after a group of sexual assault survivors complained in 2014, it said.
The report also accused Professor Nowak of falsely informing a grant-making foundation that he had matching funds from one of Mr. Epstein’s foundations, even though he had no such funds.
Claudine Gay, dean of the school’s Faculty of Arts and Sciences, said on Friday that she had placed Professor Nowak on paid administrative leave pending a review of whether he had violated policies and standards of professional conduct.
Mr. Epstein paid the tuition and fees to be a visiting fellow and showed up for registration but “did little to pursue his proposed course of study,” the report said. Still, Mr. Epstein applied for the fellowship again in the 2006-7 academic year, and was accepted. He agreed to withdraw in 2006 after he was arrested, the report said.
Dr. Kosslyn, who left the university in 2011 and is now a professor emeritus at Harvard, did not immediately respond to messages seeking comment on Friday.