French doctors found that a patient had the virus on Dec. 27, suggesting that it was circulating long before containment efforts began. A major Philippine broadcaster critical of Duterte has been forced off the air.
This briefing has ended. Read live updates on the coronavirus pandemic here.
The coronavirus reached France in December, doctors say, rewriting the epidemic’s timeline.
Some Russian Orthodox priests call it evil to lock down churches, splitting the clergy and the country.
Neil Ferguson, the epidemiologist whose frightening projections of coronavirus deaths precipitated the lockdown in Britain, resigned from the government’s scientific advisory group on Tuesday, after admitting he breached social distancing rules by illicitly meeting his lover.
“I deeply regret any undermining of the clear messages around the continued need for social distancing,” said Dr. Ferguson, who has become a household name in Britain over the last two months, preaching the virtues of staying apart.
Leading a respected team of scientists at Imperial College London, Dr. Ferguson has long been an influential voice on infectious diseases. But he achieved a new level of notoriety in mid-March, with a report warning that without steps to control it, the virus could kill 250,000 to 510,000 Britons.
That prompted Prime Minister Boris Johnson to impose a lockdown, putting Britain in line with other European countries.
During this period of confinement, the Telegraph reported that Dr. Ferguson, 51, allowed a woman with whom he had a relationship to visit him at home. He had just come out of his own self-isolation after suffering from Covid-19.
Dr. Ferguson sat on the government’s secretive Scientific Advisory Group on Emergencies, or SAGE. His membership was only formally confirmed on Monday, when the government published the names of 50 of the 52 members.
Approaching 30,000 coronavirus deaths, Britain has been one of the hardest-hit countries, and the government’s handling of the crisis has come under harsh scrutiny.
Israel, whose aggressive response to the coronavirus has held its fatality rate to a fraction of those of the United States and other hard-hit nations, is readying a nationwide serological test of 100,000 citizens to see how widely the virus has spread across its population and how vulnerable it may be to a new wave of the contagion.
A major media network in the Philippines was forced off the air on Tuesday, making it the first major broadcaster to have met such a fate during the administration of President Rodrigo Duterte, which is cracking down on news outlets that have been critical of his leadership.
The government’s telecommunications commission issued ABS-CBN Corp. a cease-and-desist order one day after the media giant’s broadcast franchise, which is granted by Congress, expired.
Mr. Duterte had earlier warned that he would not allow the renewal of ABS-CBN’s broadcast franchise. The House of Representatives, which is stacked with allies of Mr. Duterte, has sat on several bills supporting the network’s license renewal.
The network, which has closely documented Mr. Duterte’s brutal war on drugs that has left thousands of people dead, said that it would comply with the order.
“Millions of Filipinos will lose their source of news and entertainment when ABS-CBN is ordered to go off the air on TV and radio tonight when people need crucial and timely information as the nation deals with the Covid-19 pandemic,” the company said.
ABS-CBN is known for its prime time flagship news program, TV Patrol, as well as soaps and afternoon variety TV shows. Its offerings also include coverage of popular sports such as basketball and boxing.
French doctors say they have discovered that a patient treated in late December had the coronavirus — a finding that, if verified, suggests that the virus appeared in Europe nearly a month earlier than previously understood.
The finding came this week after doctors tested samples taken from patients in late December and early January. One of those, taken on Dec. 27 from a patient who had pneumonia, tested positive.
That was days before Chinese authorities first reported the new illness to the World Health Organization, weeks before the Chinese acknowledged that human-to-human transmission of the virus was possible, and nearly a month before the first report of an infection in Europe, on Jan. 24 in France.
The man who was apparently infected in December had not been outside France since August, indicating that the virus was circulating within the country last fall. It is not clear if he passed it to anyone.
The discovery suggests that the virus had made its way out of China long before measures to cut it off and contain its spread, underscoring how late the European authorities were in seeing the threat and responding. Previously, the first case outside of China was reported in Thailand on Jan. 13.
The news adds to growing evidence that outbreaks were silently underway long before they were noticed. Researchers in the United States have also documented deaths from the virus weeks before anyone recognized that it was in the country.
The French doctors who made the finding, at a hospital near Paris, said they had tested the samples twice to avoid false positives. But they acknowledged that they could not completely rule out that possibility.
The French government did not comment on the case on Tuesday.
As Covid-19 cuts a wide swath through the Russian Orthodox Church’s monasteries and parishes, many clerics are thundering against both the coronavirus and the government’s efforts to contain it, carving a deep rift between the usually allied powers of church and state.
As the government tries to block public gatherings like church services, some priests have complied readily, keeping parish doors locked and urging worshipers to take part by video link.
But others preach that it is impossible to become infected in a church, or threaten damnation for those who enforce or obey the restrictions. They have resisted shutting even monasteries devastated by the virus.
The outburst of discord is rare within the rigidly hierarchical church. Patriarch Kirill, the head of the church and an ally of President Vladimir V. Putin, has wavered between enforcing the government’s social distancing orders and placating the most fervent clerics. He urged worshipers to skip Holy Week services last month — but left it up to each diocese whether to hold them.
The patriarch issued an order last week that monastery abbots and parish rectors in Moscow must comply with lockdown measures, but so far he has taken formal disciplinary action against only one cleric: the relatively liberal Andrei Kuraev, who mocked the head of a Moscow cathedral who had died from the virus.
Around the world, zealous believers of many faiths have been among the most resistant to stay-at-home orders. The clash has been particularly divisive in Russia, where memories of religious persecution in the Soviet Union make people highly sensitive to government restrictions.
Russia has been recording more than 10,000 new confirmed infections per day.
Latest in science: New studies add to evidence that children can transmit the coronavirus.
Two new studies offer compelling evidence that children can transmit the virus, providing what epidemiologists say are strong arguments in favor of keeping schools closed around the world.
A Chinese study published last week in the journal Science analyzed data from Wuhan and Shanghai, and found that children were about a third as susceptible to infection as adults were. But when schools were open, they found, children had about three times as many contacts with other people as adults did — three times as many opportunities to become infected — essentially evening out their risk.
Based on their data, the researchers estimated that closing schools could reduce cases by about 40 to 60 percent.
The second study, in Germany, was led by Christian Drosten, a prominent virologist whose lab has tested about 60,000 people for the coronavirus. Consistent with other studies, he and his colleagues found many more infected adults than children. But children who do test positive harbor just as much virus as adults — sometimes more, even if they are asymptomatic — and so, presumably, are just as infectious, his team found.
The new studies were released amid alarm about a possible link between Covid-19 and toxic shock or Kawasaki disease, a rare illness in children that is associated with inflammation of the blood vessels. At least 15 children in New York City, many of whom tested positive for Covid-19, have been hospitalized with symptoms of the illness, and several European countries have also reported cases.
A team of scientists has developed an experimental prototype for a quick, low-cost diagnostic test, based on Crispr gene-editing technology, that could deliver results without being sent to a laboratory.
Pfizer and the German pharmaceutical company BioNTech announced that their potential coronavirus vaccine began human trials in the United States on Monday.
Indian media reported that more than 150,000 Indians in the United Arab Emirates have asked to be evacuated and that several large naval warships have already been dispatched to the United Arab Emirates and the Maldives.
The president said his administration is “looking at Phase 2, and we’re looking at other phases,” after he was asked whether it was a good idea to shut down the task force while the virus was still spreading through the country.
It’s unclear exactly what might replace the task force.
Rick Bright, a federal scientist who says he was ousted from his job amid a dispute over an unproven coronavirus treatment pushed by President Trump said in a formal whistle-blower complaint that he had been protesting “cronyism” and contract abuse since 2017.
An Amazon warehouse employee on Staten Island died after contracting the virus, the company said, weeks after the building was the scene of a protest over what workers said were inadequate safety precautions.
Customers at fast-food drive-throughs as well as grocery stores like Wegmans and Hy-Vee, where certain meat products are becoming harder to find, are seeing the impact of the closure of dozens of meatpacking plants across the country as a result of coronavirus outbreaks.
A U.S. lawsuit filed by immigration rights activists challenges a relief act.
Immigration rights activists on Tuesday filed a federal lawsuit challenging a provision in the $2 trillion relief act that denies $500 payments to the children of United States citizens if one or both of their parents are undocumented immigrants, Michael D. Shear reports.
This spring, Beijing energetically promoted its exports and overseas donations of medical supplies and asked foreign politicians to thank China publicly for the shipments. But a study released on Tuesday found that the shipments were slow to get started.
China locked down the city of Wuhan in response to the virus on Jan. 23, and waged a national “war” on the novel coronavirus through February while much of the rest of the world was not yet aware of the extent of the virus’s spread.
Just as President Trump has extolled the promise of a malaria drug in the desperate hunt for coronavirus treatments, Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, was selling the world on a pale yellow pill that he said could be crucial to fighting the pandemic.
Mr. Abe has pushed the homegrown drug, an antiviral medicine known as Avigan, in news conferences and in meetings with world leaders, including a call with Mr. Trump and the other heads of the Group of 7. He has allocated nearly $130 million to triple a stockpile of the medication. And he has offered to provide it free to dozens of other countries.
For more than three hours, one by one, global leaders said a few words over video link and offered their nation’s contribution, small or large, whatever they could muster. For Romania, it was $200,000. For Canada, $850 million. The biggest contributors were the European Union and Norway, with each pledging one billion euros, or $1.1 billion.
Leaders in China, desperate to protect their people and deflect growing international criticism of how the country has handled the coronavirus, want to come out on top in the race to find a coronavirus vaccine — and by some measures are doing so.
In India, liquor taxes are a crucial source of government revenue. By Tuesday some states had imposed “a special corona fee,” hiking alcohol prices by 50 to 70 percent.
The generation that endured Nazi death camps is especially vulnerable to the pandemic.
For Diana Kurz, 83, who escaped Vienna with her mother when she was 4 years old, the coronavirus reminded her of those years in Vienna, when any random encounter might be deadly.
The coronavirus is forcing a reckoning with Japan’s paper-hungry working practices — most notably the use of the hanko, a seal stamped on official documents.
But she emphasized that the prospect of revived travel reflected the shared success of Australia and New Zealand, which have crushed the peaks of their initial outbreaks faster than expected.
