The president named Moncef Slaoui, a former pharmaceutical executive, to lead a crash development program that if successful would shatter speed records for vaccine development.
President Trump doubled down on Friday on his promise to have a coronavirus vaccine available by the end of this year, betting that he can rally the pharmaceutical industry and the government to have one available to nearly all Americans at a speed never before accomplished.
He made his pledge after the government’s senior medical leadership warned repeatedly this week that there was no assurance a safe vaccine would be available as fast as promised by the president, or even for years.
And the president’s credibility on the issue has been clouded by months of overpromising, exaggerating and misleading about other elements of his response to the pandemic, including the availability of testing and the potential of unproven treatments.
With the nation emerging from two months of lockdown, the economy in near-Depression-level crisis and his re-election prospects at stake, Mr. Trump cast the rapid development of a vaccine as an important, but not essential, component of returning to normalcy.
“Vaccine or no vaccine, we’re back and we’re starting the process,” he said during an appearance in the Rose Garden.
He introduced a longtime pharmaceutical executive and a four-star general to lead a national effort that he compared in size and speed to the Manhattan Project, the race 75 years ago to build the first atomic bomb.
The new chief of what Mr. Trump calls Operation Warp Speed, Moncef Slaoui, a former chairman of vaccines at GlaxoSmithKline, called Mr. Trump’s goal “very credible,” even though the fastest a new vaccine has been developed and distributed is four years and most have taken considerably longer.
He did not identify which vaccine he was referring to, but until Friday, when he resigned to take on the new job with the White House, Dr. Slaoui served on the board of Moderna, a biotechnology company that has an experimental coronavirus vaccine that just entered Phase 2 of clinical trials to determine if it is effective.
As the chairman of the Moderna board’s product development committee, Dr. Slaoui might have been privy to the early indications of tests of whether the company’s approach appeared promising, now that it is being injected into human subjects.
Mr. Trump said the government was already moving to ensure sufficient manufacturing capacity to produce any vaccine that is developed and to produce the hundreds of millions of glass vials and syringes needed to hold and inject it. And he said the government would call on the military’s logistics skills to distribute any eventual vaccine as quickly as possible.
Mr. Trump, who during the 2016 campaign repeatedly questioned the use of vaccines, also seemed to acknowledge for the first time that the antivaccine movement could hamper the effort to fully immunize the United States against the coronavirus.
The president also insisted that even if the United States did not win the race for a vaccine — Chinese and British entries are also in clinical trials — he believed the world would set aside profits and nationalistic instincts to share the most successful approach.
Even China would share its findings, he said with confidence — though if China’s vaccine effort advances, its Phase 2 clinical trials will almost certainly take place inside China. Similarly, the United States would most likely prioritize initial distribution to its own citizens, as suggested by Mr. Trump’s reference to the military’s role.
President Emanuel Macron of France said this week that he would call in executives of Sanofi, a major pharmaceutical firm, after its chief executive told Bloomberg News that the United States “has the right to the largest preorder because it’s invested in taking the risk” on new vaccines.
In an interview, Dr. Slaoui called having a safe and effective vaccine in widespread distribution within 12 to 18 months of when work started at the beginning of the year to be “a very aggressive timeline” but said he was undaunted by Mr. Trump’s goal.
“I would not have committed unless I thought it was achievable,” Mr. Slaoui said on Thursday, adding that he told the president that when they met for the first time a day earlier and Mr. Trump asked if the goal was realistic.
Mr. Slaoui will serve as the chief adviser on the effort, and Gen. Gustave F. Perna, a four-star general who is in charge the Army Matériel Command, will be the chief operating officer.
Mr. Slaoui said he discussed the job with Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser, who had been searching for a so-called czar for therapeutics and vaccine development, and Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House’s coronavirus response coordinator.
General Perna, who runs the Army’s complex supply chain, said that he was asked by Gen. Mark A. Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to help run the manufacturing logistics related to the vaccine development. Beyond the vaccine itself, there are also substantial challenges in ensuring adequate capacity of the supplies needed to distribute and administer it, starting with the special glass in which vaccine doses are transported.
Mr. Slaoui and General Perna met for the first time on Wednesday, and they have been in frequent contact since then, the general said in a separate interview. They will have offices in the Department of Health and Human Services, where the secretary, Alex M. Azar II, helped develop Operation Warp Speed at the president’s request.
Most questions about how the program will work remain unanswered, including its cost, whether the Defense Production Act will be used to impel companies to produce a vaccine developed by a different firm, or whether particular groups may get access to initial doses.
Dr. Stephen M. Hahn, the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, said at a Senate hearing on Tuesday that his agency would evaluate about 10 vaccine candidates in early studies, and then select four or five to progress into larger studies in humans. Dr. Slaoui said that the goal will be to get “three or four” vaccines to large, late-stage trials, called Phase 3.
Several experimental vaccines are already being tested in humans, including the one being pursued by Moderna. Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the government’s top epidemiologist, told lawmakers on Tuesday that his institute, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, was heavily involved in the Moderna project.
Scientists hope that several of the vaccines will be successful, and for different parts of the population. But even if a vaccine candidate shows promise this year, producing one for hundreds of millions of people in the United States alone will be daunting.
The Pentagon will be heavily involved in the Warp Speed effort, in the hope that it will facilitate fast distribution of a vaccine if one is deemed successful.
“The Department of Defense is going to be putting resources that are unheard-of in any industry setting, in any private company setting, behind the process, development, and manufacturing and distribution of the vaccine,” Dr. Slaoui said.
General Perna said he had been preparing to retire on July 1 after 37 years of active duty, but agreed to be part of the effort and echoed Mr. Trump in describing what he saw as his mission.
