Guatemala’s leader protested U.S. deportations of infected migrants, as China imposed a Wuhan-style lockdown in a region where cases have flared.
This briefing has ended. Follow live updates on the coronavirus here.
Our East Africa correspondent tells us of a Ramadan like no other.
Scientists are using many techniques to develop coronavirus vaccines.
As the Chinese authorities confront scattered coronavirus outbreaks in the country’s northeast, they are turning to many of the strict lockdown measures that they used this winter in the central city of Wuhan.
This is a Ramadan like no other. The pandemic, which in Kenya has infected at least 1,109 people and killed at least 50 others, has given us the gift of loneliness. Isolated under a partial lockdown in Nairobi and a nationwide curfew that stretches from dusk to dawn, millions of Muslims in Kenya and beyond have exchanged sprawling banquets for dining alone and observing the evening taraweeh prayers from home.
I chafe at the imposed restrictions sometimes because, with 21 siblings and 16 nephews and nieces, the iftar meal to break the daily fast has always for me been a bustling family affair. We would start with dates, then gorge on spicy samosas and chicken biryani, pass around my mother’s legendary camel meat, and share cakes and sweet chai.
U.S. roundup: Trump, violating state law, tours an auto plant without wearing a mask.
Mr. Trump said he had worn a mask when he was asked to on a private portion of the tour. “I didn’t want to give the press the pleasure of seeing it,” he said.
At one point during the tour, Tom Petty’s “I Won’t Back Down” blared over the loudspeakers.
The president’s visit to Michigan, a key swing state where the virus has become a flash point, came just a day after he threatened to withhold federal funding from the state for taking steps to make it easier to vote by mail amid the pandemic.
Covid-19 has been particularly virulent for older African-Americans and Latinos: Nursing homes where those groups make up a significant portion of the residents have been twice as likely to get hit by the virus as those where the population is overwhelmingly white.
Another 2.4 million workers joined the nation’s unemployment rolls last week amid growing concern that many of the lost jobs are gone for good. The Labor Department’s report of new jobless claims, released Thursday, brought the total to 38.6 million since mid-March, when the outbreak forced widespread shutdowns.
New York State is now investigating 157 cases of a severe inflammatory syndrome affecting children that appears to be linked to the virus — a 53 percent increase over the last nine days, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said.
The coming Atlantic hurricane season is “expected to be a busy one,” a federal weather scientist said. And it may be further complicated by the pandemic, which is hobbling relief agencies and could turn evacuation shelters into disease hot spots.
The finding suggests that the virus was spreading in Italy for at least two weeks before its detection. Similar evidence has emerged in France, where a sample taken from a patient on Dec. 27 recently tested positive for the coronavirus, and in California, where health officials discovered a coronavirus-linked death on Feb. 6.
As temperatures soared above 80 degrees Fahrenheit, thousands who had been largely cooped up at home for nearly two months headed into outdoor spaces, often flouting social distancing rules — in a country that had over 250,000 confirmed coronavirus cases as of Thursday and more than 36,000 deaths, in one of the worst outbreaks in Europe.
Three players from Australia’s National Rugby League were fined last month after breaching quarantine rules by going on a camping trip. A fourth was fined after photos were taken of him at a party.
In Hong Kong, social media users were angered last month by images of people appearing to violate mandatory quarantine orders — by reclining in a bed at Ikea, for example. And the city’s judiciary said on Wednesday that a person wearing a tracking wristband had been found in a courthouse.
An American cargo pilot was imprisoned last week after leaving his hotel room for three hours to buy masks and a thermometer, his lawyer told The Associated Press.
Noma has been selected as the “best restaurant in the world” four times and diners fly in from all corners of the world to experience its famed 20-course menus featuring ingredients from the bottom of the food hierarchy.
If the United States had begun imposing social distancing measures one week earlier in March, about 36,000 fewer people would have died in the pandemic, according to new estimates from Columbia University disease modelers.
