Additional economic assistance is the only thing that can keep the U.S. economy from falling into a second Great Depression, and with interest rates near zero, the government has all the fiscal capacity it needs to borrow the trillions necessary to relieve the pain. But Congress, or rather congressional Republicans, won’t budge. After backing the $2 trillion CARES Act in March, they believe they’ve done enough for now.
“You’ve seen the talk from both sides about acting,” Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, said last month, “but my goal from the beginning of this, given the extraordinary numbers that we’re racking up to the national debt, is that we need to be as cautious as we can be.” Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina echoed this sentiment. “The real stimulus that’s going to change the trajectory that we’re on is going to be the economy, not government checks,” he said. Senator John Kennedy of Louisiana, also a Republican, was less diplomatic about his opposition to another round of assistance that would increase state and local government funding. 
And President Trump appears unmoved by the prospect of economic devastation, except insofar as it affects his chances for re-election. The White House halted talks with Congress over any further stimulus.
All of this — the passivity, the indifference, the refusal to embrace the tools at hand for ideological reasons — is reminiscent of Herbert Hoover, who also presided over a catastrophic economic downturn, the mismanagement of which plunged the United States into a crisis that tore at the seams of American society.
But that’s not quite right. “Sitting and waiting,” the historian Robert S. McElvaine noted in “The Great Depression: America, 1929-1941,” “were alien to Herbert Hoover’s temperament. His great confidence in humankind’s abilities — and his own — led him to believe that action could mitigate the effects of an economic downturn.” And so, within weeks of the October 1929 stock market crash, the president was meeting with leaders of business and industry in an effort to protect wages and boost consumption, so that Americans would spend the nation back into growth.
By 1931, Hoover was telling reporters that “We cannot legislate ourselves out of a world economic depression” and rebuking Congress for its attempts to pass relief. “We cannot thus squander ourselves into prosperity,” he said.
It is true that at the time virtually no one in government was prepared to do what was needed to end the Depression. Even Hoover’s successor, Franklin Roosevelt, would hesitate to embrace the sustained government spending needed to revive the economy. The intellectual architecture for that kind of action just didn’t exist (John Maynard Keynes had not yet made his impact on American policymaking). Still Hoover was not without tools; he could have taken steps to cushion the blow of the crash and relieve suffering for millions of Americans. But he refused, captive to a rigid, unyielding view of the world around him.
What was true then is true now. The Republican Party seems ready to let the country descend into depression rather than do what’s needed, from aid to families to help for states, to sustain the economy as the country struggles against a deadly disease. The plan, such that it exists, is to “reopen” the economy — justified with Hoover-esque rhetoric about the “American way of life” — and immunize employers against legal action should their employees fall ill.
It would be nearly four years after the stock market crash in 1929 before the federal government, under Roosevelt’s administration, began to do anything to meaningfully alleviate the pain of the Great Depression. By then, nearly a quarter of working Americans were unemployed and tens of millions of people struggled to find food and shelter.
Not only are we not that far gone, but we have a chance to remove our modern-day Hoovers before they can lead the country to further disaster. With luck, we’ll make good on that opportunity in November.