With no money or clout, what started as a cheap exploitation film managed to, like, totally click with a generation — and produce an unconventional superstar.
Four shots of nude breasts. That’s what the producers of “Valley Girl” demanded of their potential director, Martha Coolidge. If she wanted the gig — overseeing what was set to be a low-budget, exploitative high-school romp that could lure teen boys like “Porky’s” did — she’d need to make sure the requisite skin appeared onscreen.
The nudity appears in the 1983 film for mere seconds, presented frankly and lacking any titillation. In fact, Coolidge transformed “Valley Girl” from its superficial beginnings into a teen classic full of heart and a trippin’-dicular new wave soundtrack. The movie is making a comeback of sorts — it was recently made available for digital download for the first time, and on May 8, a musical remake arrives on-demand starring Jessica Rothe, Josh Whitehouse and the controversial YouTube star Logan Paul.
The films’ roots go back to Southern California’s valley girl culture, which became a national phenomenon in the early 1980s thanks to the recurring “Saturday Night Live” character Sherry and the hit song “Valley Girl,” by Frank Zappa and his daughter, Moon Unit. The tune scorned the ditzy middle-class teens who spoke in uptalk and spent their free time at the mall.
Eager to capitalize on the fad, the indie production company Atlantic Entertainment Group greenlit the original movie, batting away Zappa’s trademark-infringement suit. The budget was just $350,000. To compare, fellow 1983 coming-of-age comedy “Risky Business” cost $6.2 million. Coolidge took a mere $5,000 directing fee and many of the crew members were volunteers.
Loosely based on “Romeo and Juliet,” the film is a star-crossed love story between Julie (played by Deborah Foreman), a white-bread “valley girl” from the San Fernando Valley, and Randy (Nicolas Cage), an angsty punk rocker from Hollywood. Coolidge’s goal was to show Los Angeles and the teens who lived in it as authentically as possible, void of two-dimensional stereotypes.
To do so, she’d need a leading man who could convey both sensitivity and humor while cruising down Hollywood Boulevard in a denim vest.
After a small part in “Fast Times at Ridgemont High” (1982), Cage, a nephew of the “Godfather” director Francis Ford Coppola, changed his last name to distance himself from his famous family. Coolidge had spent several years working with Francis at his Zoetrope Studios, but it was only when Cage told her he’d have to check his production schedule on a Coppola film he was shooting, that she learned of the young actor’s pedigree.
And even in Cage’s first leading role, there were clear glimpses of the creativity and method acting he’d become known for throughout his eccentric career.
It was Cage’s idea to improvise the breakup line that mixed profanity and Valley Girl slang, and to spit his chewing gum at Julie’s preppy ex, Tommy. It was also Cage’s idea to sleep in his car in Hollywood for most of the 20-day shoot to better understand Randy and to shave his chest hair into a triangle (after being told he needed to lose some of it to appear his age).
In fact, only Heidi Holicker, who played Julie’s friend Stacey, was actually from the valley.
Their close bond made shooting the breakup scene difficult, but despite their obvious chemistry, Foreman insisted, she and Cage were never a real-life couple.
During filming, the nonexistent wardrobe budget meant most of the female characters’ outfits came from the closets of the women working on the film. The prom scene gowns and tuxedos were lent by local shops, and the decidedly nonunion extras were all area college students — including members of rival fraternities who got into a brawl and trashed the gym during the shoot.
Cage and Foreman in the film. They were fond of each other offscreen but never dated, Foreman said.
But the threadbare nature of the production, filmed entirely on location and often sans permits, also bred camaraderie among the young cast. They spent time at a valley high school to study the culture and bonded on their own, frequenting the Hollywood nightclubs Seven Seas and Florentine Gardens.
“Because we didn’t have trailers or dressing rooms, we were always together,” Holicker recalled. “When we shot the club scene at the Central” — now the Viper Room — “Debbie and I got dressed on a dirt floor downstairs” along with Cage, Cameron Dye, who played Randy’s friend, and the band.
The film made a point of showcasing the ’80s new wave music taking over clubs and airwaves with on-screen performances from the Plimsouls and Josie Cotton. And Modern English’s “I Melt With You” became a chart hit after it played during Randy and Julie’s falling-in-love montage.
Without the money for a wide release — or even a revised credits reel with the correct track listings for the songs — “Valley Girl” premiered on the West Coast on April 29, 1983. But it made its money back opening weekend and quickly expanded nationwide, ultimately earning more than $17 million (the equivalent of $44 million today).
“Valley Girl” arrived eight months after Amy Heckerling’s teen hit, “Fast Times at Ridgemont High,” but despite their pioneering successes, Coolidge said, “it didn’t open the gates” for many opportunities for female directors, like her, Heckerling or Claudia Weill.
Foreman, who has a cameo in the musical alongside Holicker and another member of the original cast, Elizabeth Daily, is more optimistic.
