An adaptation of Bong Joon Ho’s action movie debuts on TNT, and a Taylor Swift concert airs on ABC.
SNOWPIERCER 9 p.m. on TNT. Jennifer Connelly and Daveed Diggs star in this postapocalyptic drama series, based on the action flick of the same name by the director Bong Joon Ho (“Parasite”) and its source material, the French graphic novel series “Le Transperceneige.” The title refers to the show’s setting: a 1,001-car train that continuously circles the Earth after the planet has frozen and become unlivable. Yet worldly evils remain, namely class divides, social injustice and greed. Tensions reach a fever pitch when someone is killed in first class and Melanie Cavill (Connelly), the head of hospitality, seeks the help of Andre Layton (Diggs), a rebellious third-class passenger and the only surviving homicide detective on the planet. The series has been five years in the making, buts its debut comes two weeks earlier than planned. And TNT has already ordered a second season.
THE BEVERLY HILLS DOG SHOW 8 p.m. on NBC. This annual competition, recorded in February, is welcome entertainment during these stressful times. Glamorous pooches representing 205 breeds strut their stuff to be crowned best in show. The hosts, the actor John O’Hurley and David Frei, of the Westminster Kennel Club, are joined by NBC Sports commentators and a number of celebrities.
HIGHTOWN 8 p.m. on Starz. Cape Cod is most known for its pristine beaches, a popular draw for city dwellers in the summer. While that idyllic landscape makes it into this new crime drama, the show also highlights a darker reality: the region’s struggle with the opioid epidemic. Jackie Quiñones (Monica Raymund), a National Marine Fisheries Service agent, likes to party. But she reconsiders her wild lifestyle after stumbling upon the body of a young woman on a beach. As Jackie works to get sober, she decides to take the case into her own hands, which pits her against a no-nonsense sergeant (James Badge Dale) and leads to a discovery of a drug-trafficking operation.
TAYLOR SWIFT CITY OF LOVER CONCERT (2020) 10 p.m. on ABC. Last month, Taylor Swift joined the long list of entertainers who were forced to cancel or postpone shows because of the coronavirus crisis. With her “Lover Fest” tour on hold, the superstar is offering fans something of a place holder: This hourlong special, filmed in Paris in September, is a live performance of her chart-topping seventh album, “Lover.” The concert follows the season finale of AMERICAN IDOL and will be available to stream on Hulu and Disney Plus starting Monday.
SNOWPIERCER (2014) Stream on Netflix; rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu or YouTube. If the TNT series has piqued your curiosity, now is a good time as any to watch Bong’s “Snowpiercer,” even if its premise — a small chunk of society confined on a train forever — is close to home. Chris Evans stars as the leader of the revolution brewing in the train’s tail, while an unrecognizable Tilda Swinton plays the formidable second-in-command.