A documentary about celebrity experiences with hallucinogenic drugs drops on Netflix. And Louis Malle’s mammoth movie about India is available on the Criterion Channel.
HAVE A GOOD TRIP: ADVENTURES IN PSYCHEDELICS Stream on Netflix. The Broadway run of “Flying Over Sunset,” a musical that takes some artistic license with Cary Grant, Clare Boothe Luce and Aldous Huxley’s experiments with LSD, was suspended because of the coronavirus pandemic. But these pioneering celebrity psychonauts paved the way for others. In this new documentary, Sting, Sarah Silverman Paul Scheer and several other stars share their experiences with hallucinogenic drugs like acid and psilocybin mushrooms. Re-enactments and animated sequences help bring their reminiscences to life.
ALIAS Stream on Hulu. In this popular spy series created by J.J. Abrams (Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker,” “Lost”), Jennifer Garner stars as Sydney Bristow, an intelligence operative who finds out her employer is not the C.I.A. but a sinister criminal cabal. After discovering that she’s been misled, Sydney makes it her mission to destroy the evil organization from the inside. Over the course of five seasons, all of which are now available to stream, she adopts and drops one identity after another to maintain her cover, pursue her ultimate goal and keep her civilian friends safe.
ASIAN AMERICANS 8 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Social distancing may make it difficult to celebrate Asian/Pacific American Heritage Month, but this five-part documentary series will offer an opportunity to do it from the comfort and safety of your home. The first installment explores the discrimination and violence that the earliest immigrants from the South Pacific, the Indian subcontinent, China, Japan, Vietnam, Korea and elsewhere in Asia were systematically subjected to. Despite the limits that were placed upon them, they played a major role in shaping the United States at an important point in its history. The second episode, which will immediately follow, focuses on the first generation of Asian-Americans born in the United States and the pressures they sometimes experienced straddling two cultures. The final three parts of the series will air on Tuesday.