Books|John Maynard Keynes Died in 1946. An Outstanding New Biography Shows Him Relevant Still.
“The Price of Peace,” Zachary D. Carter’s outstanding new intellectual biography of John Maynard Keynes, offers a resonant guide to our current moment, even if he finished writing it in the time before Covid-19. It’s rare for a 600-page economic history to move swiftly along currents of lucidity and wit, and this happens to be one of them. (Carter pays tribute to Robert Skidelsky’s three-volume biography of Keynes in the acknowledgments.) Carter begins with a love story, and ends with an elegant explanation of a credit default swap; even readers without a background in high finance will learn how to appreciate the drama of both.
Ideas, no matter how abstract, always originate in lived experience. Carter situates the development of Keynes’s economic thought in relation to his social milieu. Keynes, born in 1883, came of age amid the bohemian experimentation of the Bloomsbury Group, exchanging lovers and gossip with a set that included Virginia Woolf and Lytton Strachey. The Bloomsberries could be at turns backbiting, encouraging, critical and adulatory; their “radical and subversive code of conduct,” coupled with a refined taste for the good life, shaped Keynes’s approach to economic questions. He was trained as a mathematician, but unlike more doctrinaire economists, he viewed markets as social phenomena. Those who studied economics, he insisted, should be curious and intellectually nimble, with an abiding interest in human psychology and ethical questions.
Carter’s explications of macroeconomic theory are so seamlessly woven into his narrative that they’re almost imperceptible; you only notice how substantive they are once you get to his chapter on Keynes’s notoriously dense 1936 book, “The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,” and realize that you’re riveted by a passage on fluctuations in liquidity preference because you somehow know exactly what it is that Carter is talking about.
“The General Theory” aside, the rough outline of the Keynes story is that nobody with any power listened to his visionary proposals before the crisis of the Depression hit; after that, almost everyone did. Keynes’s ideas were radical, Carter writes, but he was staunchly anti-revolutionary: Having been traumatized by World War I, Keynes was at pains to persuade some of his Marxist students at Cambridge that a more just and equitable society didn’t have to come at the point of a gun. An activist government and deficit spending could alleviate suffering and spur growth, he reasoned, and the world eventually obliged. As much as Franklin Roosevelt didn’t like running a deficit, his New Deal offered one version of how Keynesianism worked; World War II offered another.
Carter’s protagonist dies about two-thirds of the way through “The Price of Peace,” on Easter Sunday in 1946, but the narrative keeps going. In the postwar years, Keynesianism settled into its perch as the new economic orthodoxy in the United States. Carter traces the splintering of Keynes’s intellectual legacy and the neoliberal backlash of Joseph Schumpeter and Friedrich Hayek. Both Keynesians and neoliberals claimed that their theories were bulwarks against authoritarianism, but neither side could claim the moral high ground by the mid-1970s. Neoliberals like Milton Friedman were advising the Pinochet military dictatorship in Chile, while successive American administrations resorted to Keynesian fiscal maneuvers to fund the prolonged bloodshed of the Vietnam War.
But Keynesianism could never get stamped out for too long. Keynes’s tools proved to be too useful, especially when paying for a forever war or a bank bailout. Carter argues that what’s been largely missing is an overarching sense of purpose, a vision of the good life. He faults Presidents Clinton and Obama for squandering their chance to figure out what that might be in a futile bid to appease the right. As this brilliantly incisive book shows, being fair and judicious doesn’t necessarily mean trying to reconcile all sides.