America’s favorite financial adviser was trying on retirement. Then came economic Armageddon.
She reads guys who aren’t C.E.O.s leasing C.E.O. cars, and she reads middle- and working- class women who buy jewelry and spend too much on clothes.
When the economy is good, Ms. Orman’s business does fine. But your bust is her boom.
 
Last Wednesday, Ms. Orman sat in the living room of the Bahamas home where she’s mostly lived since 2015, delivering a virtual master class in conjunction with the 92nd Street Y. She had on the trademark gold earrings she has worn since 1990, a black cotton and leather jacket from Mackage (“eight or 10 years old” and “under $500,” she noted) and a pair of brown glasses from 141 Eyewear.
Ms. Travis stood by, and Ms. Orman discussed — what else? — managing money during the coronavirus pandemic. She gave much advice and lamented continually why more people don’t listen to her until it’s too late.
At this point, Ms. Orman is almost as well known for Kristen Wiig’s “Saturday Night Live” impersonation of her as she is for her books and her own television appearances.
Now, Mr. Zaslav surmised, Ms. Orman is reconnecting with America because of a pandemic in which “all of our lives have gotten smaller, with her emerging as the nagging conscience we can’t get rid of.” This personality, he noted, developed from her own history of reduced circumstances.
Ms. Orman grew up with two older brothers on the South Side of Chicago. Her mother was a secretary who sold Avon cosmetics for extra money. Her father owned a chicken shack that burned down twice. He didn’t have insurance on it and lost everything. “One catastrophe after another,” she said.
After high school, Ms. Orman went to the University of Illinois, Champaign and graduated in 1976 with a degree in social work. She moved to Berkeley, Calif., where she borrowed $50,000 to start a restaurant.
That taught Ms. Orman a couple of things. First, that investors who don’t understand what is being done with their money are the most likely to lose it. 
Soon, she got her own training in finance at Merrill Lynch. She became an account executive there, specializing in retirement planning. In 1983, she moved over to Prudential as a vice president.
Ms. Mead thought the subject was too dreary. She advised Ms. Orman to do a book of more general financial advice for boomers.
Few publishers were interested, but Ms. Orman managed to strike a $15,000 deal with a small house, Newmarket Press, whose publisher, Esther Margolis, had worked with Jacqueline Susann and saw in Ms. Orman a similar ability to connect with women other publishers ignored.
Ms. Orman toured the country and went on Q2, the sister channel of QVC. When the book, “You’ve Earned It, Don’t Lose It,” became a best seller, she went to meet a better-known agent, Amanda Urban, known as Binky.
First, she walked into Ms. Urban’s office and was impressed with the way she chewed someone out on the phone. Then Ms. Urban told her to lose 30 pounds.
To Ms. Orman, that was a sign she would keep it real.
Ms. Orman then told Ms. Urban a few things. First that she was a lesbian, which she worried may get in the way of her becoming a brand-name personality. Second, that she could not write.
By 2002, Ms. Orman was hosting her own Saturday night show on CNBC, where she took calls from viewers who largely asked for permission to buy things that they knew they couldn’t afford.
Andy Siegel, 57, chauffeurs her around Miami. He has driven Paul McCartney, Billy Joel, Diana Ross and Rod Stewart but says Ms. Orman is the only one who’s ever become a real friend.
After Ms. Orman and Ms. Travis sold properties in New York and Miami and moved full-time to the Bahamas, Mr. Siegel continued to serve as a kind of valet, shipping food and goods to her that she can’t get locally.
“It’s not even the coffee they’re buying — it’s the status and a place to go,” she said, noting that $100 a month placed into a retirement account accruing at 10 percent a year for 40 years (the last seven have been 14.3 percent) would bring a person $560,000.
Ayanna Benjamin, 36, preferred Dunkin’ Donuts. That’s where she went daily before appearing in one of a series of videos Ms. Orman did with domestic violence survivors, in a project produced by the National Domestic Violence Hotline and Avon. When the taping was done, Ms. Orman told Ms. Benjamin to stay in touch.
“She asked me to email her, but no one got in touch to give me her email,” Ms. Benjamin said in an interview.
Ms. Orman bought Ms. Benjamin a coffee machine and shipped it to her house. When Ms. Benjamin followed her advice to stop overspending on clothes, Ms. Orman sent her two pairs of jeans that she said were great and would last a really long time. “Gap, I think,” Ms. Orman said.
When Ms. Benjamin went to City College, Ms. Orman paid her student loan. When Ms. Benjamin graduated, Ms. Orman and Ms. Travis were in the audience.
Ms. Orman and Ms. Benjamin do a fair amount of bickering.
In 2008, Ms. Orman swooped in to help Kathy Griffin when a bad manager mishandled her money. Later, Ms. Griffin connected her to Sia.
Occasionally, Ms. Orman has misfired. In 2012, she introduced her own debit card. It was called Approved and geared at people who had been unable to build credit. There were fees, but lower than those for other cards attached to celebrities. Still, she was pilloried for one: $2 per call to customer service representatives. The venture lost money — $4 million of her own, according to Ms. Orman — and the card was discontinued two years later.
One of Ms. Orman’s biggest mantras is that no one should really retire until they’re 70.
She’s still 13 months away from that, but when she and Ms. Travis moved to the Bahamas, it did signal that she was slowing down somewhat.
Some of Ms. Orman’s advice has shifted since the Great Recession of a decade ago. The coronavirus has led her to the belief that having an emergency fund for food and health care is more important than concerns over debt. That’s why she’s telling people in financial trouble to scrape their money together and put it aside for emergencies, regardless of the damage it may do to a FICO score.
Those who are in a slightly better situation frequently ask Ms. Orman what they should do about their stock holdings. Once upon a time, Ms. Orman was an evangelist for municipal bonds and an opponent of the stock market. But that changed as the interest on them descended to “almost nil,” as she put it.
So Ms. Orman’s recommendation now is to dollar-cost average in the stock market: purchasing a little bit every month, mostly in index funds, regardless of whether markets rise or fall.
As the market rallied in recent weeks, Ms. Orman became increasingly convinced we haven’t reached the bottom.
Partly because she considers the federal response to the coronavirus to be disastrous. And don’t get her started on the election.
She wants to believe “everything happens for the best” and that we will emerge a stronger country from all this.
