U.S.|What Is Beauty Now?

But for every Karen Parker, there’s a Kristi Cooper. “I’m not going to lie,” said Cooper, “I can’t wait to get back into that salon chair and feel normal again.” She has dyed her hair every three weeks for 30 years.
As hair turns gray and the final flecks of pedicures chip away, we are coming face to face with what lies beneath all that beauty maintenance. For some, it’s become a time of experimentation and fun. For others, it’s been an unwelcome reminder of the lost access to beauty products and services.
Women are especially impacted since the pressure for bodily perfection has always weighed more heavily on women than men.
But if past crises have taught us anything, it’s that most beauty regimens will bounce right back.
Geoffrey Jones, author of Beauty Imagined: A History of the Global Beauty Industry, explained that beauty was considered so vital during WWII that the U.S. government deemed lipstick a wartime necessity. “It was like armaments or something, a necessary good,” he said, adding that vibrant lips kept morale high.
Even during economic downturns, people don’t stop buying beauty products, they just start buying more affordable ones instead. During the financial crisis of 2008-9, it was sales of nail polish and mascara that spiked. During the Great Depression, it was lipstick.
Jones doesn’t know what the big hit will be during our current plight, but he is pretty sure it won’t be lipstick. “Lipstick is going to do particularly badly because everyone is going to have these masks on, right?” he said. Although some women may brighten their lips for Zoom meetings, Jones pointed out that there were also the hundreds of thousands of furloughed workers who were unlikely to be using the video conferencing app for work.
During such a fraught time, concern about appearance can be viewed as vain and frivolous, but Hannah McCann, a lecturer at the University of Melbourne who specializes in beauty culture, said it’s important for preserving normalcy. “Maintaining your beauty rituals is a way to feel like you are in control and not losing yourself,” she said.
McCann has been keeping tabs on trends online and has seen a surge in searches for home beauty tips, such as the DIY Banana “Botox” video, which provides instructions on how to make pantry products into a facial that will purportedly tighten the skin. (It was, for a brief time, the top beauty video on YouTube.) Hair tutorials offering guidance on cuts and styling have also seen a steady rise on YouTube.
Virgie Tovar, a body positive activist known for her work combating weight discrimination, said she has experienced a significant increase in health trolling and fat-shaming on her Instagram account since quarantine began. At a time when many people are feeling extra anxious about their own weight gain, she’s not surprised to be targeted by an uptick in fatphobic comments. “People have always turned to weight-loss as a way to feel like they are in control of factors that are largely outside of their control,” she wrote in an email.
Other academics are hopeful that the pandemic will cause women and men to cultivate a more compassionate view of their bodies.
As health and economy are imperiled, people will start prioritizing community, friends and family, and that can have a positive effect on body image. “When we are in that mode of wanting to help, it tends to suppress that more appearance-focused side of trying to look good in other people’s eyes,” said Allison Kelly, the acting executive director of the Centre for Mental Health Research and Treatment at the University of Waterloo.
Focusing on what our bodies do for us can also help shift priorities: “Getting connected to what feels good in our bodies instead of how many calories we are burning,” she said.
Readers: Has quarantine changed your relationship with your body? Tell us how at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Today’s In Her Words is written by Mara Altman and edited by Francesca Donner. Our art director is Catherine Gilmore-Barnes, and our photo editor is Sandra Stevenson.
