The deal with Joe Rogan, a provocative podcast host with millions of listeners, is the latest move by Spotify to expand outside music.
Joe Rogan, the brash comedian turned hugely popular podcast host, is moving to Spotify.
Mr. Rogan announced the deal on Instagram, telling his 9.5 million followers that the podcast would move to Spotify on Sept. 1, in an agreement that further cements Spotify’s evolution from a music streaming service to a behemoth purveyor of all kinds of online audio.
The company did not disclose the financial details of the agreement to license the podcast, “The Joe Rogan Experience.” But The Wall Street Journal, citing an anonymous source, reported it could be worth more than $100 million based on the podcast’s performance metrics and other factors.
Grey Munford, a spokesman for Spotify, declined to comment on the figure cited by the newspaper.
Mr. Rogan stressed repeatedly on social media that the deal would not change the nature of his show or make him an employee of Spotify.
In a video announcement on Facebook he clarified that he would not be an employee of Spotify.
In a statement, Spotify described the agreement as a “multiyear exclusive licensing deal” that would make the podcast free for all of the platform’s 286 million users.
Mr. Rogan said clips of the show would still be available on YouTube, where the show currently streams and attracts millions of weekly viewers. But later in the year, full episodes will stream exclusively on Spotify.
She added that the deal suggests Spotify is looking to compete more directly with YouTube. “The exclusive deal for Rogan’s video and audio content suggests Spotify is placing a higher value on video than in previous years,” she said.
Since Mr. Rogan’s podcast began in 2009, his long-format interviews, which are often laced with profanities and his unvarnished observations about the news, have gained a huge audience. He has presented himself as a counterweight to what he views as political correctness run amok, and has interviewed a wide range of public figures, including the entrepreneur Andrew Yang and Senator Bernie Sanders, whom Mr. Rogan endorsed early in the Democratic presidential primary this year.
Mr. Rogan was also widely denounced for remarks he made in 2013, when he described going to a movie theater to see “Planet of the Apes” in a largely black neighborhood.
He later complained on the show about the blowback he received on Twitter. “Listen, man, I am saying it was a positive experience,” he said.
Mr. Rogan has shrugged off criticism that he peddles in conspiracy theories. “I go back and forth with conspiracies. I have a love-hate relationship with conspiracies,” he said last year on his podcast.