There are nearly 30 games scheduled for neutral sites in the coming season. Financially, they become somewhat untenable if the coronavirus forces them to go without fans.
Alabama would earn a flat fee of $6 million, according to an agreement the university signed, and U.S.C. was likely to bank a similar amount. But if the teams drew anywhere near the 81,359 fans they did four years ago, it would be a bonanza for Jones, who would reap upward of $16 million in ticket sales alone, according to estimates from a seating price chart that lists rates for the public, starting at $100 for nosebleed seats.
Then toss in parking — where some of the stadium’s 12,000 spots go for $75 and up at Cowboys games — along with concessions, game merchandise, a 22 percent cut of each team’s merchandise, sponsorships, suites and event revenues, and it’s the start to an industrious Saturday afternoon.
Now, as it increasingly appears that the college football season will be played with restrictions — if it is played at all — college administrators and event promoters are busy wondering how games like Alabama-U.S.C. pencil out if crowds are prohibited or limited.
Several of these games largely cash in on the popularity of college football, particularly in the South. The same day that Alabama and U.S.C. are on the calendar, Baylor and Mississippi play at the Houston Texans’ stadium, and West Virginia and Florida State are scheduled at the Atlanta Falcons’ stadium, which is slated to host three college football games in a seven-day span (Auburn vs. North Carolina and Virginia vs. Georgia are the others).
No university is likely to be as affected by playing games at third-party sites as Notre Dame. The Fighting Irish are scheduled to open their season against Navy in Dublin on Aug. 29. They are also scheduled to play Wisconsin at the Green Bay Packers’ Lambeau Field on Oct. 3, and have games against Wake Forest and Georgia Tech in N.F.L. stadiums.
The decisions on whether Notre Dame plays Wake Forest in Charlotte, N.C., on Sept. 26 or Georgia Tech in Atlanta on Nov. 14 will be largely left to those schools.
Neutral-site games have a long history in college football. Coaches like them because they can showcase their team in a new recruiting ground. Fans like them as opportunities to travel. Sponsors like them because they can advertise to captive audiences. And players like the chance to play in N.F.L. stadiums and sometimes on hallowed grounds.
U.S.C.’s athletic director, Mike Bohn, warned fans in a tweet that there would be “much disinformation” about the game against Alabama. He declined an interview request through a spokesman. Alabama’s athletic director, Greg Byrne, did not respond to a message left on his cellphone.
While it contains no provisions with respect to a pandemic, Alabama’s contract contains contingencies in case attendance is hurt by N.C.A.A. penalties; in that case, the $6 million payout could be withheld and renegotiated. The contract also allows for Alabama to have two suites, 75 parking passes, seating for the band at no charge and provides at least 25,000 tickets to resell to its fans at four suggested price points: $300, $200, $100 and $50 for students.
