Nearly three million new unemployment claims brought the two-month total to more than 36 million, even with some still frustrated in seeking benefits.
For millions of Americans, government benefits have provided a crucial lifeline. Unemployment programs alone delivered $48 billion in payments in April, according to the Treasury Department.
But even as states strive to keep up with the onslaught of claims, many workers remain supremely frustrated, either by their inability to submit applications or by payment delays. According to a poll for The New York Times in early May by the online research firm SurveyMonkey, more than half of those applying for unemployment benefits in recent weeks were unsuccessful.
And as of Saturday, 20 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico had not paid out any money under the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program, which Congress passed in March to help freelancers, the self-employed and other workers not normally eligible for state jobless benefits.
Some of those being called back to work have never seen a penny of government aid.
Jason Cooper, 43, went back to his serving job at the Savour restaurant in Tallahassee, Fla., in early May without ever receiving the jobless benefits he spent weeks trying to track down.
He was furloughed on March 14 and tried for the next month to file for government aid. In mid-April, a few days after he successfully submitted a claim, his employer secured a loan and began paying workers again.
Mr. Cooper was lucky: he had some savings that helped cover four weeks without income, and he temporarily moved in with his mother in St. Augustine, Fla. He plans to wait out the pandemic before trying to go to a state office to claim the backdated benefits he believes he is owed.
“It was so difficult to get through the first time that I have no real faith that the system is going to work anytime in the near future,” he said.
At first, Mr. Cooper was concerned about returning to work, but now he feels comfortable in the small restaurant, where employees are not wearing masks but are using single-use gloves for serving. Tables have also been spaced farther apart. “It feels shockingly normal,” he said.
Sarah Parker, 26, a customer service manager at a store in Chillicothe, Ohio, was asked by her employer last week to prepare to return to work in a small shopping center.
She estimates that her new paycheck will be half of the roughly $800 a week that she received in government aid, but said she did not want to subsist on benefit payments.
After the pandemic grabbed hold in March, Washington began sending $1,200 stimulus checks to most households. Congress also enacted emergency benefits that expanded unemployment insurance to gig workers and others not covered under state programs, and provided a weekly supplement of $600 through July. To help laid-off workers who exhausted their state benefits, the government extended unemployment insurance for 13 weeks.
For many low-wage workers who applied successfully, the additional $600 meant their weekly income matched or even exceeded their regular paycheck. Many would prefer to wait for the health risks to recede but fear losing their benefits.
Kelty Stanton, an 18-year-old community college student, said that she was happy to be asked to return to her job next week at a restaurant and grocery near Titusville, N.J., but that she was stunned when she read an email outlining the terms.
To stay on as an employee, she was required to return a signed and dated copy of an attached letter or risk being fired. Her company said that if she declined to go back to work, New Jersey’s unemployment department would be notified and her benefits removed.
She said she planned to buy some masks and extra hand sanitizer before she starts on Monday.
Some employers are asking returning workers to sign waivers absolving companies of liability if their workers get sick.
A survey released last week by the National Federation of Independent Business, a trade group that has often supported lower taxes and deregulation, found that 68 percent of small-business owners were worried about increased liability claims if they reopened.
This week, social media users shared a letter from the Las Vegas restaurant chain Nacho Daddy that asked returning employees to promise not to take legal action if they contracted the virus at work.
The president of Nacho Daddy, Paul Hymas, said in an emailed statement on Wednesday that the company had since removed that liability language from its hiring process.
