Smarter Living|Job Interviews Are Broken. There’s a Way to Fix Them.
For decades, managers have bet on the wrong people — and rejected the right ones. The Kansas City Star once rejected an application from a cartoonist named Walt Disney. Record labels said no thanks to the Beatles, Madonna, U2, Kanye and Ed Sheeran. A hotel, a police department and a Kentucky Fried Chicken all denied Jack Ma a job. And 30 N.F.L. teams decided not to draft Tom Brady.
It doesn’t have to be that way. In organizational psychology, we have over a century of evidence on why job interviews fail and how to fix them. If managers learn to overcome three basic mistakes, they can get better at spotting diamonds in the rough.
The first mistake is asking the wrong kinds of questions. Some questions are just too easy to fake. What’s your greatest weakness? Even Michael Scott, the inept manager in the TV show “The Office,” aced that one: “I work too hard. I care too much.” Other questions reveal more about the manager who’s asking than the candidate who’s responding. How many paper clips would fit in Yankee Stadium? Brainteasers turn out to be useless for predicting job performance, but useful for identifying sadistic managers, who seem to enjoy stumping people.
We’re better off asking behavioral questions. Tell me about a time when …. Past behavior can help us anticipate future behavior. But sometimes they’re easy to game, especially for candidates with more experience. We can get around those issues by including some situational questions. What would you do if .… Pick a challenge that’s important for success in the job and your culture, and we can learn something valuable about how candidates will lead, handle conflicts and solve problems.
The second error is focusing on the wrong criteria. At banks and law firms, managers often favor people who went to the same school or share their love of lacrosse. Across industries and occupations, economists find that even when candidates’ résumé are identical, those with white-sounding names like Allison and Matthew get 50 percent more callbacks than those with African-American-sounding names like Lakisha and Jamal. There’s evidence that birthmarks, being pregnant and being overweight can put candidates at a disadvantage. And believe it or not, bald men are seen as having more leadership potential if they shave their heads (which is obviously why I shave my head).
We can overcome some of these biases with structured interviews: identifying the key skills and values in advance, and then creating a standard set of behavioral and situational questions to ask every candidate. Although it might sound boring and robotic, it can double or even triple managers’ accuracy in predicting job performance. We can even build an answer key by posing questions to our existing employees and seeing how star performers answer them differently.
My favorite antidote to faking is to focus less on what candidates say, and more on what they do. Invite them to showcase their skills by collecting a work sample — a real piece of work that they produced. It might be a project they’ve done in the past. In major league baseball, the Moneyball movement, spurred by the Oakland Athletics’ data-driven approach to assembling the best team, revolutionized the draft by recognizing that players had already done years of tryouts in high school and college, and using their past batting and pitching statistics to forecast their future success.
A work sample can also be a live simulation of the job in real-time. In orchestras, women finally got a fair chance when blind auditions were introduced. Suddenly, managers started making decisions based on the quality of music being played behind a curtain instead of the demographics of the person playing it. At General Electric, to identify aircraft engine mechanics who work well with others, managers dump a pile of LEGOs on the table and ask a half dozen candidates to work together to build a helicopter, and score their teamworking skills.
Hungry and eager to improve. That’s what I should have been looking for when I was hiring salespeople. A colleague ended up convincing me to start collecting a work sample. So I challenged candidates to sell me a rotten apple. The guy who wasn’t making much eye contact, the math major, rose to the occasion. “This may look like a rotten apple,” he opened, “but it’s actually an aged, antique apple, and you could plant the apple seeds in your backyard if you want.” I ended up giving him the job, figuring he could learn to sell anything, and he turned out to be the best salesperson I ever hired.
Credentials are overrated, and motivation is underrated. It doesn’t matter how much experience people have if they lack the drive to think creatively, work collaboratively and keep on learning. We’re not just hiring people to do a job today — we’re hiring them to make their team and their organization better tomorrow.
Adam Grant, an organizational psychologist at Wharton, is the author of “Originals.” For more from David Chang — and for insights on reinventing job interviews — listen to WorkLife with Adam Grant, a TED original podcast on the science of making work not suck. You can find WorkLife on Apple Podcasts, or on your favorite podcast platform.