The designer let her larger-than-life husband Charles do the talking. But the style symbolized by their shared name was a joint creation.
America had its first introduction to the artist and designer Ray Eames in 1956, and it was brief. NBC’s “Home” show was featuring the debut of the now-famous Eames lounge chair, and the host, Arlene Francis, opened with Charles Eames — who was “almost a household word,” she told the audience, thanks to a series of earlier chairs made from molded plastic and plywood.
But the name, like the chair, wasn’t his alone. “Almost always when there’s a successful man, there’s a very interesting and able woman behind him,” Francis said, before calling “Mrs. Eames” to the stage to say a few halting words.
Francis asked the couple to explain how the Eames design process worked. “Ray, shall we let Charles do it, or do you want to help?” she asked, barely pausing. “No? See, as I told you, she’s behind the man, but terribly important.” In a clip available on YouTube, as Charles starts talking and the broadcast cuts to a close-up of an undulating plywood seat, you can see Ray’s feet in a corner of the screen, backing away and then disappearing.
It’s not exactly right to say that Ray was sidelined, let alone invisible, in the intensely masculine world of midcentury design. The steady stream of imagery of the couple — sometimes riding on a motorcycle, sometimes frolicking in homemade animal masks, sometimes posing in matched clothing — was as much a part of their work as their chairs, their dozens of experimental movies, or their famous house on the Pacific Ocean, whose light-filled space filled with exquisitely curated assemblages of colorful objects has become a beau ideal of humanized modernism.
But since her death in 1988, Ray Eames has been moving back to the center of the picture. Or rather, the world has been discovering that she was there all along — not just as the beaming helpmeet with sparkling eyes and a Dorothy-from-Oz dress sense, but as an artistic force in and of herself.
She was born Bernice Kaiser in 1911 in Sacramento, where her father for a time ran a vaudeville theater. “Ray” was a childhood nickname, and it stuck (though it would sometimes cause its own confusions: as recently as 2006, an article in The New York Times Magazine credited the classic film “Powers of Ten” to “the Eames brothers”).
She moved to New York City in the 1930s, where she studied with the painter Hans Hofmann and was active with American Abstract Artists, an activist group that picketed galleries that refused to show nonrepresentational art. In 1940, she enrolled at the Cranbrook Academy of Art outside Detroit, where she met Charles, at the time the head of the department of industrial design.
The Eameses designing the Aluminum Group series of furniture in 1958.Credit...Eames Office LLC. All Rights Reserved.
Charles and Ray in the house they designed and built in 1949.Credit...Eames Office LLC. All Rights Reserved.
He was tall and angular, a charismatic former track star and football captain whose looks would later draw comparison to Henry Fonda. He was also married, with a young child. After a semester, Ray left, but they exchanged smitten letters.
“We must see each other soon,” he wrote to her in March 1941. “This business of becoming dream people in each other’s minds is no good.” Soon after, Charles divorced his wife, and he and Ray married and moved to California.
It’s the kind of tribute that can come off as lip service. But in the decades since their deaths, design critics have increasingly challenged the gendered division of labor — architecture and form-giving for him; color, whimsy and “décor” for her — presumed in many accounts of their work, and of modernism itself.
Charles and Ray, then newlyweds, in their first home — the Richard Neutra-designed Strathmore Apartments in Los Angeles — in December 1941.Credit...Eames Office LLC. All Rights Reserved.
The birth of the famous molded Eames chairs might be traced to the winning design Charles and Eero Saarinen submitted to a Museum of Modern Art competition in 1940. But it wasn’t until later that Charles and Ray, working in their first Los Angeles apartment on a cobbled-together machine nicknamed the Kazam!, began figuring out how to make the compound curves of their now classic LCW chair work for mass production, with Ray mostly working the machine while Charles earned a paycheck as a set designer at MGM Studios.
The Eameses’ entry in the card catalogue of The New York Times’s photo archive.
A profile of Charles Eames, which appeared in The Times on April 24, 1973.
One 1969 television program described Ray as “sitting like a delicious dumpling in a doll’s dress.” And Ray, at least in front of the cameras, seemed willing to play the part of supportive, mostly silent wife.
A creative woman seemingly content to let her husband speak for her and their work together may feel uneasy amid recent feminist reclamation projects aimed at bringing other midcentury artistic women — like Ray’s friend Lee Krasner, who was married to Jackson Pollock — out of their husbands’ shadows (while sometimes also trying to topple the men from the pedestal of male genius).
And Ray, who died 10 years to the day after her husband, left behind few public statements about how she felt, say, in 1985 when she appeared at the World Design Conference to accept his posthumous award as the world’s most influential designer, for work they did together. If she ever seethed at her husband’s higher profile or felt marginalized (as some colleagues in the Eames studio have suggested), she did not show it.
Kirkham, who interviewed her in the years before her death, says that Ray wasn’t concerned with teasing out what part of the creativity symbolized by the name “Eames” was hers.
