Opinion|Will the Trump Administration’s New Sexual Assault Rules Hurt Survivors?
Will the Trump Administration’s New Sexual Assault Rules Hurt Survivors?
Betsy DeVos just rewrote the regulations for how schools and colleges respond to sexual misconduct.
Difficult as it may be to imagine now, students could return to class in the fall, by which time the rules will be in effect. Will they actually make schools and campuses fairer, or will they cause a return “to the days when rape and harassment in schools were ignored and swept under the rug,” as the National Women’s Law Center put it? Here are some of the major changes and what people are saying about them.
Title IX enforcement has grown increasingly contentious since the Obama administration issued its “Dear Colleague” letter in 2011, which advised schools to ramp up efforts to crack down on sexual misconduct and threatened to withdraw funding if they didn’t. Critics of the guidance say that schools have felt financially pressured to overcomply, siding with accusers at the expense of the due-process rights of the accused.
Accused students must now be given written assurance that they are presumed innocent until proven guilty.
Colleges will be required to adjudicate claims through live hearings during which accusers and the accused can be cross-examined by an intermediary to challenge their credibility.
Whereas the Obama administration asked schools to adopt a “preponderance of evidence” standard of proof in determining guilt — sometimes known as “50 percent plus a feather” — colleges will now have the flexibility to use the higher “clear and convincing evidence” standard.
The presumption of innocence is arguably the least controversial change. Since the “Dear Colleague” letter, The Los Angeles Times’s editorial board writes, schools have gone too far in countering a culture of denial by assuming guilt: It is not uncommon for accused students to be deprived of access to complaints and evidence against them, as well as the ability to question their accusers. As a result, hundreds of students have sued colleges for denying them a fair process in recent years, many of them successfully.
In The Washington Post, Sandra R. Levitsky, Elizabeth A. Armstrong and Kamaria Porter argue that cross-examination will tip the balance in favor of the accused. Research has shown that traditional adversarial questioning is a poor tool for assessing the truth in cases of sexual violence, they say, and can re-traumatize survivors, which will further deter victims from coming forward.
Despite these concerns, Evan Gerstmann writes in Forbes, cross-examination is still the best way to ensure a fair hearing. He argues that cross-examination will help victims, too, since there have been cases in which students accused of misconduct have changed their stories without being challenged.
Reasonable people also disagree about using a higher evidentiary standard given the notorious difficulty of proving sexual misconduct. But whichever standard schools end up choosing, fairness requires using the same one for sexual and nonsexual cases alike, Jeannie Suk Gersen, a professor at Harvard Law School, argued in The New Yorker last year after Ms. DeVos unveiled her proposal. Under the new rules, schools will be entitled to apply the higher standard for sexual harassment but the lower one for, say, racial harassment. “That seems discriminatory,” she wrote.
But others insist that the narrower definition will be profoundly harmful. As Dana Bolger, a co-founder of Know Your IX, a campaign against sexual violence in schools, pointed out in The Times in 2018, some courts have used that definition to rule that even a rape doesn’t count as creating a hostile environment because a one-time act is not pervasive. “That means a victim of rape (not to mention other less severe forms of sexual misconduct) might never see her school investigate her claims, let alone remedy them,” she wrote.
Under the Obama administration, schools could be held responsible for failing to address an episode of harassment or assault if they knew or “reasonably should” have known about it. Under the new guidelines, however, schools will be held responsible only if they prove “deliberately indifferent.” What’s more, colleges will be required to investigate claims only if they are reported in a formal complaint to certain officials.
This new framework will create a safer environment for accusers by allowing them to come forward without putting an investigation in motion, according to the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education. “F.I.R.E. has heard of cases where an alleged victim chose not to come forward because they wanted their alleged assailant to take responsibility for their wrongdoing, but did not want them branded rapists or expelled,” the organization says.
But others say the deliberate-indifference standard is far too low and will let schools off the hook. As Cassandra Negley notes at Yahoo Sports, it was the older standard of responsibility that justified the $4.5 million fine against Michigan State University for its failure to stop the abuses of Larry Nassar, who pleaded guilty to 10 counts of sexual assault and was accused by more than 160 women and girls.
Here’s what readers had to say about the last debate: Is food delivery during the coronavirus pandemic ethical?
Eddie from California: “You talked about tipping delivery people, but how about tipping people at the restaurant? Some people think that you don’t need to leave a tip when ordering takeout. But it’s always a nice idea, especially during a pandemic when no one can ‘eat in.’"
