Remind her that she’s the best: You can stream these shorts right here, from the safety of home.
Some of us may be far from family this year, but we can still celebrate Mom, wherever she is. We’ve put together a collection of our favorite short documentaries for Mother’s Day, by some of the best filmmakers around. Even if you’re not watching together, these are films to stream with family and then jump on the phone or Zoom to ask each other: Which one moved you most?
After her mother died, the filmmaker Judith Helfand struggled to pack up her possessions and figure out what to keep — and how to let go. She kept her mother’s belongings in boxes for weeks, until finally, she began to unpack. Here, she turns grief over her first Mother’s Day without her mom into art.
It’s obvious that giving birth is one of the most extreme things your body can ever go through. So why is the aftermath also such a shock? New mothers explain how they love their babies — but were completely unprepared for how childbirth would change them physically.
I love my baby. But I was unprepared for how childbirth would change my body.
[baby fussing] Sorry, guys. That’s all right. Honestly, don’t worry. It’s O.K. The whole process, you’re led to believe, as a woman, that it’s the most natural thing that can happen to you, sort of the purpose of your body. Except it felt incredibly unnatural and alien to me. I hated the bit at the beginning where you don’t really look pregnant.   I liked that bit where I looked discernibly pregnant, and, like, my tits went really massive and I was a bit, like, that felt like quite sexy. I was like, “Hey, yeah. I’m just carrying a child.” It was really nice having nice hair. It was wavy and long. And there was more of it. And I had beautiful nails. That was really nice. The come down from that, not so nice. But I’d say, the middle of the pregnancy is a really great time, because you’re still feeling really comfortable and you get all the benefits of the hormones kicking in. So that was awesome. The first time I was pregnant, I didn’t get stretch marks until the last month. With him it was way more challenging on my body. I put on more weight. Funny enough, the stretch marks are not the thing that bothered me the most. It’s the breasts.  And they fell a bit. It’s life. You know, it’s gravity. And in the beginning, I was really upset about it and I was telling my husband, you know, “I’m going to get a boob job when I stop breastfeeding.” The funny thing is is that it took so long to accept that this is my body and I should be happy and it’s not good or bad, it’s just me. And then you get pregnant. And then you slowly start seeing it change, which is fine, because you’re growing a human being. But when you finally give birth and then you’re left with this new body that you took — it took you 30 years to accept and to love and to figure out and figure out what works and doesn’t work and all of a sudden, it’s a completely different body. I think that’s where my issues with giving birth came from. Not being able to wear your own clothes sounds trivial. But actually, just is another thing that really makes you not feel like yourself. And it’s one of the things that makes your life legible to you.  Like he would probably object to that word, but feeling that shift of his perception of me as no longer a sexual being, he was like, “I don’t want to cover you in spunk, I want to look after you.” I expected lots of negative things from pregnancy and from giving birth. And I was prepared that it’s going to be hard and everything. But I wasn’t expecting so much love. I really didn’t even know that I’m capable of so much love, which dwarfs everything else in comparison. But I was never really too much in tune with myself as a woman to know how I looked down there or can’t even define how I felt down there. But the minute I gave birth, I knew that everything changed. For me, it wasn’t really bouncing back into my normal intimate life with my husband. That took long, long time and I think two bottles of wine. But I mean, I’m talking about like seven months I think. The last couple of weeks of being pregnant, I lost all sensation in my hands. So one after another, all 10 fingertips went numb. It’s some syndrome where your wrists swell up so much that the nerves that go through your wrist stop sending the impulses through from your fingertips. I think it took probably more than two to three months for sensation to come back in my hands. If you can’t feel what you’re doing, it’s a very weird thing to be taking care of a very little child. I never had a serious or real injury before in my life until C-section. So that was a big thing. I had no idea what’s going to happen there or how it’s going to look like after the surgery. I had a scar. I had stretch marks. I don’t have flat belly at all. But all that physical changes comes together with the everyday work of being a mom. Even the tension you put on your muscles, you should hold her tight, because like you shouldn’t drop her, and things like that. You know what I mean? Yeah. The C-section, I think it was hard on my body. And yeah, it made me dislike my body even more.  I’m Brazilian. I grew up on the beach. Now I’m like: swimsuit. I don’t want to show my belly. I don’t want to show my scar. Although I don’t think I should be ashamed of it, of course, but I do have to look at myself sometimes and admit, I don’t like it. I don’t love it. I love to send the message to people, yes, show it. Be proud of it. But I’m still working on it, let’s say. You just keep looking at yourself and you’re just, what is that? And it, actually, it affected me bonding with my baby, because you’re meant to love and protect automatically, which I did, I protected my baby, but I just didn’t like him for what he did to me. It took me like eight weeks to get into, “Oh, O.K., you’re my son. I love you.” I had some tears and I was showering six times a day, because that was the only time I could pee without feeling pain.   How do I go to the bathroom, you know? How do I take a shit? These were the kind of things that I was apprehensive about. So I had, like a two for one deal. I had like a full labor, like 36 hours of that. And then, an emergency C-section. I definitely had no idea what level of pain you can be in without being dead. It would have been really nice to just be told, it’s going to be almost as if you were going to die. Post-surgery recovery, that was a lot longer than I thought. And there were a lot more unexpected things that happened. Like the vaginal walls were really irritated, which nobody could really explain. I was forever bleeding, like every day for half a year. And nobody could tell me why or whether it was going to stop. Just before I got pregnant, I’d finished my master’s. So I’d gone from this being very stimulated intellectually to those first stages of looking after an infant, which are boring. There’s a lot of monotony. And you’re very, very tired. And so it’s a bit like, well, if no one fancies me, my brain’s not involved in the same kind of activity it used to do, then who am I? I started working out six weeks after having a baby. And I did it because I wanted to go back to how I looked as quick as possible. It’s such a weird balance of trying to diet, but at the same time, worrying about are you giving enough nutrients to your kid through your breast milk? Am I being selfish by compromising his food supply, because I’m trying to lose weight and look good, which is such a superficial thing to want? And what a selfish thing to want, you know? It felt really important to me that I wanted to breastfeed. And I think also I would have felt like, I had really failed Wolfie if I hadn’t. But afterwards, my breasts, they were quite empty. They were quite haunted, basically. The skin never kind of went back. When Wolfie was a year old, I had a breast augmentation and breast lift. For me, it felt like it was just taking ownership back of my own body. No, yeah. Breasts are only for my daughter now, definitely. Like nobody else can touch them. It is. It is. It’s different. Yeah. It’s a different feeling. But it’s generally after giving birth and being so preoccupied with keeping her alive and everything, that I put all that part of myself aside for a long, long time. Something that made me self-conscious about having sex in both pregnancies is milk, because I don’t want anyone near my boobs while I’m breastfeeding. And it’s really weird, because you have to change how you do things a bit, basically. It’s not about a sex thing, but like it’s about feeling of my boobs only belong to Luna kind of thing, which was so silly. But like, you only have that tolerance and patience just for your baby and nothing else. Sex used to be natural and fun and spontaneous and beautiful and you can’t wait for it or sometimes you want it. Sometimes you don’t. Now, it’s like this psychological thing. And I never thought that would be the problem with having a baby. The amount of pressure and the amount of responsibility that’s placed on our shoulder the moment we give birth and they give us this baby and they’re like here you go, good luck. The anxiety. I was overwhelmed with anxiety constantly. And even when Wolfie was asleep, I couldn’t sleep, because it was like having a tiny bomb that could go off at any moment. I mean, I can’t look back at the aftermath of pregnancy and birth with anything other than, I feel traumatized by that really, still. Yeah. I plan to have another one as well. And all these changes doesn’t have any effect on it, because apart from everything, each second I share with her is just amazing, just like heaven. Right. I mean, I oscillate wildly between thinking, I really want to have another baby and to I don’t want to have any children. I don’t want to have any family. I want to be on my own, just on my own on Tinder.  Do you know what I mean? I feel like, look, my body’s not, yeah, it’s not how I want it to be, but you know, who cares, basically?
A man brings objects to life in a struggle to recreate the lost memory of his mother’s last day. The result is an imagined memory, a deep longing for something he had never seen.
A man brings objects to life in a struggle to recreate the lost memory of his mother’s last day.
For too many American children, including those in this short documentary, Mother’s Day is as a bitter reminder that their mothers are locked behind bars.
When seeing your mother means a trip to prison.
With more women working, some men in Japan are breaking with tradition to do hands-on caregiving. This film follows one of those men, who spends his days balancing a demanding career with caring for his ailing mother and his young son. His story highlights the excruciating choices so many of us around the world must make between work and family.
Japanese men haven’t traditionally been caregivers. But for Masami Hayata, it’s a crucial part of raising his family.
One of the busiest public maternity hospitals in the world, Fabella Memorial in Manila averages 60 births a day — and sometimes one baby every 12 minutes. This is the story of the mothers it cares for, and the makeshift communities they forge there during a transformative moment in their lives.
A day in the one of the world's busiest maternity wards.
How do you teach a child to swim when she’s scared to go in the water? This film tells the story of a mother challenging her young daughter to face her fears as the waters around them rise.
In a small Colombian village, a mother guides her daughter through a rite of passage.
Sometimes the filmmaker’s daughter asks her questions only once. “Why are there so many people who don’t know me?” Or out of the blue she’ll ask things like, “What does ‘kind’ mean?” or “Why do trees just stand there?” Other questions are a daily occurrence. Questions like, “Mom, what were you like when you were small?” and “When will it be my birthday?” They were so strange and profound, her mother made them into a film.
The mothers living in the Siena House shelter in the Bronx face a particularly difficult set of obstacles. They share their stories and love for their babies in their own words, through the universal theme of the lullaby.
In this short documentary, young mothers in a homeless shelter write lullabies to bond with their babies.
The story of a mother’s fight to reunite her family after detention — and the personal costs of a system designed to pull children away from their parents.
A family divided by immigration authorities struggles to reunite.
