Ongoing. Garth Greenan Gallery, garthgreenan.com.
James Luna inaugurated his piece “Take a Picture With a Real Indian” in downtown New York nearly 30 years ago. As the title suggests, Luna, a member of California’s Luiseño tribe, simply offered himself to passers-by for souvenir photos. Later he would repeat the performance in a Washington Metro station, and in galleries, sometimes dressing for the occasion in “Indian” outfits, sometimes not, and always getting plenty of takers. The current show at Garth Greenan includes video and photography of these performances, a few life-size cardboard cutouts of Luna, and a handful of other works.
But it also illuminated the difficulty we have connecting, how many misapprehensions can lie between people standing right next to each other. And for that reason, revisiting the piece virtually, two years after the artist’s death, during a time of social distancing, isolation, and resurgent white supremacism, feels especially poignant.
“Well Now WTF?” is an online exhibition that’s also something of an extravaganza. Curated by the artists Faith Holland and Lorna Mills and by Wade Wallerstein, founder of the digital art space Silicon Valet (which is hosting the show), it features nearly 125 contributions. The result feels like equal parts experiment, grab bag and virtual gathering — which I love. It’s imperfect but energetic and genuine.
The exhibition contains two types of work, GIFs and videos, displayed in virtual rooms with tongue-in-cheek titles like “Kiss Me I’m Asymptomatic.” In truth, the categories seem indistinct, but larger themes emerge: confinement, the human body, the precarious state of the world and the seduction of technology.
For instance, the woman in Snow Yunxue Fu’s “Balancing Act” marches steadily forward with her head in an ominous cloud. Tourists in Tsao Yidi’s “#digitalWanderlust, #onlyAntisocialLoversLeftAlive” spin through destinations that they survey like conquerors. In Anthony Antonellis’s “graduation.gif,” graduation caps plop down methodically on MacBooks. Surabhi Saraf’s “Non Human Touch” shows a hand reaching out to, and then retracting from, a free-floating blob.
There’s a welcome dose of comedy, too, best concentrated in the videos. Works by Guido Segni, Alice Bucknell, and Maya Ben David made me laugh out loud, while Jazmin Jones’s pitch-perfect “Unlocked” uses humor in a more subversive way.
The website encourages you to view the show in one direction, from room to room, but better to click around on whatever catches your eye. Browse casually or dig in deep. This is the internet, after all.
