On the morning after Easter Sunday in 2017, the front page of The New York Times featured a different sort of resurrection story. This one, written by the reporter Nikita Stewart, told of a Girl Scout troop that homeless families had formed in the threadbare hotel that functioned as a city shelter.
As an uplifting testament, the article went viral (in the pre-Covid meaning of the term) and attracted an enormous amount of celebrity support for the dozen or so girls in Troop 6000. They were feted on the TV talk show “The View,” hosted by the New York Liberty of the W.N.B.A. and given a supply of Jessica Alba’s name-brand shampoo. The founding mother of the troop, Giselle Burgess, received a $6,000 check from Jimmy Fallon on his late-night show.
To her great credit, Stewart has too much integrity and clarity to go along with the fairy-tale version of Troop 6000’s experience. She problematizes the myth, relentlessly returning to the debilitating chaos of homelessness itself.
Certainly, the story of Troop 6000 contains irresistible elements for both its writer and her readers. Giselle Burgess, the dominant figure in the book, embodies an essential and often overlooked truth about homelessness: Many of its victims work. As “Troop 6000” opens, Burgess is straining to pay rent for her family of six on her salary as the office manager for a Manhattan dentist. She is a loving and devoted mother, and nothing short of a brilliant crisis manager in navigating the family’s journey through the homelessness bureaucracy.
The nearly fatal flaw is Burgess’s choice of men. She has five children by three fathers. One has vanished entirely and another lands in jail after Burgess breaks off with him because of his violent outbursts.
Then again, a certain president of a certain country of ours happens to have five children by three mothers. But as Stewart’s assiduous reporting implicitly shows, in the ruthless economic system of modern America, if one is born into a working-class family rather than a real estate empire, then all the emotional strength and practical canniness that Burgess possesses may not be sufficient to save her family.
Before Burgess’s family became homeless, she had placed her older daughters into a Girl Scout troop sponsored by a church in her Queens neighborhood. Burgess had assumed that scouting was “an elusive, uncool, white-people thing. Badges? Cookies? Who needs it?” — but she, as much as her daughters, ends up thriving on the sisterhood, goal-setting and mercifully predictable schedule. To Burgess’s own experience, Stewart adds a helpful bit of history on the Girl Scouts’ long history of reaching across lines of color and class.
When Burgess and her children finally arrive at the Sleep Inn, a de facto homeless shelter tantalizingly within sight of Manhattan’s bejeweled skyline, she comes up with the improbable plan of starting a troop there. In that endeavor, she is greatly helped by two other heroes of the book — the City Council member Jimmy Van Bramer, who had been homeless during his own childhood, and the Girl Scouts administrator Meridith Maskara, who is now C.E.O. of the organization for greater New York.
Despite help from those two allies, Burgess faces exasperating obstacles in forming a troop with the rules regulating life in homeless shelters. Families cannot visit one another in their assigned rooms. Food cannot be cooked on-site. Field trips require a welter of paperwork. The iconic Girl Scout cookies cannot be sold to shelter residents in the way that innumerable other Girl Scouts can knock on doors in their neighborhoods.
A paragraph like that one conveys the rigor of Stewart’s reporting and thinking. She dutifully describes the Cinderella episodes the girls and parents of Troop 6000 enjoy, but she refuses to avert her eyes from their precarious lives. It takes Burgess’s connection to Van Bramer, for instance, to spare the families at the Sleep Inn from being evicted en masse when the hotel owners want to free up rooms for tourists paying full rates.
The instability of homelessness presents a challenge to any journalist or author portraying it. How does one accurately depict incessant disorder without the writing itself turning disorderly? Stewart has not solved that problem. She splinters her book into 26 chapters and each chapter into multiple scenes; she flits from character to character, event to event, often failing to build depth or sustain narrative drive. One unintended result is that, in a book illuminating the life-changing power of scouting, none of the girls in Troop 6000 wind up being nearly as memorable for a reader as Giselle Burgess and several other adults.
