My sister can’t read an analog clock. She’s 10 years younger than I am. No doubt that skill is disappearing from the populace, along with an avalanche of others: driving a stick shift, writing by hand, navigating by memory, using stamps. (I understood the world I knew was gone forever when I had to teach a college student how to operate an envelope.) I weep not for the stick shift and could never refold a map without making a crumpled mess, but I can’t imagine going through life without being able to read a clock.
For any aliens (or little sisters) reading this: The analog clock, with its ring of numbers 1 through 12 around a circumference, has two “hands,” one short, one long, affixed to the center and pointing outward, which revolve by force of a tiny mechanical engine. The muddle comes in these little hands. The shorter one is simple: Whichever number it points to is the hour. If it points to 1, it is 1 o’clock. The longer hand is trickier. When it points to 1, it means 5, as in five minutes. The 2 means 10, and so on. The delightful key to the puzzle is that the numbers on the clock’s face represent more than one value simultaneously.
When I was a kid, I loved all clocks — atomic clocks, clock radios, even clocks you couldn’t see. (You could “call time” free of charge back then, dialing 976-1616 to hear a sentence that has never quite left my mind: “At the tone, the time will be. … ”) Analog clocks, though, are special. Every minute, every second, the hands refute Zeno’s paradox: They move continuously, never pausing artificially on one number, passing through an infinite series of fractions of time — a visual demonstration of the fact that time is always in motion.
The clunky digital clock, by contrast, jerks along, stopping every minute like a Beckett character — I can’t go on. I’ll go on — falsely implying that time is a series of snapshots, a stop-action film rather than the seamless flux that it is. On the elegant analog clock, meanwhile, time swells and recedes, like waves and seasons and life. The hands evoke the rotation of the earth, the movements of celestial objects, the cosmos.
But the ambiguous quality of the analog is a strength. I could be a minute early or late, depending on my head-tilt. A visual demonstration of relativity. The digital numerals on your phone: That is time controlling you. On the analog, I’m my own boss.
It’s important to get the right analog clock, of course. I had one that made a relentless clicking sound, forcing me to wear earplugs for years. Eventually I bought another at a garage sale, a squarish thing from the 1960s with one broken leg, a beauty, but it buzzed 24 hours a day. Next I bought one on Etsy made of repurposed iron. The hands got tangled, and the minute dragged the hour with it in a wrenching existential battle.
At last, this year I got one at a drugstore: $5, a couple of simple hands. No funny business. It’s perfect. Silent, rolling. So small I can fit it in my palm. An every­person’s clock. If it’s anything like the clocks of my youth, it will outlive the cockroaches.
An analog clock gives you just enough information to keep you tethered to the world without overwhelming you. Try this: Sit in a chair by the window. Leave your phone in the other room. Allow yourself only this one small item: an analog clock. It’s so easygoing compared with that screaming phone, which for me has become an endless scroll of death tolls and terrifying updates from our leaders.
The clock offers such a simple connection to the rest of the world. It’s calming. Gaze at it. Start with the second hand, if it has one, and as you settle in, move to the minute. A simple circle, it is the direct descendant of the sundial, connecting us to the mysteries of our forebears and their weird scientific achievements, to a time when the sky told humans how to live.
Why do we need to know the time in the first place? Sure, we have jobs and appointments, even now when so many of us are stuck at home, but I swear I have traveled through deserts and over mountains, strayed so far from civilization that I felt lost, at last — and on waking in dawn’s glow, my first thought was, What time is it?
What could it possibly matter?
And yet we need our coordinates. Where am I on the space-time continuum? A question as urgent as ever.
If you stare long enough at your analog clock, your thinking can grow dark. The contamination of the earth. The possible world we will wake to when this current disaster is over. Perhaps the clock is a marker of our arrogance, a record of our insistence that we own and dominate everything, from water to animals to hours.
But if you stare longer, your mind will keep moving beyond those dark thoughts, beyond all thought. You will stay, instead of rising to meet your churn of responsibilities. You will wait (for what?) in the beauty of the pause, in the ever-shifting emptiness. 