Developing a vaccine usually takes years, sometimes decades. Yet many scientists around the world are now cautiously optimistic that a coronavirus vaccine could be ready by next year. One sign of progress: Researchers published a report yesterday showing that a prototype vaccine protected monkeys from infection.
Nursing homes with more black and Latino residents have been twice as likely to have an outbreak as those with predominantly white residents, according to a new analysis.
The reality TV star Bethenny Frankel became an unlikely liaison for state governments seeking masks for medical workers, and she encountered a rogue’s gallery of scammers and con artists.
Days of torrential rainfall breached two privately owned dams in Central Michigan yesterday, sending water surging at least 10 feet high and forcing thousands of people to evacuate their homes. The floodwaters flowed into a Dow Chemical complex and threatened a Superfund toxic-cleanup site, raising concerns of environmental fallout.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo defended his recommendation for Trump to fire the State Department’s inspector general and denied the firing was retaliation for investigations into potential misuses of government resources by Pompeo and his wife, Susan.
“Trump’s purge of inspectors general is unprecedented,” Jen Kirby writes in a Vox article explaining the history and role of the job.
But as Chinese leaders gather tomorrow for the start of their annual legislative session, Xi’s authority looks safer.
Cyclone Amphan prompted the evacuation of more than three million people in eastern India and Bangladesh but appeared to cause less devastation than initially feared.
The Supreme Court temporarily blocked Congress from seeing redacted materials from Robert Mueller’s Russia investigation. The order could mean that the full Mueller report would not become public before the November election.
A father and son suspected of helping the former Nissan chief Carlos Ghosn make a brazen escape last December from Japan were arrested yesterday in Massachusetts.
The Bureau of Prisons announced that Michael Cohen, Trump’s former personal lawyer, would be released on furlough today.
Else Blangsted, a top Hollywood music editor who fled Nazi Germany as a teenager, died at 99.
For public figures including Emmanuel Macron and Ivanka Trump, the act of wearing a mask — or not wearing one — has become political. Nowhere is this more visible than in Nancy Pelosi’s color-coordinated facial wardrobe, Vanessa Friedman, The Times’s fashion critic, writes.
The Book Review’s annual summer reading list is out, and it can point you to the latest in thrillers, cookbooks, true crime stories and more.
Tejal Rao, one of our restaurant critics, compiled what she’s been cooking. (She likes mixing this bright kale sauce with paneer or pasta, depending on the day.) For more on how to make the most of life indoors, check out The Times’s At Home newsletter.
Visit an island in the remote waters of the South Atlantic.
Here’s today’s Mini Crossword, and a clue: Sinatra’s signature song (five letters).
P.S. The word “doomscrolling” appeared for the first time in The Times yesterday, in an Opinion column about the coronavirus (as noted by the Twitter bot @NYT_first_said).
