Food|Nutritional Yeast Is for Hippies. ‘Nooch’ Is for Everyone.
Nutritional Yeast Is for Hippies. ‘Nooch’ Is for Everyone.
Nutritional yeast (“nooch”) has gone mainstream, as consumers look beyond its supposed health benefits and treat it as an umami-rich seasoning.
It took only 50 years, but nutritional yeast has finally gone mainstream.
“Nooch over everything” reads one sticker available for purchase online, the text appearing on a yellow canister not unlike the ones used by Bragg nutritional yeast. On another site, a “Nooch God” T-shirt shows the same bottle between two prayer hands, yellow flakes showering out from the opening.
With a cheeky nickname and a new audience of experimental chefs and home cooks, nutritional yeast — long associated with hard-core vegans — has found a broader audience.
Nielsen reported that sales of nutritional yeast in the United States increased 20 percent between February 2019 and February 2020. In that time, market greens tossed in a nutritional yeast vinaigrette appeared on the lunch menu at Ssam Bar in the East Village of Manhattan. At the Los Angeles cafe Sqirl, a Caesar salad with nutritional yeast croutons was served alongside a rib-eye for two on the decidedly nonvegan Valentine’s Day menu. Omnivorous recipe databases (like NYT Cooking) are using nutritional yeast as a seasoning in creamy pastas and a topping for popcorn.
The process of making it is almost as unsexy as the name — the fungus Saccharomyces cerevisiae, commonly known as Brewer’s yeast, is grown on cane and beet molasses for nutritional yeast. Once fermented, the yeast is harvested, washed, pasteurized and dried. The last two steps deactivate the yeast’s leavening ability, its main difference from active dry yeast or Brewer’s yeast. The resulting flakes are mustard-yellow, their shape and texture often likened to that of fish food.
Some companies that carry the product advertise its high protein content and B-complex vitamins, especially B12. That was the main selling point when Bob’s Red Mill started selling nutritional yeast in the 1970s. As Sarah House, a representative for that company explained, a vegan diet “can lack sufficient B-complex vitamins, especially B12,” and a sprinkle of nutritional yeast is an easy way to supplement.
Marion Nestle, a food studies and nutrition professor at New York University, remains unconvinced by any health claims. “Nutritional yeast don’t make vitamin B12, so that has to be added to meet that particular requirement,” she said.
The only reason to eat it, Ms. Nestle believes, is for the flavor. “I don’t think this stuff tastes good, but other people like it,” she said.
While recipe sites continue to hail nutritional yeast as a “superfood,” curious home cooks appear more interested in it as a seasoning than as a supplement.
For many cooks, including Ms. Firkser, a vegan friend or blog post was the entry point to cooking with nutritional yeast — the product is most often cited in vegan cookbooks and blogs as a cheese substitute. A recipe on BuzzFeed blends yeast with cooked potatoes and carrots to create vegan “noocho” cheese dip, and the yeast appears on ingredient lists for popular vegan products like Amy’s Vegan Rice Mac & Cheeze.
But plenty of newer nooch fans think of it less as a cheese substitute, and more as a seasoning all its own.
There’s a reason nutritional yeast is so often compared to cheese: It contains naturally occurring MSG.
Whether because of the perceived health benefits or the surge in pantry stocking by home cooks, nutritional yeast sales have soared in the past months. From February to March, online sales for Bob’s Red Mill nutritional yeast jumped 400 percent, “an unprecedented increase” in month-over-month growth for the brand, Ms. House said. Bragg sold more of its yeast in March than ever before. Both brands are scrambling to mill, package and ship more yeast to meet the new demand of online orders.
It’s unclear how much of the sales are from vegans seeking vitamins, or from curious, cheese-loving home cooks who had seen yeast on restaurant menus and finally have the time to experiment with it themselves. “Both of these trends have led the customer base for nutritional yeast to expand well beyond the core group of vegans and vegetarians,” Ms. House said.
