1. Two dam breaches in Michigan are causing severe flooding, forcing thousands of residents to evacuate and threatening a major toxic cleanup site.
“It’s hard to believe that we’re in the middle of a 100-year crisis, a global pandemic, and we’re also dealing with a flooding event that looks to be the worst in 500 years,” Gov. Gretchen Whitmer said. Here’s the latest.
The failures of the Edenville Dam and the Sanford Dam, above, which are about 140 miles northwest of Detroit, sent water levels in the Tittabawassee River surging at least 10 feet above flood levels and heading toward a sprawling Dow chemical complex as well as a vast Superfund site downriver, raising concerns of wider environmental fallout.
The two dams were among at least 170 dams in the state that were classified as a “high” hazard potential, meaning that a failure could result in the loss of life.
2. All 50 states have begun to reopen to some degree.
But there remain vast discrepancies in how states are easing restrictions. Many began to reopen despite not meeting White House guidelines for progress against the virus, and newly reported cases have been increasing in some states that are moving to lift lockdown measures.
States in the Northeast and on the West Coast have moved most slowly toward reopening. Connecticut allowed outdoor dining today, seen above in West Hartford. By contrast, a number of Southern states opened earlier and more fully. Here’s what it looks like on a map.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released more detailed reopening guidance that was originally shelved by the White House. It includes specific instructions to detect and trace the virus based on exposure and risk after the pandemic.
3. Scientists are increasingly optimistic that a coronavirus vaccine will be ready sometime next year.
They’re exploring at least four approaches to creating the vaccine. They’re also combining trial phases. Animal studies have raised expectations, too. New research showed that a prototype vaccine, above, effectively protected monkeys from infection.
From what scientists are learning about the coronavirus and its mutation habits, the virus could be an easy target for a vaccine. But getting millions of doses of approved vaccines manufactured and distributed could be very hard — especially if it involved cutting-edge genetic technology.
Coronavirus cases are down in New York City, bringing relief to once hard-hit treatment centers like Elmhurst Hospital, above. But hospital executives and doctors, wary about what comes next as the city looks to ease out of its near lockdown, are asking whether this is a lull before a new wave of cases or a less chaotic slog.
The virus has wreaked havoc on the city’s jails. So far, 1,259 correction officers have caught the virus and six have died. Inmates have also been hit hard — 545 have tested positive, three died in custody and two died within hours of being released.
5. Cyclone Amphan slammed eastern India and Bangladesh.
So far, the combination of an impressive evacuation effort and the storm’s weakening as it passed seems to have spared many lives. More than three million people rushed into packed shelters, despite fears of exposure to the coronavirus.
Nearly one million Rohingya refugees prepared for the worst, but the storm skirted them. The eye passed close to Kolkata, one of India’s historic cities, bringing with it 100-mile-per-hour winds and ropes of rain.
We have live updates and a map tracking the storm’s path.
6. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo defended his recommendation to fire his department’s inspector general, saying he should have made it sooner.
Testily answering reporters questions at a news briefing, Mr. Pompeo said that when he asked President Trump to dismiss the inspector general, Steve Linick, he was unaware that Mr. Linick was investigating him for potential misuse of government resources. He said it was “patently false” that the firing was retaliatory.
Our reporting shows that Mr. Pompeo was aware of Mr. Linick’s inquiry into his role in an arms sale to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, and whether the Trump administration acted illegally in declaring an “emergency” to bypass a congressional freeze on such sales.
7. Are sports without fans worth it?
Our reporter Jeré Longman recalled covering the game above, played before empty stands in Baltimore in 2015, in the turbulence after Freddie Gray, a 25-year-old black man, died in police custody. It showed how hard it could be to captivate viewers at home without spectators in attendance, he writes.
At the end of his article, we invite you to tell us about your personal experiences of watching sports live.
Elsewhere in sports, several gymnasts are pushing for broad change at U.S.A. Gymnastics after the suspension of Coach Maggie Haney over accusations of emotional abuse. More accusers are expected to come forward.
8. We are elbow deep in the era of sip and stroll.
With most bars offering takeout only, indoor gatherings discouraged and the weather warmer, Americans are taking their drinks to the streets, like in Austin, Texas, above. Just try not to spill your drink while picking up after your dog.
We’re all coping differently. Our reporters, critics and editors have been taking notes about what’s helping them — what they’re listening to and reading, which workouts to try, how to spend spare time and energy — and we’ve assembled them into shareable documents. Consider them notes from our homes to yours.
9. Breland’s breakout single, “My Truck,” is the most viable fusion of rural and urban since “Old Town Road.” The self-titled debut EP he’s putting out on Friday pushes the sound even further.
Full of breezy, intuitive songs that make light work of the borders between country, hip-hop, R&B and pop, the EP is “a huge swing, and also utterly logical,” our critic Jon Caramanica writes.
10. And finally, drunk elephants.
Humans, chimpanzees, bonobos and gorillas have an unusually high tolerance for alcohol thanks to a shared genetic mutation that allows them to metabolize ethanol, the key ingredient in alcohol, 40 times faster than other primates.
But elephants — like the reportedly inebriated herd above, in India in 2006 — are exceptional lightweights because they lack a key enzyme that quickly metabolizes ethanol, a new study found. Other mammals, including dogs and cows, are also missing the enzyme.
The findings dismissed a previously held assumption that elephants would have to consume as much alcohol to get drunk as humans do.
