Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex M. Azar II said the World Health Organization’s handling of the coronavirus outbreak in China led to unnecessary deaths. The organization has denied the claims.
We must be frank about one of the primary reasons this outbreak spun out of control. There was a failure by this organization to obtain the information that the world needed. And that failure cost many lives. The United States welcomes the assistance provided by our friends during this crisis, and we have been proud to allocate over $9 billion that will benefit the global Covid-19 response. W.H.O.’s operations must be transparent too. And we support an independent review of every aspect of W.H.O.’s response to the pandemic. We all must come together to ensure that W.H.O. fulfills its key mandate, and that member states comply with the International Health Regulations. We saw that W.H.O. failed at its core mission of information sharing and transparency when member states do not act in good faith. This cannot ever happen again. The status quo is intolerable, W.H.O. must change, and it must become far more transparent and far more accountable. Although we are all focused on the immediate response, we need a more effective W.H.O. right now to help win this fight, and demonstrate to our citizens that we are working to prevent such catastrophes in the future.
President Trump revealed that he has been taking hydroxychloroquine, an antimalarial drug whose effectiveness against the coronavirus is unproven.
The Food and Drug Administration issued a safety warning in April about hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine, malaria prevention drugs that have been repeatedly promoted by Mr. Trump and widely used to treat virus patients despite the lack of evidence that they work.
Moderna’s announcement came just a few days after Mr. Trump named leaders for the federal government’s effort to speed up development of a vaccine. The company has said that it is proceeding on an accelerated timetable.
Oregon has some of the lowest numbers of coronavirus cases per capita in the nation. In recent days, Ms. Brown allowed most counties to begin the process of reopening, but she cautioned on Monday that abandoning the state’s strategies to combat the virus would leave it at risk of an outbreak.
Out of $1.52 billion in small-business loans that 446 public companies disclosed they received, $550 million has been returned, including most of the largest loans, according to a New York Times analysis.
Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Monday that he expected New York City to meet the state’s criteria to start reopening and begin easing restrictions by the first half of June, assuming current trends held.
A hospital-bed vacancy rate of at least 30 percent. The city is close — 29 percent.
An intensive-care bed vacancy rate of at least 30 percent. The city’s rate is 24 percent.
At least 30 working contact tracers per 100,000 residents. The city is hiring tracers and expects them to be on the job soon.
A detailed ZIP code map shows the extent of the coronavirus outbreak, with charts and tables of the number of cases and deaths.
Large parts of the South and Appalachia are especially vulnerable, according to a health-risk index created for The Times by PolicyMap, a company that analyzes local health data. The index for the first time identifies counties with high rates of the underlying conditions that increase residents’ risk of becoming severely ill if they are infected.
