Two new albums by musicians who have taken on a spectrum of love and longing explore more ambitious sonic possibilities.
Sexual desire is always complicated. It’s a profoundly individual tangle of physical and psychological actions and responses, and it’s inseparable from flesh and circumstance, from instinct and memory and culture. It grows even more complex when those desires are seen as abnormal, outside the mainstream, unacceptable or even immoral — attitudes that an adolescent can internalize and an adult can struggle to outgrow.
By coincidence, two songwriters who have braved those subjects, and who continue to explore a complex spectrum of queer desire, released new albums last Friday. Moses Sumney’s “Grae,” a 20-track magnum opus, is his second album. “Set My Heart on Fire Immediately” is the fifth studio album by Mike Hadreas, who records as Perfume Genius.
Both Sumney and Hadreas are intense, fervent singers, with voices that reach from baritone and tenor up to pearly, richly androgynous falsettos. And for both of them, musical styles and structures are mutable and conditional, not neatly mapped genres but costumes to suit a moment and a mood.
The first Perfume Genius albums were somber and solitary, filled with brooding keyboard ballads; Hadreas has since opened up to the dynamic, sometimes euphoric possibilities of pop and rock. Sumney’s 2017 debut album, “Aromanticism,” with songs that rejected romantic love as pop’s happily-ever-after panacea, frequently relied on loops and layers of his voice, at once futuristic and intimate. “Grae” delves even further inward — it’s hard to imagine many of its songs being performed onstage, even before the pandemic — even as it encompasses more sonic possibilities, from the orchestral to the surreal.
“Grae” makes no secret of its mission: to dissolve established categories of gender and relationships. It’s part critique, part coming-of-age chronicle, part self-interrogation. The album has didactic moments; with spoken words amid weightless vocal harmonies, “Also Also Also And And And” declares, “I insist upon my right to be multiple — even more so, I insist upon the recognition of my multiplicity,” in voices that morph electronically between (nominally) male and female tones and sometimes multiply into groups.
But he can’t renounce human contact entirely. In “Bless Me,” which builds up to the gravity of an anthem, a brief physical fling — “a body on top of me to teach me” — brings him a kind of redemption. And as the album closes, with “before you go,” a spoken phrase echoes repeatedly: “the ache.” He hasn’t solved the questions of desire.
Hadreas has been pondering passion and trauma for more than a decade in his songs; the first Perfume Genius album, “Learning,” came out in 2010. The urgency of desire courses through “Set My Heart on Fire Immediately,” but the album also shows some lessons of experience. As the album begins, Hadreas, who is 38, sings, “Half of my whole life is gone” and resolves to let the past “drift and wash away,” over somber keyboard chords like the ones that accompanied his early songs. Yet the album also reaches into pop history beyond his own.
With the producer and guitarist Blake Mills (who also produced Perfume Genius’s lavish 2017 album, “No Shape”), Hadreas harks back at times to Roy Orbison and to the Everly Brothers, not as revivalism but as reminders of the comforts of yesteryear’s pop. “Without You” marvels at finally getting over a painful breakup — “it’s the strangest feeling, unknown even, almost good” — as the music bridges Laurel Canyon folk-pop and Phil Spector’s Wall of Sound. Other songs, like “Your Body Changes Everything,” hint at the moody but propulsive synth-pop of the 1980s.
In “Describe,” as he yearns for an absent lover, Hadreas revisits the hefty, fuzz-toned grunge he used in “Queen,” a 2014 song that proclaimed both gay bravado and self-loathing. Between “No Shape” and the new album, Hadreas collaborated with the choreographer Kate Wallich on an extended piece, “The Sun Still Burns Here,” that he performed with her and her ensemble, the YC, as a dancer. They join him in the video for “Describe,” appearing as a rural commune in rituals of combat and (clothed) orgy.
Hadreas dances mostly alone, outdoors with his chest and fingers dragging in dirt, in the video for “On the Floor.” The music suggests both the 1950s and the 1970s, with a vintage doo-wop chord progression and a gleaming, dizzyingly recorded stereo mesh of guitars; it’s upbeat and cheerful-sounding. But the lyrics say otherwise; once again the singer is trying to get over someone, wondering “How long till this washes away/How long till my body is safe,” and admitting, “I just want him in my arms.” Late in the video, Hadreas suddenly has a partner: a doppelgänger dressed exactly like him who lifts and embraces him, but vanishes before the end of the song — a lonely hallucination, perhaps.
The sturdy structures of pop only go so far in Perfume Genius songs. They provide reassurance that others have found ways to capture similar feelings. But they can’t hold back the immediacy of longing, the all-consuming physical need. That’s captured in a pair of songs near the end of the album. “Just a Touch” is a ballad that suspends Hadreas’s falsetto above muffled drums and distant sustained tones; saying goodbye to a lover, he pleads, “touch me deep before you leave” and urges, “Take my song.” It’s followed by “Nothing at All,” propelled by an electronic throb and galloping heartbeat toward a paradoxical promise underlined by the ping of a glockenspiel: “I got what you need son/Nothing at all.” For one fleeting moment, desire is within reach.