LOS ANGELES — Jeffrey Katzenberg hasn’t left his Beverly Hills home in nearly 50 days.
Deprived of a frenetic schedule that, before the coronavirus pandemic, typically meant three breakfast meetings, three lunch meetings and a working dinner, the veteran executive has filled his days with what he calls “Zoom-a-roo” videoconferences as he tries to rejigger Quibi, the streaming app he started with Meg Whitman a little more than a month ago.
Downloads have been anemic, despite a lineup that includes producers and stars like Jennifer Lopez, LeBron James, Idris Elba, Steven Spielberg and Chrissy Teigen.
The service, which offers entertainment and news programs in five- to 10-minute chunks, was designed to be watched on the go by people who are too busy to sit down and stream TV shows or movies. It came out when millions of people were not going anywhere because of stay-at-home orders across the country.
Quibi fell out of the list of the 50 most downloaded free iPhone apps in the United States a week after it went live on April 6. It is now ranked No. 125, behind the game app Knock’em All and the language-learning app Duolingo, according to the analytics firm Sensor Tower.
Even with a free 90-day trial, the app has been installed by only 2.9 million customers, according to Sensor Tower. Quibi says the figure is more like 3.5 million. Of those who have installed the app, the company says 1.3 million are active users.
Mr. Katzenberg, the onetime head of Walt Disney Studios and a founder of DreamWorks SKG, was asked if he wished he had not launched Quibi when he did.
Mr. Katzenberg, 69, and Ms. Whitman, 63, the former Hewlett-Packard chief, raised nearly $1.8 billion from Hollywood studios and the Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba for Quibi. They pitched it as an app designed to match how people consumed media now — on their phones during slow moments, while they commuted or waited in line. Conditions were much different on the day it came out.
Also coming soon, Mr. Katzenberg said: Quibi will be less walled off from the internet, and users will be able to share its content on social media platforms.
Quibi placed a large bet on news programming for a lineup of shows from NBC, BBC, Telemundo and ESPN that it filed under the name Daily Essentials. Interest in those segments has been minimal.
“The Daily Essentials are not that essential,” Mr. Katzenberg quipped.
There have been other bumps in the last month.
A tech company, Eko, accuses Quibi of misappropriating trade secrets and infringing on the patent for the technology that allows viewers to shift seamlessly between horizontal and vertical viewing. The activist hedge fund Elliott Management has committed to funding a lawsuit filed by Eko.
A recent report found that Quibi had given away its customers’ email addresses without their knowledge. “As soon as we heard about it, we fixed it,” Mr. Katzenberg said.
Quibi will enact the new strategy on a smaller scale, spending much less than the $470 million it had planned to devote to marketing in its first year, given that many of its potential customers are stuck at home.
“Until we are in an environment where we can get a return on our investment, we are going to keep our powder dry,” Mr. Katzenberg said.
As Zoom and TikTok top the app charts, Mr. Katzenberg and other Quibi executives have been working on reducing their projections from the seven million users and $250 million in subscriber revenue they had estimated for Quibi’s first year. With television and film production shut down almost entirely, Quibi has also decided to slow the pace of its new releases so it will be able to offer fresh content until the start of 2021.
Despite the difficult start, Mr. Katzenberg said he saw reasons for optimism. Eighty percent of Quibi’s viewers complete the episode they are watching, Mr. Katzenberg said. And once daily life returns to normal, he believes, people will go back to using their phones in ways that prompted him and his investors to bet on Quibi.
When asked if the success of TikTok gave him pause, considering that it is also a platform built on short-form video, albeit of the user-generated variety, Mr. Katzenberg seemed momentarily steamed.
