Compulsory face masks, hand-sanitizer stations and one-way routes are common features as institutions reinvent themselves for the Covid-19 era.
BERLIN — Elli Gericke, 20, was among the first visitors to the Berlinische Galerie as it reopened on Monday after an eight-week closure. In accordance with the art museum’s new rules, she was wearing a blue cloth mask and keeping at least five feet from other people.
She said that she liked the main exhibition — a retrospective of Umbo, an avant-garde German photographer — and expressed relief about seeing art in person after months of being mostly indoors. But, she added, she felt restricted by the new regulations.
With confirmed coronavirus infections declining across Europe in recent weeks, several countries have announced plans to reopen museums, and Germany is among the earliest. Museum directors have become pioneers in figuring out how to kick-start cultural institutions in the midst of a pandemic, and in reinventing the museum experience for the Covid-19 era.
Germany’s 16 states have set their own timelines for easing the lockdown measures. Museums in Berlin were allowed to reopen on May 4, but many remain closed. Some, like the Berlinische Galerie, took an extra week to sort out logistics and bring in safety procedures, reopening on Monday. Major institutions like the Gemäldegalerie and the Altes Museum reopened on Tuesday.
Although the state government in Berlin has mandated ground rules for hygiene and social distancing, it has largely been up to the institutions to iron out the details, including whether to require masks. For museum directors, this involves balancing public safety against the desire to allow people to freely engage with art; for visitors, this means navigating a patchwork of new rules.
Most, but not all, museums require visitors to wear masks. Some have added signs directing visitors along certain paths, or have instituted online ticketing systems to stagger entry times and prevent crowds. Others have eliminated audio guides, or asked visitors to bring their own earphones. Many locations have installed plexiglass screens to protect staff members, and group tours have been canceled.
At the Berlinische Galerie, visitors are informed on arrival that they must wear face coverings and abide by social distancing rules, and they are encouraged to use the newly installed hand-sanitizer dispensers.
As in Germany, many museums did not open their doors on the first day they were allowed; instead, cautious administrators are taking time to make changes and retrain employees before the public is allowed in.
Berlin State Museums, an umbrella group overseeing 17 museums in the city, including some of its largest and most prestigious, decided to start small, reopening just four of the institutions under its control on Tuesday. Christine Haak, the organization’s deputy director general, said in a phone interview that she wanted to observe how visitors behave in the spaces before deciding about the rest. The museum will inevitably feel different to many visitors, she added.
In a normal week, the D.D.R. Museum, a private exhibition space providing an interactive experience of life in communist East Germany, attracts as many as 2,000 people a day, the vast majority of them people who do not live in Berlin. Its director, Gordon Freiherr von Godin, estimates that number has dropped to fewer than 50 since the museum reopened on May 4. “We are not making any income,” he said by phone.
Admittedly, the D.D.R. Museum’s interactive concept, which invites visitors to handle display items and open cupboards, is a tricky sell during a pandemic. Its slogan, “History You Can Touch,” probably is not helping either.
The museum has installed hand-sanitizer stations and suggested, but not mandated, that guests wear masks. A staff member also cleaned surfaces continually with disinfectant spray, Mr. Freiherr von Godin said.
Mr. Goldsmith, who was celebrating his birthday, said he was comfortable touching the items with his bare hands: The lack of other visitors made any concerns about the virus irrelevant, he added.
A few blocks away, a line was forming at the door of the German Historical Museum, where a new exhibition about the life and work of the German-American intellectual Hannah Arendt was opening. The show featured personal items belonging to Arendt, as well as numerous video and audio recordings.
Although on Monday the space was approaching its reduced capacity of 65 visitors — compared to the regular 200 — people were moving through carefully and calmly. Ms. Kretzschmar said that visitors were spending, on average, two hours in the show.
