A new study offers a glimmer of hope in the grim fight against the coronavirus: Nearly everyone who has had the disease — regardless of age, sex or severity of illness — makes antibodies to the virus.
The study, posted online on Tuesday but not yet reviewed by experts, also hints that anyone who has recovered from infection may safely return to work — although it is unclear how long their protection might last.
“This is very good news,” said Angela Rasmussen, a virologist at Columbia University in New York who was not involved with the work.
Health officials in several countries, including the United States, have hung their hopes on tests that identify coronavirus antibodies to decide who is immune and can go back to work. People who are immune could replace vulnerable individuals, especially in high-transmission settings like hospitals, building what researchers call “shield immunity” in the population.
But most antibody tests are fraught with false positives — picking up antibody signals where there are none. The new study relied on a test developed by Florian Krammer, a virologist at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, that has a less than 1 percent chance of producing false-positive results.
The study also eased a niggling worry that only some people — only those who were severely ill, for example — might make antibodies. In fact, the level of antibodies did not differ by age or sex, and even people who had only mild symptoms produced a healthy amount.
Having antibodies is not the same as having immunity to the virus. But in previous research, Dr. Krammer’s team has shown that antibody levels are closely linked with the ability to disarm the virus, the key to immunity.
“It really shows that most people do develop antibodies, and that there’s very good correlation between those antibodies and their capability to neutralize virus,” Dr. Rasmussen said.
“To my knowledge, this is the largest group of people described with mild disease,” Dr. Wajnberg said.
That suggests the timing of testing for antibodies can greatly affect the results, the researchers said. “We weren’t looking exactly at this, but we had enough to say that 14 days is probably a little too early,” Dr. Wajnberg said.
There was even a difference between levels at 20 days versus 24 days, she said, suggesting that the optimal time for an antibody test is well after symptoms begin. “What we’re telling people now is at least three weeks after symptom onset,” Dr. Wajnberg said.
In this group, the researchers found a different picture altogether. The majority of these people — 62 percent — did not seem to have antibodies.
The number suggests that “in cities like New York, there are a tremendous number of undiagnosed infections,” said Taia Wang, a viral immunologist at Stanford University.
Another finding from the study — that diagnostic PCR tests can be positive up to 28 days after the start of infection — is also important, Dr. Wang said. These tests look for genetic fragments, not antibodies, and suggest an active or waning infection.
She and other scientists said it was highly unlikely that a positive test so long after symptoms appeared represents infectious virus. Researchers in South Korea recently announced, for example, that several suspected cases of “reinfection” were a result of PCR tests picking up remnants of dead virus.
Still, Dr. Wang said, “Until we do know, it’s prudent for everyone to proceed as if a positive PCR test means contagious virus.” The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that people isolate for 10 days after the onset of symptoms, but that period may need to be longer.
“The question now becomes to what extent those are neutralizing antibodies and whether that leads to protection from infection — all of which we should presume are yes,” said Sean Whelan, a virologist at Washington University in St. Louis.
In Dr. Krammer’s previous work, to be published in the journal Nature Medicine, his team tested whether the antibodies have neutralizing power. The researchers found that in about a dozen people, including some who had mild symptoms, the level of antibodies in the blood corresponded to the level of neutralizing activity.
So everyone who makes antibodies is likely to have some immunity to the virus, Dr. Krammer said: “I’m fairly confident about this.” Another way to assess immunity would be to show that purified antibodies can prevent coronavirus infection in an animal.
