New York|Conn. Reopens, and Some Worship to Resume in N.Y.
Conn. Reopens, and Some Worship to Resume in N.Y.
Malls, stores and restaurants in Connecticut are open with restrictions, and religious services with up to 10 people in New York can resume on Thursday.
Reopening begins in Connecticut.
Over 100 people were found gathered at a Brooklyn synagogue, officials said.
Westchester County will open two beaches to residents only.
Religious services with up to 10 people can resume in N.Y.
Connecticut, which has been less affected by the coronavirus than neighboring New York, took the biggest step toward restarting its dormant economy on Wednesday, allowing restaurants, stores and malls to reopen, with significant limits.
At Pop’s Family Restaurant in Milford, regulars were waiting outside for the diner to open at 9 a.m., said Ipakoi Grigoriadis, whose family owns the place.
“It is quite exciting to see our customers we haven’t seen in a while,” she said.
But it was not business as usual: Pop’s, like other Connecticut restaurants, was offering only outdoor seating, and it planned to gradually expand service to half of its capacity.
“It is still a little scary considering we don’t exactly know what this is,” she said in between fielding orders for waffles and other breakfast dishes.
Stores and malls in Connecticut must also maintain a capacity of 50 percent and adopt stringent cleaning procedures. Masks are required, and seating areas like food courts will stay closed.
At Hannoush Jewelers in Danbury, Eddie Hannoush, the owner, said foot traffic was down about 30 percent from what he would expect on a typical day.
Mr. Hannoush had established new protocols for trying on engagement rings: Every one will be disinfected before being handed to a customer; if it not bought, it will be disinfected before being returned to the display case. He said he also had latex gloves available for those who felt more comfortable trying on a ring over a glove.
At the Connecticut Post Mall in Milford, where 22 of 130 shops opened, workers were handing out packets with masks and hand sanitizer, said Ken Sterba, the mall’s general manager.
Although offices in Connecticut were also allowed to open, with masks required and layouts adjusted to ensure social distancing, Gov. Ned Lamont has urged workers to continue to work from home if they can do so.
To note the start of the new phase, Mr. Lamont ordered that flags in the state, which had been flying at half-staff during the outbreak, be returned to full staff.
Things went well enough on Wednesday that Mr. Lamont began to outline the state’s plans for the next phase of Connecticut’s reopening process.
Speaking at his daily briefing, he said he expected hotels, gyms, museums, movie theaters and other nonessential businesses would be allowed to reopen on June 20 and that restaurants would be able to begin seating people indoors that day.
More tightly packed indoor businesses like bars and indoor event spaces pose a greater threat of virus transmission and would most likely be kept from opening until late July, officials said.
Mr. Lamont bristled when asked about plans by two tribal nations to reopen parts of their Connecticut casinos on June 1.
Later in the day, the governor signed an executive order allowing all registered Connecticut voters to cast absentee ballots in the state’s Aug. 11 primary.
The easing of restrictions in Connecticut began even as nearby regions of New York, including New York City and the Hudson Valley, remained far from meeting state benchmarks for making a similar move.
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut worked together on shutdown orders to ensure that their residents did not cross state borders to avoid strict social-distancing requirements, possibly spreading the virus.
Yet in recent weeks, with the states having varying success in fighting the virus, their governors have set different criteria for reopening, in sections or all at once.
In New Jersey, retail stores could provide curbside pickup as of Monday; in New York City, nonessential businesses remain closed.
A Brooklyn synagogue will be ordered to stop allowing large gatherings after the authorities found more than 100 people there early Wednesday, officials said.
After receiving a 311 complaint about the gathering at the synagogue, on South Eighth Street in the Williamsburg section, officers visited around 8 a.m. and saw a large crowd inside, officials said.
The officers ordered those who were gathered to disperse, which they did quickly and peacefully, a police spokeswoman said. No arrests were made and no summonses were issued, she added.
Olivia Lapeyrolerie, a spokeswoman for Mayor Bill de Blasio, said the synagogue would be served with a cease-and-desist order requiring that it no longer host such gatherings or risk a fine of up to $1,000.
“This behavior is unacceptable,” Ms. Lapeyrolerie said in a statement.
Representatives for the synagogue could not immediately be reached for comment.
The dispersal of the synagogue crowd was the latest episode of the authorities breaking up large gatherings of Orthodox Jews under rules that were adopted to help slow the coronavirus’s spread.
On Monday, officers, responding to a neighbor’s complaint, dispersed about 60 students who were at a Hasidic school in Brooklyn’s Bedford-Stuyvesant section in violation of public health orders.
On April 28, Mr. de Blasio personally oversaw the dispersal of a crowd of 2,500 mourners who had gathered in Williamsburg for the funeral of a rabbi who died of the virus. Two days later, the police issued five fire code violations and six summonses after officers found large groups of worshipers hiding in two Hasidic synagogues in Williamsburg.
Mr. de Blasio’s strong denunciation of the April 28 event prompted some Jewish leaders to say he was singling out a particular community unfairly. He and the police have also been criticized by others who say the social distancing rules are being enforced in a way that targets black and Hispanic residents.
Although the city’s police commissioner has defended his officers’ handling of the rules, Mr. de Blasio told the authorities last week to “reset” their approach to enforcement by focusing on breaking up large gatherings without issuing summons.
Even as beaches just to the south in New York City remain closed, two Westchester County, N.Y., beaches will be open this weekend, but only to country residents, officials said on Wednesday.
The beaches, at Playland Park in Rye and Croton Point Park in Croton-on Hudson, will be open with reduced capacities from Friday through Monday, Memorial Day, county officials said in a statement.
Anyone entering the two parks must verify their residency with a county park pass or a driver’s license with a Westchester address, officials said; all beachgoers will also be required to maintain social distance and have a mask.
The announcement came about a week after Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said that all state-run beaches in New York would be open for swimming by the Memorial Day weekend, with restrictions in place.
In making his announcement, Mr. Cuomo also said local officials had the latitude to make their own decisions on beach access.
Mr. de Blasio’s decision to keep the city’s beaches closed prompted officials in Nassau and Suffolk counties on Long Island, like their Westchester counterparts, to move to limit access to county run beaches to residents only.
Mr. Cohen, 53, who pleaded guilty in 2018 to campaign finance violations and other crimes, had been serving his sentence at a minimum-security camp next to a medium-security federal prison and detention center in Otisville, about 75 miles northwest of New York City.
Mr. Cohen’s projected release date was November 2021, according to the bureau’s website, but he had sought to be released sooner because of medical issues and the risk that they would be exacerbated by the virus’s spread at the prison.
One law enforcement official briefed on the matter said it was expected that Mr. Cohen would serve the balance of his sentence under home confinement, but it was unclear on Wednesday whether a final decision had been made with regard to that.
The federal crimes that Mr. Cohen admitted to were part of a scheme to pay hush money to two women who claimed they had affairs with Mr. Trump before he was president, which Mr. Trump has denied.
Mr. Adler said on Wednesday that he was pleased to learn “Mr. Cohen’s application for compassionate release has been viewed favorably” and that he looked forward to his client being reunited with his family.
The decision by the Bureau of Prisons to release Mr. Cohen on Thursday was reported by The Wall Street Journal.
The United States attorney’s office in Manhattan, which prosecuted Mr. Cohen, had no comment.
Religious gatherings of up to 10 people can resume in New York State on Thursday if attendees wear masks and maintain social distance, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Wednesday.
“I understand their desire to get back to religious ceremonies as soon as possible,” Mr. Cuomo said of faith leaders.
The new rule comes just before the Jewish holiday of Shavuot on May 28, in which traditionally the Ten Commandments are read before a quorum of 10 Jews, Mr. Seligson added, making the moment particularly meaningful.
Beware of fake contact tracers, N.J. officials warn.
New Jersey officials warned residents on Wednesday to be wary of fraudsters identifying themselves as contact tracers in order to obtain financial information.
In recent weeks, as health departments have hired legitimate tracers to track the spread of the coronavirus, fake tracers have been sending people text messages looking for insurance information and bank account and social security numbers, said Judith Persichilli, the state health commissioner.
Real contact tracers do not ask for such things, the state said.
A legitimate tracer will call, identify themselves as part of a local health department, and explain to the person on the phone that they may have come into contact with someone who tested positive for the virus.
Scams around the virus, unemployment benefits and stimulus checks have proliferated nationwide, the authorities say.
Gov. Philip D. Murphy said “there is a special place in hell” for people who would scam others during the pandemic.
Mr. Murphy also reported the state’s daily virus fatalities: 168, bringing the overall death toll to 10,747.
Vaccination rates fall steeply in N.Y.C.
The New York Times is looking to speak to parents who have not had their children vaccinated during the coronavirus outbreak. Please email our reporter Eliza Shapiro.
While a scramble is on to find a vaccine for the virus, another public health hazard has surfaced in New York City amid the pandemic: Vaccination rates for childhood diseases have dropped precipitously, putting children at risk, Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Wednesday.
With many doctors’ offices closed, the number of vaccine doses administered citywide from March 23 to May 9 dropped 63 percent compared with the same period last year, Mr. de Blasio said. For children older than 2, the number of vaccine doses was down 91 percent.
Children are supposed to receive vaccinations for whooping cough, measles, chickenpox and other illnesses.
Mr. de Blasio also said at his daily briefing that the city would provide enough virus tests to nursing homes so that every resident could be tested.
“Whatever amount of tests they need, whatever amount of lab capacity they need, we will find it for them,” Mr. de Blasio said. He did not provide details about where the city would get the tests but he said that he expected the homes collectively to need 3,000 tests a day.
The city will also provide workers to fill in for nursing home employees who test positive for the virus and must take at least two weeks off, Mr. de Blasio said. The state has required all nursing home workers to be tested.
A popular neighborhood butcher reopens after its longtime proprietor’s death.
When Jennifer Prezioso reopened Albanese Meats and Poultry, her family’s butcher shop on Elizabeth Street in Manhattan this week, a stream of neighbors stopped in to offer condolences for the death of her grandfather, Gandolfo Albanese.
Mr. Albanese, who was known as Moe, died of Covid-19 on April 7, Ms. Prezioso said. He had worked at the store for 70 years.
The visitors included people who had grew on Elizabeth Street, a few of whom still lived nearby. There were also more recent arrivals to the area, which was once part of Little Italy but was renamed Nolita by real estate brokers some years ago.
For many people, Moe was the glue that held the neighborhood together.
Her grandfather, she said, had simple tastes and did not speak much but was an excellent listener. He was also a voracious reader who always kept a book nearby.
Ms. Prezioso, an actress who has appeared in Off Off Broadway shows, learned about running the business from Mr. Albanese after joining him there 2017. Until March, he was a fixture at the shop, sitting inside or out front greeting passers-by.
Now, Ms. Prezioso works by herself. On Wednesday, she brought some filet mignon to Lola Saenz, an artist who works at a nearby juice bar, and the women reminisced about Mr. Albanese.
Ms. Saenz said she would often bring hot soup or smoothies to the shop, where she would sit and eat with him.
N.J. gym opens, gets cited, then opens again.
Two defiant gym owners in New Jersey who opened twice this week in a violation of shutdown orders were issued summonses on Tuesday.
The business, Atilis Gym in Bellmawr, a suburb of Philadelphia, had been the backdrop to a rally on Monday that drew hundreds of people calling for Gov. Phillip D. Murphy to loosen state rules and allow nonessential businesses to resume operating.
On Tuesday morning, the gym owners, Frank Trumbetti and Ian Smith, were charged with “disorderly persons” offenses, the police said.
At a briefing Tuesday afternoon, Col. Patrick J. Callahan of the New Jersey State Police said the gym had opened both Monday and Tuesday and the owners had been charged twice.
The Bellmawr authorities said that five gym patrons were also issued summonses on Tuesday for using the gym in violation of the state order. One person was charged with organizing a protest in violation of the order and one person was also charged “obstructing the administration of law,” the police said.
An online fund-raising campaign that is said to “be for the defense of Atilis Gym Bellmawr and all of its members” and to “support our efforts to reopen” had raised nearly $40,000 as of Wednesday morning.
“I don’t want to be equivocating,” he added.
Reporting was contributed by Maria Cramer, James Estrin, Michael Gold, Matthew Haag, Andy Newman, Sarah Maslin Nir, Matt Stevens and Benjamin Weiser.