President Trump ordered states to reopen places of worship, but several governors said that decision would be their call. Persistently high case levels in Los Angeles, Chicago and Washington have medical experts concerned.
Trump demands that governors let houses of worship reopen.
Birx expresses concerns about case levels in Los Angeles, Chicago and Washington.
Ahead of a holiday weekend, beach towns are telling N.Y.C. residents to stay away.
Airlines are permitted to stop flying to dozens of U.S. cities.
Today, I’m identifying houses of worship, churches, synagogues and mosques as essential places that provide essential services. Some governors have deemed liquor stores and abortion clinics as essential, but have left out churches and other houses of worship. It’s not right. So I’m correcting this injustice, and calling houses of worship “essential.” I call upon governors to allow our churches and places of worship to open right now. These are places that hold our society together, and keep our people united. The people are demanding to go to church and synagogue, go to their mosque. Many millions of Americans embrace worship as an essential part of life. The ministers, pastors, rabbis, imams and other faith leaders will make sure that their congregations are safe as they gather and pray. I know them well, they love their congregations. They love their people. They don’t want anything bad to happen to them or to anybody else. The governors need to do the right thing, and allow these very important essential places of faith to open right now, for this weekend. If they don’t do it, I will override the governors. In America, we need more prayer, not less.
As businesses navigate the pandemic, summer internships are sacrificed.
Deadly diseases could surge after disruptions to vaccination programs.
The problem of slipping vaccine rates is not limited to developing countries. This week, the C.D.C. reported that coverage rates among Michigan infants had dropped below 50 percent for all childhood immunizations. New York City announced that during a six-week period of pandemic lockdown, the number of vaccine doses administered to children dropped 63 percent, compared with the same period last year.
Employers are preparing to test their workers as they return to offices.
As cases rise in Alabama, Montgomery’s mayor warns of a shortage of I.C.U. beds.
As all 50 states begin to open back up in some way, some epidemiologists are seeing warning signs of a possible resurgence in the South, including Montgomery, Ala., where Mayor Steven L. Reed raised alarms going into the holiday weekend.
Mr. Reed, who earlier this week said there was just one I.C.U. bed remaining at certain area hospitals, said he spoke out after hearing from hospital leaders that the situation was becoming unsustainable.
“We are in a very dangerous predicament,” he said on MSNBC on Thursday night.
Mr. Reed, a Democrat whose position is officially nonpartisan, attributed an uptick in cases in Montgomery to changes in people’s behavior amid an early decision by Gov. Kay Ivey, a Republican, to relax restrictions across Alabama, including the reopening of entertainment venues on Friday.
Mia Mothershed, a spokeswoman for Jackson Hospital in Montgomery, said on Friday that the hospital had reached capacity in its 30 I.C.U. beds because of a combination of the virus and other patients. “We have absolutely no beds available here,” she said.
Alabama has seen more than 13,000 known cases of the virus and more than 500 deaths, according to a New York Times database. It is among a handful of states where cases have been rising in recent days.
