When my tumor recurred, I didn’t tell Ma, yearning for a mommy to cry to, rather than one who’d cry to me.
Sundown marks the beginning of my mother’s third yahrzeit, the anniversary of her death. I light a candle whose flame will burn for 24 hours, to honor her memory. But I need no candle to remember Ma, who burned bright all on her own. And I have the scars to prove it.
Ma wished her daughter was more fun. I wished Ma would stop gambling and smoking.  She didn’t suffer through the Holocaust in the Ukrainian forest as a child only to get harangued by her American twerp of a kid whining about wanting a mommy like everyone else.
Sometimes, I acted the mother. Like the day I hid Ma’s giant box of Winstons behind the big box television set, hoping to shield her from cancer.
The gambling was the worst for me, knowing that she preferred poker, off-track betting and even bingo tables to spending time with me. And the lying. When I was in fifth grade and Ma pretended for the second year in a row that she’d attended my Parent-Teacher Night, I made a beeline for her pocketbook, fishing out her date-stamped bingo cards to prove my suspicions correct.
We did have a lovely interlude after my first son was born.  How to calm a screaming child who never slept. How to make him squeal with delight. When it came to the gambling, we made a don’t ask, don’t tell pact: I didn’t ask about it, and she promised not to play all-nighters right before babysitting.
During that interlude, I learned what hiding in the forest really meant. Since I didn’t always trust Ma’s stories, I supplemented with research about life in her native Romania under the fascists. Unlike Parent-Teacher Night, I had no reason to doubt her descriptions of sleeping under snow-covered leaves or surviving on eggs donated by or stolen from nearby farms. Or remaining still and silent as death when Nazis and Iron Guards came hunting.
When Ma was 6, her father was deported to Transnistria, a Romanian killing field. She and her remaining family ultimately found refuge in the forest with other families, where she learned that every choice was a gamble. How deep in the forest to hide, which nearby villagers to trust, whether to stay put or run. Ma heard that a kindly doctor who’d brought them food had since been shot. When she was lucky enough to be reunited with her father, his face looked blue and he walked krimm — crooked. He’d never be the same again.
Ma never lost the fear that any day might be her last. “I’m dying, I’m dying!” she’d find herself screaming between palpitations even years after the war. She’d been on high doses of tranquilizers for a decade by the time I was born.
Our lovely interlude ended when Ma refused to let my father close the home equity credit line that she’d secretly run up. I insisted she close it. Though she finally relented, our relationship never fully recovered.
Now, as I stare into the yahrzeit flame, I wonder where Ma is, if there’s some Ma energy wafting from the New Jersey cemetery that will forever be her home. I wonder if she somehow knows about the multiple breast cancer recurrences I’d hidden from her in her last years. My turn to keep secrets. She’d tried to help when it was first diagnosed in 2006. She happily babysat any time I wanted. But her refusal to accept the diagnosis only made things harder for me.
I’d promised to call her after the scans and tests that would determine my treatment. Every time, her response was the same.
I finally lost control outside my son’s school one day when I’d called Ma with a brief update while waiting to pick him up, only to get her usual response.
“IT’S CANCER, IT’S NEVER GOING TO NOT BE CANCER. CANCER-CANCER-CANCER,” I screamed in front of a slew of second-graders in the wrong place at the wrong time.
I finally stopped telling Ma about doctor visits. “Gutt vill helpfen,” she signed off in Yiddish whenever we spoke. God will help.
What was hope, though, but another form of gambling?
I found a different way to cope. Even if my cancer did kill me one day, I figured, it wasn’t likely to be that day or the next. I went back to living my life, riding bikes with my children, writing my first book, having dinner out with my husband while Ma babysat.
When my tumor recurred five years later, I didn’t tell Ma, yearning for a mommy to cry to, rather than one who’d cry to me. When it spread to my lung a few years later, Ma had just suffered the first of the three strokes that would kill her within a month. In her sleep, she often cried out to her own mother in Yiddish.
At the time of her death three years ago she thought my cancer was behind me.
When my lung metastasis progressed last year, I was glad Ma wasn’t around to see it. I couldn’t have hidden the shortness of my breaths or the constant coughing.
It was as if someone had dropped a heavy velvet cloak over my life, snuffing out all air and light. There were days on end when all I could do was park myself on the couch, find a comfortable-enough position — krimm, like my grandfather — and not move an inch while racked by coughs.
By the time the doctors drained the fluid around my lung and inserted a catheter to keep it draining, I was emotionally depleted, too. I vacillated between sobbing on the couch and not having the energy or breath even to sob. Would the cloak ever lift? But there was one thought I came back to every day during those months: Ma survived the forest.
She didn’t think she’d make it to 18, let alone 81. Maybe the survivor’s daughter could survive this? Not quite hope, it was more like acknowledging a theoretical possibility.
The cloak didn’t lift all at once. But, slowly, symptoms started to improve. A slight dip in the coughing, a dent in the nausea, less fluid to drain.
Ma survived the forest.
Then bigger ones, like taking deep, full, beautiful breaths. Finally, the catheter was removed and my scans started moving in the right direction.
The cloak was gone. Normal life resumed.
I can’t pretend to know what the future will bring. But I believe I had the strength to gamble on even the tiniest glimmer of hope because my mother’s strength somehow reached beyond the grave.
Twenty four hours. The yahrzeit flame flickers out. But the life it recalls gives off its own light, fierce and dazzling.
