One builds a lot of relationships over a career covering nearly six decades, and the playwright Terrence McNally, who died of coronavirus complications on Tuesday, could count on an extraordinary number of them. Many of these bonds were distinguished by an enduring loyalty, and they ranged widely in the American performing-arts scene — McNally wrote plays, books for musicals, opera librettos and screenplays. Below are reminiscences from his collaborators and peers. Some were collected by email, others by telephone; they have been edited for length and clarity.
Terrence would not like for us to be this sad, but I don’t care how much he’d like to, he has no control over us [chuckles].
I know for a fact that I wouldn’t be the person I am today without the words and the love of Terrence. 
I remember him always upstage right in the back. As we rehearsed, he created. John [Kander] and Freddy [Ebb] and whoever was directing would ask for something and they would get it right away! It was as fresh as it could be, and funny if it had to be. And it was always right.
The first thing I felt compelled to do when I heard the news was to put on Callas and cry along with her voice, as I know Terrence did so many times in his life. Somehow connecting through her voice, I felt still connected to him.
When we did “It’s Only a Play” [in 1986], he was so nervous before the critics were coming. I said, “It doesn’t matter what they say.” And he said, “It does, of course it matters what they say.” So I told him, “To me it doesn’t: I will do your next play.” That was a moment that changed his life, my life and the artistic life of Manhattan Theater Club, because up to 1999 we produced a brand-new play by Terrence McNally virtually every year. In that period he was both prolific and very daring: He knew he didn’t have to repeat himself.
What made Terrence’s voice distinctive was his authenticity: His very being went into every character. And he wanted every project to be great, mature, profound, serious at its heart — even “Anastasia,” which was based on an animated movie. He wanted to explore the history, to tell a more grown-up story.
Our paths started crossing in the mid ’60s when we met at New Dramatists. Terrence, wonder of wonders, had already had two shows on Broadway — “The Lady of the Camellias” and “And Things That Go Bump in the Night.” And he was still in his mid-20s! But once you met him, you couldn’t be jealous. He was of such good cheer and generosity, you realized we were all in this together.
I’ll miss him theatrically and I’ll miss him personally.
Terrence was an old and dear friend and neighbor. We had many a gossipy lunch together. He was having his lung cancer out at the same time I was having my liver transplant. We would chat from hospital to hospital. He was always lovingly pestering me for taking so long finishing my book “The American People.” It is truly amazing to me that through all his infirmities he remained so productive.
I love my house. I like to fill it with my friends.
Over the years, we’ve become more like a family.
It makes me happy to have us all together in our home.
