Listening to our marginally articulate president the other night, I suddenly understood: The economy wasn’t merely his pride. It was more like his lover. He can’t get enough of it. He won’t be kept from it.
Ain’t no mountain high enough. Ain’t no pandemic grim enough.
Having it turn on him is more than he can bear. It has addled him — I mean even further. “Our country wasn’t built to be shut down,” he said during the White House briefing on Monday evening, as if other countries planned their own obsolescence. He repeated those words — “this is not a country that was built for this; it was not built to be shut down” — and then trotted them out yet again at a town hall on Fox News on Tuesday, apparently convinced that their profundity demanded it.
He also boasted — for the zillionth time — about how the economy just before the pandemic was the best economy ever. Those lips! Those eyes! They’d be reunited, he and his amour. They’d be together again when the credits rolled.
My metaphor may be lighthearted but my concern sure as hell isn’t. There are difficult choices ahead, because what’s necessary to save lives and what’s necessary to salvage livelihoods are in tension. Our leaders have to figure out how much disruption is too much disruption.
This is excruciatingly tough stuff, and yet Trump is pre-empting the thorough and thoughtful deliberation that it demands — and painting himself into a corner — with pledges that the economy will roar back and that America will “be open for business very soon, a lot sooner than three or four months that somebody was suggesting — a lot sooner,” as he said on Monday. If you’re an enemy of “soon,” you’re on thin ice with him. I can hear it cracking under Anthony Fauci even as I type.
The president’s obsession with the economy is an extension of his obsession with wealth. He has only two lenses through which he sees the world, two yardsticks by which he measures everyone and everything: money and celebrity. He can’t pretend otherwise because he doesn’t bother to try.
But it’s all-defining and all-consuming, the repository of his vanity and an expression of his virility. And clear thinking is sometimes impossible — and conscience inaccessible — when you’re this crazy in love.