Politicians and business groups are sharply divided on what to do about President Trump’s tariffs, with some arguing that China is poised to take advantage of the United States.
Supporters of lifting the tariffs, even temporarily, say it would be a simple and immediate way to help businesses and consumers struggling with higher costs from President Trump’s levies. U.S. tariffs on foreign steel, aluminum and more than $360 billion of Chinese goods have chipped away at profits for companies that depend on imported goods and parts, slowed business investment and weighed on households, particularly those on the lower end of the income scale.
But opponents warn the move could provide China with an economic advantage at a particularly sensitive moment. Factories are slowly restarting in China, as the country shakes off the virus that began on its shores, but the outbreak in the United States and Europe continues to worsen, with schools, restaurants, offices and other Western businesses now closing.
Mr. Mnuchin, who has been coordinating the government’s economic response, said he had spoken with Robert Lighthizer, the United States trade representative, about more targeted measures, such as providing exemptions for specific products. “There are small businesses that are impacted by this, I’m sure he will consider that,” he said.
On Thursday, the Trump administration announced several targeted exclusions from its tariffs for specific health products, including surgical drapes, biohazard bags and latex exam gloves. That followed an announcement Tuesday that the administration had granted an exception to surgical gowns, hand sanitizer and other medical products.
Some argue that the tariffs are impeding the ability of American hospitals and doctors to respond to the coronavirus, since China produces a large share of the medical goods and supplies used in the United States.
In a report released Friday, Chad Bown, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute, wrote that Mr. Trump’s tariffs on Chinese medical products might be contributing to shortages and higher costs of vital equipment.
Imports of Chinese medical products have declined significantly since 2017, as Mr. Trump’s imposed tariffs, while U.S. demand for these products from other parts of the world grew at over 20 percent, according to Mr. Bown’s research.
The idea of rolling back tariffs, in particular those on global metals, has strong support among free traders in Congress, including Senator Patrick J. Toomey, a Pennsylvania Republican, and Senator Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa Republican.
In an interview on Friday, Mr. Toomey said eliminating steel and aluminum tariffs would not affect China, since the United States has already virtually eliminated steel and aluminum imports from that country. However, it would help the American economy, he said.
“I think it would be a boost for markets, and more importantly it would be good for steel- and aluminum-consuming industries, and that would help stabilize the economy and employment, at least on the margins,” Mr. Toomey said.
He added that measures to curtail the metal tariffs could be included in a stimulus package that the House passed early Saturday and awaits Senate action. “Certainly, whatever the House sends over could be a vehicle for us to amend it with stuff like this,” he said.
But in a letter sent to Congress on Friday afternoon, Thomas M. Conway, the international president of the United Steelworkers Union, cautioned against removing tariffs on steel, saying that it would harm an industry that is already struggling as a result of auto plant closures and a general slowdown in manufacturing.
Mr. Conway, whose group pressed for the tariffs initially, also argued that rolling back tariffs could advance China’s interests. He cited research from Horizon Advisory, a firm that analyzes Chinese-language publications, speeches and other documents, which suggested that some Chinese strategists believe that emerging from the coronavirus first would give China an economic opportunity.
Emily de La Bruyère, an analyst at Horizon Research, said the current moment had parallels to the 2008 financial crisis. While Western economies faltered, China rolled out enormous stimulus measures that delayed the impact of the crisis on its economy for many months. In the end, China greatly expanded its global influence, Ms. La Bruyère said.
“With overall global demand contracting sharply, this is not necessarily an advantageous time for Chinese firms to be able to increase global market share in a durable manner,” Mr. Prasad said.
