New York, New Jersey and Connecticut remain under drastic restrictions and shutdowns.
N.Y.C. mayor says prepare to “shelter in place” and announces more testing.
M.T.A. seeks $4 billion federal bailout as ridership plunges.
N.Y.U. asks students to vacate their dorms to make room for possible hospital beds.
Nearly 20 cases have been linked to a psychotherapy conference in Manhattan.
City issues $275,000 in fines over suspected price gouging on high-demand items.
Mayor Bill de Blasio warned New York City residents on Tuesday afternoon to prepare for the possibility of a “shelter in place” order within the next 48 hours.
“It is definitely a possibility at this point,” the mayor said at a City Hall news conference, where he acknowledged that such a move had to be coordinated with state officials.
As the numbers of confirmed coronavirus cases grows in New York City, Mayor Bill de Blasio warned residents that a “shelter in place” order could come soon.
“This is a fast-growing crisis. In my view, I think the right guidance to give all New Yorkers is, even though a decision has not yet been made by the city or by the state, I think New Yorkers should be prepared right now for the possibility of a ‘shelter in place’ order. It has not happened yet. But it is definitely a possibility at this point. I believe that decision should be made in the next 48 hours. And it’s a very, very difficult decision. I want to emphasize that — it is difficult anywhere in the United States of America. It is particularly difficult in a city with such a large population, so densely populated together. But I think the point has come where that decision does have to be made. We will be communicating closely with the state. Obviously, it’s a decision we want to make in common. And I think it’s just right to let people know that there is that possibility. As of this hour, the number of confirmed cases in New York City is 814. The sad reality of the prediction I made last week that we would hit 1,000 cases this week is obviously about to come true. And I’m very sorry to say that. The borough breakdown as of this point: 248 cases in Queens, 277 cases in Manhattan, 157 cases in Brooklyn, 96 cases in the Bronx and 36 cases in Staten Island. Again, very sorry to say we have lost seven of our fellow New Yorkers to coronavirus.
The mayor said that such an order could limit movement in the city to people with essential jobs like police officers, firefighters and health care workers. It could also allow people to go outside to exercise, although he noted that Italy had imposed more restrictive measures.
Not long after the mayor made his comments, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo tamped down any suggestion that a shelter-in-place order was imminent.
“Any blanket quarantine or shelter in place policy would require state action and as the governor has said, there is no consideration of that for any locality at this time,” Melissa DeRosa, a top aide to Mr. Cuomo, said in a statement.
Calling in to the NY1 cable channel later in the day, Mr. Cuomo reiterated that position.
Mr. de Blasio also said on Tuesday that the city would be able to test 5,000 people a day for coronavirus, a major increase from the current capacity of several hundred people a day. And he said that alternate-side parking rules would be suspended for at least a week.
Fifteen people have died from the virus in New York State, including at least 10 in New York City.
The number of cases in New Jersey rose to 267 on Tuesday, up from 178 on Monday, with three deaths. In Connecticut, the count reached 68 confirmed cases, up from 41 on Monday.
New York City’s public transportation system, the largest in North America, is seeking a $4 billion federal bailout as the coronavirus pandemic triggers an extraordinary free fall in ridership that has created what is likely to be the local economy’s worst crisis in decades.
Other parts of the system have experienced similarly steep drops during the Tuesday morning rush hour compared with the same day last year: 90 percent on Metro-North Railroad, which serves communities north of New York City, and 67 percent on the Long Island Rail Road.
“The M.T.A. is now facing financial calamity,” Patrick J. Foye, chairman of the transit authority, said in the letter.
The authority projects revenue losses of around $3.7 billion if ridership trends continue for the next several months, and expects coronavirus-specific expenses, like disinfecting subway cars and stations, to reach around $300 million.
New York University is asking its students to vacate their dormitory rooms by Wednesday, on the chance they could be needed as makeshift hospital rooms.
Marc Wais, senior vice president for student affairs, told students in an email on Tuesday that the university had an “institutional responsibility” to help if the outbreak worsens.
“There are significant indications that the state, as part of its contingency planning, is looking at university dormitories as settings for overflow beds from hospitals grappling with potentially overwhelming numbers of sick patients,” Mr. Wais said.
Mr. Cuomo wrote in an Op-Ed in The New York Times that the “best hope” for addressing a potential shortage of hospital beds was to convert existing facilities like military bases or college dormitories.
New York University also has an affiliated hospital, NYU Langone Medical Center, whose nurses and doctors could need overnight lodging if they are pressed into service during a crisis.
Mr. Wais indicated that many students had not heeded earlier calls to leave their dormitories. “Altogether, this was the opposite of what we needed,” he said.
Nineteen people who attended a psychotherapy conference in New York City this month have tested positive for coronavirus and dozens more are in self-quarantine, according to the conference organizers, the American Group Psychotherapy Association.
The event, AGPA Connect 2020, was held at a Sheraton in Midtown Manhattan from March 2 to 7, and drew about 1,100 mental health professionals from around the world, according to Diane Feirman, an association spokeswoman.
The Americans who tested positive were from California, Idaho, Massachusetts, Nebraska, Texas, Washington State and the District of Columbia. Five of the 19 were from other countries, including Britain, Canada, Iceland and Singapore, Ms. Feirman said.
None of those who attended the conference and tested positive for the virus had reported being hospitalized, she said. Another 19 or so people have reported symptoms or are trying to arranged for testing, she said.
One person who tested positive, a 65-year-old psychotherapist who lives near Boston and asked that she not be identified by name, said she decided to get tested after learning that she had been seated at a table with someone who later tested positive.
“I felt like I had been hit by a Mack Truck,” the woman said about the illness.
She said she had not held any in-person psychotherapy sessions since returning from the conference. She said that her husband had moved to another part of their home and that her son and his girlfriend had gone into isolation.
She had weathered days of fever, cough, aches and fatigue.
“The fatigue is profound,” she said.
New York City has issued 550 violations and $275,000 in fines to retailers accused of price gouging on items in high demand during the pandemic, officials said on Tuesday.
On Monday, Mr. de Blasio announced that fines would be issued to shops that charged excessive prices on items like hand sanitizer. Retailers cannot charge 10 percent more than the product’s usual price, the city said.
The city said the fines were issued for high prices on three items: face masks, hand sanitizer, and disinfectant wipes. The 10-percent restriction will remain in place for at least two months.
The authorities also inspected restaurants and bars on Tuesday to make sure they were following new restrictions that limit their services to takeout or delivery only. Mr. de Blasio did not disclose how many inspections had taken place but said that roughly 90 percent of the establishments were following the new rules.
The others received warnings, he said.
Woman in city homeless shelter who had roommates tests positive, city says.
One of the 814 people in New York City with the coronavirus is a woman in her 50s who shared a room with eight other women in a city homeless shelter, officials said.
Isaac McGinn, a spokesman for the city’s Department of Social Services, would not disclose the shelter’s location or other specifics, including when the woman tested positive. He said the woman’s roommates had been moved to a building that the city had set up for quarantine purposes.
New York City has about 100 shelters for single adults, and most of them resemble dormitories with shared bathrooms. Such sleeping arrangements have put shelter providers on high alert.
The shelter where the woman who tested positive lived has been cleaned, Mr. McGinn said. Employees at the shelter were monitoring the health of others there.
About two dozen other residents in the city’s primary shelter system have gone to hospitals or have been referred to hospitals, he said.
Crisis could cause economic fallout akin to the Great Depression, mayor warns.
Mr. de Blasio of New York City has, from the beginning of the coronavirus crisis, used great disasters of the past as reference points. On Tuesday, he warned New Yorkers to brace themselves for economic hardship like something out of the Great Depression.
New York will open about 100 emergency child care centers next week.
New York City will open about 100 emergency child care centers across the five boroughs on Monday, according to the city’s Department of Education. The centers will accommodate the children of emergency services workers, health care workers and transit workers who attend both public and private schools, as well as some other highly vulnerable students.
The sites will provide remote learning and meals for children age 3 through 18. Each room will have no more than 12 children and at least one adult to maintain social distancing.
All New York City public school students will switch to remote learning as of Monday, and children at the care centers will join the same online classes that their classmates from regular school are participating in.
The centers will be open from 7:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. and will serve three meals to students in their classrooms, rather than in cafeterias, to avoid crowding. All other children in New York under the age of 18 can pick up free food at about 100 other sites that will be identified later this week, for as long as schools are closed.
N.Y.C. nature centers close but parks and playgrounds stay open.
On Tuesday, all New York City recreation centers and nature centers were closed to the public until further notice. Parks and playgrounds remained open.
One caution: New York City does not regularly clean outdoor furniture and play equipment, and estimates on how long the coronavirus can survive on surfaces range widely, from minutes to days.
Dr. Sean O’Leary, an executive member of the American Academy of Pediatrics’ Committee on Infectious Diseases, said that playgrounds were “probably not the safest place right now.” He recommended going to large, wide-open parks when possible.
Jonah Engel Bromwich, Annie Correal, Luis Ferré-Sadurní, Joseph Goldstein, Jessica Grose, Matthew Haag, Corina Knoll, Patrick McGeehan, Jeffery C. Mays, Jesse McKinley, Andy Newman, Jan Ransom, Brian M. Rosenthal, Matthew Sedacca, Eliza Shapiro, Ashley Southall, Liam Stack, Nikita Stewart, Tracey Tully and Ali Watkins contributed reporting.