My friend begged his parents not to go to the shiva. The person who had died was from a prominent family in their Long Island community, and he knew that during the traditional seven days of mourning hundreds of people would be passing through the synagogue where the shiva was being held.
His parents didn’t listen.
This was last week, when President Trump was still insisting that the coronavirus “will go away” and that “a lot of good things are going to happen.” It was when some people believed it.
The couple said they’d just pop by for a bit. Within 48 hours, they learned that another person at the shiva had tested positive for the coronavirus.
My friend is tearing his hair out.
You could see this as a story about the chasm between millennials and boomers, about what happens when a generation for whom uncertainty is the norm runs headlong into one that has known mostly stability. While our parents insisted this strange new disease was no worse than the flu, we didn’t have a hard time imagining Steven Soderbergh’s “Contagion” unfolding in real life.
But in Great Neck, N.Y., a town of some 10,000 people about 25 miles from Manhattan, the spat over the shiva was about more than just a generational divide. It was also a matter of a community’s religious traditions, cultural norms and a unique history that may be even more stubborn than the coronavirus.
Great Neck is home to one of the largest Persian Jewish communities in the United States. It is a community for whom the concept of “social distancing” is about as kosher as a double-bacon cheeseburger.
In part that’s because of the nature of Judaism. Dependence is something of a dirty word in a secular American culture that glorifies self-reliance, but Judaism is built on interconnectedness. Nearly everything we do requires gathering a community.
It’s also because these particular Jews come from a region where warmth and hospitality are fundamental. “Jews — especially Jews from the Middle East — we are into socializing and getting together,” said Great Neck’s mayor, Pedram Bral, a gynecologist who immigrated from Iran in 1985.
And finally, it’s because they have relied on each other out of necessity. Like the mayor, many of the community’s founders were forced to flee Iran following the revolution in 1979.
In the broader American Jewish community, Persians are famous for their joyous celebrations, their warmth and their social cohesion. But the very qualities that we admire and that they rightly pride themselves on — looking out for one another, showing up to every wedding and funeral, inviting the whole town to a bar or bat mitzvah — are exactly the things that put them at increased risk of spreading the coronavirus.
As of Tuesday, some 215 people on Long Island had tested positive for Covid-19. But many in the area believe that number does very little to capture what’s coming: Great Neck may suffer the country’s next big cluster of infections.
He has a sense of what that could look like because two of his daughters have already experienced it: They are students at SAR Academy, another modern Orthodox school in Riverdale, in the Bronx. That school became the first Jewish day school in the country to shut down over the coronavirus, way back on March 3.
The school has had at least 29 confirmed cases, no doubt because many of its students are from the nearby city of New Rochelle, which has been ground zero of the crisis in New York State and “probably the largest cluster of these cases in the United States,” according to Gov. Andrew Cuomo. Last week the National Guard moved in to help clean and provide food to people inside the one-mile containment zone with a synagogue at its center.
The situation in New Rochelle — to say nothing of the Hasidic communities in Brooklyn, where as of Tuesday some yeshivas still remained open — is a case study in how religious communities are particularly vulnerable, especially religious communities that send their children to parochial schools and gather three times a day for communal prayer.
Mayor Bral has told all Great Neck citizens to stop gathering together, including to worship. Crucially, his order went into effect before the Sabbath, a time when families typically get together in synagogues and for meals.
But others say it’s also a reflection of cultural values.
“We have a concept that runs directly counter to what this virus requires — ‘taarof,’ which is a kind of politeness or etiquette that is so over the top it can hurt you,” Mr. Ahdoot, the comedian, said.
Another factor is historical — the sense that the coronavirus crisis pales in comparison to what earlier generations of Jews have lived through.
One doesn’t need to go that far back: Before Iran’s Jewish community fled the ayatollahs, some of its leaders were publicly executed, accused of spying for Israel and America.
Still, the fear of what’s about to come runs deep. And it’s painful that the community’s strength is now its weakness.
In the end, the point of community is to protect one another, especially those who are marginalized or lonely or overlooked. Like the virus, communal connection will have to mutate in Great Neck, and in every other city and town, as FaceTime replaces face time. At least for the time being.
If Jewish history has a theme, it is resilience — the ability to renew and revive community during our darkest hours. Now, as ever, the people poised to show us the way forward are those who have been most connected all along.