Airlines are pressing the government this week for billions of dollars in emergency aid as the coronavirus crisis crushes the travel business. With Congress debating how to help the ailing United States economy, decisions like these could have long-term implications for climate change, too.
The nation’s major airlines recently asked for $50 billion in government assistance, warning that they could soon go bankrupt otherwise. President Trump has endorsed such an aid package, though the idea may prove contentious. On Wednesday, eight Senate Democrats signed a letter saying that any aid to airlines (or cruise ships, for that matter) should come with conditions requiring them to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions over time.
“If we give the airline and cruise industries assistance without requiring them to be better environmental stewards, we would miss a major opportunity to combat climate change and ocean dumping,” read the letter, signed by Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island, along with seven of his colleagues.
Air travel has become an increasingly important contributor to global warming.
While aviation still accounts for less than 3 percent of global carbon dioxide emissions, those emissions are expected to triple by 2050 as tourism and travel expand. And airlines have struggled to clean up their act: In recent years, air traffic in the United States has grown three times as fast as the rate of fuel-efficiency improvements.
Some climate experts point out that lawmakers have plenty of options to change that dynamic if they wish, particularly if taxpayers are being asked to save the industry.
Daniel Rutherford, who directs the aviation and marine programs at the International Council on Clean Transportation, offered a few ideas on Twitter for what a climate-friendly bailout of the airlines might look like. Congress could require new efficiency rules or even offer airlines tax breaks to speed up the retirement of older, more polluting aircraft in favor of newer, cleaner models. Or, airlines could be required to publicly report the emissions that result from different itineraries so that travelers can more easily choose less-polluting flights.
Is there a connection between the new coronavirus and climate change?
Katharine Hayhoe, a climate scientist at Texas Tech and an author of the federal government’s leading climate change report, the National Climate Assessment, took that pressing question on in a series of tweets on Monday.
I spoke with her on Tuesday and she expanded on those thoughts. Some diseases, such as Zika, are spread by animals like mosquitoes and ticks, and can be expected to spread as a warming world expands the animals’ geographic range. But it’s humans who transmit COVID-19. And we’re already everywhere.
She then dug into research showing the ways that climate change can exacerbate the risks associated with viruses and diseases like influenza in general.
You might think warmer winters could help, since flu seasons tend to be milder in warmer winters. But, she said, a milder season makes people less inclined to get vaccinated for the next season. The next season may start earlier and be tougher, and great suffering would result. And, she cited research suggesting that a warmer climate might dampen immune response.
She also looked to a deeper connection between climate change and disease: When we burn fossil fuels for energy, in addition to releasing greenhouse gases, we’re adding pollution to the air. And research has shown that air pollution kills. A study published this month suggests that air pollution is responsible for 8.8 million deaths each year.
Even worse, air pollution makes people more susceptible to respiratory illness. A look at the SARS epidemic in China in the past found that patients from regions with high air pollution were “twice as likely to die from SARS” compared to patients form regions with cleaner air.
Thus, Dr. Hahyoe said, climate change is a “threat multiplier” that makes many of our problems worse.
