A crowdsourced selection of podcast episodes for this time, from the people who love them and make them.
As you shelter in place or take other measures to help stop the spread of the coronavirus, you may find yourself with silence to fill. And though podcasts are famously calibrated for a commuter’s journey, there are plenty out there to help pass the time and calm you at home, too.
To find the most distracting of them, I turned to the super listeners on social media, like The New York Times Podcast Club, a Facebook group of more than 32,000 members who often debate and recommend podcasts. Here are the podcast community’s top episode recommendations to lift your spirits or distract you during this time.
From mandatory lockdown in Milan, Jonathan Zenti, a Times Podcast Club member, found some comfort in the “Patient Zero” episode of “Radiolab,” which first aired in 2014. “I think it helps to calm down, believe in maths and data, and make reasonable choices (even when it’s hard to make one),” he wrote.
But if that’s a little too close to the headlines, try hearing an old song in a new way. Seth Lind, a creator of the sci-fi improv podcast “Mission to Zyxx,” found the “Semisonic” episode of “Song Exploder” surprisingly touching. Each episode of the podcast features an artist taking apart a song to explain how it was made, and the band Semisonic breaks down the end of the dive-bar standard “Closing Time.” “I admittedly went into it thinking, ‘So you’re going to try to tell me this song means something?’ And I was kind of blown away,” Lind tweeted.
Another way to feel as though you’re hanging out with friends is by tuning in to the pop culture podcasting duo Crissle and Kid Fury on “The Read.” Linette Lopez shared on Twitter that their chatter “can make you feel as funny, fierce and unapologetically black/queer as they are, even if you’re not.” Their latest episode, “Running From Rona,” opens with a Squarespace ad for your newfound apocalypse readiness website (it’s a joke, mostly). The comedians, who aren’t afraid to swear, will make you laugh at your own situation as they compare their end-of-days skills and resources, as well as dish advice for keeping the peace at home.
Sometimes the best audio accompaniment is the kind you don’t have to pay close attention to. For that, the podcast club member Elizabeth Ellers turns to “No Such Thing as a Fish” for informative, funny entertainment. “If your mind drifts (whose doesn’t these days), you’ve just missed a fact or two, not the whole thread of the episode,” she said.
Need some laughs? Mara Severin of the Podcast Club said “Judge John Hodgman” will not fail you. “Judge John decides low-stakes (usually) disputes between friends and family with the help of bailiff Jesse Thorn,” she said. “The rivalries are always gentle, funny and loving. The advice is always thoughtful, often hilarious and occasionally touching.” No doubt some of the humorist’s verdicts can offer perspective on whatever pet peeves your partner is pushing by your eighth day inside together.
Jen Robinson, a podcast fan on Twitter, says her 9-year-old likes “Story Seeds,” in which children suggest story ideas and authors write about them. Robinson said her daughter laughed in the car to “Pants on Fire,” a media literacy game show about misinformation in which children have to decide which seemingly honest “expert” is telling the truth. For younger listeners, here’s a list of podcasts to distract 2- through 6-year-olds and their caretakers.
Though not necessarily lighthearted, the history podcast “Throughline” from NPR is always eye-opening for Allison Brown, a Podcast Club member. A recent episode about the Public Universal Friend left her smiling, because it was something that as a Canadian, she had never heard before, she said. Though I’m sure the average American has also never heard of this pre-revolutionary self-proclaimed genderless prophet.
