Eat|Who Knew Grocery Shopping Could Be So Stressful?
Pushing a shopping cart, braving crowded aisles and even unpacking bags feel perilous. Here’s our guide to shopping during the coronavirus crisis.
As much of the world practices social distancing to stop the spread of coronavirus, trips to the grocery store are one of the few reasons many of us still are allowed to leave the house.
But the logistics of shopping for groceries can be daunting. What happens if some key items on my shopping list are sold out? How do I keep my distance in a crowded produce aisle? And just how many people have touched that jar of peanut butter or can of beans we brought home?
We talked to infectious disease experts about how to shop for groceries during the coronavirus crisis. Here’s their advice.
Check store policies. Look online for what your store is doing to protect both customers and workers. Many stores now close early to sanitize and offer dedicated shopping hours to customers who are 60 and older. Some stores have installed wipe and hand sanitizer stations and put colored tape on floors to help customers keep their distance at checkout lines. If your store isn’t taking special measures, don’t shop there.
Should I wear a mask and gloves? The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says people should not wear masks, but many shoppers are wearing masks and gloves anyway. If you choose to wear personal protective equipment (even though health care workers don’t have enough), don’t let it give you a false sense of security. You should still limit trips to the store, avoid touching your face and wash your hands when you get home.
Wipe the shopping cart. Even during the best of times, the handle on your shopping cart has more bacteria than most public restrooms. When researchers in 2012 swabbed the handles of 85 shopping carts in Iowa, California, Oregon and Georgia, they found digestive tract bacteria on 73 percent of the carts.  And when you leave, do a good deed and wipe your cart handle for the next shopper.
Shop early. Most stores are closing early now to restock and sanitize at night. Try to shop early when stores are cleanest and shelves are full, or shop at off-peak hours when stores are less crowded.
Is self-checkout better? Dr. Winetsky noted that at self-checkout, you’re trading an interaction with one person for a self-checkout surface that has been touched by many, many people before you. Either way, wash your hands afterward.
Reusable bags are still OK. A report from Loma Linda University noted that bacteria could persist on and in reusable checkout bags, but this is not a reason to stop using them. Wash and wipe bags when you can, and wash your hands after using them. Offer to pack your own groceries to protect the checkout person from your germs, said Dr. Eckstrom.
Should I wipe jars and plastic containers when I get home? The majority of transmission of coronavirus is likely from close contact with an infected person. Viral particles do not survive well on paper or cardboard surfaces. And while the virus lasts longer on hard surfaces, contamination from jars and plastic containers is not a big risk. If it makes you feel better, Dr. Amler said, give them a quick wipe as you unpack.
What about produce? Dr. Eckstrom advised washing your hands after unpacking groceries. And if you’re going to eat raw produce, she recommends washing it with an organic soap for washing vegetables or any natural dish soap.
