The most sophisticated opponents of abortion have long been playing a much subtler game — and we’re about to see it come to fruition.
Ms. Ziegler is a law professor.
What if the heartbeat bills — those bans on abortion as early as six weeks into a pregnancy that made headlines last spring in states from Georgia to Missouri — were not the real story? What if the most serious threat to Roe v. Wade were far more subtle — and based on arguments similar to those that the Supreme Court has already rejected?
No one should be surprised that anti-abortion activists are eager to get in front of the Supreme Court this week in June Medical Services v. Russo. After all, a newly minted conservative majority is in place and anti-abortion legislators have pumped out a never-ending supply of restrictions for the justices to consider. But there’s something striking about the arguments that are going to be put to the court on Wednesday: Anti-abortion activists won’t be focusing on fetal personhood or rights. They’ve once again asked the Supreme Court to decide that abortion hurts women.
Why are abortion opponents employing this strategy, especially when something similar has failed before?
At the heart of the case is a requirement in Louisiana that an abortion doctor have admitting privileges at a hospital within 30 miles of her clinic — even though just four years ago, in Whole Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt, the Supreme Court not only struck down an identical Texas law but also reasoned that abortion was safe, and so such requirements were as unnecessary as they were burdensome. But Louisiana is back for more, insisting that admitting privileges guarantee continuity of care for those suffering dangerous post-abortion complications.
And in June Medical Services v. Russo, Louisiana has doubled down on the “abortion harms women” argument. The state has asked the court to decide that abortion providers cannot bring constitutional challenges to abortion laws on behalf of their patients in the first place. Abortion providers should not have standing, Louisiana says, because they exhibit “hostility to patient safety.” As the state sees it, the last thing women need is an abortion doctor — or an abortion.
Similar claims that abortion hurts women have been skewered by leading medical organizations, rejected by Supreme Court majorities, and abandoned by some of the nation’s most conservative lawmakers and ardent anti-abortion activists, who seem to prefer outright abortion bans and more straightforward arguments for fetal rights.
So why is Louisiana — and, by proxy, abortion’s most sophisticated opponents — taking this approach? The answer is simple: Leading anti-abortion groups believe that arguing harm to women — not fetal rights — is the key to convincing both the court and the nation to let go of Roe v. Wade.
The route to this week’s case began in 1992, with a court case known as Planned Parenthood v. Casey. At the time, commentators believed the court would soon unravel Roe v. Wade. But while making it easier to pass restrictions on abortion, the court ultimately preserved abortion rights. In doing so, it stressed that women rely on abortion access to take advantage of important economic, social and political opportunities.
In the aftermath of that case, major anti-abortion groups concluded that the justices, like many ambivalent Americans, believed that women need abortion. But what would happen if anti-abortionist activists could show that abortion in fact undermined women’s quest for equal citizenship? What if abortion opponents could prove that ending a pregnancy caused psychological distress and physical illness — or that women could achieve the same goals without access to abortion? Then, many in the movement believed, the demise of Roe v. Wade would be inevitable.
Decades later, many of the most sophisticated players in the anti-abortion movement have not let go of this idea. Their efforts have created a dramatic disconnect between the arguments that will be made in the Supreme Court this week and those made for the abortion bans that dominated state legislative sessions. (Louisiana itself was among the states to pass a heartbeat bill.) Those who back the bans articulate what virtually all abortion opponents want — the criminalization of abortion and recognition of a right to life from the moment of fertilization. But the advocates behind the June Medical case believe that neither the Supreme Court nor the American public would back an absolute ban, at least not any time soon. Nor do they think that the court will take up a case involving these heartbeat bills, which have been repeatedly struck down by lower courts.
What does this disconnect tell us? First, abortion bans may have distracted us from the real threat to Roe v. Wade. After all, the Casey case identified an important government interest in protecting fetal life throughout pregnancy but still saved abortion rights in the name of equality for women. Savvy abortion foes believe the fastest way to undercut that ruling is to show that abortion makes women anything but equal. In the face of failure in the Supreme Court, skepticism from the medical establishment and resistance from grass-roots activists, leading anti-abortion groups have stuck to their guns. In June Medical Services v. Russo, we may start to see whether they made a smart bet.
But the disconnect between state bans and Supreme Court strategy also tells us that a reckoning may be coming.
To be sure, in states with large anti-abortion majorities (and gerrymandered legislatures), heartbeat bans seem smart — a way to rally voters and take a shot at Roe v. Wade. But nationally (and in more divided states), the bans do not land the same way. President Trump pleaded with state lawmakers to include exceptions for rape and incest. Abortion opponents at the national level have focused on later abortions — or on killings they claim take place after failed abortion attempts. These politicians recognize what polls suggest: While public opinion on the subject is extremely messy, most Americans hardly seem ready for the criminalization of all or most abortions, much less the punishment of doctors or even pregnant people.
If Roe v. Wade were to be overturned, there would be no guarantee that support for abortion bans would grow. Decades ago, reproductive rights activists found out that a sweeping judicial decision doesn’t always translate into success in national politics — or even to lasting success in the court. Abortion opponents should be the last to ignore that history. But after Roe v. Wade is gone, the anti-abortion movement may learn their lesson the hard way.
