The American Museum of Natural History focuses on science, not politics, in its display of an environmentally challenged planet.
As that human impact becomes an increasingly urgent — and increasingly politicized — subject, the museum is focusing its efforts to explore climate change in a way that emphasizes the science, not the controversy. Its approach includes continually updating its climate-related exhibits and planning to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Earth Day with a themed festival in April.
That mission is never more clear than in the museum’s Rose Center for Earth and Space, where an immense, interactive climate-change wall dominates the Gottesman Hall of Planet Earth. Although the hall has had a climate-change display since its opening in 1999, the museum overhauled it extensively in 2018.
“We really envisioned that this would serve as the billboard for the climate-change exhibit,” said Lauri Halderman, the museum’s vice president for exhibition.
But while most billboards remain static, the wall evolves. A few months ago, the museum added new images and material, including references to the so-called Camp Fire of 2018, the deadliest and most destructive wildfire in California history. The staff also incorporated NASA data about how much leaf coverage was gained and lost worldwide between June 2000 and June 2018. Now that 2019 end-of-year reports are available, the wall will reflect them as well.
It is completely in their hands at the interactive stations lining the wall’s bottom edge. Each station has labeled panels with embedded buttons, dials and levers that will cause graphs, charts, maps and vivid images to appear low on the climate wall screens, directly in front of the viewer.
The stations are grouped into three categories. “How Climate Works” explains subjects like the greenhouse effect, the oceans’ influence and the distinction between weather and climate. A climate quiz invites you to test your knowledge.
“Our Warming World” illustrates the unfolding crisis. You use a lever to move through a graph of global temperatures over 140 years; slide another lever, and your view travels north or south over an image of the globe, where bright orange spots light up, revealing where climate change is most significant. Press buttons, and you see data on the relative effects of natural and human factors.
Perhaps the most disquieting section is “Consequences of Climate Change,” which features “before and after” images of affected sites worldwide. An aerial photograph of Greenland in 2016 shows lakes and rivers that were not there in 2014 — that is how fast the ice is melting. If you turn a dial labeled “How Will Our Lives Change,” you see a graphic present a succession of possible outcomes, like disease spread, food shortages and political instability.
But, Dr. Kinzler cautioned, “what will happen is related to what humans choose to do, which is frankly less about the science and more about societal questions and policy.” This is where hope creeps in. The display specifies the risks if warming continues unabated, but a video also explains local efforts like the NYC CoolRoofs initiative, a plan to reduce carbon emissions by painting rooftops with a heat-reflective white coating.
Opposite the wall, another interactive exhibit documents how climate changed before human intervention. It includes a model of a Greenland ice core — a kind of 110,000-year-old time capsule — as well as objects like a glacial rock from Central Park.
Climate research also appears in other areas of the museum. “Worlds Beyond Earth,” a new Hayden Planetarium show that opened in January, shows how studying other planets’ atmospheres provides clues to climate change here. And the Hall of Biodiversity, which includes a model of an African rain forest, illustrates how climate change affects ecosystems.
Science presentations will include a planetarium-focused program and a new museum video highlighting the developments and challenges since Earth Day 1970. For young visitors, EarthFest will host Superhero Clubhouse, a Brooklyn organization whose Big Green Theater program helps elementary school students write original plays on environmental themes.
The celebration will also incorporate Identification Day, an annual opportunity for visitors to bring in fossils and nature specimens, which experts will analyze for signs of climate change. The museum will show off some of its own rarely seen collections, as well as live creatures like spiders and other arthropods.
“Insects tell an incredible story about climate change — where did they live and why,” Mr. Teruel said.
Adult visitors can learn even more about insects’ roles on May 6, when the museum’s SciCafe, a monthly program of cocktails and conversation, will feature Mexican research on how the climate-driven spread of fruit flies affects an endangered fruit: the avocado.
While the museum will present all these programs as science, not advocacy, its intent is to inform the public of the future’s possible risks — and rewards.
