The coronavirus has disrupted a cheerful TV genre, exiling Ms. Guthrie to her basement and CBS’s Gayle King to the Ed Sullivan Theater.
On Thursday at 7 a.m., Hoda Kotb welcomed viewers to NBC’s “Today” show, as she does every weekday morning. This time, however, she was alone at the desk, without her co-anchor.
Ms. Guthrie appeared on half of the screen.
For a second straight day after reporting cold symptoms, Ms. Guthrie was broadcasting from a basement in upstate New York. The three-second delay separating Ms. Kotb’s question and Ms. Guthrie’s reply gave the impression that she could have been thousands of miles away.
Even in bad times, viewers depend on the feel-good presence of “Today,” “CBS This Morning” and ABC’s “Good Morning America.” But as New York City, where they are taped, became a hot spot for the coronavirus, the programs were challenged to keep up their usual good cheer and show-must-go-on spirit.
The 9 a.m. hour of “Today” has also been affected: The hosts Al Roker and Craig Melvin were sent home this week after a staff member tested positive. Since their departure, much of that hour has been replaced with previously recorded broadcasts.
“Good Morning America” continues to tape as normal from its Times Square studio, but with much of its staff working from home.
On Thursday, Gayle King greeted “CBS This Morning” viewers from an unlikely location.
“If this looks familiar to you, it’s because we’re in the home of Stephen Colbert,” Ms. King said, facing a sea of empty seats at the Ed Sullivan Theater.
With her co-hosts, Anthony Mason and Tony Dokoupil, Ms. King anchored the show from a makeshift desk set on the spot where Mr. Colbert has delivered nearly 900 monologues. The CBS late-night host has not broadcast from the theater since March 12.
The network’s news division decided to move “CBS This Morning” from its usual home, the CBS Broadcast Center. Last week, several staff members tested positive for the coronavirus.
With the move, the Ed Sullivan Theater can claim another piece of show business history.
The nearly century-old theater has been home to Broadway musicals, radio shows, “The Ed Sullivan Show,” game shows, a Sammy Davis Jr. telethon, the 1980s sitcom “Kate & Allie,” “The Late Show With David Letterman” and now CBS’s morning news program.
“We promise to be good houseguests and leave the place the way we found it,” Mr. Mason, the “CBS This Morning” co-host, said from the stage on Thursday morning.
Ms. King suggested that he tinkle the piano belonging to Mr. Colbert’s bandleader, Jon Batiste.
How long the show will remain in the theater is an open question. “The Late Show” had announced that it would go dark through at least March 30. This week, Mr. Colbert taped monologues from his backyard, porch and bathtub.
Conan O’Brien, the TBS late-night host, announced on Wednesday that he would return to TV March 30, with “Conan” episodes shot on an iPhone and celebrity guests appearing via Skype. “This will not be pretty, but feel free to laugh at our attempt,” Mr. O’Brien said on Wednesday.
With more people stuck at home, ratings have soared for the three network morning shows. To guard against losing viewers, NBC had made preparations for its anchors to broadcast remotely, sending tech teams to jury-rig Ms. Kotb’s and Ms. Guthrie’s homes.
By Tuesday, as Ms. Guthrie started to experience symptoms, the backup plan kicked in.
“My husband is helping me get the signal up and has duct-taped the doors so the kids don’t run in,” Ms. Guthrie said from her basement on Wednesday.
“You’re kidding,” Ms. Kotb said.
