Spain’s coronavirus death toll climbed above 3,400 on Wednesday, overtaking China’s as it reported 738 more fatalities. It also had a record 8,000 new cases, or about 3,000 more than in Italy, where the rise in deaths and new infections appears to be leveling off.
Here are the latest updates from around the world and maps of where the pandemic, which has now claimed over 20,000 lives, has spread.
The pandemic’s jarring economic impacts have prompted aggressive public spending across the eurozone, a rarity in a group where many leaders usually insist on budget austerity. Next up: A video call today between all 27 E.U. leaders to debate a contentious proposal for the bloc to jointly issue so-called “corona” bonds.
Prince Charles, 71 and the first in line to the British throne, has the virus, along with more than 8,000 other people in that country. He had met Queen Elizabeth II, 93, only a day before medical advisers said he might have become infectious.
The death of a supermarket clerk in northern Italy has raised fears of infection further still, and has turned people who fill often overlooked jobs into unlikely heroes.
President Vladimir Putin of Russia postponed a constitutional referendum that would allow him to crash through term limits, but he stopped short of imposing a nationwide lockdown.
What to know: The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.
New York State, with 285 deaths and more than 30,000 confirmed cases, is the epicenter of the U.S. outbreak. Gov. Andrew Cuomo said on Wednesday that the state’s stringent restrictions on social gatherings appeared to be slowing the virus’s spread.
But New York City’s hospitals are now experiencing the kinds of surges that have already overwhelmed advanced health care systems in China and western Europe. Case in point: Thirteen coronavirus patients died in a 24-hour period this week at Elmhurst Hospital Center, in the borough of Queens.
Video: A doctor at that hospital, which is struggling to get by with a few dozen ventilators, offered a rare look inside.
Looking ahead: All of New York City’s more than 1,800 intensive-care beds are expected to be full by Friday, according to an official briefing obtained by The Times. A thousand beds in yet-to-open makeshift hospitals in Manhattan may be available within a few days, but a 1,000-bed hospital ship is not scheduled to arrive until mid-April.
The U.S. has an estimated 160,000 to 200,000 ventilators, but could eventually need up to a million. Public health experts and ex-officials are calling on the federal government to take control of the existing supply.
The U.S. Senate on Wednesday unanimously passed a $2 trillion economic stimulus bill that would substantially expand unemployment benefits, create a $500 billion bailout fund for distressed businesses and send direct payments of $1,200 to millions of Americans. The House is expected to quickly approve the measure on Friday, sending it to President Trump for his signature.
States are making rules to discourage residents of other states from visiting.
As normal life grinds to a halt in much of the world, artists are processing the changes.
Our Opinion desk compiled a collection of recent artwork, from Lisbon to Los Angeles, that riffs in mostly whimsical ways on how the pandemic has changed our lives. The collection includes graphic novels; an emotional diagram that vaguely resembles a paint catalog; and sketches of coronavirus-specific “products,” like a “hand holding extender” prosthesis that keeps germs at bay.
Above, part of a scene from a quarantine-themed coloring book about New York City, by the illustrator Tomi Um.
Germany: The leaders of a far-right faction within the opposition Alternative for Germany party have asked their members to “cease their activities,” but the party itself has not asked those members to leave. Analysts say it may all just reflect internal power struggles.
Jamal Khashoggi: Turkey announced the indictment of 20 Saudi nationals on murder and other charges in the killing of the dissident Saudi journalist inside his country’s Istanbul consulate in 2018. But none of those men are in the country, and Turkish law does not allow for trials in absentia.
Snapshot: Above, growing marijuana in North Macedonia. Entrepreneurs there already export oils, extracts and tinctures for medical use, and they want to begin exporting the smokable kind as well. But a push to make that legal has been tied up in Parliament.
Play: There’s Myst, an immersive computer game from the 1990s, or Google street view, which allows you to explore how places have changed over time.
Watch: Patrick Stewart reads Shakespeare on Twitter, Ballet Hispánico dances on Instagram and museums expand their digital offerings. Here’s a rundown of fine-art offerings.
What is it about New York City that has made the virus surge here?
We looked into it. New York has conducted more tests than any other state. Even after you account for that, however, the number of cases in New York is much higher.
• Here’s today’s Mini Crossword puzzle, and a clue: Passing fancy (three letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• Times Opinion columnists and writers have begun going live on Twitter every weekday to chat with viewers. Watch Frank Bruni’s Wednesday session, or join Nick Kristof for today’s, at 5 p.m. London time.