The hoarders, the deliverers and what the coronavirus says about class in America.
This article is part of Frank Bruni’s free newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it every Wednesday.
“They can afford an indefinite shutdown,” he said. And by his estimation, they don’t care enough about the tens of millions of less-privileged Americans who can’t.
Let’s leave aside the strange notion that it’s the president’s critics, and not the president himself, who have a caring deficit. Let’s not touch the odd use of “ruling class” to define those critics, most of whom can’t match the president’s wealth, cronyism, nepotism and tax shenanigans, and none of whom are rulers of his station, because none sit, as he does, at the apex of government.
Let’s look instead at Hilton’s suggestion that this pandemic is amplifying the different vulnerabilities and fates of people who occupy different tiers of wealth in America. Let’s examine the idea that as the pandemic disrupts life for some Americans much more consequentially and irreversibly than for others, resentment will rise.
Hilton gets that much right. The pandemic is first a story about public health. But it’s maybe second a story about class, and I think the conversation about income inequality in America, which has increasingly heated over recent years, is about to grow more heated still.
Caviar transports meals from high-end restaurants to well-paid people eating at home, and it’s unknowable whether everyone in that scrum worked for the service. Some could have been Carbone customers who themselves dropped by for takeout.
But it’s undeniable that many hourly laborers who don’t get paid if they don’t show up are ignoring the dictates of social distancing — and taking the accordant risks — as they cater to salaried professionals who can socially distance to their hearts’ content.
The discrepancy between her situation and that of the people whose homes she delivers food to is obviously bothering and even infuriating many Americans. The tweet that I mentioned before, by Tom Gara, an editor at BuzzFeed News, was liked by more than 4,500 Twitter users and re-tweeted by more than 1,500 of them.
I also spotted, in The New York Post, a column by Maureen Callahan with a headline proclaiming “class warfare in Hamptons.” What prompted the hostilities? According to Callahan, the influx of second-home owners (or, this being the Hamptons, third- and fourth-home owners) who fled their populous, congested, infectious New York City neighborhoods for greener pastures and are monopolizing the precious resources there with no regard for the less-affluent folks who live and work in that area of Long Island year-round.
Despite occasional platitudes about illness being a great leveler and despite the susceptibility of anyone — even Prince Charles — to infection by the coronavirus, this pandemic does discriminate. There are affluent Americans for whom it’s a forced vacation and less-affluent Americans for whom it’s the road to financial and emotional ruin. Not even a $2 trillion federal aid package is going to change that.
