A member of the Tokyo organizing committee suggested delaying the Games. Organizers said he spoke out of turn.
Organizers of this summer’s Tokyo Olympics sought to dispel confusion on Wednesday over whether the Games would proceed as scheduled, after a member of the local organizing committee said he would recommend a postponement of the event because of the coronavirus outbreak.
Amid a backdrop of growing confusion in the global sports landscape about whether events that draw large crowds should proceed, Yoshiro Mori, the chairman of the Tokyo organizing committee, held a news conference to reiterate the position of local organizers and the International Olympic Committee that the Games remained on track to open in late July.
Standing at his side was Haruyuki Takahashi, a member of the local organizing committee who had earlier caused a stir by telling The Wall Street Journal that a delay of one or two years would be the most prudent option if the Olympics could not be held as planned this summer.
Mr. Mori said that speculation about a possible postponement represented only the opinion of Mr. Takahashi, who apologized for his comments. An International Olympic Committee spokesman said on Wednesday that the committee backed Mr. Mori’s statements.
The Tokyo organizers’ attempts to quash speculation about possible disruptions came as a cascade of cancellations, closings and general confusion played out across the global sports landscape. In Argentina, for example, news media reports said the government had banned all sporting events for the rest of the month.
At a hearing held by the House Committee on Oversight and Reform in Washington on Wednesday, Anthony Fauci, a leading expert on infectious diseases, recommended that professional sporting events in the United States be played without spectators. The Golden State Warriors on Wednesday became the first N.B.A. team to say it would bar fans from home games in response to the virus, and the N.C.A.A. announced similar measures for its men’s and women’s basketball tournaments.
That measure was already being taken in some of Europe’s biggest soccer leagues and continental tournaments, with games being played this month in front of empty stands or in some cases being postponed altogether.
In England, a game on Wednesday between Arsenal and Manchester City was postponed because several Arsenal players had come into close contact in recent days with the owner of a Greek club who had tested positive for the virus.
Also on Wednesday, UEFA, the governing body of European soccer, announced that two Europa League knockout-round matches involving Italian teams and Spanish opponents — Inter Milan vs. Getafe and Sevilla vs. Roma — would not be played as a result of new travel restrictions between Spain and Italy imposed by the Spanish government.
UEFA will soon have even larger decisions to make. Euro 2020, its quadrennial continental championship tournament, is scheduled to begin in June, with 24 national teams playing in stadiums across 12 countries.
Mr. Mori, the Toyko Olympic chairman, acknowledged at his news conference that the coronavirus eventually could affect the Games.
Changes were already implemented, for instance, for the Olympic flame lighting ceremony on Thursday in Olympia, Greece. The event, usually public, is set to take place without spectators after a recent increase in coronavirus cases in the area.
Motoko Rich, Karen Crouse and Alan Blinder contributed reporting.