Regarding Emily Eakin’s essay “The Book of Love” (Feb. 16): I enjoyed the image of Eakin in her wedding dress, reading the last pages of “Vineland,” completing a promise to her soon-to-be-husband. In the mid-1990s my new girlfriend handed me a copy of Annie Dillard’s “Pilgrim at Tinker Creek,” explaining that it was one of her favorite books and could be relevant to my theological studies.
I attempted it a couple of times but never got past the first chapters. I blamed it on the mass-market paperback’s terribly small font. Several years passed and the girlfriend and I became registered domestic partners. A year later our families and friends celebrated our wedding. Ten years passed, same-sex marriage was federally recognized and we filed our first joint tax return as a married couple. Over those many years my inability and/or unwillingness to read the Pulitzer Prize winner became an inside joke and a stand-in for anything I said I might do, and didn’t. “Is the font too small?” my wife would inquire, smiling. I’d laugh.
After 20 summers together, I secretly purchased the book in electronic form, increased the font and planned to complete it by her 50th birthday, a very delayed offering. I may have received the greater gift. I read Dillard’s remarkable book, and at nearly every page I imagined my beloved reading it on the cusp of adulthood and finding in it something vital about the life she wanted to live.
A delightful essay. The Times and her husband, Mark, are both lucky to have won over Emily Eakin.
A reader, she married him.
As much as I agree with Varian Johnson, in his essay about children reading books during Black History Month (Feb. 16), that fiction can often be a better way for readers to see themselves in history, I feel the need to stress the central importance of nonfiction in any conversation concerning Black History Month. Carter G. Woodson, the African-American writer and historian who founded Negro History Week (which later became Black History Month), believed in “raising high the standard of the truth.” His organization, the Association for the Study of African American Life and History, even provided materials for the classroom: The Negro History Bulletin featured stories and biographies of black people.
Now, I will admit, the magazine might’ve been a tad bit, um, dry, particularly for its intended audience — younger readers. Thankfully, today we have a wider range of narrative nonfiction books to offer children during Black History Month. These true stories use engaging voices, captivating plots and attractive illustrations. They offer history that is informational and fact-based, and yet inviting to young readers.
Books that deal with the struggles and injustices black people have endured can be challenging. Many are sad and painful to read. But they can also be inspirational. When done right, they can serve as examples of black strength and resilience and resourcefulness and talent and beauty.
As a child growing up in the ’70s, I would have found it helpful to have books like Lesa Cline-Ransome’s “Before She Was Harriet” and Ashley Bryan’s “Freedom Over Me: Eleven Slaves, Their Lives and Dreams Brought to Life.” These books allow young readers to get to know historical figures as people, as human beings — who thought and dreamed and loved and aspired, just as they do today. With books like these, maybe I would have felt proud instead of ashamed when the topic of slavery came up in school.
I want to emphasize, I am not knocking fiction. After growing up pretty much a nonreader, I became a reader in my early 20s because of Richard Wright novels. But when speaking specifically about the Black History Month celebration created by Carter G. Woodson, I think he would lean toward the real.
The writer is an author and illustrator of children’s books.