He’s an auteur whose bizarre creations — the Metal Gear Solid series and, most recently, Death Stranding — have become huge blockbusters. Why do gamers find them so captivating?
Death Stranding, the newest video game from the developer Hideo Kojima, was introduced to the world in the summer of 2016 on a stage at the Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3), the gaming industry’s annual trade-show extravaganza. The event was what the industry calls a press conference, but this particular spectacle more closely resembled the scene in “King Kong” when the beast is displayed to the public in a Broadway theater. A live orchestra struck up a blaring John Williams-style score as the curtain lifted to reveal a sloping stage, at the very top of which stood Kojima, a slight Japanese man with swooping black hair and glasses. The floor began to light up underneath him, panes of light flying in from left and right to create a sort of light bridge, which he bounded down to shake a Sony executive’s hand. Then he stood at center stage, beaming, to deafening applause.
Kojima proceeded to play perhaps the strangest three and a half minutes of video ever to grace the E3 stage. Keep in mind that this is a venue where cybernetic dinosaurs and giant-felling samurai are par for the course. The video opened with a William Blake poem, the first lines of “Auguries of Innocence,” then cut to a close-up of highly realistic computer-generated sand. The camera floated over the sand, revealing a jumble of dead crabs. Handprints appeared in the sand and then filled up, inexplicably, with black goop. The handprints led to a naked man lying on the beach, his left wrist locked in glowing handcuffs. A black cord connected the man to what appeared to be a tiny infant, lying next to him on the sand. The man rose to his hands and knees and crawled over to the baby and picked it up and cradled it in his hands, bringing it to his chest, and his face was revealed and it was ... Norman Reedus from “The Walking Dead”? And he was weeping hysterically?
There was no hint as to the story, the gameplay or even the genre of the game. It was all mood and symbol and Norman Reedus’s shiny posterior. It was more like something you’d see at MoMA than at E3. But the crowd went wild.
The reaction might not have been much different if he had shown a blank screen. Kojima is one of a very few video-game developers who can generate enormous anticipation for a game based on his name alone. Over his 30 years in the industry, he has come to exert the sort of reality-distorting effect on gamers that Steve Jobs did on electronics consumers, with an almost supernatural ability to persuade people to get onboard with ideas that would seem totally preposterous coming from anyone else. For decades he expressed those ideas as a developer with the Japanese game giant Konami, creating and shepherding its Metal Gear Solid series. The games of that series brazenly rejected the seamless fun typically associated with the medium, preferring instead to trawl choppier aesthetic waters. Nevertheless, they became one of the most successful franchises of all time. Now, as everyone in the audience knew, Kojima was on his own after a spectacular breakup with Konami. He had started an independent studio and signed a contract with Sony Interactive Entertainment that would give him greater creative freedom to develop this new game.
Given the idiosyncrasies of his previous creations, the audience could only wonder at what he might do with so much freedom. The bizarre trailer was perfectly calibrated to stoke that curiosity while leaving it maddeningly unfulfilled. Just trust me, it said. It’s going to be good.
Over the next three years, Kojima continued to be maddeningly obscure in teasing the game. Following the Death Stranding hype cycle was a bit gamelike in itself, as fans were forced to construct some mental image of the game out of Kojima’s sporadic hints. He talked a lot during those years, and everything he said seemed only to confuse the picture. “It would be like telling you who’s the killer in a mystery novel,” he told the website Digital Spy, when pressed for specifics.
As for me, I spent three years obsessed with this game that its own creator claimed not to understand. I pored over news and speculated with my gamer friends. I became one of Kojima’s 2.8 million followers on Twitter, where he interspersed updates from the Death Stranding set with an endless stream of trivia about his life — what food he ate, what movies he watched, what books he read. The more information I had, the more I fixated on what I didn’t know. Last fall, as the release date finally approached, I couldn’t wait to see what this game could possibly be like.
How do you explain Hideo Kojima to someone who has never picked up a PlayStation controller? His admirers have often compared him to filmmakers: Quentin Tarantino, David Lynch, George Lucas, James Cameron. Each comparison has its merits. Like Lucas, Kojima is inseparable from a beloved franchise, in Metal Gear Solid, that has achieved mythic status among fans; like Tarantino, he cheekily shows off his virtuo­sity through postmodern tricks of deconstruction and self-referentiality. The narratives of the Metal Gear Solid games can be hallucinatorily surreal and difficult to follow, in a Lynchian manner, but at the same time the games are staggeringly popular big-budget blockbusters that marry technical wizardry with cheesy melodrama, à la Cameron.
Perhaps more notable than his resemblance to any particular film director is the fact that such a comparison would be made at all. Video-game creators tend not to be recognized, much less celebrated; while most film buffs can name the directors of their favorite movies, appreciation of even the best video games often begins and ends with the quality of the experience playing it. The defining characteristic of video games is their interactivity. When you play a game, the thing that sticks out about the experience tends to be what you can do and how you can do it. As the author and game designer Ian Bogost has pointed out, video games are a narcissistic medium, which may be part of why they’re such a cultural force these days. If you step away, you may understand that the game’s mechanics, narrative and characters are all designed by someone, but in the moment they seem to be primarily enablers of your own personal adventure.
Kojima’s second major innovation was the way he applied cinematic storytelling to console video games. Hollywood-style narratives had been tried in games before, but they tended to founder on unimaginative stories, sub-B-movie acting and jarring shifts in visual style between the gameplay and the noninteractive narrative sequences (“cutscenes,” in video game lingo). Dylan Holmes, in his book on video-game story­telling, “A Mind Forever Voyaging,” has noted that Metal Gear Solid created a seamless transition between game and story by rendering its cutscenes in the same graphical engine as the rest of the game. Top-notch voice acting, a dynamic orchestral score and a complicated techno-conspiracy plot — which dealt with serious real-life themes like genetic engineering and nuclear proliferation — created a mature, surprisingly affecting narrative unlike anything gamers had encountered.
At its best, what I have come to think of as Kojima Weirdness gives the games a personality seldom found in a big-budget action game. Playing them can feel like exploring the deepest recesses of an obsessive and endlessly imaginative mind.  There’s the recurring gag in which characters soil themselves. There are the twisting, sprawling plots that leave you with only the barest inkling of what happened. Then there’s the dialogue, which ranges from OK to very bad with an average of not so good. Some have tried to interpret Kojima’s warmed-over action-movie clichés as a self-conscious parody, pointing to his penchant for metatrickery. But the worst clunkers are often delivered during the most pivotal moments of his games, which suggests the chilling possibility that their authors (Kojima often co-writes his games) believed these lines were actually powerful. “Do you think love can bloom, even on a battlefield?” Otacon, the main character’s nerdy sidekick, says at one point in the first Metal Gear Solid.
On balance, I’ve found that the off-kilter writing tends to add to the charm of the series. The same can’t be said for its treatment of women. In the first game, the protagonist, Solid Snake, hits his two female allies with dumb pickup lines within the first 30 seconds or so of meeting them. There’s a whole mission in which you have to identify your sexy sidekick, Meryl, who is disguised as an enemy soldier, by recognizing her backside, which Snake checked out upon meeting her earlier in the game. “I never forget a lady,” Snake tells Meryl after successfully identifying her.
“So there’s something you like about me, huh?” she asks.
“Yeah, you’ve got a great butt,” he replies.
Over time, the series became a flash point in a growing debate around sexism in video games. By 2013, when Kojima revealed that one heroine of Metal Gear Solid V would be a busty female sniper named Quiet, clad in a bikini and torn stockings, it provoked outrage and dismay, even from die-hard fans. “Once you recognize the secret reason for her exposure, you will feel ashamed of your words & deeds,” Kojima tweeted in response to the wave of online criticism. The “secret reason”? Because of an unusual parasitic infection, Quiet breathes through her skin, meaning that she has to wear as few clothes as possible. This explanation did not mollify his critics.
Even so, the Metal Gear Solid series delivered certain incredible pleasures that no other video games have — pleasures that are difficult to isolate or define. It’s perhaps easiest to explain them in terms of individual moments. Like the mind-blowing moment, in the first Metal Gear Solid, when a floating psychic named Psycho Mantis shows off his psychokinetic powers by moving your controller: After you place it on a flat surface, at his instruction, the game uses the controller’s built-in vibration feedback feature to make it travel around. There’s the moment near the end of Metal Gear Solid 2 when the events of the whole game are revealed to have been a virtual-reality simulation, and the no-nonsense colonel you’ve been taking orders from switches to a creepy robot voice and delivers a prescient monologue about the dangers of misinformation in the network era while the very interface of the game deconstructs and turns against you as your character runs around naked covering his privates with his hands. (Long story.) There’s the part in Metal Gear Solid 3 when, after a superintense boss fight with a 100-year-old sniper (again, long story), you climb a ladder for two full minutes, your elevated heartbeat slowing to a meditative pace as your feet clank on each rung.
The more that was revealed about Death Stranding, the more it began to seem like an entire game made up of such moments, in which you find yourself experiencing something you never expected you would in a video game — something you never even thought to want to experience in a video game, but you do, and somehow it works, and you are almost delirious with surprise and joy, and the experience lodges in your brain like a tiny meteor strike, such that every time you wonder at the mind of the person whose dedication to carrying out his ideas against all common sense gave you that experience, Hideo Kojima.
By the time I met Kojima in October, at his offices in Tokyo, I had played roughly 17 hours of Death Stranding, having received an early-review code two days earlier. It was one of the most fascinating and compelling but also frustrating and boring experiences of my long gaming career. In Death Stranding, you assume the role of Sam Porter Bridges (Reedus), a delivery man working in a postapocalyptic America that has dissolved into scattered communities in underground bunkers and cities. His is a treacherous job, because a mysterious event some years earlier — the Death Stranding — flooded the land with creepy humanoid monsters known as B.T.s, short for “beached things,” which appear whenever it rains and try to drag Sam down into a pit of black tar. Also, there are human terrorists and bandits. At the start of the game, Sam is tasked by the former president of the United States with reconnecting the country’s far-flung outposts via an internet-type technology called the Chiral Network. In order to do this, he must deliver supplies and equipment to the survivors, earning their good will so they’ll agree to join the network. For the rest of the game’s dozens of hours, you must deliver one load of cargo after another, fighting off the occasional enemies, human and B.T.
The plot of the game is preposterous, but its mood is not. The world of Death Stranding is like a depressed survivalist’s fever dream. It’s an unsettling mix of high technology, supernatural horror and pristine wilderness. The game’s vision of postapocalyptic America is a forbidding volcanic landscape of snow-capped peaks and mossy lava fields. Crystal-clear rivers testify to a near-total lack of civilization outside the angular gunmetal buildings that mark the entrances to underground cities and bunkers, where refugees hide out from the black rain. The game conveys the sense of a society both more advanced and more primitive than our own, where scattered bands of humanity struggle against forces of nature and death using superslick gadgets.
The process of gaining access to Kojima’s office had inspired in me a similar sense. In place of a reception area, there was a small white room with a round pillar at the center. A white panel on the left wall silently slid open to reveal a man in a black Kojima Productions T-shirt — this was Aki Saito, Kojima’s personal translator and the communications head of Kojima Productions. Through the door, I was greeted by a narrow hallway with a white, disco-style light-up floor and white walls that curved, tunnellike, into the ceiling. “This is what we spent all of our money on,” Saito said with a laugh.
The hallway, which bears a striking resemblance to the interior of the ill-fated spaceship in “2001: A Space Odyssey,” stands as a testament to Kojima’s twin obsessions of film and outer space. As a child, Kojima dreamed first of being an astronaut, then a filmmaker. He got his spacefaring dreams from watching the Apollo 11 moon landing and his filmmaking dreams from his father, a huge movie buff. His family had a tradition of watching a movie every night; by the time he was a teenager, he was making his own campy zombie movies with high school friends. It was only his father’s death, when Kojima was 13, and the family’s subsequent financial hardships that prompted him to seek out a career in the then-booming video game industry. In 1985, Nintendo published the original Super Mario Bros. Kojima was blown away by how the simple characters onscreen could convey a rich fantasy world. He became convinced that he might be able to fulfill his creative ambitions through game design, and the next year, he took a job at Konami.
We reached the end of the hall, and a door slid open, and there was a small woman with dyed pink hair in a large black hooded sweatshirt. This was Ayako Terashima, Kojima’s personal assistant; her fans know her as Touchy! on Twitter, where she has more than 50,000 followers and provides running updates on Kojima’s life. Tera­shima said that Kojima wished to show me a new trailer for Death Stranding that he had just edited. Saito and a Sony P.R. rep led me into a conference room with a long white table, tall-backed red leather chairs and chrome lights hanging pendulously from the ceiling.
Saito left, and a few minutes later he returned with Kojima. A youthful 56, Kojima walked in with rapid, precise steps and shook my hand. He was dressed in a light sweater and jeans. He had on thick, round blue plastic glasses; a scruff of beard lent him the nerdy-cool air of the intellectual aesthete. Saito, as he translated for him, revealed a dry sense of humor and a sort of mind-meld with his boss. He translated Kojima’s Japanese into English so quickly that to an unknowing observer, it might have appeared that Kojima was translating him.
Kojima grinned and thanked me with what seemed to be genuine enthusiasm. “I’ve wanted this,” he said.
Kojima excused himself and went back into the office to prep the trailer. After a few minutes, Saito took me in.  Toward the center of the room was a large TV on a stand in front of a stylish open kitchen area. As Kojima sat down, he warned me that there might be spoilers in the trailer.
Boy, were there. Even after 17 hours of play, I had seen almost nothing in this trailer. I was surprised, given that reviewers had been explicitly forbidden to even mention anything that happened after the third “episode” of the game; with this trailer, Kojima was essentially planning to break his own embargo.
But spoilers be damned, Kojima was going to make the trailer he wanted. Among other things, Kojima is a pioneer of the video-game trailer. A trailer for Metal Gear Solid 2 is still renowned for the impact it made at E3 back in 2000. A second trailer, presented the following year, ended simply with the word “Submerges”; afterward, Kojima granted no interviews for six months, letting the clip speak for itself.
The image of a stranded man had an added resonance for Kojima at the time. Earlier that year, he left Konami. “I was almost naked, starting a new company,” he said in our interview. “I had nothing, so I thought that that image fit perfectly with my image.” His split with Konami shocked the whole industry, and the reason for it has never been revealed; Kojima hasn’t discussed it, and his P.R. rep told me he wouldn’t answer questions about Konami. Fans and sympathetic bloggers filled in the gaps with a narrative that cast Kojima as the victim of a corporation’s soulless quest for profit, only further solidifying his reputation as an auteur. I was curious to know whether Kojima was trying to convey “the fullness of inner worlds,” as the New Yorker critic Richard Brody has written about the auteurs of film. Certainly Kojima’s games do seem to give people the sense of existing in his inner world. I asked him what of his life could be found in the game.
“I have always had this habit of feeling lonely,” he replied. “That’s why I create these things in the first place.” Kojima was born in Tokyo in 1963; when he was a year and a half old, his family moved away, eventually settling in the city of Kobe. He became a latchkey kid, he said. Whenever he came home to an empty house after school, he would turn on all the lights and the TV for company.
Television wasn’t just a distraction; he learned from it. He loved travel shows in particular, which taught him about the world outside Japan. Throughout our interview, Kojima expressed a desire for Death Stranding to offer a similarly edifying experience. He hoped Sam’s journey of reconnection might offer players a metaphor with which to understand a world he described as “coming apart.” “It’s not just America, but the problem with the E.U. in Europe, or the actual world, connected by the internet, where people are very lonely,” he said.
One of the most interesting aspects of Death Stranding is its multiplayer feature. Many games let you play along with other people, either killing them or cooperating with them or both. In Death Stranding, you don’t quite do either; the presence of other players is felt only indirectly, through items they leave that litter the landscape. You can help them by delivering cargo they’ve dropped, or by leaving useful items or buildings behind. As thanks, you can give other players “likes” for a well-placed bridge or ladder. As I walked around the landscape, littered with items labeled with other players’ names, I developed a sort of camaraderie with the pseudonymous players who always seemed to know what I needed for my journey. The traces of other players softened the game’s harsh solitude while heightening the sense of a longing for connection.
I should have pointed out that 2015, when Metal Gear Solid V came out, wasn’t all that long ago, but it was clear that my interview was almost up. Soon the Sony P.R. rep told me that there was time for only one more question. Kojima’s response had reminded me of a comment he once made about the timebound nature of video games. He had compared playing an old video game to driving a 30-year-old car — it would get you to your destination, but the ride wouldn’t be much fun.
This was a truth I had come to recognize when playing some of the old Metal Gear Solid games, whose inelegant controls and outdated graphics now significantly dampened the experience for me. I said that it was interesting he was trying to create an enduring experience through an artwork that, in 30 years, perhaps people would no longer find engaging.
The interview was over.  Kojima rose, and I shook his hand and thanked him for his time. Then he was back out the door.
Throughout his career, Kojima’s work has confronted gamers with the question of why they play.  Kojima’s games may not be for you. Do you want to experience the singular creative vision of an uncompromising auteur while luxuriating in the most badass graphics you’ve ever seen? Well, you are probably already a huge Hideo Kojima fan. Welcome. Please don’t drag my article on Twitter.
One of the defining characteristics of all of Kojima’s games is their narrative ambition. Many video-game stories are perfunctory affairs; the only purpose of the plot is to give a basic motivation for the action. The Metal Gear Solid games, by contrast, try to convey stories of operatic scope and dizzying complexity. Your adventure quickly departs from the straight­forward hero’s journey found in many video games and descends into a labyrinthine techno-military conspiracy in which you never know if you are working for the good guys — or if there are any good guys at all. In the original Metal Gear Solid, you set out to infiltrate a decommissioned nuclear base in Alaska that has been taken over by terrorists, only to stumble upon a cover-up by the United States government, which has built a top-secret, nuclear-armed robot. The sequel’s plot hinges on a series of twists that successively reveal you to be a pawn in a power struggle among three competing cabals. Along the way, you meet a huge cast of characters with complicated back stories (cloning figures prominently).
In Death Stranding, the story is stripped down by comparison, the ambiguity of its narrative situations more subtle. On the one hand, your journey to “make America whole,” as the former president tells you at the beginning, seems synonymous with progress. You deliver the scattered survivors much-needed medicine, supplies and information. With each node of the Chiral Network you bring online, the surrounding area lights up on your map, and you can now power various useful installations there that help you along on your journey. But as the game goes on, the beneficence of your mission becomes increasingly uncertain. In one unsettling plot twist, a package containing a small thermonuclear device is slipped into an order of emergency food supplies. It appears on the manifest at the beginning of the mission, but you have no choice but to take it. 
After my interview with Kojima, I spent much of the next few days sequestered in my tiny hotel room in Tokyo, playing Death Stranding on the cheap TV. Once I started guiding Sam along his journey, I found Death Stranding to be not as radically unfamiliar as Kojima’s prerelease hype had suggested. In many ways it hews to the popular conventions of the “open world” genre — a term that arose to describe titles like Rockstar Games’s famed Grand Theft Auto series, which tossed aside the linear levels of older games in favor of endlessly explorable virtual environments. As in the Grand Theft Auto games, I controlled a character from a third-person perspective and roamed free over a vast landscape. I advanced the plot by taking on mandatory missions, but I also could complete various optional secondary quests for additional rewards. I assembled an arsenal of weapons and gadgetry that slowly built my character’s abilities and opened up new ways to interact with the world. To someone watching my screen, it would have been possible to conclude that Death Stranding was basically a sci-fi version of Rockstar’s wildly popular recent open-world cowboy epic, Red Dead Redemption 2.
But there was something fundamentally new, I found as I continued to play. Death Stranding manages to transform an act that most open-world games take for granted — the act of traveling from one point to another — into a complicated and meaningful experience. Although you eventually gain access to vehicles, much of the time walking is your only mode of transit. In most games, walking is a mindless chore: You can watch the scenery go by, but there’s not much to do besides push the joystick forward. But in Death Stranding, traversing the terrain comes to feel like the core of the game. Walking Sam across the rugged landscape with a load of cargo teetering over his back requires a level of skill and concentration rarely found in games outside of combat.
For a porter, Sam is very unsteady on his feet. Every rock or dip in the terrain can cause him to stumble and fall. Going up or down steep slopes frequently results in a slide amid a shower of rocks and cargo. Sam will topple over in the middle of fording a river if his fast-draining stamina gauge runs out. In order to keep him from falling, you must constantly be ready to pull the left or right trigger, which makes him grab the corresponding strap on his backpack and jerk himself upright when his balance falters. The whole thing marvelously replicates the weight of a heavy physical load by mirroring it with a cognitive one.
Strangely, I found, this labor made me empathize with Sam to a degree that I had never experienced with a video-game character. I first noticed this near the beginning of the game, when I took shelter in a cave from a B.T.-riddled rainstorm. I didn’t really have any idea what I was doing; a marker off in the distance labeled “Port Knot City” seemed to be where I needed to go. I headed out of the cave and down a path that descended into a ravine. The path grew steep, and suddenly Sam began to pick up speed. His feet seemed to be running away from him down the slope. He pitched backward and waved his arms wildly for balance.
A blue indicator below Sam appeared, telling me to pull the right and left triggers on my controller to regain balance, but it vanished as quickly as it had appeared. The path leveled out. Then it descended even more steeply, and Sam began speeding up again. His steps got shorter and quicker as he tried desperately to slow his pace.
The balance indicator appeared again, but before I could react Sam stumbled over a small rock and went head over heels in five jarring somersaults before regaining his footing and coming to a halt. The boxes I’d been carrying on my back had flown off during the tumble and lay strewn behind me, flashing ominously.
This left me minorly stunned. I had never tripped in a video game. I’ve fallen a lot: into pits in Super Mario Bros., off the top of a roof of a gutted apartment building in the online shooter PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds, off cliff faces in the treasure-hunting adventure series Uncharted. Because it’s self-inflicted, a fall is frustrating in a way that being killed by an enemy isn’t. But usually when you fall, you fall very far, to your death, and that means a restart. When Sam fell, the only injury was to my pride. I felt demoralized in a way that reminded me of when the handle comes off the grocery bag and your apples roll down the stairs: dull, but somehow all-encompassing.
One of the first missions forces Sam to carry his own adoptive mother’s corpse on his back. The load is so unwieldy that even a slight change in direction sends Sam stumbling. Again and again I came close to falling, and each time my heart leapt into my chest. I knew that if I took things slowly I would make it, but it was hard to break my ingrown habits. In most games, whenever you have distance to cover, you tend to run, especially because even the most realistic games usually let you sprint forever without becoming winded. I never was quite able to overcome this habit while playing Death Stranding, which meant that I tripped a lot. The game was turning my familiarity with video games against me.
I ultimately did fall with the corpse on my back, while impatiently clambering over some rough terrain. The rumble from the controller as Sam sprawled flat on his face sent a jolt of sickening horror up my spine. As Sam struggled to his feet, I took some small comfort in the fact that he had fallen straight forward, so the corpse didn’t actually touch the ground while he was carry­ing it to the incinerator. I was fully immersed in Sam’s bleak situation.
A few weeks after my visit with Kojima in Tokyo, I attended a launch event for Death Stranding in Manhattan. A hundred or so people assembled at a large exhibition space in Chelsea, making the whole thing seem more like the opening of a fancy conceptual-art show than the introduction of a video game. A replica of the white hall from Kojima Productions had been constructed at the entrance; snazzily dressed people sipped cocktails and wine. An entire wall was filled with photos of Kojima posing with famous people: Del Toro, J.J. Abrams, Robert De Niro, a whole array of Japanese celebrities. Dame Helen Mirren was in attendance, channeling Kojima’s cyberpunk-meets-postpunk aesthetic in a long black blazer with a Radiohead patch on the breast. I approached her and asked if she was a gamer.
Kojima roamed the gallery wearing a black blazer over a T-shirt, black pants and black-and-white basketball sneakers. A small crowd was trailing him, including a personal cameraman there to document his every move. He stood for much of the night on an elevated stage, hamming it up with members of the cast as guests and media snapped their photographs.
Five years is practically geological time in the video-game industry, but then again, Death Stranding is a game that does not adhere to accepted time conventions. I played as fast as I could, forgoing almost all the side missions, reading barely any of the hundreds of emails you receive that fill in the plot, zooming from one delivery to the next, and it still took me over 60 hours to beat, well above the usual (30 to 40) of most big-budget open-world games.
And it seemed as if whatever pleasure I got was directly related to how much I personally struggled. About halfway through the game, there is a brutal section in which you have to make a series of deliveries in a mountain area covered in thigh-high snow. The snow makes walking excruciatingly slow. You can’t run. Sam walks with wide, sloughing steps, pushing against the snow, his face crystallizing in a mask of ice. For two hours straight, all I did was push my joystick forward with slight nudges to change direction as Sam trudged through the blinding white snowscape. It was beautiful, but given the total lack of challenge or stimulation, I felt my attention fading.
Death Stranding had made me contemplate every exhausting step. At many points, I reflected that if I didn’t have to finish the game in order to write this article, I would have quit. But I’m glad I didn’t — because I would have missed out on one of the most beautiful and unsettling experiences I’ve ever had in a game.
It came during a mission in which I was tasked with recovering a machine that a paleontologist had been using to collect samples from a tar pit. The valley was wide and flat, pocked with gaping calderas that blew enormous plumes of steam into the air, like sideways clouds drifting into the sky. After hours of white and gray and blinding snow in the mountains, gazing on the relative liveliness of the valley, the dark green grass and mud and billowing steam pillars, was as revitalizing as an extra life. Then it started to rain. A swarm of B.T.s appeared, and I was dragged down into their nightmarish pool of tar by a gang of them. And so I died. It had happened a few times before, but each time was as terrifying as the first: The camera goes first-person, and you zoom through the tar like a water slide until everything goes black, and you find yourself looking at yourself floating underwater in a sort of limbo.
But when I respawned, there was a huge smoldering crater in the spot where I had died, about a mile wide and a quarter mile deep: a void left by my body. A bit shaken, I collected the paleontologist’s machine and headed back into the mountains. Turning the corner in a wide path, I heard a far-off rumbling sound. Three enormous boulders tumbled slowly down the side of the mountain. For a second I thought they were going to run me over, and I prepared to dodge out of the way, but they came to a stop just before me, as if mocking me.
The ups and downs of the previous hour or so, from the pit of boredom to the height of terror and down again to quiet, surreal beauty, had left me overwhelmed. This is not a typical feeling you get from a video game. Video games usually make you feel powerful. It’s film that makes you surrender to the spectacle on the screen. What makes Death Stranding a powerful experience is how it uses its agency-granting power to make you bored, or confused, or scared, or awed — to cycle you through a series of disempowering states, affecting you in a way that movies can’t quite accomplish.
After the boulders came to rest, I had the feeling of an eerie presence, something alive in the rough stone spheres that had come to rest in the snow in front of me. I felt as if my entire being had been slightly rearranged, at a molecular level. It was a classic Kojima moment.