Amid a yearlong political and legal imbroglio, a deadly contagion may give Israel’s embattled prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, a new lease on political life.
JERUSALEM — The scourge of coronavirus converged this week with Israel’s yearlong electoral impasse, creating a crisis that could politically benefit the country’s embattled but indefatigable prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu.
Just days after his right-wing and religious alliance failed for a third time in a year to win a majority and form a government, and just days away from the opening of his trial on corruption charges, he has seized the initiative on the virus, leaving his chief opponent, Benny Gantz, a relative political novice, with little room to maneuver.
Since early March, Mr. Netanyahu has been appearing almost nightly on prime time to announce ever more draconian measures to protect Israelis from the outbreak, which has infected more than 140 citizens and left tens of thousands in self-quarantine.
Then, on Thursday night, in a televised address about the contagion, in tones that one commentator described as “dystopian,” Mr. Netanyahu called for a national emergency government, which could give him a new lease of political life with a popular proposal that Mr. Gantz will find hard to reject.
Leery of being blamed for any failure of the proposal, Mr. Gantz, leader of the centrist Blue and White party, responded immediately that he would be willing to enter into discussions about forming an emergency government with Likud.
Analysts said that under the circumstances, it would be hard for Mr. Gantz to reject sitting in a Netanyahu-led government, despite his staunch refusal to do so in the past.
On Friday Mr. Gantz said he had still not received any serious reply and the terms and real prospect of such a government arising remained unclear.
But the virus has showcased Mr. Netanyahu’s leadership skills as he moved pre-emptively and decisively to stem its spread, largely sequestering the country by ordering all arrivals from abroad to self-quarantine, brainstorming with foreign leaders by phone and videoconference and pledging subsidies to stabilize the economy.
Glimmers of hope amid signs of a deepening crisis.
Palestinians fear a coming coronavirus storm.
Critics have accused Mr. Netanyahu of exploiting the situation for political advantage.
After celebrating too early the outcome of the March 2 election, Mr. Netanyahu’s right wing and religious bloc of parties fell short, for the third time in the past 12 months, of winning enough electoral support to form a majority government.
Mr. Gantz was hoping to be able to cobble together a minority government with the outside support of Arab parties. Those hopes have been floundering, but Mr. Gantz is still making efforts to secure enough recommendations to get first crack at building a coalition.
For a while, Mr. Netanyahu had appeared almost down and out. Now, amid the coronavirus outbreak, he is in his element, issuing detailed health directives, even pulling a crumpled tissue out of his pocket to demonstrate good practices, while casting his opponents’ maneuvering after this month’s election as petty, partisan politics. His tough containment policies have so far earned him credit for proving prescient.
The timing of Mr. Netanyahu’s call for an emergency government is crucial. On Sunday, President Reuven Rivlin is scheduled to begin the postelection process of receiving the parties’ recommendations for who they want as prime minister.
If Mr. Gantz is selected, Blue and White would be able to begin moves in Parliament to advance legislation to prevent a candidate who has been indicted — namely, Mr. Netanyahu, who is charged with bribery, fraud and breach of trust in three graft cases — from running for prime minister in future elections.
An emergency government based on cooperation between Likud and Blue and White would likely put any such legislation on hold.
In any case, in the shadow of the epidemic, the unresolved legal questions surrounding Mr. Netanyahu’s fitness to form a new government while under indictment have largely been shunted out of public spotlight. The opening of his trial, with a mainly procedural hearing set for March 17, is also likely to take place with few, if any, reporters in attendance. It could even end up being postponed.
“He has been running a very effective campaign,” said Ayelet Frish, a strategic consultant who long worked for Shimon Peres. “Corona has given him legitimacy,” she added.
Israeli measures to contain the spread have been among the most stringent in the world. Israel moved swiftly to bar the entry of foreign arrivals from Italy in late February, angering the Italian government, which was taken by surprise, according to Lior Haiat, spokesman for Israel’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
For once, being surrounded by largely hostile neighbors has been fortunate for Israel.
Its unique placement, with only a trickle of passengers over its land borders and most international travelers passing through a single airport, allowed Israel to quickly and efficiently impose such strict travel restrictions and border controls, said Prof. Ran Balicer, a member of the Health Ministry’s epidemic management team.
“We did it early on because we could,” he said.
Israel has been preparing for such an event for two decades, according to Professor Balicer, who edited a detailed contingency plan for just this scenario 15 years ago.
Israel has since moved on to social distancing, limiting indoor gatherings to 100 people, closing schools and universities and canceling sports events.
It has also been cooperating closely with the Palestinian Authority, which is dealing with a coronavirus outbreak mainly centered on the West Bank pilgrimage city of Bethlehem, with about 35 confirmed cases there so far. Israel has facilitated the transfer of disinfectants, testing kits and tourists and has closed border crossings in coordination with the Palestinian and Jordanian authorities.
