He was appalled by English food, particularly peas. With his brother, he established the first British restaurant to win three Michelin stars.
Michel Roux, a French-born chef who lifted fine dining in London to a new plane in the late 1960s when, with his older brother, Albert, he opened Le Gavroche, the first British restaurant to earn three Michelin stars, died on Wednesday at his home in Bray-on-Thames. He was 78.
A statement by his family said the cause was idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, a respiratory disease for which he had been treated for some time.
The brothers offered a rigorously classical menu, with ingredients imported or, in some cases, smuggled from France. Sauces were rich and standards were high. Londoners with deep pockets were transported by dishes like lobster mousse with caviar and Champagne butter sauce, duck foie gras with truffles, and a signature double-baked Swiss soufflé.
The restaurant, awarded a third Michelin star in 1982, attained crown-jewel status and served as a training ground for such future stars as Pierre Koffmann, Marco Pierre White and Gordon Ramsay.
Mr. Roux and his brother added luster to their already exalted reputations when they opened the Waterside Inn in Bray, Berkshire, in 1972. Like Le Gavroche, it received a star when Michelin published its first British guide in 1974. It was awarded three stars in 1985.
Michel Roux was born on April 19, 1941, to Henri and Germaine (Triger) Roux, above his grandfather’s charcuterie in Charolles, in central France. It was an auspicious beginning.
His father, who moved the family to the outskirts of Paris after World War II and opened his own charcuterie, was a gambler and ne’er-do-well who left his home, his wife and his failing business when Michel was 10. Mr. Roux credited his mother, “an inventive, instinctive cook” whom he enthusiastically assisted in the kitchen, for inspiring him to be a chef.
After serving an apprenticeship with the pastry maker Camille Loyal in the Belleville neighborhood of Paris, Mr. Roux found work in the kitchen of the British Embassy, where Albert was a chef. He was later hired as a junior chef in the household of Cécile de Rothschild, of the wealthy banking family, rising to the position of head chef after completing two years of military service in Algeria.
The opening-night guest list included Charlie Chaplin, Ava Gardner and Douglas Fairbanks Jr. An overnight success, the restaurant moved to sumptuous quarters in Mayfair in 1982.
Mr. Roux is survived by his brother and three children from his first marriage, Alain, Christine and Francine. He and his wife divorced in 1979. His second wife, Robyn Joyce, died in 2017.
For a time, the brothers operated several bistros and brasseries in London, including Le Poulbot, in the financial district, and Gavvers, in the original Gavroche. In 1984 they created the Roux Brothers Scholarship, a prestigious competition intended to foster a new generation of British chefs. One winner each year apprentices at a top restaurant, then receives coaching by the Roux brothers.
With his brother, Mr. Roux wrote several cookbooks, notably “New Classic Cuisine” (1983) and “At Home With the Roux Brothers” (1988). His own cookbooks included “Desserts: A Lifelong Passion” (1994), “Pastry: Savory and Sweet” (2008) and “The Essence of French Cooking” (2014).
The brothers went their separate ways in 1986. Michel kept the Waterside Inn, which he turned over to his son, Alain, in 2002. Albert took over Le Gavroche, which is now run by his son, Michel. The restaurant lost its third star in 1993 and now has two. In 2018, Mr. Roux and his son opened Roux at Skindles, a brasserie in Taplow, not far from the Waterside Inn.
