The outbreak at Life Care in Kirkland, Wash., has left 7 people dead so far. Now the government is focusing all inspections at nursing homes on infection prevention.
Now, public health experts fear these facilities could become central to the rise and spread of the novel coronavirus. Statistics from China show that the infection caused by the virus, called Covid-19, kills nearly 15 percent of people over 80 years old who have it and 8 percent of people in their 70s — the very population that makes up more than half the population of these homes.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the trillion-dollar federal agency that regulates the nation’s 15,700 nursing homes, issued updated guidance on Wednesday for these facilities. Vice President Mike Pence, who is leading the nation’s coronavirus response efforts, said on Tuesday that 8,200 C.M.S-funded inspectors of nursing facilities in the states will focus exclusively for the time being on infection control — a significant shift in how resources are used.
In an interview on Tuesday, the C.M.S. administrator, Seema Verma, said that the agency’s existing rules that govern infection control and prevention should provide a strong defense — if they are followed properly.
New York State and Pennsylvania set new single-day records.
In California, Governor Newsom pushes back over concerns about his decision to send ventilators to other states.
The existing rules largely emulate a series of protocols used to deal with the seasonal flu, “the closest analogy,” said Dr. Lisa Winston, the medical director for infection control and prevention at Zuckerberg General Hospital in San Francisco, an institution that has an on-site skilled nursing facility.
But the analogy fails in key ways, Dr. Winston said — notably in that the flu has a vaccine and a prophylactic anti-viral treatment often given during outbreak; no such medicines exist here.
In tweaking its existing guidance, the federal government is now telling nursing homes to bar visits by people who are sick and have traveled to affected countries and offers procedures for determining when nursing homes and hospitals to transfer Covid-19 patients to one another.
Since the outbreak at the Life Care Center in Kirkland, Wash., nursing home chains and trade groups, along with mom-and-pop homes and assisted living operations, have been trying to get policies in place with uncertain information. At St. Anne Nursing & Rehabilitation Center, in Seattle, a 47-bed skilled nursing home, signs went up in January discouraging visits from relatives or friends with symptoms of flu or colds, but the concern has gone into overdrive after the nearby Kirkland outbreak, said Marita Smith, the home’s administrator.
St. Anne Nursing is an independent nursing home, a veritable mom-and-pop shop. On the other end of the ownership spectrum is a huge company like Genesis HealthCare, a Pennsylvania corporation that has 400 assisted living, nursing home and senior living communites around the country. Asked about its planning for Covid-19, the company issued a brief statement saying that its team is meeting regularly to discuss the issue and is coordinating its efforts based on government guidance.
The sisters have been left now with an additional concern: their mother, Susan Hailey, 76, has had a cough since early last week and now shortness of breath and diarrhea, but the nurse there has told them by phone (they are no longer allowed to visit) that their mother is not eligible for a Covid-19 test until she shows a fever.
CMS rates the nation’s 15,700 nursing homes and Life Care Center of Kirkland received an above average score for staffing — four stars out of five — and an average score of three stars for health risks based on recent health inspections. Ms. Verma, head of C.M.S., said she hoped by week’s end the agency would have investigators at Life Care in Kirkland.
