SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — When the Arizona Diamondbacks met with Zac Gallen late last season to review his rookie year, they issued a challenge. Gallen, a 24-year-old right-hander, had thrived in his first taste of the majors — before and after his trade from the Miami Marlins — and the team gave him a model for the kind of pitcher to emulate: Madison Bumgarner. Study him, Gallen was told, and learn all you can.
At that point, the Diamondbacks did not know Bumgarner wanted to join them. He had played 11 seasons for the San Francisco Giants, helping them to three titles by becoming the best pitcher in World Series history: He allowed one earned run over 36 innings and got four wins and a save in five appearances.
But the Giants were rebuilding, and Bumgarner had admired the Diamondbacks as a rival in the National League West, appreciating their effort and the competitive roster they had assembled. In December he signed with the Diamondbacks for five years and $85 million, giving Arizona an ace and making Gallen’s studies much more efficient.
The Diamondbacks have a brief but rich history of prominent starters: Randy Johnson and Curt Schilling led them to their only championship in 2001; Brandon Webb won a Cy Young Award in 2006; and Zack Greinke made three All-Star teams for Arizona before his trade to Houston last July.
Bumgarner had a locker next to Johnson’s as a rookie for the Giants in 2009. He found Johnson, who was finishing a Hall of Fame career, to be more engaging than he expected, and he considered himself lucky to have so many supportive teammates, like Matt Cain, to guide him. In Arizona, Bumgarner is returning the favor with Gallen.
Bumgarner rebounded last season after missing parts of 2017, when he hurt his shoulder in a dirt-bike accident, and 2018, when he broke his hand on a comebacker. He ranked second to Washington’s Stephen Strasburg in innings among N.L. pitchers, with 207⅔, and while his earned run average was a career-high 3.90, his underlying numbers were strong.
Bumgarner always needs an edge, and he said that was part of the reason he found the Diamondbacks appealing. Chasing the most lucrative contract from a major-market team would not have been in character.
“I like the way they go about it here — it’s more my style of baseball than a lot of places — and I also enjoy being on an underdog type team, more so than the team that’s supposed to win,” he said.
Bumgarner added that he always believes his team should win. But when others have doubt, it works to his team’s advantage.
The Dodgers are widely expected to win their eighth straight N.L. West title, especially after adding Mookie Betts, the American League’s most valuable player in 2018, to their roster. But the Diamondbacks went 85-77 last season for their third consecutive winning record, and have since added the former Gold Glove outfielders Starling Marte and Kole Calhoun as well as Bumgarner, Vogt and relievers Junior Guerra and Hector Rondon.
That was another part of the team’s message to Gallen last season. Yes, they had traded Greinke, but they promised they would not be retreating in the standings. Signing his role model was emphatic confirmation.
