Health care providers and other readers worry about inadequate testing, quarantines and protective equipment.
I am a doctor. It is a privilege to take care of patients. When I am on call, I perform surgery that saves lives. The feeling of gratification is indescribable. I love my job.
I am a mother. It is a privilege to raise my children. When they smile at me with pure joy over a shared joke or an accomplishment, the feeling of gratification is indescribable. I love my family.
We have a shortage of personal protective equipment for health care workers. At the health facilities where I work, I was told that suppliers would no longer ship regular supplies of N95 respirator masks because of a shortage. In countries with inadequate protections, health care workers are dying.
Unless the shortage of personal protective equipment is rectified immediately, health care workers will be faced with a difficult choice: Do I do my job and risk my own life and that of my family, or do I stay home from work knowing that patients will die from lack of medical care?
Vice President Mike Pence said at his news conference Monday that travelers arriving from one of the coronavirus hot spots, such as South Korea or northern Italy, are being screened — their temperature is taken and they are asked about symptoms. However, they are not being quarantined for 14 days.
This is completely unacceptable. A person who is not showing signs of an infection might still be incubating the disease. This is the whole basis for the concept of quarantine.
The current policy means that, if asymptomatic, a person arriving from a coronavirus hot spot is free to go to work the next day, whether in a hospital, a classroom or a large office building.
How can we hope to contain the coronavirus outbreak if we continue to allow fresh cases to arrive from abroad?
The writer is an assistant professor of medicine at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons.
Of course Covid-19 is underreported. On Friday night I showed symptoms of flu — cough, aches, fever, chills — the worst I’ve ever felt. Because I had a flu shot this winter, I emailed my doctor to see if I should be tested for the coronavirus.
Since test kits were not widely available, he encouraged me to get an oximeter (measures the estimated oxygen saturation of red blood cells). I am to monitor at home, and if my oxygen saturation drops beneath 92, consider proceeding to the emergency room.
So far, I have stayed in home isolation and have been hovering around 93. So, here is the problem with reporting. If I am lucky enough to stay above 92 and heal on my own, I will never know if I had the coronavirus and spread it to others while asymptomatic. Nor will others know.
I have elected to stay in isolation for two weeks for the greater good, and I am sure I’m not alone. We are not prepared.
I am a doctor on the front lines seeing cough and fever all day long. On Saturday I saw approximately 40 pediatric patients in 12 hours. We had a very limited supply of personal protective equipment for our entire urgent care. We also had to go to YouTube to remind ourselves how to don the gear. Where is the C.D.C. leadership? Meanwhile, patients with fever and cough keep coming in without wearing masks and sitting next to 6-week-olds.
I worry that I am sending children with high fever and cough home, children who are negative for the flu, knowing full well that this could be the coronavirus. I am glad to hear that more test kits are being made available nationwide and that some relaxing of the criteria to test a patient has happened.
This is still not enough, though, since most coronavirus patients will not meet even the new guidelines for testing. Doing some random testing would be helpful to at least learn about how many in the community are already positive.
Otherwise, we as health care workers will be the canaries in the coal mine.
As “Avoiding the Virus May Be Unaffordable” (Business, March 2) pointed out, many people cannot afford to miss work and/or do not have sick days to use. When Congress considers adequate funding for the virus response, it should add funds to reimburse employees who are quarantined for time lost at work. Obviously, medical verification of the quarantine must be required.
Without such funding, many sick individuals will hide their symptoms and continue to work, thus endangering co-workers and the public. If our response to this pandemic is to be effective, it must account for the economic reality of Americans with limited incomes.
Please stop publishing photographs of well persons wearing face masks during this Covid-19 outbreak. I know these images are compelling, but The Times is sending the wrong message. These photos encourage the inappropriate use of masks, may contribute to a shortage of masks, and don’t emphasize the important prevention messages about hand washing, cough and sneeze hygiene, and social distancing.
As the number of infections increases in this country, masks should be reserved for sick persons and their caregivers.
The writer is a nurse practitioner and immediate past president of the American Travel Health Nurses Association.