Laura Taylor Kinnel is optimistic.
WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — Laura Taylor Kinnel made her New York Times Crossword debut in 2019 with a Sunday puzzle, then followed that up a few months later with another Sunday.
That’s a pretty good way to make your presence known in the crossword world, and she is back with a slightly larger than usual (15x16) Wednesday grid.
31A. Editors shorten written sentences, but in this puzzle, to “Shorten the sentence, maybe?” is to COP A PLEA.
34A. We’re talking about hip, not hip. What I mean is, the “Hip designs?” are designs for one’s hip, or TATS. Of course, they could also be hip.
39A/41A. Today’s “read across” is LEIA/ I MISS YOU, a tribute to both the actress Carrie Fisher and the character she played in “Star Wars,” Princess LEIA Organa.
49A. Sssh! You are ruining it for the kids. They are not supposed to know that UPS is one of Santa’s helpers.
50A. Abbreviation clue! A QB (quarterback) blunder is an INTerception.
37D. Tough one, even for this Northeasterner. The origins of Mother Bethel AME (African Methodist Episcopal) Church date back to 1787, when the Rev. Richard Allen, a former slave, encouraged black worshipers to form their own congregations after being forced to sit in the balconies during some of the traditionally white Philadelphia church services. The original house of worship, a former blacksmith’s shop, was dedicated in 1794.
42D. Many things “might give you that nice warm Christmas feeling?” but the YULE LOG is probably the warmest.
60D. When people can travel safely again, put Berthillon, in Paris on the Île Saint-Louis, on your itinerary. The best ice cream ever.
The names of four film or television roles contain a spring season month and are described in a punny way as the Chinese food appetizer SPRING ROLLS.
The key to Ms. Kinnel’s theme is to recognize the homonym in the revealer, SPRING ROLLS. The four theme entries are actually “spring roles,” in that each of the film or television roles contains the name of a month of spring.
For example, at 17A, the answer to the clue “Laura Dern, in ‘Little Women’” is MARMEE MARCH, with March being the first month (mostly) of spring.
Similarly, at 28A, the answer to the clue “Sarah Drew, on ‘Grey’s Anatomy’” is APRIL KEPNER, with April being the second month of spring.
Now you spring forth and solve the other two.
 I’m deeply grateful for all the medical professionals and first responders who don’t need 28-A to tell them this.
I’ll never be nearly as put-together as 45-ACROSS, but I’ll do my best to look presentable as I connect with my students by teleconferencing for the first time on the day this puzzle is published. (Shout out to all the students, teachers and school administrators who are learning so much so quickly about how to teach and learn in unfamiliar circumstances).
