State insurance regulators accused a ministry offering an alternative to traditional insurance of misleading consumers.
The plans, which have become increasingly popular, rely on pooling members’ contributions to cover their medical expenses, but they are not required to meet standards for traditional insurance plans.
The state’s insurance regulators accused Trinity HealthShare, which runs ministry plans, and Aliera, which sells them, of misleading consumers and offering products tantamount to health insurance policies without state approval.
The state estimated that up to 11,000 residents might belong to plans being offered by Aliera and Trinity.
“Consumers who bought these plans thinking they purchased comprehensive health insurance deserve the full protection of our laws,” said Ricardo Lara, the California insurance commissioner, in a statement announcing the state’s cease-and-desist order.
Trinity, which said it could not comment because it had not yet been served with the state’s action, said it anticipated contesting the order.
Aliera issued a statement saying it would contest the state’s action.
“With Californians facing skyrocketing health insurance premiums, it’s deeply disappointing to see state regulators working to deny residents access to more affordable programs offered by qualified health share ministries,” the company said in a statement.
“We will utilize all available opportunities to address the false claims being made about the support and management services we provide to Trinity HealthShare and other health care ministries we represent, and we’re confident the health care sharing ministries will defend the right of their members to exercise their religious convictions in making health care choices,” it added.
These Christian nonprofit groups offer low rates because they are not classified as insurance and are under no legal obligation to pay medical claims. But state regulators are questioning some of the ministries’ aggressive marketing tactics, saying some consumers were misled or may not understand the lack of comprehensive coverage in the case of a serious illness or conditions that the ministries may not be willing to cover, like treatment for substance abuse.
Aliera has generally argued that state regulators are limiting the choices available to consumers, and Trinity has previously said its website makes clear that the ministry does not offer health insurance.