The biennial exercise, called Native Fury, shows the close ties between American forces and the U.A.E.
AL-HAMRA MILITARY BASE, United Arab Emirates — U.S. Marines and Emirati forces held a major military exercise Monday that saw forces seize a sprawling model Mideast city, a drill conducted amid tensions with Iran and despite the new coronavirus pandemic.
Troops raced over the dunes of the Al-Hamra Military Base to take the model city, complete with multistory buildings, an airport control tower, an oil refinery and a central mosque. Controlled explosions rang out as Emirati troops rappelled from hovering helicopters and Marines searched narrow streets on the Persian Gulf for mock-enemy forces.
The biennial exercise, called Native Fury, shows the close ties between American forces and the U.A.E., a federation of seven sheikhdoms on the Arabian Peninsula home to Abu Dhabi, the capital, and Dubai, its financial heart.
It also comes after the United States killed Iran’s most prominent general, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, in a drone strike in January, and Tehran retaliated with a ballistic missile attack on American forces in Iraq. While acknowledging the tensions, U.S. officials dismissed the idea of Tehran viewing such an exercise with suspicion.
The exercise saw 4,000 U.S. troops from the Army, Marines and Navy position armored vehicles and other equipment from Kuwait and the island of Diego Garcia in the desert, some 125 miles southwest of Abu Dhabi.
The combined U.S. forces and the Emirati troops then stormed the imaginary city of Al-Hamra with its blocks of stand-alone houses, hotels and apartment complexes.
While the gunplay included mostly blanks, the practice remains deadly serious for the U.A.E., which has spent billions on its military — including the Blackhawk and Chinook helicopters that circled overhead, the armored carriers that splashed into the city’s canals and the facility itself.
The U.A.E. deployed forces into Afghanistan after the 2001 U.S. invasion targeting Al Qaeda following the Sept. 11 attacks. Its day-to-day ruler, Crown Prince Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, has sought to project Emirati military power in the Mideast and into East Africa as well. Former U.S. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis famously proclaimed the Emirates “little Sparta” for its posture.
That military push has included taking part in the long-running Saudi-led war in Yemen. The U.A.E. has since pulled its troops out of Yemen, calling for a political settlement to end a conflict between the Iranian-backed Houthi rebels there and its Saudi-backed, internationally recognized government.
Emirati military officials at the base in Al-Hamra on Monday declined to speak to Associated Press journalists. U.S. Ambassador John Rakolta Jr., on hand for the event, praised the U.A.E.
Mr. Rakolta also described the exercise as “defensive in nature” when asked about Iran.
There was no immediate reaction in Iranian state media to the exercise. Iran’s mission to the United Nations did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Also a concern for those participating in the exercise is the outbreak of the new coronavirus. General Savage said those U.S. forces involved had had little contact with the outside world after shipping out for the event and none had tested positive since. But he said the military remained vigilant in terms of sanitation while living at the desert base.
“This has been an incredible training opportunity for us to go through this and practice how we would do something if, God forbid, we are forced to go fight in this region again,” General Savage said.