“The vibe is feeling like getting your last social interaction in,” said a co-owner of a cocktail bar on the Lower East Side.
The start of the weekend among the bars and clubs of Manhattan’s Lower East Side looked — and felt — more as if the end of one. Empty cabs rolled down darkened streets, past lonely food carts plopped on sidewalks where few pedestrians scurried by. Some venues closed, while others worried they might be next.
Then on Sunday night, Mayor Bill de Blasio, facing mounting pressure, announced a sweeping shutdown of tens of thousands of bars, restaurants, nightclubs and music venues in an effort to suppress the spread of the coronavirus.
Yet even before city officials on Thursday ordered venues to cut their capacity in half to reduce the risk of transmission, business had begun to slip at many places, and by Friday night the muted mood was palpable. Officials at the city’s Office of Night life have been offering guidance on how to apply for business grants and loans now being offered by the city, and on how to operate while reducing exposure.
Some public health officials, however, said capacity restrictions needed to go much further — immediately — and that any type of crowding made containment efforts much less effective.
The bans on large gatherings announced by New York officials on Thursday mirror similar efforts around the country and world as governments try to slow the spread of infection. City officials in Hoboken, N.J., announced on Saturday that they were shutting down bars and allowing restaurants to only conduct takeout and delivery services. And ominous signs are appearing overseas, as the French government took the drastic step of shuttering clubs, cafes and theaters on Saturday.
The city’s first weekend under the first restrictions comes after an increasingly nervous population realizes the blurry future they are confronting.  Other places kept their doors open, struggling to keep their staff employed.
Mr. Cho had just reopened his place in late October, eight months after having closed because of extensive damage from an apartment fire three floors above. He still hasn’t had an official grand reopening, but he is looking to apply for a Small Business Administration loan to pay the rent and his staff. If not, he’s unsure if he can weather the crisis relying on a nightly customer tally that is a fraction of the old days. Mr. de Blasio’s action on Sunday made that a moot point for now.
For how long is another question. While he had prepared for St. Patrick’s Day by hiring extra staff and buying more beer and liquor, the parade’s cancellation now has him in a tight spot even before the complete shutdown. Normally, he’d make enough on St. Patrick’s to cover his $12,000 monthly rent. Big Lee was worried if he could cover it a day at a time.
He and his wife are waiting to see if there is aid for which they may qualify for.
