Credit...Julia Gartland for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Ali Slagle.
Good morning. Where does the time go? We’ve lost an hour today, and that’s grand for those who love evening sunlight, but it may have left you logy and confused this morning. Accordingly, we’ve assembled a huge collection of ridiculously easy recipes for the first day of daylight saving time. For dinner tonight, out of that collection, I’m thinking sheet-pan harissa salmon with potatoes and citrus (above), but you may find your own bliss.
It’s a holiday week for some, as both Purim and Holi get underway at the top of the week. So maybe whip up some mango kulfi today, get it in the freezer, and a tray or two of hamantaschen for the cookie jar besides? We’ve got a nice caramelized onion and poppy seed variety, a regular poppy seed one, and another with chocolate chips.
 Or, if you’ve got a little more time, you might take a look at this delicious new oven-roasted tomato and white bean stew.
Tuesday, perhaps, might be a good one for introducing your family to the pleasures of a Tater Tot hot dish, the recipe for which I learned from the cookbook and television star Molly Yeh, right at the start of her fame. It’s great with venison steaks but also on its own, with a big green salad. Get on that, please!
Wednesday, how about creamed greens potpie? Or red wine spaghetti with pancetta? Or garlic shrimp with peas?
On Thursday, you should make huevos rotos for sure, and serve them with a tangle of baby kale cooked quickly in olive oil, then showered with salt, pepper and lemon juice.
Then to round out the week, some chicken paprikash, served, of course, with generously buttered egg noodles.
Many thousands more ideas for what to cook this week await you on NYT Cooking, at least once you’ve acquired a subscription to the site and app. We think that’s worth your time and money, obviously, and we don’t just offer you recipes in return. There’s also storage and organization, the ability to rate recipes and to leave notes on them to the benefit of yourself and others, and a great deal of instruction for those who want to learn better kitchen tradecraft. How to make pasta, for instance, or how to make soup.
You can also find us, as the internet sharpies say, “off-platform.” We dance around on YouTube and link to our news articles and restaurant reviews on Twitter. We post beautiful photography — ours and yours — on Instagram. And yes, we’re on Facebook, too, where we support a large and convivial private community of like-minded cooks. Please join us.
Please get in touch if anything goes wrong along the way, with your affairs in the kitchen or ours on the back end. We’re at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Someone will get back to you. I am at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| I read every letter and try to respond to as many as I can.
Now, it’s nothing to do with food save that they start by talking about Waffle House, but here’s Desus and Mero interviewing Missy Elliott and it’s sublime.
Let’s go ice fishing, with Steve Macone!
 Nothing lost on him! See you tomorrow.