Older voters have easily carried Mr. Biden to victory in multiple primaries. But if he wants to beat President Trump, he will have to win younger voters too — and that may not be easy.
The magnitude of former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s recent primary victories has obscured an important schism within the Democratic Party: between the older voters who carried Mr. Biden to victory and the younger voters who overwhelmingly rejected him.
The dividing line is around age 45, and it is as stark as a flipped switch. In some states on Tuesday, Mr. Biden won two-thirds or more of voters older than 45, while Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont won about two-thirds of voters younger than that.
Comparatively low turnout among young voters helped save Mr. Biden in the primaries. But in the general election, a similar lack of turnout could become a huge liability — a point Mr. Sanders made explicitly on Wednesday as he announced that he would continue his campaign at least through the next debate on Sunday.
But Mr. Biden has been campaigning for nearly a year to represent a party that young voters often prefer, and his lack of support among those voters has been evident for a long time.
The New York Times spoke with more than 30 young Democrats from 17 states this week, ranging in age from 17 to 34. Most of them said they had voted for Mr. Sanders or planned to do so if he stayed in the race through their state’s primary. Some had voted for Senator Elizabeth Warren before she dropped out. Only two said they wanted Mr. Biden to be the nominee.
And while many said they would reluctantly vote for Mr. Biden in November for the sake of beating President Trump, about a third said they would consider staying home or voting for a third-party candidate unless Mr. Biden made significant concessions to the party’s left wing.
They were well aware of his plans to address climate change, student debt and other issues that matter to them — plans that would help Mr. Biden appeal to young voters, his wife said. But those plans, the young Democrats said, were not the solution to the generational gap among the candidates’ supporters; they were a cause.
Lindsay Huber, 29, who lives in Oregon, said that at an “absolute bare minimum,” to win her vote, Mr. Biden needed to stop accepting super PAC money and endorse both “Medicare for all” and the Green New Deal.
The campaign also pointed to the geographic sweep of Mr. Biden’s victories on Tuesday, particularly in Michigan: He won every county there, including those home to the University of Michigan and Michigan State University, which Mr. Sanders won by double-digit margins in 2016, though Mr. Biden’s margins there were much smaller than in other parts of the state.
From the start, Mr. Biden’s argument for his candidacy has centered explicitly on a return to “normalcy” after four years of life under Mr. Trump. And that is not what many young voters are looking for.
“The Republican Party has moved farther to the right than Democrats have moved to the left, which leaves this huge vacuum, I feel, for younger people who actually want to be a part of a truly progressive movement,” said Hajar Khalid, 20, a student at Columbia University.
Ms. Khalid said she supported Medicare for all and would feel somewhat better about voting for Mr. Biden, should he win the nomination, if he had a more comprehensive health care plan or if he chose a truly progressive running mate.
Beyond the disconnect between young progressives’ ideals and Mr. Biden’s more moderate proposals, there is also a deeper problem: While Mr. Sanders has actively engaged with young people, Mr. Biden has never given much indication that he is seeking their votes at all. At times, he has appeared openly disdainful or condescending toward them.
Groups that work with young voters said winning their votes would require speaking more to the policies they want to see enacted, but also considering them in event planning, advertising and communications. And it could mean enlisting surrogates who have more credibility among young voters than Mr. Biden does.
The lack of political attention is a tremendous source of frustration for young people: both those who are considering not voting because they feel they are being ignored, and those who are angry with their peers for not voting because it perpetuates their exclusion.
There are many reasons young people are less likely to turn out, ranging from structural obstacles — including voter suppression on college campuses — to disillusionment or distaste for all of the available candidates. But one rationale that came up repeatedly this week was that they did not want to be taken for granted.
Democrats assume progressives will vote for them “even as they ignore and dismiss the policy positions most young and progressive voters care about, and yet enough people voted for Jill Stein to lose Hillary the election in multiple key states,” said Sam Anderson, 25, a New Yorker who plans to vote only in down-ballot races unless the party crafts a more progressive platform and Mr. Biden chooses a progressive running mate.
