With most spaces shuttered, art galleries are getting creative about presenting work online. Here are two great shows viewable from home.
Through April 4. Ortuzar Projects, 9 White Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , ortuzarprojects.com. Call or visit the website for the latest updates.
Ben Sakoguchi, a Japanese-American painter born in 1938 in San Bernardino, Calif., spent several years of his early childhood in a World War II internment camp with his parents in Poston, Ariz. You can see him kneeling in suspenders and green shorts in the central canvas of “Towers,” one of two powerful polyptychs in his show “Made in U.S.A.” at Ortuzar Projects. It’s a careful rendition of a portrait photograph of all the “Residents of Block 13,” and it’s surrounded by 14 smaller paintings of guard towers and barracks at other camps, from California to Arkansas. Combining dark historical content with a cheery, slightly whimsical style is a simple but incredibly effective choice. It cuts to the heart of our peculiarly naïve American idealism, with its willful amnesia and its exceedingly brutal shadow.
The technique is even more arresting in the artist’s “Orange Crate Label” paintings, six of which are in the show. Imaginary citrus brands appearing in the works include a campy “Post-Modernism,” adorned with a coffin for modern art, and “Nam,” with a few musical notes as a nod to the influence that the catastrophic foreign war had on domestic rock music. But for me the winner is “Surf Nazis,” which shows a cluster of blond young men holding a board decorated with a swastika. It alludes to an actual phenomenon, but you don’t have to know about real-life “surf Nazis” — or even about Henry Ford’s influence on Hitler — to experience the queasy feeling that there’s something very apt about the image.
Through April 26. Spencer Brownstone, 170-A Suffolk Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , spencerbrownstonegallery.com. Call or visit the website for the latest updates.
It’s unusual when, after making one type of work for decades, an artist does something totally new. That’s the case with Jane South, who’s known for her elaborate paper constructions that look like agglomerations of architectural and mechanical parts.
In her sixth solo exhibition at Spencer Brownstone Gallery, “Switch Back,” Ms. South is showing what you might call soft paintings (and an M.D.F. sculpture in the backyard). Sewn together from pieces of canvas, batting, tarp and other pliable materials, with acrylic applied in places, they’re big and roughly geometric, purposefully imperfect and allusively abstract. They evoke homemade creations like patchwork quilts and curtains as much as the post-minimalism of Eva Hesse and Robert Morris, and even Claes Oldenburg’s replicas of ordinary objects.
“Cutter” (2019), for instance, suggests a radio, but also the insides of a couch splayed on the wall. A central panel nods to the art historical grid, while fringes add feminine flourishes. With nearly concentric circles, sometimes scalloped edges and swathes of brown and olive green, “Mark” (2019) brings to mind an army blanket, a Jasper Johns target painting and a hoop skirt.
Ms. South is playing more productively than ever with ideas of hard and soft. Her tributes to industrialism and the built landscape linger here, now alongside a valuable honoring of domestic labor.