The Masters and the Boston Marathon join in the postponements.
A day after nearly every major sporting event in the United States had been suspended or canceled because of the coronavirus, it became a question of which sports were on, not which were off.
One of the biggest sporting events of the year, the Masters golf tournament, will be postponed, it was announced Friday.
The Boston Marathon will be rescheduled for September.
The N.B.A., the N.H.L., M.L.S. and Major League Baseball suspended play. The N.C.A.A. canceled all of its championships, including the men’s basketball tournament, which supplies most of its annual budget.
Around Europe, more leagues shut down their seasons, joining Asia, which has been almost without sporting events for weeks.
And looming over all the decisions was the Summer Olympics, still planned to begin as scheduled in Tokyo in late July, even as qualifying events were being canceled around the world.
The Masters will be postponed, according to an announcement Friday from officials at Augusta National Golf Club, the host of the event.
On Thursday night, the PGA Tour, which conducts the bulk of the professional golf events in North America, announced it was canceling several tournaments and suspending operations until the week of the Masters, which is scheduled for April 9 to 12.
“We hope this postponement puts us in the best position to safely host the Masters tournament and our amateur events at some later date,” tournament organizers said in a statement.
The Masters is the first golf major championship of the year and has been played every year since 1934, except from 1943 to 1945, when it was canceled because of World War II.
Latest Updates: Coronavirus Impact on Life in the U.S.
We want to see your acts of kindness in a difficult time.
After 12 days on a ventilator, a chance to FaceTime hello.
Tiger Woods, in one of the most memorable sporting events of 2019, came from behind to win the tournament last year. It was Woods’s 15th major championship. Woods has been sidelined in recent weeks resting his surgically repaired back.
After initially announcing that the Players Championship in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., another of its important events, would proceed without fans, the PGA Tour decided late Thursday to cancel it as well as its next three events in Florida and Texas. An event in the Dominican Republic had been canceled earlier in the day.
The L.P.G.A. Tour had previously announced the postponement of three events in the United States, having previously canceled two Asian events.
Games will not be played in the top four divisions until April 3. Scotland also suspended its games. Arsenal, Chelsea and Everton have all quarantined some players.
England and Scotland join almost every other major league in Europe, including France, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain and a host of smaller countries.
Germany was the last major league to surrender to the tide of cancellations, deciding Friday to stop games until April 2.
All Champions League and Europa League games have been suspended indefinitely.
Most Asian countries suspended play some weeks ago, and with Major League Soccer suspended, that leaves games for the most part only in Mexico, Africa and some of South America, for now.
Races in China, Bahrain and Vietnam were postponed, meaning the season would open in May at the earliest.
NASCAR postponed its race in Atlanta this weekend and Miami next week. IndyCar suspended races through April.
Thursday started with the dominolike cancellation of just about every college conference tournament. The first game of the Big East tournament quarterfinals tipped off as scheduled at Madison Square Garden, but the tournament was canceled at halftime.
Then late Thursday afternoon, the national basketball tournaments were scrapped. All other winter and spring college championships were also canceled.
Donovan Mitchell became the second N.B.A. player known to have tested positive for the coronavirus. The N.B.A. suspended its season after the first, another Jazz player, Rudy Gobert, tested positive.
Adam Silver, the N.B.A. commissioner, said the league’s suspension would probably last “at least 30 days.” Silver said it was possible that the rest of the season would be canceled.
The top European basketball competition, Euroleague, suspended all games until April 11.
The Miami Open, one of the top tennis tournaments in the country, was canceled on Thursday. Its cancellation came after one of the world’s leading tennis tournaments, the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif., was also canceled. Soon after, the governing body of men’s tennis suspended tour events for six weeks, until April 27.
The Fed Cup finals, scheduled for Budapest in April, have been postponed. WTA events will not be held until April 6.
Most N.H.L. teams have about a dozen games left in the regular season, with the Stanley Cup playoffs scheduled to begin in about a month.
President Trump added his voice to the conversation on Thursday, suggesting that the Games in Tokyo should be postponed for a year rather than being held without spectators. Thomas Bach, president of the International Olympic Committee, has insisted that the Games are on schedule to begin in late July, though a member of Japan’s Olympic organizing committee said Tuesday that postponing the Games should be discussed.
Mr. Trump’s comments came during a news briefing at the White House, where he talked about numerous measures his administration and others were taking to combat the spread of the coronavirus.
The Olympic flame lighting ceremony in Greece on Thursday was held without spectators, and the torch relay was suspended Friday morning after larger crowds than expected turned up to watch.
The Boston Marathon, a spring staple on the sports calendar, will instead be held on Sept. 14. The New York City Half Marathon, scheduled for Sunday, has been canceled. The London Marathon was delayed until October. The Paris and Barcelona Marathons have also been delayed until October. The Rome Marathon on March 29 has been canceled.
The Indian Premier League, the richest league in the world, in a country where cricket’s popularity is off the charts, postponed the start of its season until April 15.
England called off its tour of Sri Lanka, which had already begun with exhibition matches. “These are completely unprecedented times, and decisions like this go beyond cricket,” the English Cricket Board said in a statement. South Africa and India canceled international games as well.
Bill Pennington contributed reporting.