I was stuck inside with my parents during Chinese New Year. Here’s what we did.
I was joking with our nurse that day that my life goal has changed now. Everyday I wake up, I look forward to getting the injection, then I look forward to my meal. Because I believe you can cure us. We are not afraid anymore because you are guarding us. We want to go for a walk by the river now, with masks of course. Do you guys want to have a walk too? I am going to have double insurance. Daddy do you need a mask? Let me get you one. Okay, I’ll get it myself. Do you have one, Junting? I do. Mommy is so wise. Mommy foresaw this outbreak two years ago — a hunch. And I bought so many masks. 100! I can give you one. How long have you been staying home? I haven’t gone out for six days. Buttons of the elevator are all wrapped up. Happy New Year! We all wear big masks! Just keep wearing it! The news just said today the U.S. will start travel control tomorrow. Yes. It’s not lucky to be back at this time. Well we can’t have a big family meal this year. Ah, no need! He still should have the lucky money! Thank you! That mask looks good! Did you make it? Of course not! This is N95! N95? You can’t find them now but experts say it is a waste for us to use. My mom hasn’t stepped out of the apartment. Today is my first time out for the past week also. We went out everyday and people said we are so bold. They said it is not human-to-human and it is controllable. And now it’s all out of control. This won’t work! This is working. Don’t mess up the plant! Just put it here! Please hold on! Please wait! Please wait! Wait! Wait! Please wait a bit! Thanks! Ah, they’re coming! All local government departments must obey the order from the central. Dear passenger, the flight you booked...January...New York...flight...the departure date has been changed to...February 7th! Damn, I just requested a refund! You requested a refund? Damn. This is so dramatic! Okay. Let me call them. For inquiries, please press one. Damn! How long have you been on the call? Already 20 minutes. 20 minutes and 18 seconds. We have too many requests. Just let it go. Let’s see how it goes tomorrow. We still have...let’s see...We have some. But we still have two months ahead. If we use one mask at a time, we won’t last for a month. What about the ones I bought? Yours have… Yes let’s count everything. Two...Four...Six...Seven! There are seven left of the ones you bought. I will figure it out. Mommy is all about solutions. Mommy is very incredible, I’m telling you. You can tell from all the masks I prepared beforehand. That is completely luck. Well do you have such luck?  Luck roots in intelligence! My brother just told me all the masks in the pharmacy go to the hospital first. I’m fixing this mask. Somehow the strap is broken here. It’s gone and I’m sewing it back. Like this. There are two layers. I’ll wash this layer when we get home. Wash it with soap and put it in boiling water. Then we can use it again. Two layers. One layer is enough. Two layers! The delivery guy had two layers yesterday! People found a way to continue using the mask! Please press your left hand thumb. Please lift your finger. Fingerprints are collected. Please wait. In the beginning, the airline sent us a message saying the flight was cancelled. So we’re supposed to request a refund. So I requested the refund immediately. Later they sent a second message saying the flight was changed to February 7th. Mommy asked them to cancel the refund. Look at how many messages I sent to them. They finally responded to my request. Don’t you feel like CCTV talks about the same stuff everyday? Well, it is what it is. We need positive energy. But don’t you feel like you’ll never know what it’s like in Wuhan? No, I don’t know. Well, there are a lot of rumors on WeChat. I mean on the news. We can see nothing on the news. We can only read some rumors on WeChat. But unregulated articles will get deleted. Our news is about praising. News abroad is about critique. There’s a big difference. How many days have you been back? 23, 24, 25, 26... So it’s how much less? Two weeks less. Junting, how should we take the photo? How should we do it? Whichever way you like. It doesn’t matter. How does Mommy want it? If we shoot the whole body, we will see Mommy’s pajamas. It has some characters. Sit closer, sit closer. Hello, body temperature check. Our family won’t lose. Because of Mommy’s genes. Your turn. What? Because of Mommy’s genes. It goes without saying. They don’t allow filming here, Junting.
Mr. Zhou is a filmmaker.
The coronavirus outbreak didn’t decimate my family’s hometown, Guangzhou, China — at least not the way it did in Wuhan, the epidemic’s epicenter, more than 500 miles away.
But when I visited my parents from New York for Chinese New Year, we quarantined ourselves anyway, as the government advised. I documented our experience in the film above, shot entirely on my iPhone.
In quarantine, life took on a routine: we ate, we slept, we switched between bigger and smaller screens. The news on TV, meanwhile, was all about progress and positivity. Sometimes I couldn’t tell if the reports weren’t just reruns.
Yet the unflappable positivity of the voices in our TV seemed to confirm the grim stories about Wuhan on WeChat: Users told about Li Wenliang, the whistle-blowing doctor there who was detained and then died from the infection; the online diary from a girl who lost her parents to the virus; people with serious illnesses dying because medical resources were being channeled toward the outbreak; the Red Cross keeping masks and supplies from the public.
There was no positivity on social media. It was all sadness, terror, doubts and anger. It tainted every breath I took in. And then the giant seamless censorship system gagged me. With no way for me to express them, my emotions rotted inside of me instead.
None of these disturbing stories bothered my parents. They said this was a historic moment and we should try hard to remember this experience. They were more amazed by how quickly and efficiently the authorities had the situation under control: After all, there is no other government in the world that can shut down a city of 11 million like Wuhan in one day.
So in the end, this moment is not about coronavirus. It’s about China.
Junting Zhou is filmmaker based in New York City.
