The justices seemed split along familiar lines in a case challenging the independence of the director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
WASHINGTON — Paul D. Clement, a lawyer appointed by the Supreme Court to defend the independence of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau after the Trump administration refused, gave a timely example on Tuesday to illustrate why it can be a good idea for agencies to be insulated from politics.
“People are trying to make a political football out of dealing with a pandemic disease,” he said, referring to the coronavirus outbreak. A reasonable congressional response, he said, might be to make it harder to fire the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “That is the kind of sensible decision that Congress has been making for over 100 years,” Mr. Clement said.
In the case before the justices, a challenge to the constitutionality of the consumer bureau’s leadership structure, the court’s conservative majority generally seemed open to setting limits on agencies’ independence.
That standard is used in many laws, but it tends to limit the president’s power to fire officials on multimember commissions.
Justice Neil M. Gorsuch rejected that approach. He said it would be more honest to overrule precedents allowing limits on the president’s power to fire people than to water down the standard.
Republicans and business groups have long accused the bureau of regulatory overreach. Businesses have repeatedly challenged the limits on the president’s power to remove the consumer bureau’s director, saying they violated the separation of powers.
The Trump administration agreed with the challengers. The bureau once took the opposite position, but it changed its stance last year, agreeing that its director could be fired at will.
Justice Ginsburg asked Solicitor General Noel J. Francisco, who represents the administration in the Supreme Court, why it did not defend the challenged law. “Isn’t it uncommon for the Department of Justice not to defend a statute passed by Congress?” she asked.
Though the law firm and the administration agreed that the bureau’s structure violated the Constitution, they were divided about whether actions taken by the director would have to be voided if the Supreme Court struck it down. Mr. Shanmugam said yes, while Mr. Francisco said no.
Since the two sides agreed on the basic issue, the court appointed Mr. Clement to defend the constitutionality of the law.
He was afforded no special courtesies. Justice Gorsuch, in an unusually testy exchange, accused him of dodging questions and being disrespectful to other lawyers.
“If we could avoid disparaging our colleagues and just answer my question, I would be grateful,” Justice Gorsuch said.
Mr. Clement, perhaps the most accomplished appellate lawyer of his generation, was making his 101st argument in the Supreme Court, and it was characteristically vigorous and clear. He seemed taken aback by Justice Gorsuch’s repeated hostile questions.
The case before the court, Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, No. 19-7, was brought by a law firm that objected to an investigation of aspects of its debt relief services. The firm challenged the bureau’s power to pursue the investigation, saying its director was unconstitutionally insulated from presidential control.
The firm lost in the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, which concluded that Supreme Court precedents upholding limits on presidential power to remove officials on multimember commissions and independent counsels allowed the bureau’s structure.
Much of the argument explored the differences between single directors and commissions, and opinions varied on which structure provided for more independence.
