Opinion|When Will We Be Ready for a President Warren?
When Will We Be Ready for a President Warren?
Michelle Cottle joins readers in mourning the end of a dream for 2021.
Ms. Cottle is a member of the editorial board.
Since Elizabeth Warren’s departure from the presidential race on Thursday, readers too have left comments discussing the degree to which gender kept back women in the 2020 race. Ms. Cottle shared more of her thoughts on the issue with readers. Their exchanges, below, have been edited for length and clarity.
Lisa Cabbage, Portland, Ore.: I think Elizabeth Warren ran a near-perfect campaign. The logistics of the campaign’s organizing and volunteer efforts were outstanding — did any other campaign come close to her phone banks and outreach?
Women have better outcomes in parliamentary systems; our system is designed for the horse race, demanding excitement and charisma. Too many people find middle-aged women neither charismatic nor exciting. That’s their problem, and our country will go down the tubes because of it.
Michelle Cottle: Lisa, you make an important, often overlooked point about the peculiar nature of our presidential elections, and one that also speaks to how we wound up with a woman as speaker of the House well before we had a female president. Nancy Pelosi did not have to charm the public to win the House’s top job. She had to prove herself to the members of her caucus.
Not that this was an easy task. Congress has its own sexism issues, and Ms. Pelosi endured plenty of patronizing eye-rolls and insufferable mansplaining on her way up through the ranks. (Small wonder her smile looks a wee bit strained at times.) But her path to power was at least somewhat more rational than the insane process by which we pick presidents.
Greg, New York: How many white men have run for the presidency since the start of the Republic? Over 1,000? How many have won? 44. It’s hard to win the presidency. The fact that a mere handful of women and people of color have run and lost (excluding Barack Obama) is not representative of racism and sexism, just that it’s very hard to win.
MC: You are 100 percent correct that it is hard to win the presidency; it requires an almost magical mix of qualities. As much as on experience and policy proposals, candidates are judged on intangibles like leadership ability, likability and, this year especially, electability.
That said, research — and recent history — suggests that women have far less wiggle room than men in striking an appealing balance. You know the old trope: An assertive man is a strong leader; an assertive woman is a … witch. Assertive women, ambitious women, successful women, powerful women — all tend to provoke complicated reactions, and not in a good way. All of this makes it that much harder for female candidates to strike voters as convincingly presidential — whatever that means.
Gender bias isn’t the problem. But it is a problem.
Why aren’t women voting for women?
Sean, Durham, N.C.: Look at the gender breakdowns in Super Tuesday’s results. The gulf between women who voted for Elizabeth Warren and men who voted for other candidates is so significant that to assume anything but sexism would be to deny reality. Warren is objectively the most competent progressive to run for president in the 2020 election cycle. Kamala Harris and Amy Klobuchar were the most competent moderates to run.
The saddest part of all of this is that women, too, have been habituated and socialized to dismiss female candidates for the same sexist reasons men use to justify their preferences for old white male candidates.
MC: I agree. It would be less depressing, though perhaps more enraging, if gender bias could be chalked up to sexist men clinging to their prerogatives. But it is just as much about the subtle biases, and fears, of women. This cycle, the whole question of other people’s perceptions of a candidate — who was likable, who was too risky — weighed extra heavily on voters. This may have been true of women even more than men (as one of the polls I cited found), in part because women have their own firsthand experiences to draw on. They know the double standards are real. Annnnd now I’m even sadder.
Cool Dude: My 5-year-old daughter saw me looking at Elizabeth Warren’s speech on CNN on Super Tuesday and she was like, “Who is that, Daddy?” I said it was someone running for president whom I supported. She said: “But she’s a woman. She can’t be president.” It broke my heart.
Warren’s brief lead in the polls caused the entire media establishment to dissect her “Medicare for all” plan mercilessly. Bernie Sanders never got that level of scrutiny and he was more rigid about it.
MC: At least your 5-year-old — and my two teenagers — won’t consider it odd to see women running for president. Small consolation, I know. But a kind of progress. As for Ms. Warren’s Medicare for all meltdown, I agree that she was unfairly held to a much higher standard than Mr. Sanders, who tends to be big on promises but light on details. That’s how he rolls, and many people are just fine with it because they find him so inspirational, believable, visionary, authentic — choose your laudatory adjective. I just find him shouty.
DE, Texas: I will never forget my mother calling me, crying, in 2008 after Barack Obama won the Democratic nomination over Hillary Clinton. She told me that she was worried she would not live to see a female president. The 2016 election disappointed again. Although I knew that Amy Klobuchar would probably not win, I couldn’t forget my mother’s tears and I early voted for Klobuchar this year.
My mother is 87 and in failing health. I fear she won’t live to see the day when “she” is the president of the United States. Sad.
MC: Well, now I feel like crying — while at the same time punching something. But amid all the grieving, it is worth celebrating that there was more than one woman who made an impressive showing in this race.
Amy Klobuchar’s candidacy never quite caught fire, but her third-place finish in New Hampshire marked her as a serious contender. She had a strong bipartisan record of accomplishment in the Senate and understood how the levers of government work. She was a formidable debater, making a compelling, passionate case for unity and pragmatism. She knew how to connect issues to people’s lived experiences, and she had a sharp sense of humor — a valuable survival skill in politics.
I have plenty of theories about why she didn’t go farther, many of them tied up in questions of charisma and style and other nebulous factors that should be total nonsense but aren’t. But I knew plenty of Klobuchar fans who were disappointed to see her go — and who are rooting for her to have future bites at the apple.
Susan, Ashland, Ore.: I wish it could have been a woman. It is time. Elizabeth Warren is terrific, as was Kamala Harris. But it wasn’t to be. But I’ll vote for any Democratic candidate. If it turns out that Joe Biden is the nominee, then he had better pick a woman as his running mate or a person of color, either gender. Another white man would be terrible.
MC: Joe Biden, Bernie Sanders, Captain America — whoever winds up the nominee, the arguments for choosing a woman, or better still, a woman of color, as his running mate are legion. I won’t bore you with my in-the-weeds political blather about the need to mobilize this group or balance out the ticket in that way.
I’ll simply note once more that this is the Democratic Party we’re talking about, the party of progress, diversity and the future. It will be pathetic if a woman does not wind up on the ticket. I mean, it would be one thing if there weren’t any strong candidates, but that is far from the case. So if the nominee’s team members have any trouble coming up with names, they should feel free to give me a call.