The coronavirus has changed the way we all use our homes.
Around 10 a.m., my 9-year-old performed a rousing karaoke-machine rendition of “I Will Always Love You” to no one, as my son aggressively practiced his violin in the next room. Through it all, my husband managed to carry on his Zoom conference call, as if the cacophony didn’t exist. Theoretically, I was also working. Welcome to the new American home office, a setup being replicated around the country as millions of workers and their school-age children hunker down amid the onslaught of the coronavirus pandemic.
I’m something of a pro when it comes to working from home. I’ve been doing this full-time for more than a decade, and have successfully navigated many snow days with restless children stuck at home while I’m on deadline. I also co-authored a book, “The New York Times: Right at Home,” which includes guidance on how to decorate and organize a home office, and plenty of advice for how to set up a child’s playroom. But the coronavirus has tested my skills and resolve, calling on every trick I know to keep my family sane and functioning in these unpredictable times.
Over the weekend, I did what I do best. I organized. We cleared out old toys from the basement playroom, setting up a workstation in a corner that once held Beyblades, trains and dolls. For the time being, it will be my husband’s new office — if he ever relinquishes the dining room. My daughter’s bureau, cleared of the clutter, now doubles as a desk. My son will work in his room, and I in mine.
Millions are trying to work out this new normal. The hashtag #homeschooling is proliferating on Twitter, with parents sharing their ad hoc school schedules, inspirational shout-outs and photographs of classrooms at dining-room tables. So far, from what I can see, not much is getting done.
“Went from home schooling to a roller skating party real quick,” wrote one parent, who posted a picture of the spontaneous indoor skating event, which appeared to involve only the siblings of the house — so not a violation of social distancing protocol. My sister, 3,000 miles away in Los Angeles, texted me early in the afternoon to ask if my son was up for a game of Fortnite with his cousin. “As you can tell, we’re having a very educational day,” she wrote.
On my neighborhood Facebook group, parents lamented their new reality and shared schedules with activities like “fight over video games,” “raid pantry” and “drink.” One day in, and it’s dawning on us that this is no snow day. We’re looking at facilitating our children’s schooling for weeks while carrying on with conference calls, deadlines and the other responsibilities of work. All while staying calm.
We’ve been advised to create schedules and routine in a world where all routine has been swept away. My daughter’s principal now gives his morning announcements over ClassDojo, an educational communication app. (One Brooklyn parent said her daughter’s high school urged students to “dress like they were at school” for video instruction.) I find it soothing, sitting beside my daughter on the edge of my bed reciting the Pledge of Allegiance and hearing the daily joke.
Overall, I’ve lowered expectations. The work will get done. The days will pass. As I write these words, my daughter is in the midst of her very first FaceTime play date. It’s a huge success, as we all can hear.