Weather: Sunny and pleasant, with a high in the low 50s.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Tuesday (Purim).
Handshakes have been replaced with elbow bumps and heart taps. About 300 students studying abroad were told to return home. Over 100 families in the New York suburbs were told to quarantine themselves.
Since Sunday, 13 cases of the coronavirus have been confirmed in New York, and residents have adopted a variety of strategies to curb the spread of the illness.
State officials announced on Sunday that a Manhattan woman, 39, had contracted the coronavirus. The woman, a health care worker, had returned to New York after visiting Iran, a hot spot for the outbreak.
The woman, who did not take public transportation home from the airport, has been in isolation with her husband — who has tested negative for the virus — since returning. On Wednesday, Governor Cuomo said she was recovering.
Before the state had confirmed the first case, another case was developing: A man from New Rochelle, just north of New York City, became ill on Feb. 22. A neighbor drove him to a hospital in Westchester County on Feb. 27.
The man, a lawyer who works in Manhattan, first received a diagnosis of pneumonia, according to a person who knows him well and spoke on the condition of anonymity. But on Tuesday, state officials said he, too, had tested positive for the coronavirus. As of yesterday evening, the man, who has an underlying respiratory illness, was hospitalized at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan.
A naval hospital ship is docking in Manhattan today.
Disease detectives said they were monitoring a handful of people whom the man, 50, may have exposed to the virus in Midtown, officials said.
Mr. Cuomo said yesterday morning that the man’s wife, his two children and the neighbor who drove him to the hospital had all tested positive for the virus.
He later said five other people connected to the man had tested positive, bringing the number of confirmed cases in the state to 11.
Dr. Raul Perea-Henze, New York City’s deputy mayor of health and human services, said the city’s health department was monitoring 2,000 people who were self-quarantined after spending time in China.
Many New Yorkers have been taking steps to prevent the spread of the disease. On Tuesday, transit officials began to disinfect New York City’s vast network of trains and buses.
The two schools where the New Rochelle man’s children study were closed: Yeshiva University in Manhattan — which shut its doors yesterday but kept dorms open — and a Jewish day school in the Bronx, which was closed on Tuesday and Wednesday.
A synagogue in New Rochelle where the man worships was closed by Tuesday evening. Over 100 families who had recently attended the synagogue, Young Israel of New Rochelle, were asked to quarantine themselves.
Mr. Cuomo said yesterday that the State University of New York and the City University of New York were bringing home about 300 students studying in China, Iran, Italy, Japan and South Korea.
A charter plane will bring the students to New York, he said, where they will be isolated in a dormitory for two weeks.
Still, the governor has tried to ease concerns, saying that 80 percent of coronavirus cases resolve with no medical attention. “The facts are not very frightening,” he said.
She Was Excited for a New School. Then the Anti-Semitic ‘Jokes’ Started.
A Bowery Chapel Once Let Homeless New Yorkers Sleep Inside. No More.
They Wanted the Apartment. Then the Broker Asked for a $2,850 Fee.
Michael Bloomberg’s presidential campaign was short and expensive.
He spent more than half a billion on ads, according to The Times. That does not include campaign salaries and other expenses, so the final figure will be higher.
On Super Tuesday, when 14 states and one territory cast ballots in Democratic primary contests, Mr. Bloomberg, the former New York mayor, got 1,711,347 total votes. That means he may have spent about $300 per vote.
Mayor de Blasio spent nearly $1.3 million on his presidential bid but dropped out before the first votes were cast.
It’s Thursday — appreciate the little things.
My sister and I spent several days in New York for the holidays. On our last night in town, we decided to go back to the Turkish restaurant we had eaten at the night before. We had another excellent meal, and were served by the same waiter.
As we got ready to leave, my sister told the waiter how much we had enjoyed our meals there. She added that this would be our last visit because we were leaving the city the next day.
“You’ll be back,” he said.
My sister laughed and said that was unlikely because she lived in Florida.
The waiter shook his head.
“You’ll be back,” he insisted.
We had walked about five blocks when I realized that I had forgotten my credit card. We retraced our steps to the restaurant. When we walked in, the waiter crossed the room and handed the card to my sister.
“I told you you’d be back,” he said.
