President Trump said he was waiving interest on federally held student loans because of the coronavirus outbreak. But payments won’t change.
At the end of a week full of talk about bailouts and stimulus, President Trump said Friday afternoon that he was waiving interest on all student loans held by federal government agencies. Right away, the most obvious question was this: How much would monthly payments fall for the tens of millions of borrowers?
By nightfall, the Department of Education had a surprising answer. Monthly payments aren’t going to go down at all. Instead, the entire payment will go toward paying down the principal amount on the loan.
The result will be little short-term relief for many of the borrowers who celebrated the announcement. Instead, they will benefit later — say, if they pay enough principal during the waiver period to shorten the scheduled term of their loans.
There is a group of borrowers who could benefit a great deal: those whose incomes have fallen, or might fall soon, because of the economic contagion of the coronavirus.
When borrowers pause their monthly payments because of a hardship — a status known as forbearance — the interest normally continues to pile up until they can start paying again. Now, no interest will accrue as long as the waiver is in effect. This is true both for people already in forbearance and for those who may be soon.
It’s not clear who decided to do things this way and why, or even if any of this was the initial intention of the White House. Establishing an interest-rate waiver that lowered bills would have been enormously complicated: The federal government relies on several outside servicers to bill borrowers and collect their payments, and many have committed errors in recent years.
So there’s a lot we don’t know, and there are many questions the Department of Education could not immediately answer. We’ll get to those, but first, a bit more about what we do know.
The waiver will cover plenty of borrowers. The federal government is the biggest holder of student debt, with $1.2 trillion in direct loans to more than 35 million borrowers.
But it doesn’t apply to every student loan out there. Loans issued through state agencies and others, including from big private lenders like Sallie Mae, are not covered. Other loans that are not part of the waiver program include the majority of Federal Family Education Loans, which are mostly held by commercial lenders, and school-held Perkins loans.
