Funny, scary and necessary, this series of taped soliloquies contemplate the way we live now, in isolation.
Marin Ireland looked right into my eyes, then stared straight through me. I didn’t take it personally. Even though she’s one of my favorite actresses, I’m not enough of a fan to assume she was talking to me directly. Except she was, sort of, at a time when I needed to hear exactly what she was saying.
Ireland, or rather the nameless character she was playing, was addressing an alien life form. (Hmm … maybe she was talking to me.) That was because she was so lonely, and so scared, and so trapped, she thought there might be deliverance somewhere in outer space.
And when this unguarded yet hesitant individual said to her other-planetary listener, “You’re out there thinking, ‘What a small life’ — yeah, it is,” I heard bells of recognition pealing in my head. A pandemic has paradoxically guaranteed that life has never felt smaller.
Created by a host of professional dramatists (including such well-known names as Stephen Adly Guirgis, Jesse Eisenberg, Hilary Bettis and Hansol Jung) and performers (Denis O’Hare, Rachel Dratch, Tavi Gevinson, Russell G. Jones), these works are a godsend to theater addicts going through withdrawal in their own private quarantines. And while I’m loath to suggest that digitally recorded theater is ever an improvement on the real thing, I will say that form and function are perfectly matched here.
That’s because — if I may state the obvious — our possibilities for in-the-flesh communication are sadly curtailed these days. Each of these distinctive playlets acknowledges this in both its mode of presentation, in which the illusion of intimacy is achieved through a cold screen, and its content.
These are almost all stories of what it’s like to find yourself stranded in solitude by historical circumstance, as so many Americans are right now. Some of the writers have responded by making the coronavirus the directly identified catalyst of their plots; others prefer a more oblique attack.
There are amusing riffs on the art of stealing toilet paper (Russell G. Jones in a play by Harrison David Rivers) and the dangers of violating quarantine by a man in a maverick state of mind (Will Swenson, at his unnerving best, in Charlie O’Leary’s “This Trip”). A makeup vlogger (Dratch) shifts from tips about facial contouring to advice on hard-core survival tactics in a winningly straight-faced vignette by David Lindsay-Abaire. Some slip from blithe whimsy into abject, desperate anxiety (Amy Hargreaves presenting a fantasy job application to be a worldwide secret agent, from a script by Shara Feit).
We have tales of roommates forced to communicate via laptops and smartphones — even though they are only yards away from each other — with considerations of crossing the great divide into face-to-face conversation or even (shudder) physical contact. (These include Haskiri Velasquez reliving a one-night stand that probably warrants another name in Howard Sherman’s “Distance,” and Isabelle Fuhrman performing Kathleen Hale’s “A Little About Me”).
In other cases, sudden singletons reach out to the partners or potential partners they may have already left behind or driven away. Often, these laments are placed specifically in the broader context of government-recommended “social isolation.” But as performed with the tiny glimmers of self-betrayal that close-ups allow by, among others, Hugh Dancy, Ashlie Atkinson and O’Hare, they exist outside of the topical here and now.
A few episodes have slightly more elaborate camerawork than others. (I love the use made by Swenson’s character of his cellphone.) But mostly, they are single-shot, single-angle pieces, creating a dialogue of intimate loneliness between the speakers and us (or rather, you or me) on the other side of the screen. And you begin to realize the extent of both the connective and distancing effects of all those video forms made famous by YouTube.
These performances are also in the noble tradition of the series of self-betraying monologues “Talking Heads,” Alan Bennett’s peerless series of character portraits for the BBC. They’re less consciously and thoroughly crafted, of course. Remember: These were thrown together, by playwrights collaborating with performers, within a 24-hour period.
But I have gone through all of them as if they were M&M’s, or Kleenexes, or Xanax (depending on what you reach for compulsively in times of crisis). They have been a consoling reminder of all the rich and varied voices in theater out there, just waiting for the chance to take the stage again. In the meantime, we have this banquet of glimpses into other lives of isolation, to take some of the chill off our own captivity.