My mother and I have sipped tea with maharanis, swapped stories with Burmese nuns and bumped through the streets of Bangkok on midnight tuk tuks — but the delight we return to, again and again, is the moon. “Go outside and take a look,” she’ll command over text, and I’ll stumble out the door to glimpse at a crescent sliver. We swap cellphone photos of fuzzy white discs that are indistinguishable from the ones that preceded them but offer what feels like newfound delight. Our shared moon: a simple joy that binds us together across years and over continents.
Dr. Zhang and her team assembled 135 undergraduate students and asked them to put together time capsules — written reflections on quotidian experiences including the last social event they attended, three songs they had recently listened to and a Facebook status update. Then they were asked to estimate how curious they would be at future point in time to see what they had shared. At the time of assembly, students ranked their curiosity at an average of 3, on a 1-to-7 scale. But three months later, when polled just before opening their reflections, ratings jumped to over 4.
Other portions of the study reinforced the finding that time changes the perceived value of ordinary actions, with an added exploration of the ordinary versus extraordinary. For example, students not only underestimated their future curiosity about reading written summaries of recent conversations; but those who rated their conversations as “ordinary” also more greatly underestimated both curiosity and interest. And while perceptions of so-called extraordinary events (Valentine’s Day, in Dr. Zhang’s study) held constant, seemingly unremarkable events came to be perceived as more remarkable over time.
Introspective writing can help reduce blood pressure, increase immune function and mitigate impacts of stress, depression and diseases ranging from to irritable bowel syndrome and breast cancer to asthma and rheumatoid arthritis. But its most enduring value lies in self-discovery: We unearth ourselves through the stories we tell ourselves about ourselves.
Let less be more.
In “Essentialism,” Mr. McKeown encourages readers to review their writing every 90 days or so and closely assess small details. Passing events or brief encounters that seemed trivial in the moment might take on new weight — or reveal larger life patterns. Looking back to discover what is meaningful and true can help us propel forward in a new way.
And keep documenting.
