A deputy commissioner at the New York City Commission on Human Rights writes about the need to unite to fight anti-Semitism. Also: A legacy of Pete Buttigieg; the national security adviser and the president.
As a secular Jewish woman, I can dwell on the seemingly vast distance between my conservative Jewish upbringing and that of Haredi Jews. But now is the time for secular Jews to reach across that distance and build connection and solidarity. After all, although anti-Semitism takes different forms, it affects all of us.
Last year, as I dropped my 2-year-old at his small neighborhood Jewish preschool in brownstone Brooklyn, I pulled back a makeshift covering on the door to find a swastika there, discovered (and covered up) by staff members minutes before morning drop-off.
As a deputy commissioner at the New York City Commission on Human Rights, I helped develop a recent public awareness campaign to combat anti-Semitism. It features the names and faces of both Haredi and secular Jews smiling proudly at the camera.
It was intentional, and no small feat, to make sure that New York City’s diverse and beautiful mosaic of Jewish communities were represented side by side. No matter the particulars of what may divide us, our shared heritage and common threat must unite us to say that we belong here and that anti-Semitism does not.
I teared up reading Frank Bruni’s moving reflection on Pete Buttigieg’s historic candidacy. Mayor Pete meant so much to me personally.
Right around the time when he announced his exploratory committee, I was told by my rabbinical school that I could not be ordained as a rabbi because of my public identity as a gay man and engagement to another man.
That was a dark time for me personally, and reading Mayor Pete’s book and getting to know him inspired me and presented me with a role model.
Mr. Bruni focused on Pete’s thoughtfulness. Watching how Pete navigated his position as a trailblazer without being defined by it helped me in my own similar path, as I was the first openly gay man ordained by an Orthodox rabbi anywhere, in May 2019.
Thank you, Mayor Pete.
According to one who should know — Gen. Colin Powell, the former national security adviser under President Ronald Reagan — the head of the National Security Council is “first and foremost” a process manager.
But this process will work only if the president himself wants to hear these views and consider them.
Apparently President Trump does not. Only his views count.
