We’re covering India’s national lockdown, a planned $2 trillion economic stimulus for America, and the children that Venezuela’s migrants leave behind.
As of this morning, India’s 1.3 billion residents are under orders to stay at home for three weeks. Prime Minister Narendra Modi carried out the rule amid concerns that the coronavirus could cause an epic disaster if it were to hit the subcontinent with the same force that it has already brought to China, Europe and the United States.
“If you can’t handle these 21 days, this country and your family will go back 21 years,” Mr. Modi told the nation on Tuesday, as confirmed coronavirus infections surpassed 400,000 worldwide. India’s confirmed count of around 500 is relatively low, but maintaining strict social distancing there may be impossible because so many people live in packed urban areas.
Also on Tuesday, the Tokyo Olympics were postponed until 2021 — a scheduling change to that event not seen since World War II. Here are the latest updates on the virus and global markets.
The Chinese province of Hubei, where the coronavirus pandemic began, will start allowing most of its 60 million residents to leave today, ending a nearly two-month lockdown.
More than 30 health care professionals have died across Western Europe from coronavirus complications, and 5,400 of them have been infected in Spain alone. The same dynamics are now taking hold in Britain and the U.S.
Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte of Italy said he was raising the fines on those who defied the country’s lockdown. But for the thousands who are homeless in Rome, staying home is easier said than done.
In memoriam: Among the 1,000-plus people who have died from Covid-19 in France are the Congolese singer Aurlus Mabele and the Cameroonian saxophonist Manu Dibango.
Death is a social event in Ireland, so a ban on large gatherings there has prompted a rethink of funeral rituals.
Senators and the White House agreed early this morning on a roughly $2 trillion economic stimulus plan, the biggest in modern U.S. history and a lifeline for businesses, hospitals and American families.
The deal on the draft legislation, which would send direct payments and jobless benefits to individuals, was reached hours after the World Health Organization said that the U.S. could soon replace Italy as the epicenter of the pandemic.
Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York, a state that has nearly half of the country’s roughly 53,000 confirmed coronavirus cases, said on Tuesday that it could ultimately need as many as 30,000 ventilators when only a fraction of that number — somewhere around 5,000 — was available.
New York City alone has 192 deaths from Covid-19 and an infection rate that is doubling every three days. Experts said the outbreak there could reach its peak in as little as two to three weeks, far earlier than previously anticipated.
The Trump administration has been slow to respond to the acute shortage of lifesaving equipment that New York and other states need as they battle the first wave of coronavirus patients.
President Trump defied the warnings of most health experts by saying that he wanted the U.S. opened up by the Easter holiday on April 12.
Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases since 1984, has repeatedly contradicted Mr. Trump’s assertions. Aids say the president’s patience for him is wearing thin.
Jessica Lustig, a deputy editor of The Times Magazine, wrote about the panic and uncertainty that engulfed her home after her husband fell ill with Covid-19.
A growing number of women in Indonesia are promoting the niqab, a conservative face veil. They see it as a way to get closer to heaven while avoiding unwanted sexual advances.
The peaceful movement is another sign of how Indonesia, a democracy with the world’s largest Muslim population, has moved toward a more conservative Islam in the 22 years since the dictator Suharto was ousted.
Albania and North Macedonia: European Union ministers agreed on Tuesday to allow Albania and North Macedonia to begin talks about joining the bloc. President Emmanuel Macron of France held up the process last year, arguing that the procedure for expanding E.U. membership should be reviewed.
Snapshot: Above, a boarding school for girls in need in Maracaibo, Venezuela. As economic crisis grips the country, mothers and fathers are going abroad in search of work, leaving hundreds of thousands of children in the hands of relatives, friends and, sometimes, one another.
 The cause was complications of the coronavirus.
Cook: This “highly adaptable” vegetarian skillet chili from Melissa Clark, part of our weekday series on cooking with pantry staples.
Smarter Living: Catastrophizing, or imagining the worst-case scenario and planning for it, can be damaging. So take a breath, stick to the facts and follow these other suggestions for staying sane.
There is growing evidence that anosmia — loss of the sense of smell — may be a symptom of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. Medical experts said that people who lose their ability to smell or taste should isolate themselves for at least a week, even if they were otherwise asymptomatic.
Sarah Maslin Nir, a Times reporter who covered an outbreak in the New York City suburb of New Rochelle, lost her sense of smell last week and later tested positive for the virus. She spoke to our colleague Jonathan Wolfe about her experience for our Coronavirus Briefing.
When did you notice that you couldn’t smell?
I quickly made my exit, because I remembered reading an article about two Chinese health care workers and one sentence stuck out to me — that one of the women lost her sense of taste and smell. I went home, got my godmother on FaceTime, opened my spice cupboard and tried sniffing all of the spices. I sliced fresh ginger and practically put it up my nose and couldn’t smell it.
Is anosmia your only symptom?
I don’t have a cough or a fever, but I’m exhausted. And because I can’t smell, food is bland. Eggplant Parmesan tastes like a hot wet book.
Has your sense of smell returned?
Since I can’t smell, I don’t really have an appetite, but I’m still trying to eat nutritiously. After several days, my sense of smell briefly came back: I was making myself what I would normally make, a kale salad, and surprisingly, it did not taste like serrated paper. But shortly after that it went away again.
How would you describe anosmia to others?
It’s deeply unsettling. It’s a constant reminder that something is deeply wrong with your body. You can perk up and have a good moment or two, but then you eat your Cheerios and your heart misses a beat.
• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is about the fight to contain the coronavirus in the U.S.
• Here’s today’s Mini Crossword puzzle, and a clue: Capital of Vietnam (five letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• The New York Times Company has acquired Audm, the subscription-based audio app that transforms long-form journalism into audio.