Everyone’s Talking About Canned Tuna. Here’s How to Make It Delicious.
Japanese-style tuna noodle salad.Credit...Jenny Huang for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Beatrice Chastka.
Canned fish is one of the great delights of this shoulder season, as spring begins its ascent — and maybe particularly when so many of us are cooking with the cans in the back of the pantry, or trying to keep stocks of food in the house. I like the larger ones mixed into mayonnaise and the smaller ones dabbed with hot sauce. I like albacore crumbled into roux and heated with elbow macaroni and cheese — tuna wiggle, some people call it, or tuna casserole. I like sardines shingled over pilot crackers or accompanying a sleeve of stoned wheat thins, with an apple and a wedge of cheese. I like canned salmon flaked onto a salad, with a tangy vinaigrette. I like to eat these things outside, in the brisk bright air of early spring as much as in the warmth of summer, at a table on a porch or on a blanket in the sand, and especially now, as I emerge blinking from the Northeastern winter blues, ready for a new season.
I’m not alone. Even some of those who have access to the finest ingredients, chefs for whom the distance between ocean and table is smaller than average, men and women known for their devotion to the fresh and the new — even they love a can of fish. Especially if it’s what I’ll call a best-available can of fish: sustainably caught, packed in good oil.
“It’s not bunker food,” the chef Erin French told me. “It’s sexy picnic food.” French owns and operates the Lost Kitchen, in Freedom, Maine, where the menu arises from what the farmers nearby have grown and what the boats have brought to shore in Portland, down the coast. You don’t run into a lot of tuna wiggle there. “But a good, tender tinned fish, soaked in clean and fruity olive oil,” French asked rhetorically, “on a bit of crusty bread slathered with butter?” That she endorsed, calling it “the purest of joy.” I tried that preparation, just to see, with best-available sardines and a baguette swiped with Irish butter. It is in fact joyful.
So is the version I learned from Carri Thurman, one of the chefs and owners of Two Sisters Bakery in Homer, Alaska. (On the menu: sunflower oat bread, vegan pitas and multigrain focaccia with roasted veggies.) Thurman doesn’t keep tuna in her larder, or sardines, not after 35 years in a city devoted to the harvest of halibut and salmon. But like a lot of her neighbors in Homer, she puts up a lot of salmon. “All you have to do is open the can and slice open a bag of saltines,” Thurman said. Add cream cheese, sweet pickles, chives if you can find them. “It’s the perfect on-the-go potluck plate,” she said. That’s true, I’ve discovered, even with canned salmon bought at a grocery store in the lower 48.
Steven Satterfield, the vegetable shaman, co-owner and executive chef at Miller Union in Atlanta, taught me yet another approach: crumbled canned tuna served over a salad of baby kale and chicory mixed with a shallot vinaigrette, along with shaved radishes, sliced fennel and a handful of olives. Satterfield called it a late-winter salade niçoise, and who am I to disagree? It’s awesome.
But it was Bart van Olphen, a YouTube fish fanatic, entrepreneur and chef whose “The Tinned Fish Cookbook” will be published this spring, who gave me my favorite recipe of the new season: an udon noodle salad with canned tuna in oil, dressed in a sweet-salty vinaigrette of soy, sesame oil, mirin and rice vinegar. Van Olphen calls this dressing wafu, which translates roughly as Japanese-style. I think of the dish as Japanese tuna wiggle. It is as good served cold as hot.
I did make some adjustments to van Olphen’s instructions. To the dressing, for instance, I added a little sweet miso, as much for the texture it added as for its taste. And I increased the amount of wakame, a remarkably flavored seaweed, just because it’s so delicious and I wanted to make a point: It’s not really a garnish but an ingredient, like the peas in a tuna casserole, not the chopped parsley on top.
Which is not to say this salad isn’t garnished. But instead of using a spray of van Olphen’s plain toasted sesame seeds, I substituted a like-size amount of furikake, the Japanese seasoning blend that has a base of sesame seeds and then some mixture of dried bonito, hot peppers, chopped seaweed, sugar, salt and, sometimes, monosodium glutamate. My children call furikake “shake” and use it to anoint their afternoon rice snacks, where it adds a hit of pungent umami to their meal. I shower my Japanese tuna wiggle with it for similar reasons. The result tastes to me of promise, of what’s to come.
