The moment of discord between Mr. Trump and one of the nation's most trusted authorities on the coronavirus was a clash between opinion and fact. It threw Mr. Trump’s faith in his own instincts into conflict with the careful, evidence-based approach of scientists like Dr. Fauci, who has held his position since the presidency of Ronald Reagan. Mr. Trump appeared eager to sweep aside long-established standards for evaluating drugs in order to champion the remedy he favors.
The excitement about the drugs is based largely on reports from China and France that they seem to help patients. But researchers and Dr. Fauci have stressed that the reports are not based on carefully controlled studies, which are the only way to be sure a treatment really works.
In a tweet on Saturday, Mr. Trump called attention to yet another unapproved treatment for Covid-19, this time a combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, a common anti-bacterial agent. He cited a report by French researchers in a scientific journal that was not a controlled clinical trial, and studied only 20 patients.
As word of the drugs’ possible effects have spread around the globe, demand has surged, with hospitals ordering the treatments in a desperate effort to treat severely ill patients.
Two large generic manufacturers, Teva and Mylan, have said they are ramping up production of hydroxychloroquine, and Teva has said it will donate millions of pills to the U.S. government. The sole manufacturer of chloroquine, Rising Pharmaceuticals, has also said it is increasing production. In addition, the German company Bayer announced this week it was donating millions of pills of chloroquine to the U.S. government and would seek approval from the F.D.A. for its products to be used in the United States.
Dana Olita, 50, of Los Angeles, raced Thursday and Friday to refill her prescription for hydroxychloroquine, which she has taken for a decade to treat rheumatoid arthritis. Her pharmacist at CVS initially told her it was unavailable; then she was told on Friday that they had located enough to fill her prescription. “There are lots of people that desperately need this, and if we stop taking it, the problem to us is overwhelming,” she said.
A spokesman for CVS said the company was “closely monitoring the global pharmaceutical manufacturing environment and working with our suppliers to ensure we can continue filling prescriptions for pharmacy patients and plan members.” The company said it had adequate stocks of hydroxychloroquine but described the supply of chloroquine as “tight” and said it was taking steps to address the issue.
Judie Stein, of Sun Prairie, Wis., said she was stunned when she heard Mr. Trump pronounce the name of the drug she has taken for two years to treat rheumatoid arthritis. “When I was first prescribed this, nobody had heard of it,” said Ms. Stein, who is 59. She said she has a one-month supply of the drug and she quickly tried to refill her prescription yesterday. She has not yet received a confirmation. “If it’s readily available and has other uses, then fine, but when I say I really need it, I need it,” she said.
Dr. Michael Belmont, medical director of NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital, said a number of his lupus patients had requested 90-day prescriptions for hydroxychloroquine, rather than the usual 30 days’ worth.
Onisis Stefas, the chief pharmacy officer for Northwell Health’s 23 hospitals, said the system began stocking up on hydroxychloroquine several weeks ago. He said the drug was being given to many coronavirus patients, but that Northwell’s 10 pharmacies were also setting aside supplies for patients who had been taking it regularly for lupus or rheumatoid arthritis.
On Friday, Mr. Trump appeared to encourage Americans to do just that, arguing that there was little downside to taking a malaria drug that is already on the market.
