“As we enter the moment in this campaign where we come down to a two-person race, I think it important for us to differentiate our records, and I intend to do that,” Mr. Sanders said.
DETROIT — Calibrating his approach for a tough head-to-head primary matchup in a year when many Democratic voters want to put up a united front, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont on Friday renewed his attacks on former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s record on trade while also conceding that Mr. Biden could defeat President Trump.
In Michigan, where the Sanders campaign is running a TV ad featuring an autoworker who says his community has been “decimated” by free trade deals, Mr. Sanders attacked Mr. Biden for his support of the North American Free Trade Agreement in the 1990s.
As a long line of mostly young supporters filed into a downtown convention center, organizers called out for any union members to identify themselves. After major disappointments on Super Tuesday, Mr. Sanders is hoping for a comeback next Tuesday as six states go to the polls, none more crucial for him than Michigan, the first of several Midwestern industrial states to vote in the next two weeks. Four years ago, he pulled off one of the biggest surprises of his first presidential campaign when he upset Hillary Clinton in Michigan.
Asked about Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s endorsement of Mr. Biden on Thursday, Mr. Sanders sounded miffed. “Well, that wasn’t her thoughts when I came here to help her get elected, as a matter of fact,” he said.
Speaking earlier on Friday with reporters in Phoenix, Mr. Sanders also condemned Mr. Biden’s votes as a senator on trade agreements, while brandishing new attacks over Mr. Biden’s record on federal funding for abortions, same-sex marriage and the former “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy.
But in a sign of the careful approach both candidates are taking while seeking to draw distinctions between their campaigns, Mr. Sanders reiterated multiple times that he would support Mr. Biden if he eventually won the presidential nomination, and, pressed by a reporter, said he believed Mr. Biden could beat Mr. Trump in November.
The Biden campaign sent one of its most high-profile new surrogates to Michigan, Senator Amy Klobuchar, but she was far less visible than Mr. Sanders. She toured the backstage areas of an MGM Grand hotel and casino with union leaders, but the event was off-limits to out-of-town reporters.
Mr. Biden plans to visit Michigan on Monday, but Mr. Sanders — who canceled an appearance in Mississippi — intends to campaign intensely in the state, visiting Dearborn, Flint, Grand Rapids and Ann Arbor.
After other major candidates quit the Democratic primary race this week, Mr. Sanders has relentlessly and repeatedly contrasted himself with Mr. Biden.
“As we enter the moment in this campaign where we come down to a two-person race, I think it important for us to differentiate our records, and I intend to do that,” Mr. Sanders said in Phoenix.
He was referring to the Defense of Marriage Act, which defined marriage as a union between a man and a woman, and the policy that prohibited openly gay people from serving in the military.
As a senator, Mr. Biden supported a broad defense bill in 1993 that included the “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy, but also voted for a failed amendment that would have removed the policy from that bill. He also voted for the Defense of Marriage Act in 1996.
But as vice president, he said in an interview on “Meet the Press” in 2012 that he was “absolutely comfortable” with same-sex marriage, a stance that was ahead of the Obama White House’s policy at the time.
Mr. Sanders also offered a fresh critique on Friday of Mr. Biden’s record on the Hyde Amendment, which bans federal funding for most abortions. Until June of last year, Mr. Biden had supported the measure, which critics say disproportionately affects poor women and women of color. He reversed his position after sustaining attacks early in his campaign.
Mr. Sanders has watched his delegate lead evaporate after the first three nominating contests as Mr. Biden racked up wins in South Carolina and several Super Tuesday states, including some that Mr. Sanders had hoped would wind up in his column.
Moving forward, the two candidates will essentially go head-to-head next week in six states including Michigan, which will present one of their first tests in a major general-election swing state.
On Friday, Mr. Sanders, who is Jewish, also addressed an episode at a rally for his campaign in Phoenix on Thursday, when a man in the crowd unfurled a flag bearing a swastika before he was removed.
Separately, Mr. Sanders acknowledged that his team had communicated with the federal authorities about the possibility of Secret Service protection for him. Some Democratic lawmakers have called for added security after Mr. Biden’s Super Tuesday address was disrupted by protesters who were able to gain access to the stage.
Trip Gabriel reported from Detroit, and Matt Stevens from New York. Sydney Ember contributed reporting from Phoenix, and Thomas Kaplan from Washington.