I Fled Yugoslavia in 1941. Then I Returned to Join the Resistance.
After the Germans had consolidated in northwestern Yugoslavia, I told my parents I wanted to become a freedom fighter.
This account is from “Beyond the World War II We Know,” a series from The Times that documents lesser-known stories from World War II. Before the Axis powers invaded and divided up the territory of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1941, Stasha Seaton and her family were evacuated by the British government, and they eventually made their way to the United States. There, Stasha enrolled at Barnard College in New York, as her father aided the Allied war effort while working between the United States and London for the BBC. Twenty-year-old Stasha returned to Yugoslavia in 1944 to join the National Liberation struggle, a resistance campaign made up of a variety of anti-fascist left-wing groups, including smaller movements and Josep Tito’s Communist National Liberation Army.
After the Germans consolidated in northwestern Yugoslavia, I left New York for London, crushed by the news of what was going on. I told my parents I was returning to Yugoslavia to become a freedom fighter. My father worried that it wasn’t safe, but I said, “Who cares, I’m going anyway.” I wasn’t ready to fight, so I thought I could be a nurse on the front lines, since I had attended nursing school while I was in New York.
I went from London to Bari, Italy, where the receiving station for voluntary fighters in the Yugoslavian resistance was based. There, the members of the resistance movement interrogated me, as they were looking to weed out potential spies who might subvert the authority of Tito’s National Liberation Army. Two unfriendly, nasty officers woke me up at 2 a.m., asking why I would come here from the States, where I was comfortable. I told them I wanted to fight, to see what I could do for my country, but they kept asking me questions to confuse me. “Why would you want to help us?” I kept my story straight: I wanted to help out as a nurse; I had come with friendly intentions. Eventually, I convinced them.
A week later, I received orders to travel from Bari to the headquarters of the Slovenian Army in Split, Croatia. I was thrilled at the prospect of walking on Yugoslav soil again. A group of Slovenians was gathering at the pier, seven men and two women wearing British battle uniforms, and we took a shuttle taxi to the city of Biograd na Moru, in northern Dalmatia. It looked like something Monet would paint, the streets abandoned, but lined with barbed wire. The fishing villages by the Adriatic had disappeared.
In January 1945, our leader said we could join the Second Battalion of the Fifth Overseas Brigade, a British and Yugoslav-organized unit that included Slovenian soldiers who had previously been forced to fight for the Germans on the Western Front. Everything we had was provided by the British, so I wore a British-issued battle dress. Our orders were to march around the areas of Split and Biograd na Moru, where there were still pockets of German soldiers on the periphery who had to be chased out.
In March, a comrade took me aside for a chat, his voice serious and quiet, and told me our brigade was now ready to head toward Slovenia, to sweep the retreating Germans. “Stasha, we are going north to fight,” he said. “It will be cruel, and we will not be able to protect you from the Germans.” He told me in graphic detail what the battle would entail and said I didn’t have a chance to survive. I accepted this, because I was terrified to death. I didn’t even know how to shoot, and the only time I’d fought was fist fighting my two brothers — though I could barely survive my younger brother! I ended up staying behind after being transferred to another unit. Two of the men I was closest to went north to fight. One of them was a poet, the cutest one in the bunk, and he had fallen in love with me. I was surprised by that; I did sort of love him, too, but I was afraid to say anything. Before he left he said someday we’d be together.
The brigade never came back: They went all the way to Slovenia, and it was the end of my friendships with those men. We had a bond that was so deep it will be with me forever. I later found out from friends that after chasing the Germans out of Slovenia, some members of the Fifth Overseas Brigade were shot, by orders of the Yugoslav authorities and the Slovenian Communist Party, or taken to grottos and executed en masse. I think the Communist Party leaders didn’t want to risk being challenged by the nonpolitical factions of the movement. I survived by the grace of God. Thinking of those brave and dear men, I still grieve.
This account has been edited and condensed for length and clarity. Stasha Seaton told her story to Jake Nevins, The New York Times Magazine’s editorial fellow.
Sign up for the weekly At War newsletter to follow The Times’s “Beyond the World War II We Know” series.