The prohibition on public gatherings imposed as a result of the coronavirus has made it difficult to memorialize those who have died of complications from the virus — or anything else.
SEATTLE — After Mary Flo Werner died last week of cancer, her nine grandchildren filed in through the big white doors of their Catholic church in Janesville, Wis., for the funeral Mass. Nine plus the priest made 10, the maximum number allowed to gather since a widening coronavirus outbreak led to strict limits on public gatherings.
Left to grieve in the church parking lot were Ms. Werner’s four adult children. They sat in their cars and watched their 74-year-old mother’s service on their phones and tablets.
In Staten Island, N.Y., the family of Arnold Obey, 73, a retired school principal, does not know when or how his funeral might occur. Mr. Obey died Sunday night while vacationing in Puerto Rico, and his wife is in isolation in a San Juan hotel room, awaiting her coronavirus test results.
Meri Dreyfuss, a tech worker in the San Francisco area whose older sister, Barbara Dreyfuss, died in Seattle this month of complications from the coronavirus, has put off a funeral until the fall.
It has become a time of frantic improvisation and adaptation as families and funeral providers scramble and relatives mourn as best as they can.
The family of 86-year-old Norman Merkur gathered on Tuesday afternoon to participate in his funeral via Zoom, the cloud meeting app. Mr. Merkur, a Korean War veteran, died over the weekend as his health deteriorated from lymphoma. The burial was observed by a rabbi at the gravesite in Palm Bay, Fla. — along with 45 family members and friends who watched online from New York, California, Pennsylvania and New Hampshire. It was brief and traditional, despite the nontraditional webcast, and there were few references to the pandemic, until the end.
Ahead of the Werner family observance last week, Neal J. Schneider, owner of Schneider Funeral Directors, posted a video of himself on YouTube. With only a few days to go before the ceremony for Ms. Werner, Mr. Schneider wanted to get a YouTube channel up and running so that extended family members and friends could attend, at least virtually. He needed 1,000 subscribers to make it happen.
By Tuesday morning at 5, Mr. Schneider said, he had his first 246 subscribers. By 11 a.m. he had 1,500. The service on Friday for Ms. Werner, webcast by a camera set up at the back of the church, was the Schneider YouTube channel’s first funeral.
Arnold Obey and his wife, Cheryl Obey, in a photo provided by their family.
Henry Wray Eversole Jr. in a photo provided by his family.
Barbara Dreyfuss in a photo provided by her family.
Meredith Davis Gray holding her daughter Elisabeth Claire Avery in a photo provided by her family.
“Obviously, it was a difficult situation,” said Ms. Werner’s oldest son, Steve Werner Jr., a lawyer who watched the service in the parking lot on his cellphone. As for who got in and who did not, Mr. Werner said, the decision was obvious: Flo, as she was known, doted on her grandchildren.
At Bradshaw-Carter Memorial and Funeral Services in Houston, a family came in last week saying they expected 25 immediate family mourners to attend an upcoming service. “What we offered was 10 at one time,” said Michael Carter, a co-founder of the company. “Ten at, say, 2 o’clock, a maximum of 10, and then we could schedule another 10 for another time, 3 o’clock, which would give us time — we needed a certain amount of time to sterilize the facility,” he said.
Even though some families are making do, others continue to fret about when a traditional service might be allowed — the kind where family and friends show up to say goodbye.
“She had friends in every city in Georgia, I swear,” Ms. Avery said. “She loved art and music, and that’s how you can celebrate her in isolation.” She has had the difficult task of responding to the many people who have been reaching out, asking what they can do. “Listen to rock ’n’ roll, which she would’ve liked,” she tells them.
Chris Robinson, a board member of the National Funeral Directors Association who is a fourth-generation funeral director and managing owner of Robinson Funeral Home in Easley, S.C., said members of his trade association were getting swamped with questions and requests, and scrambling to find answers. Video companies are installing cameras. Mortuaries are deciding how much room they have to store bodies for weeks or months in refrigeration. He said he thinks some of the technological innovations will persist when the crisis eventually lifts, but he also expects an emotional swing back to simpler services.
Mortuaries face another challenge. Like hospitals, they are running low on masks and gloves that funeral workers need to protect themselves not only from the coronavirus but other infectious diseases as well.
“It’s usually two persons at a cremation, and normally we would both be there hands-on,” said Clay Dippel, a provisional funeral director and embalmer at the Bradshaw-Carter home in Houston. Now, he said, only one person gets gloved up and touches a body. “Instead of using two sets of gloves, now it’s one person does the lifting, the other is there to observe,” he said. “Yesterday, I was the employee who wore the gloves,” he added.
Meri Dreyfuss, the San Francisco tech worker who lost a sister to the coronavirus, went with another sister, Hillary Dreyfuss, up into California’s majestic redwood forests and walked through the ancient groves, trying to make sense of everything that was happening in their lives, and the world around them.
Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs contributed reporting from New York; Frances Robles from Key West, Fla.; and Patricia Mazzei from Miami.