They were clearing a large, well-defended cave complex alongside Iraqi counterterrorism forces in a mountainous northern area of the country, officials said.
WASHINGTON — American military commanders are reviewing how their forces conduct missions in Iraq and Syria after the deaths of two U.S. Special Operations troops in northern Iraq on Sunday during an operation against Islamic State fighters, military officials said on Monday.
The review, spurred by the particular circumstances surrounding Sunday’s mission, will examine how U.S. forces advise and accompany local troops, the officials said. During the review, American military operations will continue, they said.
The Americans killed were part of a Marine Special Operations team partnered with Iraqi counterterrorism forces, and were locked in a brutal gun battle while clearing a well-defended cave complex in mountains near the town of Makhmur, roughly 40 miles southwest of Erbil. The U.S. deaths are the first of 2020 in the nearly six-year American campaign against the terrorist group.
According to one military official, the Americans who were killed had to be pulled out with a hoist after falling into a crevice.
In a statement, Col. Myles B. Caggins III, a spokesman for the American-led mission in Iraq and Syria, said U.S. troops had to deploy additional forces to recover the dead in an effort that took roughly six hours.
Other officials said that those additional troops were drawn from the elite Delta Force.
The deaths come as the Islamic State has spent recent months reconstituting its ranks in porous and ungoverned areas of Iraq and Syria, leaving local forces in both countries working to keep the terrorist group away from urban areas.
The Islamic State fighters who were the target of Sunday’s raid are among a number of larger groups that have gradually grown in a rugged area of northeast Iraq. Makhmur is one of Iraq’s disputed areas, where security responsibility has shifted back and forth between Iraqi Kurds and Iraqi Arabs.
The land around Makhmur is rocky, hilly and arid, with numerous natural caves that the Islamic State has exploited as hide-outs and for storing weapons. The group targeted on Sunday included at least 19 men and was one of the larger clusters of fighters identified by American and Iraqi intelligence sources, according to officials.
No Iraqi counterterrorism fighters were injured in the battle, according to officials, but two were killed earlier this year in a previous raid.
In a tweet, Brett H. McGurk, the U.S. special envoy for the coalition to defeat the Islamic State until 2018, pointed to the length of time it took to recover the dead. “Something is not right,” he said.
“We seem to have lost focus on this mission while increasing risks to our people and depleting their resources for no good reason,” he wrote.
In January, after a U.S. airstrike in Baghdad killed the most important Iranian general, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, the American-led mission in Iraq suspended its mission against the Islamic State in the country for 10 days, hunkering down in fear of Iranian retaliatory strikes.
After the Iraqi government accused the United States of violating the country’s sovereignty with the strike, the country’s Parliament called for the expulsion of all American forces from the country, roughly 5,200 troops.
The last American killed in combat in Iraq was in August, when Marine Gunnery Sgt. Scott A. Koppenhafer died during a joint Iraqi-U. S. operation in Nineveh Province against the Islamic State. The Pentagon is weighing options to draw down forces in Iraq to around 2,500.
At its height, the Islamic State’s self-declared caliphate was the size of Britain and controlled the lives of up to 12 million people.
Alissa J. Rubin contributed reporting from Baghdad.