With another fall on Friday, the Dow Jones average is now lower than it was when President Trump took office.
Before he was sworn in as president, Donald J. Trump made clear that he would treat the stock market as a crucial yardstick of his success in office.
Now his bragging rights and doomsday threats have evaporated — along with trillions of dollars in wealth.
Stocks continued their monthlong meltdown on Friday, with the Dow Jones industrial average tumbling about 4.5 percent to below where it stood when Mr. Trump was sworn in as president on Jan. 20, 2017. The S&P 500 also sank more than 4 percent, though it remains up — barely — during the Trump presidency.
The implosion — stocks have collapsed about 35 percent since the coronavirus spread globally last month — is shaping up to be one of the most destructive periods in American financial history. More than $8 trillion in shareholder value has been destroyed. On four occasions in the past month, automatic circuit breakers halted trading to stall dizzying sell-offs. The plunge is the steepest since at least 1928.
The market collapse isn’t Mr. Trump’s fault, although some of his decisions may not have helped, including his statements minimizing the danger of the virus. The fast-spreading pandemic has forced countries all over the world to essentially shut down their economies, and that probably would have happened in the United States regardless of who was in the White House.
But the speed and violence of the fall have stunned just about everyone. Only a month ago, on Feb. 19, Mr. Trump was in chest-thumping mode. “Highest Stock Market In History, By Far!” he crowed on Twitter.
That day turned out to be the market’s peak.
From the start of his presidency, some of Mr. Trump’s policies have seemed tailor made to catapult the stock market to new heights. His landmark legislative achievement — the $1.5 trillion tax-cut package that he signed into law at the end of 2017 — handed out rich rewards to corporate America. The windfall fattened profits and led to a frenzy of companies buying back their own shares, which propelled stocks still higher.
Investors loved it. Bankers loved it. Corporate executives loved it. The money showered upon them from tax cuts and the seemingly invincible bull market mollified even those who privately grimaced at the president’s pronouncements and social policies.
In some ways, Mr. Trump, with his fixation on the markets, has resembled old-school corporate chieftains like Sandy Weill. As chairman and chief executive of Citigroup, Mr. Weill kept moment-to-moment tabs on his company’s stock price, viewing it as the best quantifiable measure of his performance. But Mr. Weill got out before the reckoning. Two years after he retired in 2006, Citigroup, deep in debt and burdened with toxic assets after years of financial recklessness, required $45 billion in taxpayer bailouts.
So deeply has Mr. Trump interwoven his fortunes with those of the markets that plenty of members of the Trump-loathing left have watched markets plunge with a dose of schadenfreude.
Democrats’ distrust of Mr. Trump runs deep. Some have kept their money out of the stock markets, according to a team of economists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who studied anonymized data about the stock portfolios for millions of investors.
“People who are more likely to be Republicans, after the 2016 election, were a bit more likely to put money into the stock market, while Democrats do the opposite,” said Antoinette Schoar, an M.I.T. professor.
For a long time, as markets roared, that meant missing out on big profits. Now it’s not looking like such a bad decision.
“I’d wished I’d went to even more cash,” said Tom Leohr, a 65-year-old Iowa retiree who said he had significantly reduced his stock holdings after Mr. Trump won the election.
Even as markets were cratering this month, Mr. Trump has clung to the good days.
As he spoke at a White House news conference on the afternoon of March 13, the stock markets staged a 9 percent rally. It wasn’t enough to recover from the drop the day before, but Mr. Trump was so jubilant that he printed out a chart of the day’s market activity, autographed it and sent it to a Fox Business anchor.
Those gains were erased within moments of the opening of markets the next Monday — and Mr. Trump, for the first time in his presidency, adopted a more philosophical tone.
