New York|The Wealthy Flee Coronavirus. Vacation Towns Respond: Stay Away.
Tensions mount between New Yorkers with the means to retreat to their second homes and those who live in the towns year round.
He estimated that his township had tripled in size to 15,000 as part-time residents arrived, lured by last weekend’s warm, sunny weather and the relative safety of the beach.
The cancellation of schools in most states and work-from-home edicts have left many families unfettered by offices or primary residences, free to work wherever they can find Wi-Fi.
The influx has drained local supermarkets, and fueled fear that a continued onslaught could cripple towns with tiny police forces and few hospitals.
At Red Horse Market, a gourmet food shop in East Hampton, part of Long Island’s East End, some customers are phoning in to ask for personal shoppers or for delivery to their cars, so they don’t have to walk through the store, said Jeff Lange, one of the owners.
At the moment, he said his 30-person staff is too busy to accommodate such requests.
A liquor store in Sag Harbor, another Hamptons town, is selling cases of wine and spirits through a half-opened door.
“It’s like the Fourth of July out here,” said Robin Farnam, a clerk at the store.
The number of known coronavirus cases in the United States continues to grow quickly.
As of Thursday morning, there have been at least 81,578 cases of coronavirus confirmed by lab tests and 1,180 deaths, according to a New York Times database. Close to half are in New York State and most of these are from New York City — an easy drive to some of the wealthiest enclaves in the nation.
New York’s governor, Andrew M. Cuomo, has said that with cases doubling every three days in New York City alone, as many as 140,000 people might need urgent care in the next few weeks.
“Greene County is a large rural county with NO hospital!" the message reads.
On Long Island, private plane and jet traffic increased at East Hampton Airport, with everything from single-engine Cessnas and Piper Cubs to Gulf Streams and Falcon jets landing.
Stores there have also been stripped. Some people are even buying extra freezers, residents said.
Long before the virus struck, many full-time residents of towns that flood with seasonal visitors already had a healthy distrust of their part-time neighbors and the crowds that follow in their wake.
Still, the rapid swell of visitors remains worrisome to elected leaders.
Officials on Fishers Island, a quaint oasis in the Long Island Sound not far from the Connecticut coastline, with an off-season population of 230, have issued “new urgent protocols” pleading with people to stay away for at least a month.
Jay Schneiderman, the supervisor of Southampton, an area comprising more than a dozen hamlets and villages on eastern Long Island, said the population had soared in the last two weeks to nearly 100,000, up from 60,000.
Bob Sankosh, 56, splits his time between a one-bedroom apartment in Manhattan, where his office is, and a home in Beach Haven, N.J. He and his wife and his two adult children are now living at the beach as they all work or study from home.
He said he believed the warnings from Mr. Murphy and others to stay away had been effective, noting that recently, beaches felt emptier.
Some New Yorkers, however, still seem undaunted by the warnings.
Last weekend, on Middle Lane in East Hampton, contractors bustled around a house under construction.
The home is at least two months away from completion, but the owner wants to move out of the city and into the home as soon as possible, said Michael Maycol, a carpenter and painter.
Sheelagh McNeill contributed research and Jane Margolies contributed reporting.