A surge in new infections coincided with an increase in testing capacity in New York State, and Connecticut delayed its primary.
A jump in testing yields a spike in new cases.
Surge in cases creates urgent need for medical gear, mayor says.
About half of those infected in New York City are under 50.
New Jersey Transit trims service amid huge drop in ridership.
Three more correction officers test positive, officials say.
A few days ago, New York State was testing only a few hundred people a day for coronavirus.
From Wednesday night to Thursday morning, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said, the state processed the tests of 7,584 people.
The testing has increased as dozens of private laboratories in the state received authorization to test for the virus. Two government-run labs had shouldered most of New York’s testing until recently.
The huge increase in testing capacity and the quickening spread of the virus yielded sobering news: more than 2,200 newly discovered cases in New York State. The case count in the state has more than quadrupled since Monday.
The total as of Thursday afternoon was more than 5,200 cases statewide, up from about 3,000 cases on Wednesday. There were more than 750 people hospitalized statewide. At least 29 people had died of the virus in New York State.
Mr. Cuomo has said the virus has spread so widely that the increase in the number of confirmed cases reflected New York’s added testing capacity more than anything else.
The addition of three drive-through testing centers has helped expand that capacity. The first opened last Friday in New Rochelle, the state’s original virus hot spot. A second opened on Tuesday at Jones Beach State Park on Long Island, and a third opened on Staten Island on Thursday.
In New Jersey, the governor’s office said on Thursday that another 318 people had tested positive, raising the state’s total to 742. Nine people had died in New Jersey, up from five on Wednesday. Three of the nine deaths were associated with long-term health care facilities, which have been closed to visitors, the state’s health commissioner said.
In Connecticut, Gov. Ned Lamont said on Thursday that the state had recorded its second coronavirus-related death and had added 63 confirmed virus cases since Wednesday, bringing its total to 159.
Of the Thursday total, 1,030 of the cases were in Brooklyn, 980 were in Queens, 976 were in Manhattan, 436 were in the Bronx and 165 were on Staten Island. On Tuesday afternoon, there were 157 cases in Brooklyn.
As the number of cases rises, hospitals in the city are on pace to run out of crucial medical equipment, including face masks and gloves, in the next few weeks if new supplies do not arrive soon, Mr. de Blasio said on Thursday.
Among the needs, the mayor said, are three million N95 masks, 50 million surgical masks and 15,000 ventilators. New York State only has about 3,000 ventilators, one for each intensive-care hospital room.
Health care workers will need another 45 million of each of the following: surgical gowns, coveralls, gloves, regular face masks and face shields, the mayor said.
In making the call for the supplies, Mr. de Blasio again asked President Trump to deploy the military as part of the effort to see that city has the equipment necessary to save lives. “We need these in great numbers,” the mayor said.
As of Wednesday evening, more than 500 coronavirus patients were hospitalized in New York City, 169 of them in intensive care units, according to city officials, who announced on Thursday the city was expanding its testing capacity.
“If we’re going to curb this epidemic, we need fast and expansive testing for those most at risk for serious illness,” Mr. de Blasio said in a statement.
On Wednesday, the city health department released information about who has tested positive for the virus. About half of those people were between the ages of 18 and 49.
The city’s data aligned with recent information from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which on Wednesday said that nearly 40 percent of people hospitalized with the virus were 20 to 54.
Fifty-eight percent of those who tested positive in the city were men, and 42 percent were women, according to data from the city Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
With so many commuters confined to their homes instead commuting to work, New Jersey Transit said on Thursday that it would switch to a weekend schedule, with a few modifications, beginning Friday.
The abrupt announcement came after the agency’s chief executive, Kevin J. Corbett, sent a letter to New Jersey’s congressional delegation asking for $1.25 billion in federal aid to offset lost revenue and increased costs caused by the coronavirus outbreak.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which operates New York City’s subway and buses and two commuter railroads, said this week that it was seeking a $4 billion federal bailout for similar reasons.
Mr. Corbett said New Jersey Transit had experienced a “dramatic 88 percent reduction in systemwide ridership” since March 9. He said revenue had fallen in line with ridership and that the agency expected “this precipitous drop to continue” as fewer riders to buy monthly passes.
New Jersey Transit’s schedule changes apply only to the agency’s trains and affect all lines except for the Atlantic City Rail Line, and do not affect buses or light-rail systems.
On weekdays, eight daily runs will be added to the usual weekend schedule on the Morris and Essex line between Dover and Hoboken. Service on the Gladstone branch will be unchanged.
The city’s Department of Correction confirmed on Thursday that two correction officers and a captain had tested positive for the coronavirus.
The announcement came a day after an inmate, a man in his 30s, at the Rikers Island jail complex tested positive, as did a correction officer who was assigned to a security checkpoint there. Eight other inmates who were in contact with the man and had shown symptoms of the virus have been placed in isolation at a Rikers hospital unit.
The mayor’s office is trying to identify Rikers inmates who could be released early in hopes of stemming the virus’s spread among the roughly 5,400 people in the city’s custody. Mr. de Blasio said on Wednesday that inmates with underlying health conditions could be eligible.
On Thursday, the mayor said that the city had identified 40 inmates who could be released, pending the approval of other criminal justice authorities.
Outside the city’s jail system, three employees at facilities in the New York City area that house people detained by federal immigration authorities tested positive for the virus, officials said on Thursday.
The cases included a member of the medical staff at the Elizabeth Detention Center in New Jersey, which is managed by Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE, and a staff member at the Mercy First facility on Long Island, where minors in the Office of Refugee Resettlement’s custody are held.
In addition, a correction officer at the Bergen County Jail in New Jersey, which has a contract with the immigration enforcement agency, tested positive, county officials said.
The Bergen County Sheriff’s Office said in a statement that the guard had not interacted with detainees. But one detainee, speaking through his wife, said the guard had recently helped move a unit from dormitory-style quarters to cells to increase social distancing.
More cases among public workers and those receiving city services.
Among other public sector employees, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said on Thursday that 23 of its workers had tested positive for the virus. Nineteen are with the New York City Transit Authority, which operates the subway and buses; the others work for the Long Island Rail Road.
And the New York Police Department said that 20 employees had tested positive for the virus. Some officers and the city’s largest police union recently accused the department of failing to properly outfit officers with protective equipment, including gloves and masks.
Elsewhere, seven people living in New York City’s primary shelter system have tested positive for the virus. They lived in seven different shelters, which remain open and have been cleaned, officials said.
Three single adults were being treated in hospitals. A woman in her 50s who was the first person in the shelter system to test positive was released from the hospital and was in an isolated location, officials said.
Cuomo orders businesses to keep 75 percent of workers home.
With the virus continuing to surge and the economic fallout crippling New York State, Mr. Cuomo on Thursday ordered most businesses to keep at least 75 percent of their workers at home, up from the 50 percent announced on Wednesday.
Among the essential industries that are exempt from the rule are food, health care and pharmacies, banks, warehousing and shipping, and media.
The governor also announced an order waiving mortgage payments for three months for homeowners facing virus-related financial hardship.
“If you are not working, if you are working only part time, we are going to have the banks and financial institutions waive mortgage payments for 90 days,” Mr. Cuomo said.
Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York provided an update as cases continue to rise in the state.
We said we are fighting a war on two fronts. We’re fighting the virus and we’re fighting fear, and they are two totally different situations that you have to deal with. In many ways the fear is more dangerous than the virus. I had a conversation last night with a businessperson from New York City who I know who was panicked that New York City was going to be locked down, that there were going to be roadblocks, that there were going to be mandatory quarantine, he was going to be imprisoned in his house. I said, you know, where did you hear that? “Well that’s what they say, that’s what I’m hearing, they’re saying.” And I would say, look, I would know, right, because I would have to authorize those actions legally. It’s not going to happen. “Well I hear it is going to happen.” I said but I know, but I would have to do it, and I’m telling you, I’m not doing it.
Mr. Cuomo also sought to clarify his stance on a potential shelter-in-place measure, which Mr. de Blasio has said might be imminent in New York City.
The issue has spawned a semantic debate: The governor has said he supports the framework of a shelter-in-place order in California’s Bay Area, which still allows people to exercise and go out to buy groceries or medicine, but he rejects the term itself.
A family grapples with a wrenching question.
Joseph Trinity, pictured here in the 1950s.
Joseph Trinity’s family members were there one day, and then they were not, for the same reason much of the world is trying to suppress the human desire to be with one another: the coronavirus.
Mr. Trinity had found himself in a New Jersey rehabilitation facility that, like most health care institutions across the country, had declared a no-visitor policy to stem contagion. But he is 92, and in fragile health; family sustains him.
Several times a day, he would call his daughter, Mary Trinity, to ask in a faint, slightly garbled voice where everyone was — and to beg her to please, please, get him out of there.
Mr. Trinity was caught in a moment. And he wasn’t alone.
The federal government and various health care associations have issued strongly restrictive guidelines to prohibit family members and other nonessential personnel from visiting nursing homes, rehab centers and other facilities with older, vulnerable residents.
Mr. Trinity’s children faced a heartbreaking dilemma. Should their father remain in the care of professionals who were much better equipped to handle his myriad needs? Or was he at greater risk of contracting the virus by remaining in an institution?
And given the prevailing threat and the open-endedness of restrictions, was it possible they would never see him again?
Dan Barry, Jonah Engel Bromwich, Annie Correal, Luis Ferré-Sadurní, Alan Feuer, Michael Gold, Christina Goldbaum, Matthew Haag, Patrick McGeehan, Jesse McKinley, Andy Newman, Azi Paybarah, Jan Ransom, Ed Shanahan, Liam Stack, Nikita Stewart, Tracey Tully and Ali Watkins contributed reporting.