Check out our low, low interest rates.
If you’re a normal human being considering reading this post, fair warning: although it’s not super-technical, it’s aimed at a very wonky audience, and parts of it won’t exactly be in English. Also, it’s of limited policy relevance: the Trump administration would never consider the policy I suggest, and even a Biden administration would probably balk at going where I suggest. The only reason I’m writing about it is to get the idea out there. Oh, and I don’t think it’s very different from what Larry Summers has been saying, but I thought it might be helpful to put some stylized numbers to what I believe, and believe he believes.
OK, if you’re still with me: I hereby propose that the next U.S. president and Congress move to permanently spend an additional 2 percent of GDP on public investment, broadly defined (infrastructure, for sure, but also things like R&D and child development) — and not pay for it.
What this tells us is that the bond market isn’t just pricing in a global recession driven by the coronavirus, but that it expects the Fed funds rate to be near zero a lot of the time looking forward. That is, the market sees a future of secular stagnation, in which the economy is in a liquidity trap, that is, a situation in which monetary policy loses most of its traction, much if not most of the time. We were in a liquidity trap for 8 of the past 12 years; the market now appears to believe that something like this is the new normal.
Conventional monetary policy doesn’t work in a liquidity trap, but fiscal policy is highly effective. The problem is that the kind of fiscal policy you really want — public investment that takes advantage of very low interest rates and strengthens the economy in the long run — is hard to get going on short notice. That’s why current proposals for fiscal stimulus, like the one advanced by Jason Furman, basically involve handing out cash — a good idea given the constraints, but a shame given the missed opportunity to invest in the future.
Hence my suggestion. Why not put investment-centered stimulus in place all the time? It would cushion the economy when adverse shocks hit. It wouldn’t be necessary to achieve full employment in better times, but it wouldn’t hurt either, given low interest rates and the need for public investment.
But, you say, what about debt? Well, that’s where the arithmetic of debt in an era of low interest rates becomes crucial to understand.
Let’s consider a stylized, round-number economy that I’ll call “America.” This economy currently has public debt equal to 100 percent of GDP. It can expect, on average, to experience nominal GDP growth of 4 percent a year, half real, half inflation. It can also expect, on average, to pay an interest rate of 2 percent on its debt. The actual numbers don’t match my example exactly — right now, growth prospects may be a bit worse than that, but interest rates are even lower. But I think this is close enough to make my point.
So in my hypothetical case, where d = 1 (debt is 100 percent of GDP), the debt ratio can be stabilized while running a primary deficit of 2 percent of GDP.
Put the interest payments back in, and this translates to a headline deficit of 4 percent of GDP. Our actual deficit is a bit bigger than that, but we could get back into that range by repealing Trump’s giveaways to corporations, which don’t seem to be doing anything for investment anyway.
OK, now let’s introduce a public investment program of 2 percent of GDP, with no pay-fors. The debt ratio will now begin to rise, but not without limit. If nothing else changes, d will eventually stabilize at 2 — debt at 200 percent of GDP.
That’s terrible, right? Um, why? Don’t tell me about the burden of paying interest on the debt — that’s already taken into account by the calculation. Maybe we’d have a debt crisis, but Japan has debt exceeding 200 percent of GDP, with no crisis in sight.
OK, there is a valid objection to my argument: I’ve just implicitly assumed that permanent fiscal stimulus wouldn’t raise the interest rate, and that’s not a safe assumption. For one thing, zero-lower-bound episodes would probably be fewer and shorter than otherwise. Also, the Fed would probably raise rates a bit further than it would have otherwise during those period when the economy isn’t in a liquidity trap.
First, when the economy is in a liquidity trap, which now seems likely to be a large fraction of the time, the extra public investment will have a multiplier effect, raising GDP relative to what it would otherwise be. Based on the experience of the past decade, the multiplier would probably be around 1.5, meaning 3 percent higher GDP in bad times — and considerable additional revenue from that higher level of GDP. Permanent fiscal stimulus wouldn’t pay for itself, but it would pay for part of itself.
Second, if the investment is productive, it will expand the economy’s productive capacity in the long run. This is obviously true for physical infrastructure and R&D, but there is also strong evidence that safety-net programs for children make them healthier, more productive adults, which also helps offset their direct fiscal cost.
Finally, there’s fairly strong evidence of hysteresis — temporary downturns permanently or semi-permanently depress future output. Again, by avoiding these effects a sustained fiscal stimulus would partially pay for itself.
And here’s the thing: because a debt crisis doesn’t seem at all imminent, there will be plenty of time to reconsider if the arithmetic of infrastructure spending doesn’t turn out as favorable as I expect it will. If secular stagnation looks like less of a problem at some future date — say, during AOC’s second term in the White House — we can rethink permanent stimulus then.
Meanwhile, however, there’s a very good case for putting a sustained, productive program of stimulus in place as soon as possible, instead of scrambling to come up with short-term measures every time bad things happen. Because everything we see now says that bad times will be a very frequent occurrence.