Mulaney, the comic and former “S.N.L.” writer, and the cast took aim at Mike Pence, the Democratic presidential race and La Guardia Airport, among other targets.
The annual appearances of John Mulaney, who this weekend hosted “Saturday Night Live” for the third time in three seasons, have become one of the show’s more enjoyable traditions in this current era of its history. The presence of Mulaney, the former “S.N.L.” writer turned stand-up star and ubiquitous comic talisman (“Oh, Hello,” “Documentary Now!”, “Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse”), seems to help loosen up the cast members and bring out their goofiest material. And this time, he had extra help from some co-stars of his latest Netflix special, “John Mulaney & the Sack Lunch Bunch,” including Jake Gyllenhaal and this week’s musical guest, David Byrne.
But first: another opening sketch featuring “S.N.L.”’s now familiar roster of celebrity impressionists playing the Democratic presidential contenders.
The segment was set in the White House, where Vice President Pence (played by Beck Bennett) was holding a news conference to discuss preparations for a widespread outbreak of coronavirus.
Then came the questions — not from journalists but from the Democratic nominees.
In his monologue, Mulaney freely admitted that he had no new projects to plug (“I have nothing coming up — I’m here to promote the month of March”) and instead used the time to tell jokes on a variety of topics.
In his first outing as an “S.N.L.” host, Mulaney resurrected a long dormant musical parody, “Diner Lobster,” and helped make it a viral sensation. Last year, he followed that up with “Bodega Bathroom.” And for his three-peat, there’s … whatever the heck this sketch is, about a man (Pete Davidson) trying to buy questionable sushi from a vendor (Mulaney) at La Guardia Airport.
As is tradition, Davidson’s problematic act triggers all kinds of sendups of Broadway musicals, including Thompson as the Phantom of La Guardia and a passenger played Gyllenhaal, wearing pajamas and levitating with the help of a harness, as he sings a song set to “Defying Gravity” about how much he loves airport security.
Over at the Weekend Update desk, the anchors Colin Jost and Michael Che continued to riff on the Trump administration’s response to the coronavirus outbreak.
President Trump held a press conference today to educate the public about the coronavirus. But I’m not sure it worked, because according to a new survey, 38 percent of Americans say they won’t drink Corona beer because it sounds like coronavirus. While the rest won’t drink it because it tastes like syphilis. Donald Trump is the worst person to possibly ease people’s fears. Trump’s whole thing is that he whips arenas into a frenzy of anger and bloodlust. Hoping Trump can calm people down is liking hoping cocaine can fight insomnia. And I don’t really trust Trump on medical issues because, remember, this is what he had to say about Ebola. [Plays clip of President Trump saying, “Ebola, you disintegrated. You got Ebola, that was it.”] You disintegrated? Does he think that Thanos was named Ebola? Then on his way to a rally where he would meet with thousands of untested people in an enclosed space, Trump explained his plan like this: [Plays clip of President Trump saying, “We’re ordering a lot of different elements of medical. As you know, they’re working as rapidly as they can on a vaccine for the future. And with that, I think I can head out.”] You think you can head out? I’m not sure because you didn’t tell us anything. He said, “We’re ordering different elements of medical.” Which I guarantee you he thinks is fire, earth, wind and water. And now scientists estimate that the mortality rate from the coronavirus is around two percent. Which sounds pretty bad, but honestly if you had given me only a two percent chance of dying in Trump’s first term, I would have taken that in a heartbeat.
Man, I don’t want to make jokes about this coronavirus. And not because it’s too sad, but because I don’t know that I don’t have it yet. And if I do have it, the internet is going to play this clip of me, making fun of it, over and over again. As they should, because that’d be hilarious. Imagine if there was video of the Crocodile Hunter making fun of stingrays? I mean, what if this is it? This is not how I want to be remembered. Sitting here, pretending that I care about politics. Wearing this fancy tie. I don’t need this. Why am I hiding my drinking problem? You know I just found out I might have a kid?
Appearing as himself, Chris Redd lamented that this had perhaps not been the most successful Black History Month, since it had been overshadowed by more pressing news developments, like the emergence of the coronavirus.
“I know people that wear protective masks that don’t wear condoms, and that’s wild to me,” he said.
