A simple tree diagram shows how limiting contacts early might prevent many infections.
If each infected person spreads the coronavirus to two other people, the chain of infections would grow exponentially.
Avoiding even one social transmission early on in the chain could significantly reduce the number of infections.
Avoiding even a single social connection early on in the chain could significantly reduce the number of infections.
After studying infectious diseases, epidemiologists like Helen Jenkins, of Boston University, and Bill Hanage, of Harvard, who are married, typically go one of two ways.
“We would mostly be in the second category, but this has pushed us into the first category fairly visibly,” he continued, adding, “when the facts change, I update my priors” — a statistician’s term for what one believes and expects.
Recently, the family — Dr. Jenkins and Dr. Hanage, and their two daughters, ages 10 and 7 — gathered around their homemade whiteboard in the kitchen. Dr. Jenkins, whose work focuses on tuberculosis, which still kills about 4,000 people daily around the world, drew a simple tree diagram, as a way to clearly convey the value of cutting just one link in the coronavirus transmission chain.
The basic message: Very simple interventions, such as working from home and severing even one link, have an exponential effect. Every individual acting preemptively can make a huge difference.
“I started working from home a long time ago,” Dr. Hanage said.
“It was just a week ago,” Dr. Jenkins noted.
“Right, it was just a week ago,” he said.
It was also a week of trying to keep up with work already planned, and of writing op-eds in The Guardian and The Washington Post on topics including testing issues in the United States, working from home and the controversial pandemic strategy in Britain. Their older daughter has daily Google Hangout meetings with her class and, with a friend, is creating a coronavirus PowerPoint information guide for their peers. There are whirlwind conference calls with colleagues, and live feeds with local and international radio and TV stations.
The following is an edited version of my phone and email conversations with Dr. Jenkins and Dr. Hanage, who were at their home in Cambridge, Mass.
Tell us about the tree diagram.
HJ: It simply shows what happens if you cut even one contact that would have resulted in transmission.
A tree diagram is not the type of thing epidemiologists would usually draw, because it seems obvious. But clearly we still need to do better at getting these concepts across to people.
BH: I build a lot of trees, but they are phylogenetic trees. My lab is very interested in figuring out ways of using genetics to detect transmission. The thing on our whiteboard is just a transmission tree. Every time you cut a link, you don’t just take out that link, you also take out all the potential cases and links descending from it. Those people could be infected by other means, later on, but every time each of us stops — or even just delays — an infection is a small victory.
HJ: I still feel really concerned about the complacency among so many people — people thinking that what happened in Wuhan, China, or Italy can’t possibly happen here. It’s really hard to see people in the U.K. and the U.S. not taking the problem seriously, and putting themselves and others at risk.
BH: It could be a month from now, it could be longer. I want to be wary of getting into the weeds of complicated modeling or predictions. Instead, what I want to get across is: We know that this is a virus capable of doing what it did to Wuhan, and what it is now doing in Italy and Spain and what it will almost certainly do in the U.K. Washington State is coming under severe strain. Given what we know the virus is capable of, we should be preparing for it now.
And the risks and interventions will change over time, as people better understand the situation. We should not think that this will blow over in a few weeks and then life will resume as it was before.
BH: Sustainability is a completely reasonable thing to be worried about. But it’s not an excuse for not taking urgent action now. We must not let the perfect be the enemy of the good.
The most sustainable measures will be put in place when the incidence of infection is low. Because when the incidence is high, the only way to save lives will be with really extreme interventions — the lockdowns, police on the streets like we have seen in Italy.
Coronavirus may not be dangerous to most people. But it is transmissible enough to infect a very large number of people. And even a small fraction of a very large number can be a large number — certainly enough to overwhelm our health care system.
It’s important to distinguish between the short term and the long term. The long term is hard to predict, but there are a lot of things we can do now, and many of them are common sense. As I keep saying: It’s epidemiology, not rocket science!
The uncertainty and unpredictability are confounding.
HJ: Yes, but an immediate crisis on our doorstep is that Personal Protective Equipment — masks, shields, gloves and so on, or P.P.E. — is running out for health care workers. We’d been hearing about a movement afoot to get the Defense Production Act invoked, and now that has happened, allowing mass production of P.P.E. and other necessary equipment. We are essentially entering a wartime situation and need to behave with that in mind; call your senators and other representatives, anything you can do to enact change. Health care workers are our front line soldiers, and we need to protect them. Talking of a “wartime situation” might sound scary, but remember: This is an opportunity for everyone to unite against a common enemy. I’ve been incredibly moved by how much important work everyone is doing to help one another. If we can harness that effectively, then I can start to feel more optimistic.