The Los Angeles Rams made a much-anticipated update to their logo, and it did not go over well.
On Monday, the Los Angeles Rams unveiled a new logo, which had been subject to speculation for most of the month. The redesign was the culmination of a two-year process, and the rollout, ahead of the team’s relocation to a new stadium, was clearly important to the Rams. The design process was painstakingly detailed on a website launched just for the occasion.
Kevin Demoff, the chief operating officer of the Rams, said the team’s goal “was to restore the blue and yellow color scheme that the fans love.” Yet despite the good intentions, the reaction to the unveiling of the logo seemed unanimous by Tuesday: Almost everybody hates it.
There were two versions: a new take on the familiar ram’s head, an alteration that drew mostly negative feedback, and the primary logo, an abstract ram’s horn swooping over a capitalized L.A., which drew mostly derision.
“The L.A. mark was crafted with a focus on the horn entwining with L.A., ensuring that the Rams are forever tied to the city of Los Angeles,” the team said in a statement, gliding over the franchise’s 20-year history in St. Louis, where it won a Super Bowl.
The curvature of the horn in the new logo is said to be tied to the so-called golden ratio of about 1.62 to 1, made famous by the Greek mathematician Euclid. Maybe it’s just as well that Euclid died in the third century B.C. If he hadn’t, the social media scorn of the 21st century might have killed him.
Demoff confirmed that the team had worked with design teams from the N.F.L. and Nike (the league’s apparel sponsor), a committee of eight to 10 people, and had gotten feedback from focus groups and fans. Nevertheless, the brickbats outweighed the bouquets.
Here’s why people just don’t like the redesign.
It looks … familiar.
It made some expect weather and traffic updates.
It triggers dial-up trauma.
Others thought it said “internet browser” more than “football team,” comparing the swoosh around the L.A. to the one around Internet Explorer’s “e” or the fox circling the globe in Firefox’s logo.
It’s vaguely presidential.
It reminded some of a well-known figure. “Did they use Donald Trump’s hair as inspiration for the new Rams logo?” one Twitter poster asked.
It scrapped the blueprint.
It looks … familiar, part 2.
“The court of public opinion is huge,” Wilson said. “These are knee-jerk reactions, and people have nothing else to do” because of lockdowns over the coronavirus.
It remains to seen whether the new logo will find its way onto the team’s helmet, whose current spiraling horns are one of the most recognizable symbols in sports. The team plans to roll out helmet and uniform changes after the N.F.L. draft at the end of April.
