The court ruled in cases on the insanity defense, race discrimination and copyright infringement.
The justices who did turn up for the conference skipped a longstanding custom at the court, that of each justice shaking hands with every other justice each time they convene.
Several of the justices are in the demographic group thought to be most at risk from the coronavirus: notably Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who is 87, and Justice Stephen G. Breyer, who is 81. Four other members of the court — Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel A. Alito Jr. and Sonia Sotomayor — are 65 or older.
The justices were to have started a two-week stretch of arguments on Monday, but those have been postponed. It is not clear whether or when they will be rescheduled. It issued its opinions on its website at five-minute intervals and in ascending order of the author’s seniority, roughly tracking how the decisions would have been announced had the court been in session.
The case concerned James Kahler, who was sentenced to death in 2011 for killing four family members. His lawyers said he had severe depression that made it impossible for him to understand reality or distinguish right from wrong. Under the Kansas law, similar to those of Alaska, Idaho, Montana and Utah, Mr. Kahler was barred from raising the defense that his mental illness prevented him from knowing his actions were wrong.
Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Thomas, Alito, Neil M. Gorsuch and Brett M. Kavanaugh joined Justice Kagan’s majority opinion in the case, Kahler v. Kansas, No. 18-6135.
The court ruled that Byron Allen, an African-American entrepreneur, had to meet a demanding standard in a lawsuit saying that Comcast, the nation’s largest cable company, had discriminated against him based on his race in its decision not to carry programming from his network.
Justice Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous court, said that Mr. Allen had to meet the more demanding standard that race was a “but for” cause. He said the appeals court should decide whether the allegations in Mr. Allen’s lawsuit were enough to clear that higher bar.
In a concurring opinion, Justice Ginsburg suggested that the allegations might be sufficient to allow the case to move forward.
After a private company discovered the wreckage in 1996, it hired the videographer, Frederick Allen, to film and photograph its ambitious underwater salvage work. Mr. Allen copyrighted the images and videos he created, but North Carolina officials posted five of his videos on a YouTube channel and printed one of his photographs in a newsletter.
Justice Kagan, writing for the majority, said Mr. Allen could not sue. The Constitution, she wrote, granted states sovereign immunity, shielding them from federal lawsuits.
Under the court’s precedents, Justice Kagan wrote, Congress was powerless to enact the law, dooming Mr. Allen’s case, Allen v. Cooper, No. 18-877. Six justices joined most or all of her opinion, and all of the justices agreed on the bottom line.