Friday: The governor took an extraordinary step to try to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
On Thursday evening, Gov. Gavin Newsom ordered California’s almost 40 million residents to stay home as much as possible and many businesses to close in an extraordinary effort to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
The order exempts businesses and agencies that provide essential services, like grocery stores, pharmacies, gas stations and doctor’s offices, or are considered critical infrastructure.
It has no specific end date.
The move added a level of consistency to restrictions that have been enacted piecemeal over the last several days across the state.
In large swaths of California, “nonessential” businesses like movie theaters, gyms and bars had already been ordered to close. Restaurants had been limited to takeout or delivery only. And state officials had already urged residents 65 and older or with chronic health conditions to stay at home.
Mr. Newsom’s announcement came two days after public health officials in seven counties around the Bay Area ordered their roughly 7 million residents to shelter in place, setting in motion a vast, unprecedented experiment.
Other communities followed, adopting almost identical orders or measures with slight variations.
In Los Angeles, leaders in the nation’s most populous county announced a similar order they called “safer at home” — minutes before Mr. Newsom’s news conference began.
You can still take a walk — in fact, it’s encouraged. You can still go to the grocery store, or bring food to loved ones. Just stay at least six feet away from anybody you don’t live with and be mindful of others’ vulnerabilities.
How the state and local orders will be enforced remains unclear, but officials said that they expected residents to follow them.
Mr. Newsom did, however, say that the state would be “more aggressively” policing xenophobic attacks against Asians. “We are better than that,” he said.
State public health officials on Thursday reported the state now has 675 confirmed cases and 16 deaths, up from 598 cases and 13 deaths the day before. The most recent death, the county’s public health department said, was a 30-something person who had underlying conditions and lived near Pasadena.
Health officials in Los Angeles County have been reporting a rapid rises in known cases — as of noon on Thursday, there were 231, up from 190 the day before. But as recognition grows that many infections are undetected, leaders are now focusing on ways to expand the capacity of stretched health care systems and to help residents who were already teetering on a financial edge with the economic fallout from the crisis.
In a letter he sent to President Trump on Thursday, Mr. Newsom asked that the U.S. Navy hospital ship Mercy be sent to Los Angeles through Sept. 1 to help treat patients having heart attacks, strokes and car accidents, as well as the likely surge of patients suffering from Covid-19.
Mr. Newsom said that the state was projecting that 56 percent of California’s population, roughly 25.5 million people, will be infected with the virus over an eight-week period — a stunning disclosure that quickly rippled across the internet.
But on Thursday night, he said he hoped that the extraordinary measures being taken would stop those projections from becoming real.
Karen Meyerhoff’s mini Australian shepherds, Roxy and Toby, are getting lots of attention these days.
Dr. Meyerhoff’s boyfriend has been at home with the 6-month-old pups, along with their other dogs, since his firefighter training was suspended and Monterey County issued a shelter-in-place order.
But Dr. Meyerhoff is still heading out to work; she’s an anesthesiologist and intensive care doctor in Salinas.
My fingers are crossed. Stay safe and well, everyone.
