Loretta Mendoza Dionisio, outgoing and unstoppable, died of the coronavirus, a statistic in a growing U.S. count. But her life meant much more.
Loretta Dionisio with her husband, Roddy, in a photo from 2005 provided by her children.
Her name was Loretta, but they called her Lettie. She stood 4 feet 10 inches tall. She was outrageously friendly, the kind of person liable to invite the sales clerk at T-Mobile to join the family for dinner. This made her children cringe but was also something they loved. Pure Lettie.
She was tough. At work, she could stare down colleagues who were hairy, blustery and taller than her by a foot or two. And it was true of her husband, Roddy. He could not say no to her.
Roddy had not wanted to go on their February trip to the Philippines. He was watching the early news about the coronavirus, and worried it would put his wife, a cancer survivor, in danger. But she was adamant. There was something she needed to finish.
On March 11, Loretta Dionisio became a data point.
At the news conference where her death was announced, the public health director in Los Angeles County did not name her, in accordance with federal privacy regulations.
The public health director referred only to a woman in her 60s with “underlying health conditions” who was stopping briefly in California after travels in Asia, adding that “shortly after being hospitalized, she unfortunately passed.” In the ongoing tally of fatalities associated with the coronavirus, hers was the 37th death in the United States, the first in Los Angeles County.
Nearly two weeks later, Ms. Dionisio’s family was still grappling with the bureaucracy that surrounds infectious disease. She died far from her home in Orlando, Fla., during a layover 2,500 miles away. Her son and daughter, on the East Coast, have been unable to see their father, who is in quarantine in California after giving their mother cardiopulmonary resuscitation. For days after her death, he barely spoke.
And in the painful logistics of hygiene and quarantine, no funeral Mass has been said for her.
“Through this whole ordeal, we didn’t want her to get lost in the story,” said her son, Rembert Dionisio.
Janice Jenkins, a close friend of Ms. Dionisio’s, said that the days after her death had felt strange and disjointed, without the ceremonies that mark the passing of someone dear.
“This whole thing is just like a hole in the ground that they’re just throwing bodies into,” she said.
News of the pandemic is released in the form of data, illnesses and deaths compiled by countries and counties. But sparks of humanity glow here and there.
Merle Dry, 55, who died on Wednesday in a hospital in Tulsa, Okla., trimmed the hedges at Oral Roberts University into topiary birds and curlicues.
Gary Young, 66, a retired cabinet maker who died in Gilroy, Calif., on Tuesday, was a talker, sometimes lingering for half an hour with goodbyes as his family waited in the car.
His daughter told The San Jose Mercury News that she watched through a glass divider as he died in an isolation ward, and a medical team in blue protective gear turned off his heart monitor.
The list goes on. As of Sunday, 390 deaths had been tied to the coronavirus in the United States. The average age of those who had died was a few months over 77, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In the most vulnerable age brackets, men are nearly twice as likely to die as women.
Because people over 80 are far more likely to die, the deaths may ultimately be clustered in wealthier countries with higher life expectancies, according to a study published last week by demographers at Oxford University. The virus spreads faster in countries like Italy, where there is a high level of contact between the young and the old.
As the crisis has deepened, mourning rituals have fallen by the wayside.
In China, where more than 3,100 people have died, the national health commission has banned funerals. Patients die in intensive care units that do not allow visitors, and in the moments after a person’s death, health workers in hazmat suits enter a hospital room and take the body away.
In Italy, where funerals serve as a central pillar of community life, many of the dead are being buried by a lone priest, without mourners present. A local cemetery in the province of Bergamo, at the center of the outbreak, shut down this past week for the first time since World War II. The local newspaper, L’Eco di Bergamo, ran 10 pages of obituaries.
“These are people who die alone and who are buried alone,” the newspaper’s editor, Alberto Ceresoli, said.
Ms. Dionisio, 68, was fond of emeralds (the real kind), serial killer documentaries and the Home Shopping Network.
She had a passionate interest in food. Her brainstorming about lunch plans, her co-workers would joke, sometimes began at 9:30 in the morning. People not related to her called her “mom.” And she had such a close, tender relationship with her husband that when he had to work on Saturdays, she would drive an hour to work with him just so she could sit by his side.
“I don’t mind, I just want to be with him,” she said, once, when a co-worker asked her why.
It would be a mistake, however, to consider her a softy. When the family needed someone to negotiate a deal, they sent Ms. Dionisio.
Loretta Mendoza was born in Pasay City, in the Philippines, to parents who had fled by foot into the countryside to escape the Japanese occupation during World War II, at times eating roots to survive. It was an ordeal they rarely spoke of. In first grade, she was sent away to a convent school, to be educated by nuns.
Ms. Dionisio’s decision to travel to the Philippines in February was bound up in that history.
She and her husband, Rodrigo, a classmate from art school in the Philippines, left for the United States in the 1970s, and found work as commercial artists. They eventually settled in Orlando and raised two children, Rembert and Rowena.
But unfinished business from the Philippines nagged at Ms. Dionisio.
Her father, who had grown up in poverty, had spent years scrimping to buy land for a coconut plantation in the coastal region of Camarines Norte, promising his children it would support them in their old age.
This was dubious — the land’s value had dwindled over the years to a few thousand dollars, and the government had forced the family to surrender the property when they immigrated to the United States. But Ms. Dionisio, as a tribute to her deceased father, was intent on collecting compensation for the plot from the Department of Agrarian Reform. She and her sister had chipped away at this task for years, a wrestling match with provincial land bureaucrats who demanded a long list of notarized documents. This spring’s trip was the one in which Ms. Dionisio would collect the check.
News about the virus was already beginning to circulate, and an active volcano had spewed ash particles into the air. People tried to talk Ms. Dionisio, who had survived two bouts of cancer and suffered from diabetes, out of traveling. Her husband was against making the trip, and so was their daughter and her sister. Ms. Jenkins tried to dissuade her, as well, but understood it was useless.
“It goes back to her never wanting to give up,” Ms. Jenkins said. Ms. Dionisio’s daughter, Rowena Dionisio-Connelly, agreed: As a small girl, Ms. Dionisio would run after a neighbor who teased her brother, who was gay. “She would pull out a wooden spoon and chase the neighbor with it all the way to his doorstep,” she said.
So the couple set off for a month of travel, sending back dispatches from their journey. Increasingly, they were in the shadow of the virus.
“We’ve been wearing our masks to avoid the coronavirus,” Mr. Dionisio wrote in a text message to Ms. Jenkins, along with a photo of a carved bench nestled in tropical greenery. As the trip went on, he wrote, more and more of the tourist sights were being closed.
In early March, Ms. Dionisio called home to announce that she had achieved her goal: Zipped inside her suitcase was a check from the Filipino government, compensating the family for the loss of the coconut plantation, said her sister, Ms. Quijano. She turned toward home, a trip that would take the couple through Thailand and, briefly, South Korea.
There were, their children now realize, small signs that something was wrong.
At one point, Mr. Dionisio mentioned to Rowena that her mother had a fever. In a phone call to her sister, passing on the triumphant news about the check, Ms. Dionisio mentioned she wasn’t feeling well.
Then they were on their way to safety. Mr. Dionisio told his daughter that they had to wait, exhausted, for nine hours in the airport in Seoul, where there was no free seat for them.
That is something Rowena’s mind gets stuck on now.
When they landed in Los Angeles, her mother called from outside her sister-in-law’s house, saying she needed to rest after the 11-hour flight.
When Mr. Dionisio awoke from a deep, jet-lagged sleep hours later, he could not wake his wife. Panicked, he performed CPR and called an ambulance, which took her to a hospital with a weak pulse. Over the next hours, she experienced four cardiac arrests, her family said. She was declared dead at 2:57 a.m. on March 10.
After she tested positive for the virus on March 11, the family was occupied with crisis management, five or six hours a day of phone calls to public health officials, the crematory, hospital staff. Not only their father, but also their aunt and uncle, and another aunt and cousin, have been ordered to self-quarantine.
A memorial gathering, for now, is out of the question.
His cousin, Paula, is thinking of setting up a conference call so that a priest can say Mass.
The check for the coconut planation will be deposited, its balance given to Ms. Dionisio’s eldest sister.
Rowena has trouble speaking about her mother without breaking down.
Sarah Mervosh contributed reporting from New York, Amy Qin from Beijing and Jason Horowitz from Rome. Kitty Bennett contributed research from New York.