Max von Sydow, the tall, blond Swedish actor who cut a striking figure in American movies but was most identified with the signature work of a fellow Swede, the director Ingmar Bergman, died on Sunday. He was 90.
His wife, Catherine von Sydow, confirmed the death in an emailed statement. No cause was given. The Swedish newspaper Aftonbladet said he died in Provence, France.
In “The Seventh Seal” (1958), Mr. von Sydow played Antonius Block, a strapping medieval knight who returns from the Crusades to his plague-ravaged homeland only to encounter the stern, ghostly pale, black-hooded figure of Death, played by Bengt Ekerot. To stave off the inevitable, Block challenges Death to a game of chess, and in the long intervals between moves he searches the countryside for some shred of human goodness.
The two grim figures hunched over a chessboard in a desolate north-country landscape made for an unforgettable cinematic image, which has been both imitated and parodied. But sustained Hollywood stardom eluded Mr. von Sydow, despite his promising introduction to a wide audience in the lead role of George Stevens’s biblical epic “The Greatest Story Ever Told,” released in 1965.
Though that movie turned out to be less than a blockbuster, Mr. von Sydow’s performance as Jesus was good enough to bring a flood of offers his way. Still, he often found himself typecast as a stereotypical bad guy, thanks to his imposing physique, strong features and Scandinavian accent.
There were exceptions. In one of his most commercially successful films, “The Exorcist” (1973), an adaptation of William Peter Blatty’s best seller, Mr. von Sydow played a grimly resolute Jesuit priest summoned in the film’s last scenes to rescue a girl possessed by a demon.
But it was not until his later years that he could range widely in American movies. In “Hannah and Her Sisters” (1986) he was the possessive lover of the youngest sister, played by Barbara Hershey. In the science-fiction thriller “Minority Report” (2002) he was Tom Cruise’s coolly efficient boss, the director of a police force that benefits from telepathic powers to stop crimes before they are committed.
Mr. von Sydow earned his first Academy Award nomination in 1988 — some 40 years after his movie debut — for his work in “Pelle the Conqueror.” A Danish film directed by Bille August, it told the story of Lasse (Mr. von Sydow), a down-at-heels widowed Swedish laborer who brings his young son, Pelle, to Denmark at the turn of the century in search of a better life, only to encounter still more hard times.
There were other late-career high points, including “Hamsun” (1997), in which Mr. von Sydow submerged himself in the tangled personality of the Nobel Prize-winning Norwegian novelist Knut Hamsun, whose age and ego led him to become a tool of the Nazis during World War II.
Perhaps no role was as emotionally charged for him as the one he played in the French-language film “The Diving Bell and the Butterfly” (2007): a frail, elderly man whose emotional defenses collapse when he learns that his son’s paralytic stroke is irreversible. The role reminded him of his relationship with his own father and of all the unresolved issues between them, he told The New York Times Magazine in 2008.
“I had great difficulty getting rid of my emotion after making this movie,” he said.
Carl Adolf von Sydow was born on April 10, 1929, in Lund, in southern Sweden. His father was a university professor, his mother a schoolteacher. He attended the Cathedral School in Lund, where he learned English at an early age, and began his acting career in an amateur theater group he founded with friends.
He was said to have adopted the name Max from the star performer in a flea circus he saw while serving in the Swedish Quartermaster Corps.
After his military service, he studied at the Royal Dramatic Theater in Stockholm, from 1948 to 1951, and made his screen debut in “Only a Mother” (1949), Alf Sjoberg’s drama about a woman raising a brood of children while toiling in virtual serfdom in a class-riven Sweden.
In 1951, while still in Stockholm, Mr. von Sydow married Kerstin Olin, an actress, with whom he had two sons, Clas and Henrik. The marriage ended in divorce after 45 years.
Along with his sons and Catherine von Sydow, he is survived by her sons, Cedric and Yvan, whom he adopted, according to the Expressen newspaper.
Mr. von Sydow began his long association with Bergman in 1955, when Mr. von Sydow moved to the city of Malmo, in southern Sweden, and joined the Malmo Municipal Theater, with which Bergman was associated.
Over the next few years Mr. von Sydow appeared in many Bergman films, becoming an important member of what was essentially the director’s repertory company, whether in lesser roles (in “Wild Strawberries” and “Brink of Life”) or lead ones (in “The Magician,” “Through a Glass Darkly” and “The Virgin Spring”).
In “The Virgin Spring” (1960), he played a wealthy man whose daughter is raped and murdered by two local shepherds. When he discovers the identity of the killers, he methodically plans and executes a bloody revenge.
By the early 1960s Mr. von Sydow was getting offers from Hollywood and turning them down, saying he was happy enough with his work in Sweden. Then he was offered the role of Jesus in “The Greatest Story Ever Told,” and he went to Hollywood, embarking on an international career.
In 1966, in “Hawaii,” based on the novel by James A. Michener and directed by George Roy Hill, Mr. von Sydow gave a nuanced performance as a young minister who comes to 19th-century Hawaii with his wife (Julie Andrews) to seek converts among the native islanders.
Mr. von Sydow made his Broadway debut in 1977 as the star of “The Night of the Tribades,” a play by Per Olov Enquist about the Swedish writer August Strindberg. Despite a cast that also included Eileen Atkins and Bibi Andersson (another Bergman mainstay, who died last April), the production ran for less than two weeks.
For all his connection to the land of his birth and of Bergman, Sweden became distant to Mr. von Sydow. In the 1980s, though he had a summer house on an island in the Baltic Sea, he lived in Rome. His sons attended American universities.
Alex Marshall and Christina Anderson contributed reporting.