Russell Okung, an outspoken opponent of the N.F.L.’s proposed collective bargaining agreement, filed a complaint with the National Labor Relations Board just days before the players’ vote.
KEY BISCAYNE, Fla. — With just days to go before N.F.L. players vote on a 10-year labor agreement, one of the most influential members of its union’s executive committee has accused the staff of the N.F.L. Players Association of negotiating the proposed deal in bad faith.
Russell Okung, who has been vocal opponent of the proposed 10-year labor deal now before roughly 2,000 N.F.L. players, on Monday filed an unfair labor practice charge with the National Labor Relations Board, the independent federal agency tasked with guarding employee rights.
The three-page filing accuses the N.F.L.P.A. staff, including its executive director, DeMaurice Smith, of forcing a vote on the deal over the objections of its executive committee, in violation of the union’s constitution. Okung also accused the union’s leadership of trying to muzzle him from speaking out about the lack of transparency with the executive committee about the negotiations with N.F.L. owners, which began last year.
The owners said in February that if the players do not approve the proposed deal by the end of the league’s calendar year on March 18, then the coming season will be governed by the existing collective bargaining agreement until it expires next year.
The N.L.R.B. typically takes several weeks to investigate charges and decide if there is sufficient evidence to proceed with a formal complaint, which can lead to litigation, which can take several more months.
The 11-member executive committee, which is made up of current and former players, is responsible for negotiating labor agreements. The owners approved the new, 10-year deal last month, ahead of negotiations for what is expected to be lucrative broadcast rights with media companies. Many players have opposed the deal because it adds an additional regular-season game and increases the players’ portion of league revenue to only 48 percent, among other points of dispute.
Last month, the executive committee voted 6 to 5 not to recommend the deal. The measure then moved to a vote of the 32 team representatives on the board, before a general body vote. The board voted 17 to 14 with one abstention, below the two-thirds majority needed to recommend the deal. The union said that the simple majority was enough to send the proposal to the full membership, which has until 11:59 p.m. Saturday to vote in a newly extended deadline.
Okung said that the proposed collective bargaining agreement should not have been sent to the full membership to vote because the deal was rejected by a majority of the executive committee. The dispute hinges on the view of the proposal. If the proposal constitutes an amendment to the existing labor deal, as Okung believes, it must be approved by a two-thirds majority of the union’s 32 player representatives. In his view, the proposed C.B.A. lacks enough substantive change from the current labor agreement to be considered a new deal.
If the deal is considered a new agreement, as union staff contends, then only a simple majority of the board must approve it for full membership to vote. Okung said if that is the case, the deal should not have proceeded because the executive committee rejected it.
The filing comes a day before the 32 player representatives, who are meeting here at their annual convention, are expected to elect a new president, the highest ranking player in union leadership. The current president, Eric Winston, has held the position for six years, but is prohibited from running for re-election because he was not on an N.F.L. roster last season. Okung has announced his candidacy. Sam Acho, Michael Thomas and J.C. Tretter are also vying for the position. It is unclear if today’s filing with the N.L.R.B. means Okung will drop out.