The Pulitzer Prize winners Lynn Nottage and Annie Baker are among those who said they had been asked to give back advances because of the coronavirus pandemic.
In a sign that American theaters are desperately worried about the impact of the coronavirus pandemic, playwrights are reporting that they have been asked to return payments for productions that have been canceled or postponed.
Two Pulitzer Prize-winning playwrights, Lynn Nottage and Annie Baker, said on Twitter that they had been asked to refund money paid for forthcoming productions, and that they were resisting the requests. The two are among the nation’s most heralded living playwrights, and their work is regularly performed around the country.
The Dramatists Guild of America, a national trade association representing playwrights and composers, said it had heard the same from less well-known writers as well, and denounced the practice. The requests, the guild said, have been coming from nonprofit theaters, which depend on a combination of philanthropy and ticket sales to stay afloat; some of those theaters have also been asking ticketholders for canceled shows to consider donating the value of their tickets, rather than seeking refunds.
An advance is an amount of money paid by a theater to a writer for the right to produce a play. According to Ralph Sevush, the guild’s general counsel, advance payments generally range from $500 to $10,000, and are usually contractually guaranteed to a writer, even if the production never happens. “Every contract I’ve seen says options and advances are nonrefundable,” he said.
Writers, who are among the few theater industry workers who are not unionized, also then earn some money from a royalty — perhaps a percentage of the box office — when their show is produced by a nonprofit, and then sometimes earn money from licensing fees for future productions.
We are deeply committed to the art of theater and we pride ourselves on supporting everyone involved in bringing their work to our stages. In the moments after we learned that the County of Los Angeles had closed our theaters and that we would need to cancel performances for a still-undetermined amount of time, we felt it critical to take stock and figure out what the baseline of our financial commitments were in the coming weeks and months so we could attempt to chart a path forward that would be as fair as possible to all of our artists, staff and crew that have been impacted by this truly unprecedented moment. In that hurried cancellation process, we automatically reached out to Samuel French to assess all our financial commitments surrounding the upcoming production of ‘The Antipodes,’ which needed to be canceled before going into previews. As we moved beyond our initial steps and realized our mistake in asking the playwright to return a payment, we took actions to rescind the request.
Baker, who won the Pulitzer for “The Flick,” did not respond to a request for comment. Nottage, who has won two Pulitzer Prizes, for “Ruined” and “Sweat,” declined to identify the theater that asked her for a payback, other than to say that it is a “large regional” theater. “Everyone is in pain and I really do not want anyone suffering, including theaters,” she said. A spokesman for the League of Resident Theaters, which represents 75 major American regional theaters, did not respond to a request for comment.