U.S.|Justice Is Blind. What if She Also Has the Coronavirus?
As the coronavirus spreads across the country, the nation’s criminal justice system could become a casualty. Law enforcement officials say the public should be prepared for interruptions to two basic functions: quick responses to all 911 calls, and the right to a speedy trial.
With little experience in managing a pandemic of this magnitude, some courthouses and police departments have been scrambling in recent days to ensure they can avoid a breakdown in public safety if the outbreak significantly widens in the United States. But many are doing so in a piecemeal fashion, without significant guidance or widespread agreement on what to prioritize and how to keep operating.
“If we lose 40 percent of our force, what would police service look like?” asked Chris Davis, a deputy police chief in Portland, Ore.
Departments were making plans this week to quarantine their own officers if needed and deciding how to “triage” essential safety functions, even as judges began to clear their courtrooms, postpone trials and restrict people who might be at risk of infection.
At the federal courts in Maryland on Thursday morning, anyone who had been in New Rochelle, N.Y., or Washington State in recent weeks, as well as several countries where the disease has also spread widely, was barred from entering.
Some courthouses are automatically excused anyone from jury duty who is over 60 — those most vulnerable if they contract the disease — orwho is pregnant or has underlying health conditions.
Others, like the court system in Harris County, Texas, which includes Houston, are taking broader steps: On Wednesday, the county canceled all civil trials that require a jury for the rest of the month.
And on Thursday afternoon, in the most dramatic sign yet, the Supreme Court closed its building to the public.
Police officers and others who work in law enforcement and public safety face special challenges: They have extensive contact with the public, including people who call 911 for health emergencies, and are some of the least able to stay isolated if they are at risk of infecting others. A major outbreak could test the ability of law enforcement to maintain public order in ways never seen before.
The contingency plans at many police departments include reallocating staff, deploying trainees and retirees and curtailing some service calls. To focus on critical needs, officials say they might have to respond to fewer minor car accidents, pull resource officers out of schools or delay responding to nonviolent crimes such as shoplifting and vandalism. The Miami-Dade Police Department said on Thursday that it would not enforce eviction notices for the time being.
“You will see all-hands-on-deck moments, where you are canceling vacations and taking detectives out of burglary and property crimes, for example, and putting them back on the street,” said Robert Davis, a former police chief in San Jose, Calif., who is now a senior vice president at a prominent security risk management consulting firm.
In Sunnyvale, Calif., several police officers were performing chest compressions on a 72-year-old man last week when a relative shared disturbing news: The man had been on a cruise ship with people who may have contracted the coronavirus. They kept performing CPR, and the Police Department then quarantined the five officers and two firefighters who had interacted with him, sending them home while health officials ran tests.
Sunnyvale’s police chief, Phan S. Ngo, acknowledged that his response exceeded federal guidelines. But knowing the risks, he decided to be extra careful until results came back showing that the man, who did not survive, did not have the coronavirus.
Other departments have also had to take personnel off the streets. Three police officers and a quarter of the firefighters in Kirkland, Wash., had to be quarantined after an outbreak at a nursing home, and in San Jose, 10 percent of the city’s firefighters were isolated after one of them tested positive for the coronavirus, officials said on Thursday.
During the 2003 outbreak of SARS, another respiratory illness caused by a coronavirus, more than 300 police officers in Toronto were quarantined as the epidemic led to about 40 deaths in the city. The shortage of officers meant officials had to reprioritize how to respond to service calls.
Toronto later increased training and planning for disease outbreaks and created a plan to better track infected or exposed officers. It also stockpiled N95 respirator masks and antibacterial gel. The lessons prompted some police departments in the United States to update their plans for a pandemic.
One was the department in Overland Park, Kan., the state’s second-largest city. If a large number of police officers have to be quarantined during an outbreak, the city’s contingency plans include turning resource officers at the local high schools into patrol officers, and responding to fewer noninjury accidents and reports of retail theft.
Mr. Davis now runs his own business strategy and security services firm. While many cities now have a greater stock of hazmat equipment, he said, police officers and other emergency responders have often not been trained in their use.
And he worries about the ability of police officers to enforce orders calling for large-scale isolation. After the Boston Marathon bombing in 2013, the police had no authority to arrest anyone who went onto the streets after the governor declared a voluntary lockdown, he said.
At some courthouses, fears of the virus are running so high that all courtroom business is being called off. In New Hampshire on Thursday morning, all criminal and civil cases in the state Superior Courts were canceled for 30 days, and juries were ordered not to report.
While federal courthouses remain open in Seattle and Tacoma, Wash., trials and all other proceedings that require lawyers, jurors or anyone else to show up in a courtroom have been suspended. Given the dangers posed by the virus, “the ends of justice served by ordering” the postponements “outweigh the best interests of the public and any defendant’s right to a speedy trial,” wrote the federal judge who issued that order, Ricardo S. Martinez.
Some lawyers said that if too many people in high-risk categories were excused or unable to participate in jury duty, it could raise civil rights concerns about whether juries would be adequately representative. Judge Martinez cited that concern as one of his justifications for postponing trials.
Ron Wright, a former federal prosecutor who is now a law professor at Wake Forest University, said the longer that certain classes of people do not take part in jury duty, the greater the chance defendants would be able to successfully argue they did not receive a fair trial.
“If you can make the case that this is only going to last a little while and then it will go back to normal, I don’t see any constitutional claims surviving,” Mr. Wright said. “But over the long run, the doctrine is a lot more flexible in allowing” defendants to show that the composition of the jury pool may have discriminated against them.
At many police departments, the focus now is on figuring out where to draw replacements from if their own patrol officers get sick or have to be quarantined, and what sort of investigations and other activities to trim back in a crisis.
Officers in some departments are privately questioning whether their forces are prepared. One officer in San Francisco, who asked not to be named because he feared he would be punished, said little had been done to plan for what would happen if many officers were exposed to the coronavirus, despite nearly 100 confirmed cases in the Bay Area.
Hard-hit police departments could benefit from emergency agreements among cities and states that allow departments to share officers and resources in times of need, such as when hosting political conventions or recovering from a hurricane, said Art Acevedo, the police chief in Houston.
His department is finding places to potentially quarantine any officers who become infected so they do not have to isolate themselves at home and risk infecting relatives. If a large number of officers were exposed, the department could lengthen shifts from eight hours to 12 hours for those still on the job. When Hurricane Harvey struck the city in 2017, Houston police officers worked six straight days without going home.
Patricia Mazzei contributed reporting from Miami and Adam Liptak from Washington.