Sunday Review|Yes, I’m Turning 50. No, I’m Not Really Ready.
Yes, I’m Turning 50. No, I’m Not Really Ready.
 And other lessons for my next decade.
PARIS — I turn 50 today.
There, I’ve said it, which is more than some friends of mine can manage. One just calls it %) — shift 50 on the keyboard. Another describes her age entirely in fear emojis.
In search of a more cheerful approach, I got in touch with a man who threw a rollicking 50th-birthday party in December. He said that once the high from his festivities wore off, he fell into a depression and tested positive for a condition that can lead to gout.
I should probably worry about the coronavirus instead of turning 50, but it turns out that I can worry about both. It doesn’t help that, in French the word “quarantaine” can mean both being in your 40s and isolating sick patients (because boats from plague-stricken countries used to wait 40 days before unloading their goods).
You’re more settled. The 40s bring an explosion of new insights and the feeling that it’s now-or-never to change your life.  “In the 40s you’re still in chaos,” a friend in her 60s explained. In the 50s, you have revelation fatigue and just want to enjoy what you’ve learned.
Still, your self-esteem doesn’t flatline as easily. You feel like less of an impostor, in part because you’ve lived long enough to accumulate small accomplishments. In moments of near despair, I remind myself that a student devoted a section of her master’s thesis to the use of italics in the French translation of my book.
You can’t hide from time. I wasn’t bothered when my doctor prescribed hormonal gel or when a hairdresser offered to dye my eyebrows. But I can sum up the physical trauma of the 50s in two words: wrist wrinkles. I’ve also been grappling with an existential question: Since I’ve spent decades investing in expensive skin care “rituals,” why don’t I look any better than my 50-year-old husband, who has never spent a dime on any of it?
 When I was 45, a friend asked, “Do you feel like you have five years left before no one wants to sleep with you anymore?” He was wrong. At a party recently, I was chatted up by the host’s elderly father. 
You’re better at spotting trends, because you’ve witnessed so many of them. I can see that bilingual is the new gifted, listening is the new talking, and — for environmental reasons — thrifting is the new shopping (or as my teenage daughter said when I tried to buy new jeans, “Are you trying to murder your grandchildren?”). But age also brings fresh doubts: Am I rejecting a new idea because it’s wrong or because I’m old?
No one cares how old you feel. Age is only “just a number” in the way that money is just printed paper or that 1600 is just a score on the SATs. Humans invent stuff and give it meaning.
Some of the shock of aging dulls. Forty felt new-old. By 50 you’re used to being middle-aged, though you suspect the next decade will speed by even more quickly than the last one did. When I met a tour group of retirees recently, I suddenly realized that some weren’t much older than me. The real problem with 50 isn’t 50, it’s that 60 comes next.
Old problems are replaced by new ones. For my 40th birthday I threw an aspirational party and invited people I thought should be my friends but who barely knew me. They wondered why they were there. For my 50th, I vowed not to make the same mistake. I phoned a few actual friends to invite them over but refused to disclose how old I’d be. “Alexa, how old is Pamela Druckerman?” one shouted into his house. He had the answer in seconds.
I needn’t have said anything; I ended up canceling the party because of the pandemic. To be honest, I’m relieved. Maybe I don’t have to turn 50 after all.