Times features writer Taffy Brodesser-Akner learns just how nice Tom Hanks really is.
Hi, it’s Taffy Brodesser-Akner, a feature writer here at The Times. Michael Barbaro handed me his show today so that I could tell you a little bit about a profile I wrote a few months ago about Tom Hanks.
Just let me be OK.
I’m right here for you, Taffy.
When I interviewed him, I was not myself. I was really sad from missing my kids. I was sick. And though I tried to be a real professional in this interview, I fell apart a little bit. And Tom Hanks comforted me.
It’s good to cry. It’s good to talk.
And I realize now that, now that we know that he and his wife Rita Wilson are in quarantine in Australia with the coronavirus, I’m thinking a lot about contagion. But I’m also thinking a lot about him and other things that are contagious in our world, like kindness and consideration.
There’s so much panic and worry out there. I hope you listen to the story, which will be read to you by Samantha Desz. And I hope that hearing about my time with Tom will give you some comfort as well.
Here is a list of stories about Tom Hanks I’ve heard over the last few miserable months, as it appeared that politeness, and civility, and manners were facing an extinction event in this country.
Once, in 2008, when he was shooting “Angels & Demons” in Rome by the Pantheon, a bride and her father couldn’t approach the chapel because of the hullabaloo, so Hanks stopped filming to escort them to the altar.
Once in 2015, he stopped by a table of Girl Scout cookies and bought some boxes, donated an additional $20, then offered selfies to passers-by as an enticement to buy.
That same year, he found a young woman student ID in a park and used his charming Twitter feed, which is filled with found items, to get it back to her.
Once in 1997, before shooting “Saving Private Ryan” Steven Spielberg sent Hanks and other cast members out to do military training in the woods with a former Marine. After spending time in the rain, they all voted to quit the training, except for Hanks, who chose to obediently perform the job he was hired for and spurred the other men to stick with it as well.
These are the regular-nice acts of a person who holds the mantle of Everyman in our movie star culture.
But lately, they have signified more than simple good deeds. They’re something like the embodiment of a gold standard of menschiness, which is not just gone from the culture at large, but now plays like a parody of it.
There’s more. Spielberg once said about him, “If Norman Rockwell were alive today, he would paint a portrait of Tom.
Quick, who is your favorite president? Is it Abraham Lincoln? Well, you’ll never believe this, but Tom Hanks is related to him. The maiden name of Lincoln’s mother Nancy was Hanks. And yes, it’s the same Hanks.
Quick, who is your second favorite president? If it’s Barack Obama, here’s what he said about his true-life friend Hanks at the Kennedy Center Honors reception in 2014. People have said that Tom is Hollywood’s Everyman. That he’s this generation Jimmy Stewart or Gary Cooper. But he’s just Tom Hanks. And that’s enough. That’s more than enough. Two years later, Obama gave him the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
So Tom Hanks is as nice as you think he is and exactly what you hope him to be, which is great, unless you are someone trying to tell a good story about him, with elements like an arc and narrative tension. Saintly Actor Playing Saintly Public Television Childrens Host Mister Rogers Is Saintly is not a great story. But what am I supposed to do? He sat facing me, cheerful and focused and willing. Maybe this could just be a story that makes you feel better.
An hour later, he sat on a panel with the filmmakers and other actors, all of whom seemed giddy to put a Mister Rogers movie out into the world, relaying all the stories they’d heard about him. Tom Junod, who wrote the 1998 article in Esquire that the movie is based on, would talk about the way his interactions with Fred Rogers changed his life. 
In our first interview there in Toronto, Hanks sat back in a chair with his left ankle pressed against the top of his right patella. He was wearing clear plastic framed glasses and a beard for shooting “News of the World,” which is set in the aftermath of the Civil War. In our interviews he says, “oh dear” and “jeez” and, “for cryin’ out loud.” He is a history enthusiast. He is an information enthusiast. He is an enthusiasm enthusiast. At one point, I can’t remember why, he recited the Preamble to the Constitution.
In the panels after the premiere, some of the questions seemed to be based on the notion that Tom Hanks is so wonderful and Mister Rogersy that he just had to show up and read some lines since, hey, they’re both essentially the same: easygoing, nice men with graying hair.
This created as close to a crisis as the people who made this movie will probably have. It has been 24 years since Tom Hanks won an Oscar — two in a row for “Philadelphia” and “Forrest Gump.” It has been 18 years since he was even nominated, even though he has had an unrelenting leading man career that includes the last three devastating minutes of “Captain Phillips.” So while other movies this year opened to PR disasters around the offscreen behavior of their stars or directors or producers, it was this that the “Beautiful Day” team felt they had to get in front of: the notion that Tom Hanks wasn’t acting when he was playing Mister Rogers.
Performance aside, it’s not hard to see why the director Marielle Heller wanted him so badly for the role. He bears a somewhat passing physical resemblance to Rogers, which was a good start. He is most often cast in roles that need what Robert Zemeckis, who directed “Forrest Gump” among other Hanks movies, calls, “that classic everyman quality.” 
But Mister Rogers wasn’t an Everyman. It didn’t hurt that, whereas Mister Rogers was the closest thing my generation had to a living saint — even Mother Teresa got canceled, eventually — Tom Hanks was the closest thing we had to Mister Rogers — an uncomplicated-seeming, scandal-free man with a long career who never had to issue a public statement that included the phrase, “It was a different time.” In other words, having Tom Hanks cast as Mister Rogers removes a layer of suspension of disbelief that is the burden of a movie depicting a real-life person.
Hanks had read the script years before. But while Mister Rogers is the hero of the story, he’s not necessarily the protagonist of it. And so it felt like just another midlife crisis movie about a man dealing with a fraught relationship with his father. But by the time a revised script got to him, circumstances had changed. Back in 2015, Hanks read a story on female directors in The New York Times Magazine and had decided he wanted to make an effort to work with some of them. That week, at his granddaughter’s birthday party, he met Heller, who had been featured in the story. He went home and watched her debut, “The Diary of a Teenage Girl” and told her that he wanted to try to make something work. A few years later, now attached to “Beautiful Day,” she sent the script over to him. And here we are.
A week after our first interview, a member of Hanks’s team would call to plan our second interview. And she would casually bring up that he was actually acting as Mister Rogers. And that, yes, he was nice, but he was very much more than that. And please, maybe I should not tell another story in which Tom Hanks is simply depicted as nice. And then she told me a story about a time she was with him en route to the airport and was feeling a little nauseous in the car. She was trying to make sure he didn’t notice. But he did. And he changed seats with her so that she could sit the way she needed to in order to feel better. I then told her the story of the time I interviewed an actor in a hotel lobby, where I was so sick that a member of the hotel staff came over and asked if I needed painkillers or a doctor. And the actor not only hadn’t noticed, but continued to not notice even after this happened. What she was saying was that playing any role successfully takes talent and work. What she was also saying is that being nice is a choice.
In “Can You Say...Hero?,” the magazine article that “A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood” is based on, the writer Tom Junod follows Fred Rogers as he interacts with children and commits acts of kindness and empathy that are simple yet totally astounding. But the protagonist of “Beautiful Day” is not named Tom Junod. He’s named Lloyd Vogel. In the movie, Lloyd (Matthew Rhys) is an Esquire writer with a bad reputation whose broken relationships with his father and his new son have led to anger and despair. His editor assigns him a short piece on Mister Rogers that changes his life. The movie veers into science fiction when it features a female editor-in-chief and a ‘90s era Esquire staff filled with people of color.
In the last part of the article, Junod prays with Fred Rogers at Rogers’s behest. And he writes that his “heart felt like a spike, and then, in that room, it opened and felt like an umbrella” — that just being around him was enough to make him see the world differently, and then, to be loved by him, was enough to make him a completely different kind of journalist and a completely different kind of person.
But neither the movie nor the magazine article tell the real backstory of the meeting. Junod, who is a friend of mine, profiled Fred Rogers after writing a story in 1997 in which he, in effect, outed Kevin Spacey, who only recently revealed that he is gay after a #MeToo scandal. The story briefly made Junod something of a pariah in Hollywood and flung him into soul searching about the kind of writer he wanted to be. He’d had a ruthlessness to him, he told me in Toronto. He didn’t want to be ruthless anymore.
It was then that he met Mister Rogers, who prayed for him and his family every day, and who kept a file on Junod, which the screenwriters Micah Fitzerman-Blue and Noah Harpster found in Rogers’s archives in Pittsburgh. In that file, he laid out four pillars of journalism that he hoped Junod would stick to: 1. Journalists are human beings not stenographers, human beings not automatons. 2. Point out injustice when you have to. 3. Point out beauty when you can. 4. Be aware of celebrating the wonders of creation.
In our interviews he doesn’t evade any questions, but he doesn’t spill either. He doesn’t appear to have a need to be known by his public. But he also doesn’t have the same strains of contempt for journalists that I’ve seen from other movie stars. Maybe that’s because he’s never been truly screwed by one. But just as likely, it’s because he believes in the truth. “The best articles I’ve ever read that have come out have been an accurate reflection of the time I spent with that journalist,” he said.
That night in my hotel room, I watched the Kennedy Center Honors from 2014. There’s a moment when the a cappella group Pentatonix sings, “That Thing You Do!” the title track from the movie Hanks directed and starred in about a boy band that is filled with a kind of wholesome, debonair, charming and witty characters that he tends to favor. At the ceremony, as the group sings, Hanks sits in the balcony with Wilson right behind him, waving his head in joyous, uncomplicated beat. For maybe two seconds, a second camera goes to the grown Hanks children in the audience, each of them singing along and bobbing their heads too. Colin is an actor and owns a handkerchief company called, uh, Hanks Kerchiefs. Elizabeth is a writer. Chester has been chasing a rap career (with attendant rap controversy) and now plays a rapper on “Empire.” And Truman is working on film sets and, his father tells me, has a degree in mathematics from Stanford. I watched those two seconds at the Kennedy Center maybe 10 or 12 times.
Tom Hanks got his first typewriter when he was 19. He told me this at our second meeting, which was in Santa Fe where he’s shooting “News of the World.” It was a Sunday, and he’d just come from seeing “Ad Astra” with his youngest son, Truman.
He’d altered his schedule that day for me. Santa Fe has an elevation of 7,200 feet, and I’d woken up breathless and had gone to an urgent care center for oxygen that morning. So after they’d gone to an earlier movie than they had planned, he met me in a conference room at a hotel ahead of schedule so I could leave town earlier than I’d planned. He walked in wearing a big straw hat and the same beard he’d had in Canada. Once a person I was interviewing showed up four hours late so that our interview began at 11 p.m.
Hanks grew up in Northern California in the era of the Zodiac Killer and Patty Hearst and the Black Panthers and the People’s Park riots. He was five when his parents divorced. And he and his older brother and sister went to live with his father, while another brother lived with their mother. Both parents were in rough shape, just trying to survive. His father worked in a variety of small restaurants, remarrying again and again and moving every few months.
Everyone I spoke with about him told a story about notes they received from one of his typewriters. Sally Field recently received a note from Hanks that conveyed how moved he was by her 2013 memoir, “In Pieces.” She was kicking herself, because she has yet to convey to him how much she enjoyed his book of short stories, “Uncommon Type,” which she had read a year earlier. She also told me about the weekly newsletter he wrote on a laptop on the set of “Forrest Gump” about happenings among the cast and crew. A weekly newsletter.
He loves typewriters because “they’re brilliant combinations of art and engineering. But art, engineering, and purpose,” he said. “Every machine is as individual as a set of fingerprints. So every time you type something on a typewriter, it’s a one-of-a-kind work of art.” He even created a sweet little app called Hanx Writer that allows you to type and send a message rendered in typewriter style.
I told him then that I’d watched his Kennedy Center Honors Ceremony probably more times than is appropriate. His older children have weathered divorce and uncertainty. His younger sons have weathered a life of wealth and privilege. And I wanted to know how you could be a transient person trying to make a name for yourself in the world and also end up with children that sing along to your songs with great affection when you’re done raising them.
My children are getting older, the oldest about to turn 12, I told him. And I felt like lately everything I said was misunderstood. Everything was seen as criticism or nagging. And suddenly, I could clearly see how a child who used to want to lie in bed with you and watch movies on his birthday could drift towards someone who could barely look at you. Someone who didn’t understand that all your insistence was just about being a good person in the world, and the myriad ways to do that, and the even more myriad ways you could stumble upon the opposite. This coupled with an awareness that being good wasn’t so simple anymore, and that I ran the risk of my children seeing behind the nagging and criticism, down to my basic daily deeds, and finding that I wasn’t so good in the world — that, at best, I was neutral.
Not that all of his characters are saints. He played an assassin in “Road to Perdition” and a terrible villain as one of the several characters he played in “Cloud Atlas.” “But that was under an awful lot of makeup,” he said. But he can’t play a villain who wants to destroy for no reason. Because he can’t bring himself to understand what that motivation might be. That’s one of the reasons his production company, Playtone, options and develops so much non-fiction material. It’s why he ends up playing so many real people. Real people have real motivations. They are complicated in realistic ways.
But it’s more than that. He favors stories of extraordinary acts that are based on reality — proof that extraordinary things exist, that they don’t just have to be imagined. It’s a movie with optimism. It’s a role where you get to wear a uniform and a hat. It’s a debonair man with good values who has the perfect comeback. It’s war heroes and the promise that science will make us better and how history should be memorized. It’s a belief in humankind, that we can’t all be that bad.
I laughed out loud. He looked at me again and waited. It’s just all been so dark lately, I told him. It feels like the world has been engulfed in a chronic-seeming grimness. And it was beginning to feel like it was no longer an aberration but the new reality. I told him I remembered that in 2015 we’d make jokes on social media about what a cursed year it was. But it got worse and so on, until now, here we are, a journalist crying in a conference room in Santa Fe.
“It’s completely relative,” he said, and if you had gone back not very far, this level of vitriol, and excitement, and worry was just as huge back in the Monica Lewinsky era.  And then along comes something equally big and insane.
Then he told me about a trip he and Truman took on the Los Angeles light rail. So many people complain about public transportation. And most people as recognizable as Hanks wouldn’t dream of using it. But while he was on the train, he couldn’t think of a thing you’d complain about. He couldn’t stop marveling about how well it worked, what a miracle it was. Meaning: things were always this bad. But they were also always this good.
Lately, he’s been giving away his typewriters. Now that he’s had a home all these years and stability, and a wife who sings to him and children who bring his three granddaughters to visit him regularly, he wants to get a little leaner on stuff again. He’s down to about 120. One day, he’ll just have one. The one he’ll keep is the Olivetti Lettera 22, the same model they keep at MoMA. I told him I make too many mistakes to work on a typewriter. But Tom Hanks is more optimistic than I am. It was this optimism I’d been hoping to capture when I took on this story.
It was this optimism I was hoping to marinate in, so that I’d feel a little better about the world for a couple of hours a day for a few weeks. I’d been depressed lately. And the amount of time you have to spend researching a profile — reading the old articles, rewatching the movies — would help me avoid any kind of subversiveness. In exchange, my story would be boring. It’s OK, I told him. Some stories are boring.
Which is not much by way of darkness. And all it really proves is that Tom Hanks is even nicer than I thought: He wants to save my story from being boring.
Which I could do on my own. I could make a convincing argument that performance art as a nice person — from your public actions to your choice of roles as altruistic, heroic types — is a way to hide from expanding your range. I could ask questions about that weird one-sided feud with Henry Winkler, who was fired from directing “Turner and Hooch” after 13 days and who recently told Andy Cohen that he “got along great — great — with that dog.” I could call old assistants to try to find out what he was really like back then, since the most recent ones I spoke with were warmly talking about how wonderful he is.
I’m not sure where we got the concept of an Everyman, but Tom Hanks isn’t really it. I don’t know people with hundreds of typewriters. He is the Platonic ideal of a man, a projection of what we wish we were — or more worrisome, a theory of what we actually are. And, well, have you read the other pages of this newspaper? I am too old for Mister Rogers.
My children are too old for Mister Rogers too. So instead, I showed them “Splash,” then “Forrest Gump,” then “Big,” then “A League of Their Own.” I showed them “That Thing You Do!” and parts of “Cast Away.” I told them about the man who heard I wasn’t feeling well and adjusted his schedule for me. I told them that it doesn’t matter why you do nice things. All that matters is that you do them. And one day, something changed. I had just finished “Toy Story 4,” and suddenly all my algorithms were recommending openhearted movies with heroes and good values, and I realized that I had begun to feel a little better. My heart was never a spike; it was always an umbrella. But sometimes it would invert against a storm. That day, I recalibrated, and suddenly my umbrella was upright, once again able to shield me from the weather. It was enough. It was more than enough. This is an accurate reflection of the time Tom Hanks spent with a journalist.
This was recorded by Audm. Audm is an app you can download to listen to lots of audio stories from publishers such as The New York Times.
— you do need to tell me something. You’d be surprised how often people have that dynamic.
Well, if you have anything — if you have any other questions, just you know, just let me know.
Taffy Brodesser-Akner, a magazine writer at The New York Times.
Taffy Brodesser-Akner contributed reporting.
