The authorities said reports of several shootings preceded a fatal shooting at a gas station in Springfield, Mo., on Sunday night.
A shooting spree that spanned nearly five miles across a Missouri city ended with a car crash and a rampage at a gas station on Sunday night, leaving five people dead, including a police officer and the attacker, the authorities said.
The police in Springfield, Mo., said Monday that they first received a call about a shooting at 11:24 p.m. Sunday, in the southeast area of the city, about 220 miles southwest of St. Louis.
While officers were responding, more reports followed about shootings at other locations, and at about 11:43 p.m., a call came in about an incident at a Kum & Go gas station and convenience store on East Chestnut Expressway, near Highway 65.
“In essence, we had a roving active shooter moving from the South Side of the city up,” Chief Paul Williams of the Springfield Police Department said at a news conference on Monday. Chief Williams said later in an email that there was no discernible motive and that the investigation was ongoing.
Callers told the police that a car had crashed at the scene and that someone with a gun had entered the store and started shooting the people inside.
When the first two police officers arrived at the scene, they were immediately fired on from inside the store, the police said. Both officers, Christopher Walsh and Josiah Overton, were injured.
Other responding officers removed Officers Walsh and Overton from the scene, and when the police made their way into the store, they found the attacker dead from a self-inflicted gunshot wound, Chief Williams said.
They also found three other people shot dead. The police identified them as Troy D. Rapp, 57, an employee of Kum & Go; Shannon R. Perkins, 46, an employee of the WCA Waste Corporation; and Matthew J. Hicks-Morris, 22, a customer. A fourth person was injured and in critical condition at Mercy Hospital on Monday afternoon, the police said in a statement.
Officer Walsh died at a hospital. Officer Overton was treated for an injury that was not life-threatening, and remained in the hospital on Monday afternoon, the police said.
The police identified the suspect as Joaquin Roman, 31. Jasmine Bailey, a spokeswoman for the Springfield Police Department, said that the police did not yet know what might have motivated the gunman, but that they believed the attacker was shooting at different locations while heading north toward the gas station.
“We are still actively investigating multiple crime scenes and dealing with grieving over the loss of one of our own,” Chief Williams said.
Mr. Roman pleaded guilty to three traffic violations in 2019 and was charged with a fourth traffic violation in February, according to court records.
Mr. Rapp’s daughter Bailey Rapp wrote in a post on Facebook on Monday that she was devastated. Mr. Rapp had been working at the Kum & Go for only about a month, she said. “I miss you more than words can explain,” she wrote.
Officer Overton, 25, has been with the Springfield Police Department for two years.
Officer Walsh, 32, had served with the department since 2016 and was assigned as a patrol officer. He was a Springfield native and an Army veteran, and had been active with the Army Reserves for 10 years, the department said.
The shooting took place in a neighborhood with a mix of businesses, including a strip mall, a container store, fast-food restaurants and some residences to the south.
An employee at Hair Design, a shop near the scene of the shooting, said police were still outside the Kum & Go on Monday afternoon and that the area had been cordoned off. “I’ve never heard of anything like that before,” said the employee, who declined to give her name. She said she generally feels safe working in the area.
Springfield, a city of about 168,000 people in Greene County, was, like most of the country on Monday, bracing for the coronavirus outbreak. The county had three reported cases as of Monday, and city leaders held an emergency meeting around midday to discuss measures recommended by the Centers for the Disease Control and Prevention.
