On a swing through Michigan, I could see that the candidate wasn’t connecting with black voters.
GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. — Senator Bernie Sanders has a problem winning over black voters.
It was clear in 2016, when he stumbled on issues of race and faced protests from Black Lives Matter activists.
It was clear after the Super Tuesday contests last week, when Joe Biden cruised to victory on the strength of his decisive margins among black voters in Virginia, North Carolina and other states.
And as the race moves to Michigan, Florida, Illinois and other delegate-rich, diverse states, it’s becoming even clearer that Mr. Sanders’s failure to win significant support with black voters could end up dooming his second primary bid.
As I traveled with the Sanders campaign across Michigan this past weekend, he drew huge crowds, as he often does. But they were overwhelmingly white.
Those demographics were stark in a state where black voters are expected to make up nearly a quarter of the Democratic primary electorate on Tuesday.
Clearly, the Sanders campaign wants to expand beyond its base. At seven rallies over three days, it showcased a diverse array of supporters, including Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York and the celebrity academic Cornel West.
In Grand Rapids, Mr. Sanders accepted the endorsement of a man he called “one of the true heroes of modern America,” the Rev. Jesse Jackson. Like Mr. Sanders hopes to do, Mr. Jackson used a surprise victory in Michigan to buoy his 1988 presidential bid.
Yet, at a town-hall meeting in Flint, billed as an opportunity for Mr. Sanders to make a case directly to black voters, the Vermont senator refused to discuss issues of particular concern to black Americans. Instead, before yet another overwhelmingly white audience, he ceded the stage to African-American surrogates who delivered a series of searing attacks on Mr. Biden’s record.
His campaign said Mr. Sanders had scrapped his speech in order to “lift up” the voices of the black panelists.
Presidents, of course, have to talk about all kinds of issues affecting all kinds of people — whether they have direct experience with them or not. No president, for example, has ever given birth.
Mr. Sanders has shown little hesitation in expressing his opinions on issues impacting Latinos, women or L.G.B.T.Q. Americans. (And he has found success with Latino voters, who make up just a sliver of the Michigan electorate.) Yet, while Mr. Sanders rattles off policy positions on issues like criminal justice, housing and education, he seems less comfortable driving a message around racial justice and the lived experiences of African-Americans.
Part of the problem Mr. Sanders may face is fundamental: His campaign is deeply rooted in his democratic socialism, focused heavily on class as the root of all the country’s ills. Racial discrimination is a byproduct of economic inequality, rather than the cause, in Mr. Sanders’s telling.
From Flint to Ann Arbor, Mr. Sanders cast his campaign as a unifying cause for working-class Americans, focused heavily on economic issues like the cost of college, unions, health care and low wages. He talks far less and in far less explicit terms about racial injustice.
“Our campaign is the campaign of the working class, by the working class and for the working class,” he told voters in Dearborn on Saturday morning.
Of course, race and economics are intertwined. But as two political scientists wrote in Politico Magazine last week, “race is the principal identity that resonates with the black community.” When it comes to voting, racial identity has traditionally been a far more reliable predictor of political behavior among black voters.
In Flint, Mr. Sanders left discussion of those topics largely to his supporters. The next morning, Mr. Jackson delivered a message focused on racial injustice, even calling for Mr. Sanders to put a black woman on the ticket.
As I watched Mr. Jackson address thousands gathered in downtown Grand Rapids, I couldn’t help but think about what a fascinating political moment this must be for him. His dream of a “rainbow coalition” has been realized in today’s Democratic Party. As the Republican base grows ever whiter, Democrats have turned their diversity into their calling card.
But with that more diverse base comes a desire not to be taken for granted. And those voters want to hear from their candidate, not just his rainbow coalition of supporters.
Monday mailbag: Where do those Warren delegates go?
Come convention time, if there are only two men standing, and it’s a close race, what happens to the votes of the delegates that other candidates won in the various primaries?
Over the past week or so, the Democratic presidential race has shrunk. Drastically.
By the current count, Mr. Biden leads the delegate race, with 664 delegates out of the 1,991 needed to win the nomination. Mr. Sanders is second, with 573 delegates. And then, there are 158 delegates that were picked up in early contests by Senators Elizabeth Warren and Amy Klobuchar and former Mayors Michael Bloomberg and Pete Buttigieg.
What happens to those delegates?
OK, bear with me, things are about to get technical.
The first thing to understand about the delegates is that they are actual humans who will attend the party convention in July and cast a vote. In the majority of states, those people have not yet been elected by the party. That’s a process that typically happens at state party conventions well after the initial primaries or caucuses.
When that happens, the delegates that are allocated based on statewide results — about 25 percent of the total — will just be reallocated to candidates still remaining in the race.
The remaining 75 percent, which are allocated based on congressional district results, are technically still the property of the candidate who won them. But the actual delegates — meaning the humans — are not legally bound, so they’re likely to just vote for someone still in the race, probably the person whom their original candidate endorsed. That process typically happens with some behind-the-scenes coordination between the two campaigns (the one still operating and the one that ended).
This reshuffling is a standard process in Democratic presidential politics and is part of the reason Democrats haven’t had a contested convention in decades. In 2016, some states unanimously announced that they backed Hillary Clinton at the party convention, even though she didn’t win all the delegates from those states. Then, like now, the delegates coalesced behind the winner.
Sign of the times, sure. But this chart is really useful.
