Attendees of the bash for Kimberly Guilfoyle at the president’s private club chipped in — including financial backers of the Trump re-election campaign.
WASHINGTON — It was a lavish birthday party for Donald Trump Jr.’s girlfriend, Kimberly Guilfoyle. The setting was Mar-a-Lago, President Trump’s private club in Palm Beach, Fla. The guest list included dozens of Trump family members and friends.
But when it came to picking up the tab, hands went out to other attendees. Among them were at least four whose families are financial supporters of the president’s re-election campaign, for which Ms. Guilfoyle helps lead the fund-raising. They ended up pitching in tens of thousands of dollars, passed along to Mar-a-Lago, to help pay for what two people familiar with the planning said was a $50,000 celebration of Ms. Guilfoyle’s 51st birthday.
At the very least, he said, the party created the appearance of supporters of the president currying favor with his family by steering money into his private business, which he continues to profit from.
“This may not be illegal, but it is incredibly unethical,” he said.
Even some in Mr. Trump’s orbit worried that it would look unsavory to accept money from political donors for the celebration at a time when coronavirus fears were spreading, according to people familiar with the concerns.
The party was organized with the assistance of Caroline Wren, a veteran Republican fund-raiser who sent out invitations and gave a speech at the party thanking attendees who chipped in, according to people familiar with the planning.
Ms. Wren is a finance consultant to an arm of Mr. Trump’s re-election apparatus called Trump Victory, for which Ms. Guilfoyle is the chairwoman of the finance committee. Trump Victory is a joint fund-raising committee formed by the Trump campaign and the Republican National Committee, and is Mr. Trump’s primary means of raising six-figure campaign donations.
The committee was hosting major donors at a spring retreat in Palm Beach the same weekend as the party, drawing many of Mr. Trump’s top financial backers to the area for events, including some at Mar-a-Lago. Ms. Guilfoyle’s birthday party became a coveted ticket for donors.
Michael Ahrens, a spokesman for the R.N.C., said that the party committee and Trump Victory “were not involved in the organization or financing” of Ms. Guilfoyle’s party.
The White House declined to comment on the party, and why the president did not pay for it himself.
The chairwoman of the Republican National Committee, Ronna McDaniel, who spent time at Mar-a-Lago during the retreat but did not attend the birthday party, fell ill after the weekend, as did a fund-raiser who works with Ms. Guilfoyle. Both are awaiting results of tests for the coronavirus.
The birthday party had the feel of a Trump campaign event, according to attendees. The invitees included a panoply of administration officials, campaign figures, political allies and major donors to Trump Victory, many of them both personal and professional friends to Ms. Guilfoyle.
And Donald Trump Jr. reportedly joked that Ms. Guilfoyle would be soliciting contributions for his father’s re-election from party attendees.
The money given to pay for the party went to Mar-a-Lago, though it is unclear if each donor individually paid the club, or if the money was pooled and paid to the club by a member, who could put the expenses on an account. Donald Trump Jr. and another attendee, John W. Giordano, a lawyer and Republican donor, are members of the club. People involved in the planning said the attendees were not solicited as part of an organized fund-raising effort.
But one of the donors, Madhavan Padmakumar, an information technology executive from New York, said he had never met Ms. Guilfoyle. Mr. Padmakumar traveled to Palm Beach as part of a delegation of Indian-Americans attending the Republican Party donor retreat.
He also said he donated to Mr. Trump’s campaign at the retreat.
Others who contributed funds for the party were longer-term supporters of Mr. Trump’s campaign.
They included the New York supermarket billionaire John A. Catsimatidis, who chipped in $10,000, according to people familiar with the arrangement. His daughter Andrea Catsimatidis, a longtime friend of Ms. Guilfoyle’s, attended the party.
In a statement, Mr. Catsimatidis described his donation as strictly motivated by a two-decade friendship with Ms. Guilfoyle. “I am always happy to support my friends,” he said.
Another contributor to the festivities was Catharine P. O’Neill, whose father is a major Trump donor. She worked as a staff assistant in the State Department after Mr. Trump took office and became a fixture in Washington’s pro-Trump social scene.
Also helping to finance the celebration was Mr. Giordano, who had advised Mr. Trump’s campaign and transition and had been rumored to be in contention for a position in his administration as a United States attorney. He is a partner in the government-affairs division of Archer, a Philadelphia-area law firm with a substantial lobbying business.
The key question in determining whether the arrangement crossed legal lines, said Mr. Fischer of the Campaign Legal Center, could be whether the attendees who contributed to the party would have done so even if Mr. Trump were not the president running for re-election.
He said that if the donors gave only because Mr. Trump is a candidate, then “there could be an argument that they made contributions to Trump’s campaign,” which would need to be reported to the Federal Election Commission.
Another attendee who is friendly with Ms. Guilfoyle asked the head of a Miami marketing and advertising agency to provide liquor for an after-party. The marketing executive turned to a Florida tequila company, Don Sueños, which sent over two cases for Ms. Guilfoyle’s party.
Not all the attendees were asked to contribute, said Doug Deason, a Dallas businessman and Trump donor. Mr. Deason was invited by Ms. Guilfoyle after they chatted at the Trump International Hotel in Washington a week earlier.
“I was not asked to sponsor her birthday party and I don’t know of anyone who was,” Mr. Deason said in a text message.
A video shows partygoers forming a “Trump Train” conga line to the song “Rhythm Is Gonna Get You,” by Gloria Estefan.
Kenneth P. Vogel reported from Washington, and Steve Eder and Nicholas Confessore from New York. Maggie Haberman contributed reporting from New York. Susan Beachy contributed research.