Actresses and models have sued a Brooklyn agent, saying he pressured them into sex. A film depicting one encounter opens online this week.
A young actress named Pearl arrives at an apartment in Brooklyn to meet her talent agent for a screen test. But there’s been a change in plans, the agent gently informs her: To make the footage really pop, Pearl will strip nude and have sex with him on camera.
But the film is based on an actress’s description of an encounter with an actual agent, and off screen, recent lawsuits filed by models describe similar behavior by the same man, a little-known player in the entertainment industry’s backwaters. He is 41, lives in Brooklyn, and he is, as they say, having a moment.
His name is Brhonson Lexier St. Surin and, after at least 10 years of dwelling on the fringes of the film and modeling industries, he finds himself in separate simultaneous spotlights — a movie that draws attention to two lawsuits that in turn seem to closely track the plot of the movie.
The accusations are also a reminder that young women with ambition in the entertainment industry are far more likely to encounter a little-known agent who meets clients at a Starbucks in Chelsea than a cigar-chomping mogul who can make or break Hollywood careers.
And these incidents were not from a bygone era — the women said their encounters with Mr. St. Surin took place as recently as 2017.
Mr. St. Surin, leaving a court hearing in Brooklyn on March 3, declined to discuss the case. “I can’t comment on the allegations,” he said. He is representing himself in court and said his filings would speak for him. He did not respond to follow-up requests for comment.
The film was scheduled to open in an East Village theater before the coronavirus outbreak closed the city’s cinemas. Instead, “Tape” will screen online at 7 p.m. on Thursday, followed by screenings at the same time every evening through April 9. Each screening will be followed by an online panel discussion; the creators hope to replicate the experience of being together in a theater.
“Tape” is based on the account of an actress, Annarosa Mudd, who works with Ms. Kampmeier and helped turn her story into the film. She also joined the cast — not to play the actress, but to portray a former victim-turned-avenger who is stalking the agent.
Ms. Mudd, 35, said in an interview that she met Mr. St. Surin in 2010 through Casting Networks, a site for actors seeking exposure. “I am eager to learn and to develop myself into a professional,” she wrote in an email exchange with the man who went by “Lex” that she shared with The New York Times.
She agreed. The two met at an apartment in Downtown Brooklyn in March 2010. Together, they acted from a script about a husband and wife facing hard times.
The scene included a kiss that was “like acting,” Ms. Mudd said, but then Mr. St. Surin told her she needed to appear nude in another scene. Then came another twist: “At some point it was revealed that we were going to have actual sex on camera,” she said.
In the film, as in Ms. Mudd’s account of the actual incident, the actress agreed. Mr. St. Surin asked Ms. Mudd to state, on camera, that she consented to the scene, and that she was not under the influence of alcohol or drugs, she said.
Ms. Mudd took her next acting opportunity quickly, a small Shakespeare production, followed by others. She said she told a friend about the incident; that friend confirmed this week that she remembered Ms. Mudd’s account clearly. Then, Ms. Mudd said she put aside her memories for years, until she revealed them to Ms. Kampmeier in 2016.
Only after the filming of “Tape” was completed did Ms. Mudd learn of two lawsuits naming Mr. St. Surin. One was filed last year, but was withdrawn and replaced with a new version this month, when Mr. St. Surin was served with a copy in a Brooklyn courtroom.
A second lawsuit has four anonymous plaintiffs, all models suing for breach of contract and emotional abuse. Both were brought by the same lawyer, Steven R. Fairchild.
One model, Anne Therese Gennari, 28, one of the four anonymous plaintiffs who agreed to be quoted by name, said she auditioned for a spot in the project in a studio near Astor Place. She was rejected, she said, but was called back by Mr. St. Surin. She arrived to find another model already there.
Mr. St. Surin instructed the women to kiss on camera, which “lasted a long time and made them feel awkward and uncomfortable,” the lawsuit states.
Another plaintiff, Nikkol Irene Wade of Virginia, alleged in an interview and in the lawsuit that she, too, left after Mr. St. Surin said her shoot would include sex.
A third, who lives in Michigan, said in an interview and alleged in the lawsuit — where she is referred to as Plaintiff 4 — that she traveled to New York in November 2017 for a photo shoot with Mr. Surin.
 He used “professional equipment” and his cellphone to record the incident, the lawsuit states.
She said she flew home the next day, shortly before a family gathering for Thanksgiving and new developments in the #MeToo cases.
Ms. Mudd said she hopes “Tape” helps women like the model in Michigan living with her secret.
