The “America’s Got Talent” winner and actress in “Stargirl” can’t live without Audrey Hepburn, ramen and flea markets.
In 2016, Grace VanderWaal — a singing, songwriting, ukulele-strumming 12-year-old — auditioned for “America’s Got Talent,” and something like magic occurred. Howie Mandel called her “a living, beautiful, walking miracle” and Simon Cowell predicted she’d be the next Taylor Swift. VanderWaal went on to win Season 11.
Now she’s making her acting debut in “Stargirl,” streaming on Disney Plus. Based on Jerry Spinelli’s young adult novel, the movie follows a teenage nonconformist with a ukulele in tow who arrives at a high school in small-town Arizona. VanderWaal even wrote a single, “Today and Tomorrow,” for it.
Offscreen, VanderWaal, now 16, is recording a follow-up to her 2019 EP, “Letters, Vol. 1.” Calling from Los Angeles, she gushed about the 10 things she can’t live without. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
This so is not my type of movie. I don’t know what happened. Was it God? Was it destiny? All I know is that I watched the movie, and the next night I watched it again, and the next night I watched it again, and I’m still watching it to this day. I can’t get enough of it. Even talking about it right now makes me want to watch again. I have an addiction.
This is one of my favorite things in the world. Just being able to feel like you’re cooking — but you’re not really cooking — so it feels really good. This could mean making pasta, because it’s not like you’re making pasta. You’re just throwing hard pasta in a boiling-water thing.
This ramen is so good. I went to Japan when I was younger and I ate real ramen there, and I became addicted to it. This is prepackaged ramen, except it’s so spicy and amazing, and the noodles — oof! — masterpiece. I give it to people all the time, and they’re always so impressed, and I hide the package.
I study French close to every day. I love the language. I’ve been studying it since the sixth grade, but I’m definitely not at the level that I should be. This next coming year is my junior year in high school, and it’s a really strong goal of mine to become semi-fluent.
Someone actually sent me the book while I was on “America’s Got Talent.” I relate to her style and her ukulele, but it’s hard for me to relate to her personality.
And so then — sorry, it’s a really long story — I went to my friend Ido [Zmishlany], because we were in a producing session, and I start playing “Good Habits.” And then we start listening to the angsty indie music, and the two puzzle pieces clicked in my mind.  I’m like, “How did I not see this before?” The angsty indie singer is the 6-year-old! She’s grown up now. And I’m so proud of her, because that music is really good, too. I love both of them.
I don’t want to sound too bougie, but here’s the situation. I started kind of working with Chanel. I don’t want to imply that they’ve signed me. They have brought me out to a couple of things, which is insane. And for specific performances, they offer to dress me. They use Chanel makeup on me as well, and sometimes I get to keep it. You just feel so French.
Me and my best friend — she lives in upstate New York, where I live — go to Koreatown every other weekend almost. I don’t even remember how this all started, but we always go to this same restaurant. And I have no idea of the name, to be honest. The food isn’t unbelievable, and it’s not very scenic. I think it’s just more of the tradition at this point that we like the most.
If you’re ever in New York City, it’s Flamingos. They base [the price] off the weight of what you’re buying, and there are really, really aesthetic cool pieces that are one of a kind.
Remember how I was telling you about my “Aladdin” addiction? Well, I was addicted to “Breakfast at Tiffany’s,” but it was actually worse, because I would watch it multiple times a day. That was a while ago, but it still holds a special place in my heart. It’s like I’m watching my Pinterest board, you know? I have at least a hundred different Pinterest boards for all different things: my future apartment, my future husband, my future shoes, the decorations I want to put in my future car. Audrey Hepburn in “Breakfast at Tiffany’s” is on so many of my boards.