There was a bit of a cacophony at first, as conflicting melodies emerged and subsided. This was the chaos of preparation, the warm-up, but after a few moments the orchestra went quiet. It felt like a long, deep breath, and so I took one, too. The graphic advertising the concert as “Live From Benaroya Hall” in Seattle disappeared, revealing the conductor, as he took his place onstage, all eyes on his upheld baton. The music started softly and then grew stronger, filling my living room: floating flutes, a charge of clarinets, the friendly vibrato of bassoons. The strings played a single note, across seven octaves.
It had been a scary week in Seattle, then the center of the coronavirus outbreak in the United States. The virus was spreading in nursing homes, and there were more deaths being reported every day. The governor of Washington had just banned all large gatherings and closed all schools in the Seattle area. There were runs on food and supplies. There were already layoffs and sure to be a lot more. Though it was clear that we were at the very beginning of what would be a long and spiraling crisis, the region’s hospitals were even now running low on supplies, personnel and beds for critically ill patients. Every small decision — to go to the store, to see friends, to eat at restaurants, to visit the elderly — was suddenly taking on a new moral weight. Within just a few days, as it sank in what truly caring for one another needed to look like, even those choices would be gone.
And from Italy, where a cascade of deaths in overwhelmed hospitals presaged what we feared our own crisis would become, video after video emerged of people in lockdown, standing on their balconies or leaning out their windows, uniting the music of their violins and tambourines and accordions and saxophones. They played patriotic tunes and folk songs. They played “Smoke on the Water” and “Tequila.” Elderly women stuck inside stepped onto their balconies and danced.
By the time it was over, nearly 90,000 people from Seattle and around the world had tuned in. By comparison, 4,835 people bought tickets for the original three-day run of the symphony, back in the other world that was last September. The symphony made plans for more shows: experimental solos filmed in homes or the empty hall; group pieces merged together electronically; more livestreams of past performances. I knew I would want to watch them. I wanted the deep breath, the feeling of connection, even the jokes about sex bots. I wanted the woodwinds making the soft sounds of nature and the brass section trumpeting victory, whatever that might mean now.