N. K. Jemisin’s Broken Earth trilogy, set on a distant planet prone to calamitous earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, made history twice over: in 2016, when she became the first African-American woman to win a Hugo Award for best novel (for the first in the series, “The Fifth Season”), and in 2018, when she became the first author to win a Hugo for every novel in a trilogy. After eight novels set on fantasy worlds, Jemisin has turned her sights to ours: Her latest book, “The City We Became,” unfolds in present-day New York City, with its crosstown bus delays, hot garbage reek and all its other mundane problems — plus one large, looming supernatural one.
Spun off from Jemisin’s 2016 short story “The City Born Great,” the novel figures cities as living, sentient organisms that are “born” into human avatars, midwifed by the previous city to be delivered into sentience. But an Enemy lurks, ready to devour newborn cities on the cusp of coming into their power. New York is embodied by a young queer black man living on the streets, and the Enemy infiltrates those most dangerous to him: the police. Having overexerted himself in fighting off the Enemy, the city’s human avatar falls into a coma and vanishes. In his absence, New York’s five boroughs stir into sentience and claim their own avatars, all of whom need to find one another to stamp out the Enemy’s infectious presence, wake the primary avatar and make the city whole.
I read “The City Born Great” with a mixture of admiration and alienation. I am not a New Yorker — I’m not even American — and while I loved the shape of the short story, its insights and structures, I was less engaged by a denouement that relied on familiarity with the city’s bridges and roadways for its effect. The story was wonderful, but it wasn’t for me, in a way that I couldn’t fault but also couldn’t quite overcome. So it’s with some gratitude that I found that “The City We Became,” while still a joyous love letter to New York, broadens from its origins and explicitly welcomes the foreignness of readers like me.
Structurally, “The City We Became” is largely a sequence of fast-paced set pieces, a series of encounters with the Enemy, with each embodied borough discovering new powers as readers discover their histories and personalities. In quick succession, we’re introduced to Manhattan, a young black man who surfaces from Penn Station with no memory; Brooklyn, a black, middle-aged city councilwoman and former rapper; Bronca, a tough-as-nails queer Lenape woman in her 60s; Padmini Prakash, a South Asian graduate student repping Queens; and Aislyn Houlihan, a sheltered young white woman with an abusive racist cop for a father, standing for Staten Island. Each of them squares off against the Enemy — incarnated in a white woman of varying age and features, but always dressed in white — with mixed results.
The book is rich and generous in a way that belies the easy analogues of the plot.  Instead, its main project is one of bridge-building, knitting communities together, showing how the embodied boroughs must overcome their own prejudices, their own irritations and limitations, to embrace and trust one another before they can win the fight.
In personifying four of the five boroughs as people of color, Jemisin flips the script on the film and television portrayals of New York that commonly relegate black and brown people to a kind of background flavor text. Crucially — and most affectingly — Jemisin locates New York’s identity in plurality and adoption rather than any kind of nativist purity. In the novel’s moving first chapter, Manhattan — arriving disoriented, amnesiac, overwhelmed — receives the kindness of strangers, people who see echoes of their past selves in him, who say they were new here once, too. New York “needs newcomers,” Jemisin writes, later adding, “There ain’t no one way to be a part of this city.” It’s a theme throughout the book, layered like so much mortar binding the boroughs’ disparate bricks. It wasn’t lost on me that of the five embodied boroughs, the one who comes to love the primary avatar of New York most fiercely and helplessly is also the newest transplant.
There is a tension, though, between the book’s argument and its world-building, a kind of background static distorting its otherwise clear lines. Jemisin makes an unsettling attempt at legitimizing the Enemy’s actions — a claim that when cities gain sentience, they weaken the fabric of reality and destroy entire universes. “Countless people, dying on countless worlds, and you don’t even notice,” the woman in white says. The book contends that she is actually fighting for her species’ survival. If Jemisin ended up dismantling this motivation, aligning it with the baseless hysterics of white supremacists denouncing “hybrid vigor” and white genocide, it would be one thing. But the destruction is acknowledged in the book, by multiple parties, as real.
Even more uncomfortably, the language the woman in white uses invokes the consequences of American imperialism: “Some try to fight you, flee to nearby realms in hope of sanctuary, even worship you in hope of mercy — but not one of those poor souls has a chance.” Mashing together the fear-mongering of white supremacy with legitimate criticism of America’s wars makes for an awkward allegory that occasionally undermines the book’s core assertions. While the whole project is enjoyably looser, faster, jokier than Jemisin’s other novels, passages like this make it feel less disciplined or anchored in its rhetoric than her fantasy worlds.
Mostly, though, my experience of this book was of a white-knuckled grip, as people I loved and cheered for fought hard on one another’s behalf.
