I was astonished and horrified at the hateful reactions to Jeanine Cummins’s “American Dirt.” But I’m curious why her book was on the receiving end of so much hate and hostility, and Colum McCann seems to elicit nothing but praise for “Apeirogon,” which you reviewed in the March 1 issue. It too is a novel about individuals completely outside the author’s culture.
I’m glad for McCann. It is how literature should be treated. I just don’t understand why he gets a pass on “cultural appropriation” while Cummins does not.
As Mark Lilla notes in his March 8 review, Ross Douthat envisions a “Western renaissance, brought about by … Africa.” This should not be surprising. To many conservatives, Africans represent the best current hope for a counter-modernist movement — see, for example, the tendency of the conservative Pope Benedict XVI, before his retirement, to appoint a disproportionate number of bishops and cardinals from that continent. It is well known that “a majority of African-Americans consider themselves politically moderate (44 percent) or conservative (27 percent).” Africans generally, for a host of reasons, espouse socially conservative policies, including opposition to abortion and same-sex marriage. With respect to Ross Douthat, this is hardly the formula for a renaissance — more like a retreat.
Goodness knows Ross Douthat is a marvelous thinker, so I was surprised and appalled to read in the review of his new book, “The Decadent Society,” that he seems to believe it’s important for a population to keep growing in order to have a vibrant and economically successful society. True, that’s the way it’s worked for years. But we all have to recognize that it’s unsustainable. We should be celebrating the fact that our country’s birthrate is low. The world population of around 7.8 billion is more than twice what it was 50 years ago. Slowing down that trend is at least as important as building more wind farms or electric cars. Finding ways to thrive in a more static economy is a vital project for the earth, and for us as a nation. Ideally, such a society need not feel “decadent” or dispiriting, just different.
In his March 15 review of Thomas Piketty’s latest book, “Capital and Ideology,” Paul Krugman claims that Piketty’s thesis turns “Marx on his head” because “in Marxian dogma, a society’s class structure is determined by underlying, impersonal forces, technology and the modes of production that technology dictates.” This is deeply unfair to Marx — his argument was not that class structure is determined by technology, but rather that class structure was determined by class struggle: a position that in fact is very close to Piketty’s. Krugman likely would not agree with that argument either, as he appears to think that politics is driven almost exclusively by ideas. However, that does not relieve Krugman of the responsibility of accurately representing the arguments he discusses. In short, Piketty’s book does not turn Marx on his head, it rather borrows and updates Marx’s basic argument: a quite different matter. Readers at The Times should understand the difference.
The author is a professor of sociology at the University of California, Berkeley.
I’ve been reading By the Book since its inception. An 85-year-old reader and writer of books myself, I found Lily King’s comments in the March 1 issue to be profound and worth underlining for posterity. “You can’t make a good spaghetti sauce with rotten tomatoes” I took literally, as I was about to. And King’s salient comment about concision in her reading is a dictum she’s obviously applied to her concise and most exquisite writing.
