When I couldn’t get tested, I realized how close we are to a real-life apocalypse.
Mr. Newman is an actor.
ATLANTA — From 2016 to 2018, I played the role of Daniel on “The Walking Dead,” a TV show that depicts the apocalypse. In the face of a zombie invasion, people fight for food and supplies and try to find hope in an atmosphere of total panic.
My character was a warrior. He defended his group, The Kingdom, against zombies and other invaders. What I didn’t know, when I finished my time on the show, was that a variant of the apocalypse would so soon be coming to my life off the screen.
From Feb. 25 to March 3, I traveled to Australia to celebrate Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras along with Sam Smith, Dua Lipa, Kesha and thousands of other revelers from around the world. We marched in a Pride parade, participated in interviews with local TV stations and attended a week of concerts, parties and dinners in celebration of L.G.B.T.Q. pride.
Though we heard reports of the coronavirus from China, we thought the virus was contained. In my last week in Australia, I started to have a mild cough and assumed it was a cold.
On March 3, I flew back to Atlanta. Someone behind me on the first leg of the flight was coughing for the entire trip. I considered getting up and moving, but the flight was full. She covered her mouth with her scarf. I wasn’t wearing a mask, nor were those around me.
Three days later, my symptoms worsened. Going for walks with my dog would leave me out of breath. I coughed at night and had difficulty breathing when I tried to sleep. I heard news that someone in my Mardi Gras group tested positive for the coronavirus.
Out of concern for my family and my community in Georgia, I started searching for a place to get tested. My doctor didn’t have the test. I called all the urgent-care facilities in Atlanta I could find, including throat and nose specialists, but none of them had the test. After calling the health department, I found one emergency room in Atlanta that had access to coronavirus testing.
On March 14, I drove to the hospital, parked my car and entered a line of ill people that snaked out of a tent adjacent to the E.R. entrance. People in front of me had their temperatures taken and were asked questions about their symptoms. Almost everyone was told, without having been tested, that they most likely had a cold or allergies, and to go home and self-quarantine.
She retook my temperature, asked me questions and told me that my symptoms were a good match for the virus and that I should be tested immediately. She convinced the staff to admit me into the emergency room. Getting preferential treatment felt wrong. I thought about all the people in line who had just been turned away and could be returning home to infect their loved ones.
The doctors and nurses who examined me wore masks, eye goggles, smocks, gloves and a hair covering. After X-rays, blood work, and nasal and throat swabs, it was time to sit and wait for the results. I tried to take a nap, but I couldn’t help but think: Well, if I don’t already have this virus, I’m probably catching it here.
The doctor came back in and told me there was a shortage of beds and since my symptoms were not severe (I could breathe on my own), they were letting me go home.
“So I tested negative?” I asked.
He told me they have a limited capacity for testing, so they are limited to only sending out samples for testing patients with severe symptoms, the elderly or patients that have recently traveled to China or Italy.
As I checked out of the E.R., they told me I’d be responsible for the bill of $9,116, even though they never processed the coronavirus test.
We won’t know how bad the problem is until people are properly tested. Young people are not immune. There has to be a more efficient way to test people for the virus. We are not prepared.
My biggest fear is that I have passed whatever illness I have on to someone. I haven’t seen my family since returning from Australia. I wish I could know whether it is safe to see them.
“The Walking Dead” is one scenario of the apocalypse: Society shuts down, stores are ransacked, and the power goes out. No one can go to work, no one can function. New groups form in isolation. The echoes of my acting work in today’s world are eerie. We have to find a way to survive — and to be prepared for what’s next.
Daniel Newman (@DanielNewman) is an actor who starred in The Walking Dead.