The presidential race entered extraordinary new ground as the leading Democrats called off primary-night events in Cleveland, and President Trump’s signature rallies also faced an uncertain future.
The disruption to traditional campaigning was the first powerful sign that the virus is changing American politics, coming at the height of a primary season as Senator Bernie Sanders and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. battle for the Democratic nomination. Mr. Sanders especially relies on huge rallies to energize his base of younger voters — the kind of barnstorming he needs to halt Mr. Biden’s growing momentum in the race.
Mr. Sanders, quickly followed by Mr. Biden, called off events scheduled for Ohio just hours before they were set to begin and as the candidates awaited the results of voting in six other states. Gov. Mike DeWine of Ohio, a Republican, had asked earlier Tuesday for all major indoor events to be canceled. The Sanders and Biden campaigns indicated they would evaluate future events; the Biden campaign added one for Tuesday night in Philadelphia.
As the anxiety built, the Democratic National Committee announced Tuesday night that there would be no live audience and virtually no traveling members of the news media at the party’s presidential debate on Sunday in Phoenix.
But several people close to Mr. Trump have suggested to his campaign and White House officials that he not go ahead with rallies, a person close to Mr. Trump said. It was unclear how forceful any of them had been in pushing him away from them.
Since his 2016 campaign, Mr. Trump has left the glad-handing at diners and the round-table discussions to surrogates, focusing solely on rallies to communicate his message and connect with supporters. Any slowdown or suspension of rallies would deprive him of a major political weapon at a time when concerns about the virus — as well as the damage to a national economy that is Mr. Trump’s calling card in the 2020 race — could further alienate some disaffected Republicans and independents from the Trump camp.
For the first time in months, Mr. Trump has no rally scheduled for the coming weeks. His last campaign rally took place on March 2 in Charlotte, N.C., on the eve of Super Tuesday. But on Tuesday evening, his campaign announced a “Catholics for Trump” event at a convention center in Milwaukee on March 19. It is not technically a rally, but two campaign officials described it as a test run to see how people reacted to the president holding a large-scale event.
The cancellations by Mr. Biden and Mr. Sanders came on a critical day of voting, as Mr. Biden cemented his front-runner status with victories in the battleground state of Michigan as well as in Missouri and Mississippi, further denting Mr. Sanders’s hopes at a comeback in the race.
The one-two punch of the cancellations was not as unexpected as it was jarring. As the public has grown increasingly wary of the coronavirus outbreak, it has largely been business as usual for Mr. Sanders and Mr. Biden, who have continued shaking the hands of supporters.
But on Tuesday afternoon, that quickly changed.
Almost immediately, the Biden campaign said it, too, was canceling its evening event in Cleveland.
Mr. Biden’s campaign later announced that he would deliver primary night remarks from Philadelphia, where his campaign is based.
Some of Mr. Biden’s allies believe this moment offers the chance to highlight his experience as a former vice president, and to cast him as a steady hand — in contrast to Mr. Trump, the thinking goes — at a deeply uncertain and high-stakes time.
Mr. Biden was slated to begin another intense stretch of campaigning starting on Thursday, with planned visits in delegate-heavy Florida, Illinois and Arizona before the March 17 contests in those states. The campaign said it was canceling a planned rally on Thursday in Tampa, Fla., but the full fate of Mr. Biden’s swing was unclear on Tuesday.
There were some indications earlier on Tuesday that the coronavirus could begin to affect scheduled political events. In the afternoon, Mr. DeWine wrote on Twitter that he was asking for major indoor events in his state to be canceled.
Mr. Sanders had also told reporters outside a polling place in Dearborn Heights, Mich., that he would abide by guidance from local public health officials when planning his campaign events.
Mr. Sanders also held a round-table discussion on Monday at a hotel at the Detroit airport where he and public health experts talked about the coronavirus.
Until Tuesday, though, Mr. Sanders had continued to hold enormous rallies, a signature part of his campaign but one that was at odds with the quarantines and public directives from officials across the country to avoid large public events. Should Mr. Sanders be unable to stage rallies, it would drastically change how he campaigns at a critical juncture: After a lackluster Super Tuesday and losing in Michigan, he is now chasing Mr. Biden with increasing desperation in the delegate race.
It was Mr. Sanders himself who called off his Cleveland rally, his campaign said.
Any announcement from the Trump campaign about a formal rally would come less than 24 hours after a public health official on Mr. Trump’s coronavirus task force had hinted that there could be dangers to holding one. The rally the campaign had indicated it would announce on Tuesday was to take place in Florida at the end of the month, according to a person familiar with the planning. That rally is more than two weeks away, which could give officials a better chance to monitor the progression of the virus across the country, while also allowing them to claim they are maintaining normal operations.
Reid J. Epstein and Katie Glueck contributed reporting.