Federal officials said that anyone who left New York recently should self-quarantine at home for 14 days.
White House emphasizes how hard New York is being hit.
New York police report a drop in crime and a rise in infection among officers.
M.T.A. cuts service as riders stay home and more workers are infected.
De Blasio mourns the playwright Terrence McNally.
With New York emerging as the U.S. epicenter of the coronavirus’s spread, White House officials on Tuesday focused on the crisis in the city and state amid their efforts to contain the virus from spreading widely elsewhere.
Speaking at a White House briefing, officials said that anyone who recently left New York should self-quarantine at home for 14 days to prevent the virus from infecting those in other regions.
“We’re starting to see new cases across Long Island that suggest people have left the city,” the White House coronavirus coordinator, Dr. Deborah Birx, said at the briefing.
Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said that New Yorkers who were “understandably” trying to leave for places like Florida needed to make sure they were not “seeding” the rest of the United States.

Vice President Mike Pence repeated the advice, calling New York City a “high-risk” area and asking New Yorkers to avoid nonessential travel.
New Jersey reported 113 more deaths, bringing the state’s total to 646.
Mr. Cuomo’s briefings have become must-see television as his handling of the crisis wins him a national following.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said the federal government needed to provide more medical equipment as the number of coronavirus cases accelerated.
FEMA says we’re sending 400 ventilators. Really, what am I going to — what am I going to do with 400 ventilators when I need 30,000? You pick the 26,000 people who are going to die because you only sent 400 ventilators. Where are they? Where are the ventilators? Where are the gowns? Where’s the PPE? Where are the masks? Where are they? Where are they if they’re doing it? And by the way, Peter Navarro — “Well, we want to work with companies.” Fine, work with companies. When — what the Defense Procurement Act was about, the country needed materials to go to war. They didn’t — when we went to war, we didn’t say, “Any company out there want to build a battleship? Who wants to build a battleship? Maybe a couple of you guys can get together and build a battleship. Maybe a couple of you guys could get together and build us some missiles.  You know, we’re going to need planes. They’re sending planes at us, and they’re dropping bombs. Anybody want to do that?” That’s not how you did it. The president said it’s a war. It is a war — well then act like it’s a war.
New York City had 15,597 confirmed cases and 192 deaths as of Tuesday night, according to city officials.
More than 3,200 people in the state were hospitalized and 750 of those patients, or 23 percent, were in intensive care.
Measures adopted to stop the spread of the coronavirus in New York appear to have put a dent in crime, New York City’s police commissioner said on Tuesday.
But the commissioner, Dermot F. Shea, also expressed concern about the persistence of violent crimes like robberies and shootings. And he specifically said he was troubled by a “dramatic” decline in reports of sexual assaults and domestic violence.
“We saw an immediate drop in most categories in crime,” Commissioner Shea said at a news briefing, when asked how the new restrictions on businesses had affected public safety.
Compared with the previous week, the police recorded 443 fewer serious crimes, like assault and burglary, in the week that ended on Sunday, a 24.5 percent decline. Officers also made 1,538 fewer arrests last week compared with the week before.
Last week, detectives received just 25 new complaints that met the federal threshold for rape, compared with 51 the week before. The number of other sex crimes reported fell to 62 last week, compared with 102 on March 15.
Mr. de Blasio noted a surge in bias attacks aimed at the city’s Asian residents, and he urged the victims of such crimes to contact the police right away.
As crime ebbed, more Police Department employees became infected. As of Tuesday, Commissioner Shea said, 211 department members had tested positive for the virus, including 177 uniformed officers.
Two of the city’s biggest police unions say the department is failing to inform officers when someone they have worked with has tested positive.
The Police Benevolent Association, which represents rank-and-file officers, has instructed members to log sick time or time spent in quarantine related to the virus on line-of-duty injury forms, while the Sergeants Benevolent Association has assigned its delegates to monitor commands for reports of new cases and exposures.
The goal, an official said, was to avoid something similar to what occurred after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, when many officers who worked to clean the wreckage at the World Trade Center site did not have records of the time they spent there.
As the coronavirus engulfs New York, the city’s public transportation network is slashing service at least 25 percent as ridership plummets and an increasing number of sick workers hobbles the ability to run the system normally.
The decision on Tuesday to cut service on the nation’s largest transportation network came after subway ridership plunged a staggering 87 percent, or nearly 4.8 million riders, compared with the same day last year. Personnel shortages forced the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which oversees subway, buses and two commuter rails, to temporarily eliminate service on three subway lines: the B, W and Z.
So far, 52 M.T.A. workers have tested positive for the virus, officials said.
New York City’s transportation system typically carries eight million riders each weekday. But the sudden and steep drops in ridership have severely strained the authority’s operating budget, about half of which comes from fares and tolls.
At the end of last week, compared with the same period last year’s, ridership had dropped 70 percent on buses; 94 percent on the Metro-North Railroad, which serves communities north of New York City; and 71 percent on the Long Island Rail Road, officials said.
But health professionals have raised concerns that running fewer trains will lead to more crowding on the trains that are running, increasing the risk that passengers, many of whom are essential workers like doctors and nurses, are exposed to the virus during their commute.
At a news briefing on Tuesday, Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York City took a few moments to note the death of a friend, the Tony Award-winning playwright Terrence McNally, who died on Tuesday at 81 of coronavirus complications.
Mr. de Blasio said he knew Mr. McNally well because one of his college roommates, Tom Kirdahy, was the playwright’s husband.
The remembrance of Mr. McNally came as Mr. de Blasio echoed Mr. Cuomo’s call for the federal government to provide more equipment, including ventilators, to the virus-ravaged state and city.
So far, 192 people in the city had died of the virus, officials said later on Tuesday.
Mayor will decide by Saturday whether to close parks.
With the governor concerned about the number of New Yorkers gathering at city parks and playgrounds, Mr. de Blasio said officials would give residents until Saturday night to show they could practice social distancing appropriately.
If the city is not satisfied, he is prepared to shut down parks and playgrounds “for the foreseeable future,” Mr. de Blasio said on Tuesday, though he noted that, broadly speaking, city residents were adhering to restrictions on crowd sizes.
To reduce gatherings, the mayor said, the city was considering closing “up to two” streets in each borough to vehicles as a way to provide more public space and reduce crowding.
The mayor also said that alternate-side parking rules would be suspended for another week, through Tuesday, March 31.
The city is also moving to immediately release about 300 inmates from the Rikers Island jail complex who have been convicted of misdemeanors and some nonviolent crimes, Mr. de Blasio said. All of them have less than one year left on their sentences, he said.
The de Blasio administration is also working with state officials and the city’s district attorneys on the potential release of about 100 people who are awaiting trial in city jails, and around 700 people who are in jail on parole violations, the mayor said.
Reporting was contributed by Jonah Engel Bromwich, Christina Caron, Michael Crowley, Luis Ferré-Sadurní, Michael Gold, Christina Goldbaum, Nicole Hong, Jesse McKinley, Andy Newman, Azi Paybarah, Brian M. Rosenthal, Ashley Southall, Nikita Stewart, Tracey Tully and Katie Van Syckle.