A Dutch community encourages residents to design their own houses, and much more.
This article is part of our latest Design special report, which is about getting personal with customization.
In architecture, the tension between freedom and restrictions animates the best work. We wonder how a building by, say, Frank Gehry can stand up, given the striking twists and turns of its form.
No matter how visually striking, structures have to follow local building codes, not to mention the laws of gravity.
In the Netherlands, a 10,625-acre community called Almere Oosterwold is demonstrating a democratic version of this balancing act, experimenting on the frontiers of house-customization in a country known for heavy regulation.
Owners have the freedom to design what they want — with or without an architect, or with software specially designed for the project, as long as it meets codes. One house in Oosterwold is powered by a bike and built on a rail so that it can turn and follow the sun during the day. There are prefab houses, tiny houses and a “garage house” that holds RVs owned by its older, part-time residents, who travel a lot.
Ironically enough, it took a lot of government planning to open the floodgates of self-expression. Almere Oosterwold may be the most planned unplanned place around.
Conceived more than a decade ago, the development now has some 1,000 completed houses, with thousands more in the offing. It is the first of four planned “garden cities” within Almere, which will all have a different concept and character.
The architect Winy Maas, a co-founder of the Rotterdam firm MVRDV, created the Oosterwold masterplan and has been involved in all aspects of the project; his firm has also consulted on some of the house designs and created the DIY software, HomeMaker.
Almere and the Dutch government’s real estate development agency commissioned the plan from Mr. Maas, a passionate urbanist and designer of what he called “dense environments.” He worked with the former Almere alderman Adri Duivesteijn to get the project through bureaucratic hoops.
For the Dutch, the concept requires a new way of thinking.
What’s unusual, however, is the scale and density. When it’s completed, the plan is to have 15,000 homes and some 40,000 residents.
The Netherlands is the 32nd most densely populated country in the world, famous for harnessing nature with canals and windmills. Oosterwold’s master plan is driven by ecological concerns. New structures are only allowed to occupy up to a fourth of the land, and about half is devoted to agriculture, to bolster a sustainable ecosystem.
At the home of Barry and Shirley van Oostrom, the approach is not only green, but also dusky purple, at least when their Cabernet Cortis vines ripen. The couple, who had lived in Almere for 20 years before moving to Oosterwold, grow three varieties of wine grapes next to their new home, and they operate three bed-and-breakfast lodges, which they built in 2017.
They are always booked, because “people like sleeping by a vineyard only 25 minutes from Amsterdam,” Ms. van Oostrom said.
The decision was easy, but the design and construction, less so.
The couple consulted an architect on their design, particularly for the engineering, but they sketched out ideas and took the lead on creating their office area. Over all they wanted a U-shaped plan and sliding doors “like on a barn,” she said. They got it. The spare, wood-and-concrete house that resulted gave them the modern farmhouse vibe they wanted.
But “the rest” can involve a lot of unusual tasks, as Anke de Boer, another Oosterwold denizen, is discovering.
“Finalizing the design wasn’t the problem,” she said of the wood-frame home, to be painted an “ocean blue-green.” The couple established their priorities with a pen and paper, chief among them a bedroom orientation that would allow them to wake with the sun. They consulted an architect whom they met through their construction company.
After coordinating with 11 neighbors, she and her husband latched onto an association that had built a dirt road. Asphalt will be the final material.
“It depends on your definition of bad taste,” he added.
Ms. Provoost noted a trajectory toward less inventive design. “The houses have become more the same, and that’s disappointing,” she said.
