For too long, mothers have been held responsible for every aspect of their children’s well-being.
Ms. Grose is the lead editor of NYT Parenting.
I couldn’t sleep on the night of March 12. New York City public schools were still open, and many of my peers were choosing to pull their children out. I couldn’t decide whether to keep mine in class. My friends in Hong Kong had been home with their kids for months, but the schools never closed in Singapore.
Even though I was speaking to infectious disease pediatricians every day as part of my reporting, there wasn’t consensus among them about how parents should proceed. The local mom message boards were lit up with shaming and countershaming: You’re hysterical for pulling them out! No, you’re crazy for keeping them in!
I was relieved when the city announced schools were shuttering on March 15, so I didn’t have to decide.
Since that night, the other decisions I have made as a mother came rushing back — the ones I have been judged for getting wrong, either overtly or through brightly exclaimed, passive-aggressive jabs like, “Well, whatever works for you!” These are the kinds of choices that as a well-resourced white woman living in a big city, I am supposed to agonize over: Does that chicken really need to be organic? Do all these toys really need to be wooden, even though my toddler likes to use them to bludgeon her sister?
And then there are the more universal choices: Can I send my son to day care if he has a runny nose but no fever, knowing that keeping him home means I have to miss work? How much screen time is too much when there’s no other way to keep my kids calm while I put dinner together?
The coronavirus pandemic reminds us that mothers have been unfairly blamed for their children’s illnesses, even in the face of public health crises, for decades. Mothers are held responsible for every detail — large and small — of their children’s well-being. That didn’t happen overnight.
The historians Nancy Schrom Dye and Daniel Blake Smith, in a paper published in 1986 and called “Mother Love and Infant Death, 1750-1920,” pointed out that the household structure in early America was “permeable” — neighbors, friends and relatives all helped with caretaking. Watching over children was not seen as an individual mother’s job. And though the child mortality rate was high, mothers did not feel a sense of personal responsibility for their children’s deaths. They felt it was God’s hand.
Of course, they grieved for their children deeply, sometimes permanently. But these women also accepted death as part of life, as something ultimately beyond their control. “It may with truth be said the ways of Providence are dark and mysterious far beyond our comprehension,” wrote one Louisiana mother, whose fourth child died after a brief illness in 1836.
Though much of the American population was still deeply religious, mothers began to blame themselves when their children got sick. One woman, whose toddler died after a short illness thought to be brought on by teething in 1848, was forever “haunted by thoughts of what might have been avoided, the most pitiless of all.” There was nothing that mother could have done with the knowledge she had at the time. And yet she tortured herself for years after her child’s death.
So what can we do? Some things are obvious. Children should be loved, have enough food to eat, clean water to drink and places to play outside; they should be vaccinated, and get enough sleep. Parents should heed public health recommendations about staying inside.
If nothing else, the pandemic teaches those privileged enough to worry about the little things the truth: We never had complete control in the first place. We have no way of knowing which of the tiny choices we’re making every day about what kinds of greens to buy and whether the kids watched an hour too much “Paw Patrol” yesterday mean anything in the long run.
Instead of worrying about the micro-decisions in our individual well-heeled families, we — dads included — should be putting our energies and efforts into keeping institutions accountable for everyone’s well-being.
To paraphrase that Louisiana mother, the pandemic is dark and mysterious far beyond our comprehension. But it also gives us the opportunity to make lasting moves away from the ethos of individual responsibility for children’s health and toward community support. We should take it.
Jessica Grose (@JessGrose) is the lead editor of NYT Parenting.