The nonprofits that serve vulnerable communities were already stretched thin before the coronavirus.
New York, with the greatest number of confirmed coronavirus cases in the country, is racing to save lives. It cannot do so effectively without moving quickly to protect its most vulnerable citizens, including the more than 1.6 million people in New York City who live in poverty.
Meeting this challenge will require Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew Cuomo to mobilize New York’s enormous city and state governments to fight the pandemic, and its devastating economic effects, among communities and populations that were fragile even before the virus hit.
New Yorkers are already in distress.
Earlier this week, the state’s unemployment website temporarily crashed, a foreboding indicator of what’s to come. On Tuesday, the number of unique users on the site reached nearly 130,000, state officials said. They said the number for a normal weekday before the crisis was closer to 24,000. The governor has directed 700 state employees to handle the claims.
Nonprofits that provide services to poor New Yorkers say they need immediate help to stay afloat. These nonprofits include shelter providers, senior centers, youth programs and food banks, and they play essential roles in the lives of millions of people. The city and state cannot afford to lose these groups. They say they need not only financial assistance but also the slashing of regulatory tape to ease their operations during the crisis — something the city promised to do in a letter to providers on Wednesday from the Mayor’s Office on Contract Services.
The de Blasio administration said it would hold the providers harmless for contractual obligations that can’t be fulfilled during the crisis (like minimum staffing requirements or home visits) as long as the decisions are made in consultation with the city.
The city said it would continue to fund the nonprofits on time, which is a key action. “Pay us for what we’ve done so that we can continue to make payroll,” said Muzzy Rosenblatt, chief executive of the Bowery Residents’ Committee, which provides temporary housing and services for homeless New Yorkers. Mr. Rosenblatt said the Department of Homeless Services owed the nonprofit $8.8 million for operating shelters as well as outreach to homeless New Yorkers.
The administration also said it would temporarily suspend audits and offer an emergency funding increase to providers to lessen the strain on a system that struggles to serve people in the best of times. These are smart steps that will pay dividends later. Give these critical providers the cash now, when they need it.
Fortunately, Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Cuomo aren’t shy about using government to solve problems. New York State has enacted a moratorium on evictions and foreclosure. It is offering free breakfast and lunch to students for pickup at every school. There is more to do.
About one in 10 students in the city’s public schools is homeless. With schools closed for weeks, at least, the Department of Education will have to pay special attention to these children. Most of the roughly 100,000 students are crowded with their families into cramped apartments throughout the city; about 15,000 are living in the shelter system. Ideally, the department or a service provider would conduct daily check-ins with these children and their parents, as well as any others identified as high-need. It can also work to ensure that each has a tablet and wireless internet for remote learning, something the city has already committed to do for all students in need.
These children need as much social interaction as is possible and responsible during this crisis, along with exercise and fresh air. The city Parks Department can do its part by disinfecting playground equipment, benches and other surfaces daily — protection all New Yorkers would benefit from.
Especially difficult will be protecting the 58,000 people living in the city’s shelter system, and the thousands of others who work there. Families live together, separate from the rest of the shelter population. But most single adult shelters are dormitories with shared bathrooms, and typically, around eight to 12 people sharing a room. On Tuesday, officials said a woman living in a shelter room with eight others tested positive for the virus.
City officials have set aside space for those with the virus in the shelter system to recuperate in isolation. And in an encouraging example of cooperation, officials at the city’s public health system and officials who oversee the shelter system have worked together to ensure that any shelter resident who needs testing can get it.
New York’s jails, courts and criminal justice system also need decisive action. On Tuesday, the Board of Correction, an independent group of nine members appointed by the mayor, City Council and appellate justices that oversees the city’s jail system, called on the city to “drastically” reduce the number of people in custody, which, on Wednesday, was just under 5,400. One inmate at Rikers so far has tested positive for the virus, shortly after a corrections officer at the jail also confirmed that he was sick with it.
The board said those over the age of 50 or who have certain pre-existing medical conditions should be released if they are not a danger to anyone else. It also asked the state to release those being held for technical parole violations, a step Mr. Cuomo should take immediately.
The board also asked city officials to release those serving sentences of less than one year and pleaded with the city to limit new admissions to exceptional circumstances.
Also extremely vulnerable are the roughly 600,000 people who live in densely populated public housing. The city’s housing authority is still emerging from years of mismanagement and neglect by all levels of government. But now, it must move quickly to protect the safety of its residents, doubling efforts to clean hallways and refuse areas. If need be, the mayor can enlist other city agencies to help. A key will be making sure to meet the needs of the authority’s sizable population of older New Yorkers, who may need food or other services brought to them during this crisis.
There are other vulnerable populations that need special attention as well.
New York’s immigrant communities will need help. The state is home to about four and a half million immigrants. In New York City, an estimated 560,000 people are undocumented. Fortunately, the city’s public hospitals will serve anyone regardless of immigration status or ability to pay. But the Mayor’s Office on Immigrant Affairs can step in, too, by conducting outreach to immigrant communities, connecting them with vital services during the pandemic.
Seniors and those with disabilities may need groceries, meals and medicine delivered to their homes, something the city’s Department for the Aging can coordinate alongside nonprofits.
Some New Yorkers who are employed informally won’t qualify for unemployment benefits. They will need financial assistance as well.
As Mr. Cuomo said this week, New York cannot do this alone. It will need a substantial amount of aid from the federal government, to help the state ensure its budget and small businesses, cover a surge of unemployment benefits and bail out its subways. Business and civic leaders can also step up, raising funds and cheering New York on.
But there is still plenty Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Cuomo can do, working together to lead New York through this crisis.
The work must begin with the people who need the help the most.