The coronavirus has forced Americans to rethink how to feed themselves, from cooking to shopping to ordering in.
The white-tablecloth restaurants and the dive bars are closed. The ample buffets that feed America’s tech work force and Las Vegas gamblers have been shut down, along with millions of school cafeterias. On Monday, McDonald’s joined other fast-food companies and closed its restaurants except for delivery and drive-through.
Almost overnight, Americans have had to rethink one of the most elemental parts of their daily lives: food.
 But eating is a cultural ritual that is also a necessity.
Mealtimes arrive three times a day. How do you feed yourself and your family when restaurants are shuttered and store shelves emptying? And how do you take care of a community in crisis when caregiving meals like Sabbath suppers, pancake breakfasts, casseroles for new parents and funeral food are off limits?
Catherine Powell, 58, a lawyer in Crested Butte, Colo., is like millions of other people who suddenly have to figure out how, and what, to cook in the age of the coronavirus.
She sat in her car outside a grocery store on Sunday, struggling to pull up recipes her husband had sent to her phone. “I’m a recipe follower,” she said, not a practiced cook who can whip up a meal from a random assortment of pantry ingredients.
In the end, it didn’t matter that she couldn’t download the recipes. The store was out of pasta and canned vegetables. There was no chicken, but plenty of pork, which she doesn’t eat.
All at once, it seems, many Americans are scrambling to learn how to cook. A week ago, Google searches for cooking videos hit Thanksgiving-level highs, and traffic to cooking websites is skyrocketing.
Cooking teachers and chefs who don’t have kitchens to run are offering tips on social media for cooking from pantry ingredients and making dishes that can be stretched into several meals. Families and friends are teaching one another on FaceTime and Zoom to bake sourdough and cook beans.
“If I’m having to think about this, and I am a culinary professional who can basically make dinner out of a jar of mustard, then what does that mean for the normal person?” said Virginia Willis, 53, a cooking teacher and author in Atlanta.
