Opinion|I Lost My Son. Support L.G.B.T.Q. Youth.
I Lost My Son. Support L.G.B.T.Q. Youth.
Jane Clementi, the mother of Tyler Clementi, discusses anti-transgender rights bills in state legislatures. Also: Stacking the federal courts.
As a mother who lost my son, Tyler Clementi, to suicide after he was bullied for being gay, I know that the language and sentiment around L.G.B.T.Q. children can be a matter of life and death. Just the act of introducing anti-trans bills like those in Idaho into public discourse has the potential to be damaging to thousands of transgender children nationwide. And the effects could be more far-reaching if these bills are passed.
Not only is it wrong for elected officials to try to dictate and control the very personal journey that trans youth face, but it is also incredibly harmful for them to hear their unique identities discussed and codified as if something is wrong with them. This language can only be described as bullying.
There is scientific evidence that this kind of rejection from society is connected to the suicides of these young people. We have to ask, Do these so-called advocates and legislators want these young people to die?
It is appalling for trans youth to be subject to debate over whether they deserve to express their identities openly and safely. Debating their worthiness to live as themselves is dehumanizing.
These Americans should be able to make their own decisions based on their identities and lived experiences. We must continue to push back, not only against these policy proposals, but also against the damaging dialogue they precipitate, which questions some young people’s right to exist. I urge political leaders nationwide to publicly denounce these bills and oppose their passage.
The writer is co-founder and chief executive of the Tyler Clementi Foundation.
“Trump Stamps G.O.P. Imprint on the Courts” (front page, March 15) painted a grim picture of the federal appellate bench during Donald Trump’s presidency. The truth is that what is to come is even more sinister.
The conservative agenda is to install judges who will actively roll back hard-won civil rights protections, concentrate power for the wealthy and protect this president. And the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, is actively blocking voting rights and election security bills, because he knows that his unpopular agenda is being fulfilled by these appointments.
The Senate Judiciary Committee has stacked and held hearings during Senate recesses, in addition to ignoring the American Bar Association ratings. The move to push through nominees at such breakneck speeds is by design.
President Trump’s judges are becoming a judicial Praetorian guard, protecting his unconstitutional and unlawful policies in immigration, health care, the environment and more. The repercussions of their rulings will be felt for decades to come.
We all deserve federal judges who will protect the hard-fought civil and human rights of all. The conservative agenda is accomplishing the opposite.
The writer is president and chief executive of the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights.