The spread of the virus has cut Americans off from each other, but some are using the opportunity to enjoy more simple pleasures.
Americans have shut themselves off from each other in a dramatic fashion in hopes of curbing the global coronavirus outbreak. The days of cutting loose are gone. Unless it’s six feet apart.
“I am in charge of our entertainment. All of a sudden, we had to rethink what we can do,” said Mr. Kasen just after pulling their blue compact car into the parking lot for the 8 p.m. showing of “Bad Boys For Life.” The night before, they saw “Onward,” Mrs. Kasen announced while unpacking a bag stuffed with hand sanitizer, pretzels and candy.
The outbreak has led to questions unimaginable just a month ago: What is fun in the age of a pandemic? What can one do safely indoors or outdoors? How does a play date work six feet apart?
“From the people at the bars who are like, ‘whatever,’ to people behind drawn curtains and everyone in between, we are just trying to figure out what it means to practice social distancing,” Ms. Sturdivant said, ticking off a list of events canceled by the outbreak, including her son’s soccer practice, a birthday party and a gala.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has urged people to stay away from crowds of 50 or more. President Trump slashed that number to 10 and asked Americans to avoid bars and restaurants altogether. The message was loud and clear: stay home, stay away from your favorite places.
Megan Ledbetter’s social calendar usually includes evenings and weekends at house music sets, ecstatic dances and art shows. She had plans to go see her favorite D.J. spin house music at a downtown Chicago club, but that was before Illinois’s governor began imposing serious restrictions.
“I wanted to support the artists who will suffer, and I am already feeling cooped up,” said Ms. Ledbetter, 39, a criminal defense lawyer.
With so much of her entertainment postponed or canceled, Ms. Ledbetter spent the weekend with her 7-year-old daughter, Portia, and ex-husband, inside her house, a safe distance from others.
Dolores Bsharah went to her last exercise class at a senior center in Livonia, Mich., last week.
Ms. Bsharah plans to fill her days with neighborhood walks and baking Irish soda bread. She has also embraced a bit of spontaneity.