In the rush to manage and make more money, don’t forget to manage your mental health, too.
You might’ve heard of impostor syndrome, the feeling of inadequacy that can bubble up in your mind when you think everyone else earned their seat at the table, but you don’t belong. While this phenomenon is well documented, a less well-known version can occur when you start making decent money for the first time. Despite making a living wage, you still feel poor.
Everyone feels as if they could always use a little more money, but for people under a certain threshold — commonly referred to as a living wage — the issue isn’t just a matter of desire, but of survival. For these people, paying for food may mean skipping a visit to the doctor, or paying rent may mean they can’t afford to fix their car. When no amount of sacrificing pleasures like dining out or entertainment will allow their budget to cover all of their basic needs, something has to give.
Like millions of Americans, I lived like this for years. Despite working far more than full-time hours and having multiple jobs at a time, I made considerably less than what I needed to cover basic expenses. To get by, I had to learn what medical problems could wait, how long my car could really go without an oil change and how to make a $20 pair of shoes last as long as possible before wearing thin.
Then I got a job that paid a lot more than what I was used to. But the old habits remain.
When you first get a job that pays more than you’re used to, the feeling that you shouldn’t blow through all of your money is not only strong, but it’s also wise. Financial experts warn against lifestyle inflation, which is when you spend more money because you earn more money. Maybe you buy a new car or move into a more expensive house, and suddenly your expenses relative to your income are just as high as they were when you made less money. This is how people who earn a higher salary can still feel as if they’re not that well off.
But there’s another, more visceral reason you might have financial impostor syndrome: If you’ve spent most of your career not earning much, then it’s more familiar to you than being financially stable. Making enough money doesn’t feel real yet, and you’re afraid it will all go away.
In some cases, this can be a good thing. Pouring your extra money into paying off debt or building up your savings are all good habits to have. But it can also prevent you from taking care of yourself, even now that you can afford to.
If you’ve been putting off going to the dentist, for example, the thought of needing expensive dental work can be enough to scare you away. But waiting to see a doctor, dentist or mechanic can end up costing a lot more in the long run. Living in poverty can train you to feel like even routine visits are too expensive, which can lead to continuing bad habits. In my own case, I knew mathematically that getting an oil change or new brake pads wouldn’t break my wallet, but it took a while to accept it emotionally. The anxiety was still there. That feeling of bracing for a financial impact didn’t disappear overnight.
Figuring out which vital expenses you can live without is a stressful, sometimes soul-crushing task for anyone who’s had to live paycheck to paycheck. But it comes with one bitter “silver lining.” You never have to figure out what optional things you can afford.  It doesn’t matter because you can’t afford either. Does it make more sense to buy a console or build a gaming PC? When you don’t have money for either, there’s no need to spend time worrying about it.
Being in this position for a long time can leave an educational scar. Learning to comparison shop or to create a budget can be skills that get overlooked. If someone spends a couple of decades buying the cheapest food because that was what they could afford, the task of learning which foods have the most nutrients and what they need to make cooking easier — once they can afford to do so — might be overwhelming.
Some research suggests that there’s a link between those who are poorer off financially and those who are less financially literate. While one interpretation of this data is that people are poorer off because they’re less financially literate, the inverse can be true just as often. Being poor means not having the ability to make financial choices; you simply have to throw money at whichever bill is most overdue today. When you lack that level of control, learning the “best” way to spend money becomes an irrelevant skill. The choices are made for you by the situation you find yourself in.
You might’ve heard of the boots theory of economic unfairness, which suggests that being poor can be more expensive because you can’t afford to buy better quality items that last. In my own life, this was true in a literal sense. While working as a cart pusher at Walmart, I went through shoes quickly from the hours of walking on pavement every day. Every few months, my shoes would be so worn down that my toes would get burned on the asphalt during the summer.
Yet, I made so little that I could justify only spending $20 or so on a pair of shoes. Saving for a “good” pair would mean living potentially for months with shoes that weren’t fit to do my job. I got into the habit of buying cheap shoes and, for years after I left that job for better paying ones, I never stopped. Thankfully the shoes lasted longer once I no longer worked outdoors on my feet, but I would continue to buy cheap shoes and wear them until they had holes in them. Plus a few weeks more.
There’s this idea, fueled by movie montages of shopping sprees and indulgence, that if someone starts earning more, they’ll immediately start spending more. And the existence of lifestyle inflation proves that’s true to a certain extent. But it often applies to things like living expenses, transportation and maybe food. The kinds of critical expenses that, when limited, are a constant pressure on the mind of someone living in poverty.
For everything else, the experience of earning more can feel paradoxically bewildering. Things that cost a few hundred dollars, like say a game console or a tablet, have been prohibitively out of reach for years, so they still feel too expensive. Since they’re optional — unlike that trip to the mechanic — it might never enter your mind that it’s something you can afford. When it does, the emotional toll can be devastating.
Shortly after I got my first staff writing job, I decided that I wanted to buy an Xbox.  If I wanted to buy it, I had to prove somehow that it was worth the money, that it was cheaper than some alternative, that it would provide some benefit that I couldn’t already get.
That I simply wanted it and could afford it didn’t enter my mind for weeks. When it did, I broke down crying. Despite being a fairly common household object, and not even the most expensive thing I’d ever owned, the idea of buying something with money that I’d earned simply because that was a choice I could make was a new feeling. To this day, this mind-set still creeps in. When someone talks about buying or doing anything expensive, there’s a part of my brain that immediately rules it out as something that “other people do” simply because it costs any money at all.
That emotional reaction can have practical effects. The correlation between wealth and health has been known for some time, but it’s somewhat nullified if you don’t spend money on things that can improve your life. If you never shop for healthier food or look into better health care because you assume you can’t afford it, those things can’t improve your life.
If you manage to get a better paying job and improve your financial situation, no one automatically comes along to teach you what you can do with your new paycheck. And it’s easy to slip into old habits and continue living the life that you had when finding $10 on the sidewalk counted as a major windfall. While there’s a charm in sticking to your roots, there’s also a hard road ahead toward making the most of your new means.