New Yorkers have headed outdoors to the parks to enjoy sunshine and nature — as long as they are 6 feet away from each other.
Antsy children, frazzled mothers, seniors strolling on paved paths and young families with newfound free time all shared the familiar green spaces of New York this week as the city shut down around them as a result of the coronavirus spread. Being in a park felt both liberating and subversive, and a public statement of sorts — one made at least six feet away from stranger and friend alike.
At the opposite end of the sprawling, 153-year-old park, two parents with their young sons claimed a stretch of lawn for throwing a Frisbee, a new routine.
By Monday, 1,000 people had died in New York. Soon, that number will be 3,000.
New Jersey lowers flags to half-staff as another 113 people die.
The parks commissioner, Mitchell J. Silver, said there were no current plans to close parks.
Not in recent memory have the city’s parks been called upon to provide what Frederick Law Olmsted, one of their celebrated landscape architects, said in 1866 was “the feeling of relief experienced by those entering them, on escaping from the cramped, confined and controlling circumstances of the streets of the town.
Escape and freedom can seem scarce these days.
“Thank God for the park — I say it every 10 minutes,” said Luiza Kurzyna, sitting on a bench along the edge of Prospect Park’s lake, her baby and husband at her side.
There is no real-time data available for how many people are visiting the parks this week; the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation canceled its public events days ago. On average, some 42 million people visit Central Park alone in a given year. This week, the biggest difference is the distance they traveled to get there.
“With work and school disrupted, we’re seeing more of those people visiting the park, and fewer tourists,” said Mary Caraccioli, a spokeswoman for the Central Park Conservancy.
Frequent visitors this week said attendance was robust, but measured, with little close contact. Parkgoers kept more distance, but with collegial nods and smiles, as if all on the same team.
“Wow, it feels like going for a walk now is such a novelty,” said Lauren Schlanger, 36, walking in Brooklyn’s McCarren Park with her roommate, Hannah Carroll, 29, who admitted to worrying about the optics of what might seem like a nonessential outing. She decided people might be “less judgey” if she kept moving and did not linger.
“Don’t ‘escapegoat’ me,” Ms. Carroll said.
Ms. Warsh, the historian, said the parks were ideal for face-to-face gatherings.
Nearby, Joe Peppe, a cabinetmaker, found the return to nature a balm (“I told my wife, ‘I’m definitely going outside, I won’t touch anything’”) as he watched a squirrel who in that moment was keeping an eye on a nearby hawk.
In Riverside Park near 90th Street in Manhattan, Michael J. Reilly, an instructor and trainer at Equinox, led a noon exercise for six women with yoga mats.
In Central Park, Michael Michiue, 24, fished in a pond that he had all to himself.
He caught three bluegills.
In Brooklyn’s Bushwick Inlet Park, Jeremy Jackson, 28, was reminded on Wednesday of playing outdoors as a boy along the Tennessee River near Nashville. The memories were a comfort more than ever this week.
John Leland, Corey Kilgannon, Azi Paybarah, Alex Vadukul, and Nate Schweber contributed reporting.