Weather: Cloudy and windy, with a chance of afternoon showers and a high in the mid-60s.
Alternate-side parking: Suspended today for Purim.
There are now more than 140 confirmed cases of coronavirus in New York State, which has among the highest number in the country.
As fears over the virus grow, Mayor de Blasio is encouraging people to work from home and to avoid crowded subway trains. Schools are canceling classes. More New Yorkers are isolating themselves at home.
Yesterday, New Jersey declared a state of emergency. And Governor Cuomo announced that the state’s prisoners are making hand sanitizer.
A top transit official is among the confirmed cases.
Rick Cotton, the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, tested positive for the coronavirus, Mr. Cuomo said yesterday. The Port Authority oversees numerous airports, bridges, tunnels and bus terminals in the New York area, making Mr. Cotton one of the most prominent officials in the United States to contract the virus.
“I’m in self-quarantine at home at the moment,” Mr. Cotton told The Times. His wife, Elizabeth Smith, president of the Central Park Conservancy, also has the virus and is working from home, a spokeswoman for the conservancy said.
Other new cases in the city include a 75-year-old Queens man, a 68-year-old Brooklyn man and 22-year-old Brooklyn man.
A 7-year-old girl in the Bronx has also tested positive; she is isolated at home and “doing well,” the mayor said. Also, according to a spokeswoman for a New York Fire Department union, an emergency medical worker has the virus.
City public schools are open, but other institutions have closed.
Mr. de Blasio said there were no plans as of yesterday afternoon to close the city’s nearly 1,800 public schools. But some other schools and districts, including universities and colleges, were proceeding more cautiously.
As of yesterday, Barnard College and Columbia University, both in Manhattan, had canceled classes through today and were planning to hold classes online for the rest of week. Yeshiva University, also in Manhattan, said that some classes would resume remotely tomorrow and others on Monday.
Fordham University, which has campuses in the Bronx and Manhattan, canceled classes through at least today, and planned for online classes later in the week.
Just north of the city, Scarsdale public schools were closed through March 18.
New York State inmates are making hand sanitizer.
Mr. Cuomo said that because of the price gouging and shortages, inmates would produce up to 100,000 gallons of hand sanitizer per week for CorCraft, the state’s prison-based product company.
The sanitizer will be distributed to government offices, schools, transit locations and prisons, the governor said. He called the floral-scented substance “superior” to similar products on the market, citing its alcohol content: 75 percent.
The move was not universally welcomed. In a statement, the Legal Aid Society noted that inmates themselves might not be able to use the hand sanitizer — it could be considered contraband because of the alcohol content.
Doug Roland, a filmmaker, was walking through the East Village around 4 a.m. when he noticed a man standing on a deserted street corner.
Mr. Roland was adamant about finding a deaf-blind man for the lead role. Mr. Roland wanted to cast that man he had met on that street corner many years ago but could not locate him in time.
Mr. Roland found his lead actor, Robert Tarango, working in the kitchen of the Helen Keller National Center for Deaf-Blind Youths and Adults, on Long Island. Acting in a movie was the fulfillment of a childhood dream, Mr. Tarango said with the help of a translator.
Mr. Tarango stars alongside Steven Prescod, of Brooklyn, who plays a troubled teen helping Mr. Tarango’s character to a bus stop.
It’s Tuesday — dream big.
Last spring, I spent a long weekend in New York with my mother. One morning, we went to a cafe in SoHo for breakfast.
As we went inside, I held the door for a slim older woman with long gray hair who was wearing flannel and a black beanie.
As the woman walked inside ahead of us, my mother hit me in the back.
“Emma, do you know who that was?” she said.
