Opinion|They Went Off the Grid. They Came Back to the Coronavirus.
They Went Off the Grid. They Came Back to the Coronavirus.
25 days rafting through the Grand Canyon meant no access to the news — and a new reality when the trip ended.
Every time Zach Edler sets out on a rafting trip — out on the water for days, away from phones, an internet connection and the rest of the world — the question comes up.
As they pulled their rafts out of the Colorado, they were met by a man named Blane, who worked for a rafting company out of Flagstaff, Ariz. He had one question: Have you been in contact with the outside world? They hadn’t. Aside from a few one-way text messages sent to family on a satellite phone, the friends hadn’t heard anything in more than three weeks. No cell service. No news. Not even a passing dispatch from fellow travelers.
“He gave us a look, sighed, and then launched into it,” Mr. Edler said.
Since they’d left, the coronavirus exploded in the United States and around the world, he told the group. Italy was under lockdown. The stock market was plummeting. Professional sports were suspended. Many schools were closed indefinitely. Infections were growing exponentially. Tom Hanks had it.
A few of the rafters joked that they should just turn around and do the trip again. Somebody quipped that staying in the canyon was the safest course of action.
For the rest of us who’ve followed the news of the pandemic as it’s swept across the globe, the experience is like tracking a hurricane and bracing for landfall. There’s a feeling of powerlessness accompanied by anxiety that ratchets up day by day. For the rafters, that stress and confusion and helplessness was compressed into an instant — and in a way, somehow both more and less intense. It’s left me wondering, if given the chance, would I trade places?
After they got out of the river on Saturday, the group packed up their rafts and gear quietly and got in their vans to drive out. Purposely, they kept the radio off, wanting to extend the blissful ignorance of the trip a little bit longer. Ninety minutes later, they picked up a cell signal. That’s when the texts poured in.
“It was this feeling of disbelief,” Ms. Knaack added. “It’s like, ‘How’d we go from paradise to hoarding rice and beans?’” Another rafter searched Amazon by phone for toilet paper and saw that it wasn’t available. “That was a moment where it felt pretty real,” she said.
The group stopped at an In-N-Out Burger in Kingman, Ariz., and called family members.
Huddled in an Arizona hotel Saturday night, the group tried to hang on to the last hours of the vacation. Most didn’t look at the news, hanging out with one another instead. But reality crept in. “The lady at the hotel was like, ‘We have toilet paper; just don’t steal it.’ And the TV was showing some sports game from the ’80s or something and it was this reminder that, ‘Oh, everything’s canceled,’” Ms. Knaack said.
Re-entry has proved surreal for the rafters. When Mr. Edler went to pick up his mail, he discovered that most places besides the post office were closed. The supermarket was mostly out of meat. Since he’s a raft guide and part-time elementary-school teacher, his summer guiding and fall teaching plans are up in the air. Ms. Knaack is preparing to head back into a health care system strained by the epidemic. “I suppose it’s good that I got a vacation in,” she said.
Listening to the rafters describe their confusion, I feel almost envious of them. As we’ve prepared for the outbreak, one of the hardest parts has been figuring out how to process what will be our new normal. It’s an endless series of hard choices. How much to pay attention to the news, how much to ignore it. How much to be hopeful. How much to fear. For weeks, the rafters didn’t have to make those choices. And they appear grateful.
“It would be worse to have been sitting and stewing in it,” Mr. Thomas said.
“There was probably less overall stress and worry this way,” Ms. Knaack agreed.
“We rafted the Grand Canyon, so there are no regrets at all,” Mr. Edler said. “Some people wouldn’t like this but I loved that blissful ignorance. It allows you to enjoy the beauty of life.” For him, the last week was the rarest form of adventure — precious stolen days to postpone a dire reality.
