The moves are the most far-reaching and disruptive the city has taken to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
Schools, restaurants and bars in New York City will close.
Restaurants and bars will be closed in New York City.
The number of confirmed cases in New York is now over 700.
New York City’s public school system, the nation’s largest with 1.1 million students, will begin to largely shut down this week, in what is the city’s most aggressive and disruptive effort to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
The mayor also announced on Sunday night that he would order all bars and restaurants to close, limiting them to takeout and food delivery.
Public schools in Long Island and Westchester County will also close this week, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Sunday.
The governor ordered New York City school officials to develop a plan within 24 hours on how to offer child care to students of parents who work in essential industries like health care and to provide food to students who will need meals.
In New York City, the schools will be closed on Monday for all students and staff, but teachers will be asked to report to work later in the week for training on how to provide remote learning, Mr. de Blasio said.
The decision to close the schools came after the mayor faced increasing pressure throughout the day, including from the governor.
Some campuses will reopen on March 23 as “enrichment centers.” They will be set up to provide instruction and services for vulnerable children, likely including many of its homeless students and children with special needs.
The mayor said the goal was to reopen all the schools on April 20, though he cautioned that could be overly optimistic. He said there was a strong chance that the schools would not reopen at all this school year.
In Connecticut, Gov. Ned Lamont said Sunday that all public schools in the state would shut down on Tuesday and stay closed until at least March 31.
Read more about New York’s school closings.
Mayor de Blasio on Sunday night enacted new restrictions on public life in New York City after coming under increasing pressure from other elected officials, who had raised growing alarms that the city was moving far too slowly as the coronavirus outbreak spread.
They pointed out that on Saturday night bars and restaurants in many parts of the city were still relatively crowded, elevating the risk that the coronavirus would continue to spread rapidly.
Early Sunday night, Mr. de Blasio indicated that he was taking these concerns seriously. Around 10 p.m., he issued a statement saying that he was closing restaurants and bars, effective Tuesday.
He said his executive order would limit restaurants, bars and cafes to takeout and delivery. Nightclubs, movie theaters, small theater houses and concert venues must all close.
The order will go into effect on Tuesday at 9 a.m.
On Sunday afternoon, Mr. de Blasio announced a number of other measures: Ordering hospitals in the city to cancel all elective surgery, postponing an upcoming election for the Queens borough president and closing city senior centers.
State law says people who are arrested on violent felony charges and held in jail must be indicted by a grand jury within six business days or they are released from pretrial detention.
The law has long required that charges be dismissed if prosecutors don’t comply with speedy trial rules. The state’s recently enacted rules also require that prosecutors turn over evidence against the accused within 15 days of the first appearance.
If the worst projections become true, Mr. Cuomo said, New York State’s hospital system would not be able to handle the rush of patients, many of whom would require acute care. The state has only 3,186 intensive-care hospital beds, he said.
Mr. Cuomo said on Sunday that the state would likely need thousands of additional intensive-care beds.
As of Sunday, New York State had 729 confirmed coronavirus cases, officials said.
Five people have died in New York City, the mayor announced on Sunday afternoon. All of them had underlying health issues, he said.
The largest concentration of cases was in New York City, where 329 people have tested positive.
There were 196 confirmed cases in Westchester County, just north of New York City.
Just under 20 percent of the total cases in New York were of people who were hospitalized, Mr. Cuomo.
Mr. Cuomo said efforts in the city and state were still focused on tamping down the disease where they could. The state tested 700 people for the virus on Friday.
The governor expressed concerns about hospital capacity, particularly in intensive care. The state has approximately 3,000 I.C.U. beds, about 80 percent of which are already occupied, he said.
Students at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., are dealing with the emotions and logistical hurdles of being told to return home because all in-person classes have been canceled for the rest of the semester.
Cornell was one of the first universities in the country to suspend classes on campus, and the college has given students a three-week break to make the journey home before online courses begin.
“I feel like a lot of experiences have been stolen from me,” Justin Welfeld, a senior, said.
