This article is part of our latest special report on Museums, which focuses on the intersection of art and politics.
WILMINGTON, N.C. — Standing on the remnants of earthworks erected by Confederate forces in the waning months of the Civil War, the historian Chris Fonvielle pointed to a sandy trace snaking through a stand of pine trees — the last remnant of the Federal Point Road that once ran about 20 miles south, toward the mouth of the Cape Fear River.
Here on the afternoon of Feb. 20, 1865, the flags, muskets and blue forage caps of the Fifth Regiment of the United States Colored Troops would have appeared in the distance.
“They came marching up this road,” Mr. Fonvielle said.
And they will again — albeit in a representational work of art.
In November, a bronze sculpture honoring the African-American soldiers who would have led the Union advance in what would become known as the Battle of Forks Road, will be unveiled on this spot, which is on the grounds of the Cameron Art Museum.
Just 250 feet from the entrance to the museum — with its collection of 3,000 works by the likes of Joan Miró, Robert Rauschenberg and Marc Chagall — the sculpture will stand, along with interpretive signs explaining the role of the black troops here.
Forks Road, although a small battle by Civil War standards, was a decisive engagement in the campaign to take Wilmington: the South’s last major open port and a critical lifeline for supplies to Robert E. Lee’s army in Virginia. Mr. Fonvielle — professor emeritus of history at University of North Carolina-Wilmington and author of an upcoming book on the battle, “Glory at Wilmington: The Battle of Forks Road” — points out that less than two months after this battle and the city’s subsequent capitulation, Lee was forced to surrender at Appomattox.
More than 50 percent of all Union casualties in the Wilmington campaign were men of the United States Colored Troops, or U.S.C.T. — most of them at the Battle of Forks Road. The Confederates, who had been entrenched, repulsed the first assault here but withdrew after another day of fighting.
The memorial, which is being created by Stephen Hayes, a sculptor based in Durham, N.C., will celebrate the black soldiers who carried out the initial attack and suffered the brunt of the casualties. They were among the roughly 179,000 African-Americans who served in the United States Colored Troops, a branch of the federal army created in 1863 after the Emancipation Proclamation.
Some of those involved in the Wilmington campaign were escaped slaves from the Cape Fear region who had joined the Union effort.
And yet, the museum — which has been in its present location since 2002 — is now as committed to the Civil War as it is to exhibiting Modernist prints and paintings.
“I feel like it’s a moral obligation for us to recognize what happened here,” said Heather Wilson, the museum’s deputy director.
Coming at a time when Confederate memorials are being removed throughout the South, however, there are those who might not be happy seeing one erected to the memory of Union soldiers — particularly African-American soldiers. The Cameron is expecting that there will be attempts to vandalize the sculpture.
“It would be naïve not to,” said Anne Brennan, the museum’s executive director.
Moreover, many of the area’s new residents are from some of the same Northern states that were the bitter enemies of those fighting the U.S.C.T. troops here in 1865.
 When Ms. Wilson approached the local chapter of a Confederate heritage organization to tell them about the project, she said she received a cool reception. “I was asked why we would be erecting a monument to Union soldiers here,” she said.
Wilbur Jones, 85, a native of Wilmington, has an answer for that. Mr. Jones is a local historian who has written on the city’s role as an industrial powerhouse during World War II (when Wilmington’s shipyards churned out 243 vessels in four and a half years).
He is proud of his hometown and his Southern heritage, but he fully supports the Cameron’s decision to honor the African-American men who fought here, for the “other” side.
The completed bronze sculpture will have nine life-size soldiers marching with muskets, a flag bearer and a drummer boy. For the faces of the soldiers, Mr. Hayes used the faces of local U.S.C.T. Civil War re-enactors, and some descendants of actual participants in the battle. The casting process, in which the models’ faces were wrapped in wet plaster strips, took place over the course of a day at the museum in October.
