The city government was soon under siege.
An NBC News-Wall Street Journal poll conducted last week found that 81 percent of Republican voters said Mr. Trump has done well in handling the coronavirus crisis, and 84 percent of Democrats said the opposite. More than half of Republicans — 54 percent — worried that government will go too far in responding to the crisis, while just 31 percent of Democrats did, according to the poll.
But as they strive to echo Mr. Trump’s shifting stance on the virus — from hoax to serious health threat — they can wind up contradicting themselves, sometimes within hours. One point remains constant, though: The president’s political enemies are to blame.
On Monday the federal government issued new guidelines telling Americans to avoid bars, restaurants, travel and gatherings of more than 10 people. Some trusted figures on the right have joined the call for more dramatic action. Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker, said the Trump administration should be preparing military hospital ships and cruise ships to handle an overflow from the nation’s hospitals. And the latest maneuver on the right is to label the enemy “the Chinese virus,” as Mr. Trump did Tuesday morning.
But the president has not rebuked his allies for their denialism. During a news conference, Mr. Trump was asked about Mr. Nunes’s Fox News interview on Sunday, in which he encouraged Americans “go to a local restaurant, go to your local pub.” Mr. Trump said he was not familiar with the comments.
“Because the climate change narrative for global governance failed,” Mr. Howard-Browne said in a video of the service, “they are using the World Health Organization to then come in and take over the control of nations.” He added, “There’s going to be forced vaccines” to “kill off many people."
On Monday, Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, tried to combat the disinformation.
 COMPLETELY FALSE,” he wrote. “We will continue to see closings & restrictions on hours of nonessential businesses in certain cities & states. But that is NOT marshall law.” Mr. Rubio later acknowledged his misspelling of martial law, but called it “marital” law.
The mayor was chiefly concerned with such mundane items as closing the firehouse to public tours, giving the city manager broader authority to manage staffing, and buy supplies like face masks. But the code provided for far more than that.
By Friday morning, the N.R.A. had sent an alert, “Champaign, IL First Locality to Use ‘Emergency Powers’ to Ban Gun Transfers,” and urged members to “swiftly” oppose it.
Phones rang off the hook at City Hall, and “our social media just started blowing up,” Ms. Feinen said.
Stories about the gun provision were picked up by The Daily Caller, Breitbart News and several gun-rights and far-right conspiracy websites. Donald Trump Jr., tweeted about it. Rumors based on the N.R.A.’s alert circulated on social media; one user wrote “WHEN TYRANNY BECOMES LAW, REBELLION BECOMES DUTY.” A friend of Ms. Feinen called her to report that sales of ammunition (and toilet paper) were booming at a local store.
Ms. Feinen emphasized that some comments and calls were from Champaign residents, legitimately confused and concerned by the sweeping provisions.
“I am a small government person. I understand that when you see it in a vacuum it’s very scary,” she said. “I also know that in a pandemic you need to protect health and safety and be proactive.
“Some mayor and city council members are asking to get tarred and feathered,” wrote one commenter.
City staff members worked all weekend to quell the uproar, in between preparing for statewide school, restaurant and bar closures ordered by Gov. J.B. Pritzker, a Democrat.
Champaign County on Sunday announced its first coronavirus case, a woman in her 60s who is recovering at home, Ms. Feinen said.
