A retro tradition get a (temporary) boost from social-distancing edicts.
So Ms. Philhower was surprised — ecstatic, even — to see one group entertainment venue still open for business: the Blue Starlite, a local drive-in movie theater currently allowing 35 to park at one time.
When Ms. Philhower’s children, who are 20, 16 and 12, were younger, the family would frequent the theater. The kids loved sitting on the roof of the car and chomping on candy under the stars.
But there are still 305 of them in the United States, according to the United Drive-In Theatre Owners Association in Stephens City, Va. The U.D.T.O.A. says every state has a drive-in movie theater except Alaska, Delaware, Hawaii, Louisiana and North Dakota.
While most drive-in theaters open for the summer, some of their owners decided to get an early start this year to provide families an escape insulated by their cars during the pandemic, as malls, concert halls and restaurants shut down. “Who would have thought that drive-in movies would one day again become the most attractive option for going out?” Mr. Frank said.
At the end of February Mr. Frank opened a second Blue Starlite, in Round Rock, a town 25 miles north of Austin. Every weekend there up until now have been three to five shows, all of which have sold out days in advance.
Drive-in theaters have taken extra precautions to ensure social distancing. At the Blue Starlite, you could flash your tickets on your phone from your window to gain admission. Many theaters have started having people order concessions by phone. Servers wearing latex gloves deliver them to the car so crowds don’t congregate in concession stands.
Brian Francis, who runs the 99W Drive-In Theatre in Newberg, Ore., received 30 messages from customers in the past week asking him to open early. “Folks are thinking that the drive-in is the original social distance way to see a movie, and this is some kind of golden opportunity for the vanishing drive-ins to shine,” he wrote in an email.
And by Wednesday, March 25, the Blue Starlite too had gone dark.