New York|N.Y. May Need 18,000 Ventilators Very Soon. It Is Far Short of That.
N.Y. May Need 18,000 Ventilators Very Soon. It Is Far Short of That.
Doctors are increasingly anxious that New York — like other states — won’t have enough of the breathing machines that are key to fighting the coronavirus.
It is still possible that the state could slow down the spread of the virus enough to curb the demand for ventilators, the machines that help the sickest patients to breathe. But a panel convened a few years ago by the state found that in the worst-case scenario of a flulike pandemic, New York could be short by as many as 15,783 ventilators a week at the peak of the crisis.
The panel, the New York State Task Force on Life and the Law, studied ventilators for years before issuing a 2015 report offering guidance for hospitals on how to decide who to ventilate and who to effectively let die during an emergency. The advice is now frighteningly relevant.
While a national stockpile of ventilators exists, it is unclear how that will be doled out. In a conference call on Monday with a group of governors, including Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, President Trump said that states should not count on the federal government for more ventilators and other equipment. “We will be backing you, but try getting it yourselves,” he said, according to a recording of the call.
Most of the New York’s major health systems have declined to provide details about their ventilators or what they will do if they run out. Some hospital administrators have said they believe new measures, such as closures of schools and restaurants, can slow the spread of the virus and keep the number of critically ill people below levels that could overwhelm hospitals.
But officials have repeatedly said that a ventilator shortage is one of their top concerns.
In interviews, ventilator manufacturers warned that, amid the pandemic, they do not have the ability to provide New York more ventilators — which can cost at least $25,000 apiece and require significant training to use.
Ventilator shortages are already a reality elsewhere, such as Italy, where the high number of coronavirus patients flooded the system, leading some doctors to say they had to choose putting only younger patients on ventilators because they have more life to live.
After two days with fewer deaths, the region hopes for a third.
‘You can feel the surge happening,’ a Long Island official says.
How gig workers are surviving the shutdown.
New York’s hospitals are considered to be among the best in the world. But the state has slightly fewer ventilators per capita than the national average, according to a New York Times comparison of the 2015 state task force report and a study by the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.
The task force found that in 2015, there were about 7,250 ventilators in New York hospitals and about 1,900 in nursing homes. But the vast majority of them were already being used. Even with the state’s own emergency stockpile, the group found there were only 2,800 available.
The New York State Department of Health has declined to provide updated numbers.
In New York City, Kenneth Raske, president of the Greater New York Hospital Association, a trade organization, said that as of last count, there were slightly more than 2,000 ventilators available, after accounting for ones already in use.
The task force estimated that in a severe pandemic similar to the 1918 Spanish flu — which killed more than 50 million people worldwide — about 18,600 New York patients would need ventilators each week at the peak of such a crisis.
“We are recommending that we prepare for a 1918 type scenario,” said Crystal Watson of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.
It is impossible to know how bad the coronavirus pandemic will be. Some experts have said that it will not be as bad as the Spanish flu, which tended to cut down not the elderly but younger people, some collapsing just hours after the first onset of symptoms.
Mr. Raske said that over the weekend his organization had been talking with state and federal officials about how to get more ventilators into New York City.
“We are working diligently with our city and state colleagues — and for that matter with the federal government — to make sure that every ventilator that will be needed is available,” he said.
But executives at several ventilator manufacturers said that shortages exist everywhere and it would be difficult to ramp up production quickly to the level that is needed now.
Chris Kiple, CEO of the Seattle-based Ventec Life Systems, said his company was already being inundated with orders from across the world. “To be honest, we’re already picking and choosing where we’re shipping,” he said.
Part of the problem is that the shortage goes far beyond the nuts and bolts of a machine. Ventilators must be operated around the clock by trained employees.
“The fact is that if the pandemic got so bad that we were using all the ventilators, we likely wouldn’t have enough staff to operate them anyway,” said Beth Roxland, a bioethicist who served as executive director of the state’s task force.
The task force was created in 1985 to examine a number of ethical issues in health care. Throughout the years, it issued reports on several topics. Its ventilator report in 2015 said that during the shortage, hospitals should focus on helping children and the patients most likely to survive the pandemic. The guidelines included a formula of medical criteria and also envisioned a lottery system in some instances. They recommended against moving ventilators from nursing homes into hospitals.
Only a few hospital systems have so far been willing to say publicly what they would do if they have more patients in need of ventilation than machines.
Northwell Health, which has 23 hospitals, and Montefiore Medical Center, with 11 hospitals, both said that if supplies ran out, they would adopt the task force guidelines.
New York City’s Health and Hospitals Corporation, the city’s public hospital system, said it had no plans to implement the triage in the guidelines, and that every patient who needs a ventilator will get one. It said it would not remove a patient from a ventilator, if it was medically necessary for them to be on it.
Mount Sinai Health System and NYU Langone Medical Center declined to answer questions.
Doctors at various institutions said they did not yet know what the triage policies would be but they had been discussing the matter with colleagues.
Some said they expected that in a shortfall, they would likely be reluctant to give ventilators to people over a certain age. Or they might inquire about a patient’s family status. “Do you give it to the 40-year-old with children, or the 40-year-old without children?” one wondered.
Adding to the strain is the fact that some patients on ventilators have remained on them for weeks, before dying or recovering. The state guidelines in the report suggested giving patients 120 hours on ventilator therapy to show improvement before removing them and giving the ventilator to someone else. But some coronavirus patients may need longer to recover.
Generally, when patients are mechanically ventilated, a flexible tube is placed into their windpipe, and a finely calibrated pump sends oxygen-rich air into the lungs. Managing everything — from air flow to medicines — is labor intensive. Intensive care nurses are typically assigned just a few such patients at a time.
A huge question is what percentage of coronavirus patients will need ventilators. So far in New York City, approximately 25 percent of confirmed cases have been hospitalized, and 44 percent of those have required ventilation, according to the city Health Department.
Some experts said hospitals could turn to other solutions in a ventilator shortage.
One doctor wondered if they could recruit enough volunteers to manually ventilate patients — which involves squeezing a small inflatable device by hand — indefinitely.
Jeffrey Engel, executive director of Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, mentioned ECMO, a process by which blood is removed from the body, passed through a membrane that oxygenates it and then returned to a vein or artery. But the procedure requires far more supervision than ventilators, making it a potentially poor solution.
Laura Forese, executive vice president of NewYork-Presbyterian, said that canceling elective surgeries — as some hospitals have done — meant that more anesthesia machines were now available. Those could now be used as ventilators for coronavirus patients, she said.
One task force member, Samuel Gorovitz, a professor of philosophy at Syracuse University, said it was too late for hospitals to address the ventilator shortfall. He said officials should have paid more attention to the task force report.
Rachel Abrams and Jesse McKinley contributed reporting.