With the country in lockdown, dancers do barre exercises in their bedrooms and take classes on WhatsApp.
Making do and staying fit: clockwise from top left: Nadia Scherani, who teaches class remotely; Marco Messina, Piera Nicoletti Altimari and Giuseppe Picone.Credit...Nadia Scherani, left, and Marco Messina.
Dance is a social art form that happens in crowded rooms full of people. Partnering and dance instruction are all about touching. Movement requires large spaces. So what happens in a period of enforced separation and reduced square footage?
American dancers are just beginning to deal with these challenges. In addition to the stress of not being able to take part in their daily routine of rehearsals and dance classes, many face worries about when, or if, the next paycheck will come.
In Italy, dancers have been experiencing these disruptions for weeks. The first lockdowns began in northern Italy in late February. On March 8, much of northern Italy was shut down, and the rest of the country followed two days later. Italians are not supposed to leave their homes except to buy food, go to work — if they can’t work from home — or receive medical treatment. The slogan “Io resto a casa,” or “I stay home,” has become a national manifesto.
Gatherings have been suspended; relatives who live in different cities, or even just across town, are no longer visiting one another, except virtually. Social media and video calls have become a source of solace.
How are Italian dancers handling this new reality?
The first answers came, unsurprisingly, from social media. On March 11, Marco Messina, a corps de ballet dancer from the Ballet Company of the Teatro alla Scala in Milan posted a mash-up of videos created by his fellow dancers showing them doing barre exercises in their bedrooms, stretching their feet while watering plants, bench-pressing toddlers, lifting each other in the backyard and perfecting pirouettes in the living room.
Mr. Messina, who lives in Gerenzano, near Milan, with his husband Salvo Perdichizzi, a former Teatro alla Scala dancer, and two Rhodesian Ridgeback dogs, said creating the video was a way to lighten the mood. He and his fellow dancers have been keeping in touch using WhatsApp, and when he requested videos, “they just flooded in,” he said.
But, Mr. Messina said, he considers himself lucky: As a full-time employee of a major opera house with state funding, he is still receiving a salary.
Seventy of the 90 La Scala dancers are full-time employees, a spokesman for the theater, Paolo Besana, said in email. The remaining 20 are on short-term contracts. But even they are being paid, at least for now. (Smaller theaters can’t afford to do the same.) La Scala too will suffer: Mr. Besana said the theater’s losses from ticket receipts amount to about a million euros a week.
Suddenly she found herself confined to her tiny apartment in central Milan with no job, no income and no classes to attend. She considered going home to Sofia, where her family lives, but was afraid of bringing the virus with her. So she stayed. She has enough savings to keep her going for about a month.
After two weeks, the school began to hold online classes. Nadia Scherani, a former dancer and actress who teaches there, uses the platform Zoom, which allows her to see all of her students onscreen at the same time.
Online teaching has kept Piera Nicoletti Altimari, 13, a promising young ballet student, going as well. Last year, she and her mother moved from Naples to Schio, a small town in the Veneto region, near Lake Garda, so she could be trained by the well-regarded teacher Enrica Marcucci at her studio, called Domus Danza.
Before the virus interrupted her training, Piera was taking four to five hours of ballet classes each day. Now, most of her life happens online. She does all her academic lessons via Google Classroom. And Ms. Marcucci gives her daily lessons with three other students through WhatsApp.
She had been planning to audition for the Royal Ballet School in London at the end of February, but her audition was canceled. She’ll try again next year, her mother says, though in a budding dancer’s life, a year is a long time.
The Naples ballet company, which rehearses and performs at the Teatro di San Carlo, one of the most beautiful opera houses in the world, closed on March 10, the day the national shutdown was proclaimed. The troupe had just concluded performances of the ballet “Don Quixote” a few days earlier.
At the beginning of his seclusion, Mr. Picone, a former star who used to partner the Georgian dynamo Nina Ananiashvili at American Ballet Theater, said he was in too much shock to do much besides watch the news and talk to friends and colleagues on WhatsApp. “And eat!” he said. “All we do here is eat!” By the fourth day he was feeling an itch to move, so he started working out, stretching and doing barre exercises by holding onto the windowsill.
Still, amid the fear and uncertainty, there have been bright spots. As in other parts of Italy, Mr. Picone’s neighbors joined together to sing last week, their voices rising from the balconies in his central Naples neighborhood. Their song? “O surdato ’nnammurato” (or “The Lovesick Soldier”), a tune known to almost every Neapolitan.
“It was so beautiful,” Mr. Picone said.