Opinion|I’m 26. Coronavirus Sent Me to the Hospital.
I’m 26. Coronavirus Sent Me to the Hospital.
Fiona Lowenstein is a writer, producer and yoga teacher.
I’m 26. I don’t have any prior autoimmune or respiratory conditions. I work out six times a week, and abstain from cigarettes. I thought my role in the current health crisis would be as an ally to the elderly and compromised. Then, I was hospitalized for Covid-19.
On Friday, March 13, only a few hours after deciding I would begin to socially distance for the well-being of others, I developed a fever and headache. I tried not to assume the worst, but just in case, my partner and I decided to sleep in separate bedrooms. By the next morning, I had a cough. On Sunday, I started to feel better and my fever was gone. I felt thankful that even if this was coronavirus, I’d most likely be able to ride it out at home, as I’d heard people like myself had little to worry about. I began planning the work I’d catch up on the next day, and the much-needed shower I’d take.
There are many reasons to take Covid-19 seriously if you are a millennial. As one of the largest generations in the United States, we can have an enormous influence on the course of this pandemic. Since it’s hypothesized that many infected millennials won’t exhibit symptoms, our social distancing is crucial to the health of more vulnerable populations and can have a huge impact on flattening the curve. Unfortunately, much of our generation — and some of those younger than us —­ is not taking this public health crisis seriously enough. We’re continuing to gather in groups, travel internationally, and see quarantine as an extended spring break. As a generation with a supposed commitment to social justice, we should be stepping up in our role as allies to more vulnerable populations. Yet, somehow the message of staying home still isn’t permeating our ageism and ableism.
Millennials, if you can’t be good allies, at least stay home to protect yourselves. Our invulnerability to this disease is a myth — one I have experienced firsthand. Countries in Europe and Asia are reporting younger and younger patients. The New York Times reported this week that nearly 40 percent of hospitalized Covid patients in the U.S. are under 54 years old. What’s worse is that when medical professionals have been forced to make choices about who lives and who dies in other countries, our generation is often chosen to receive treatment. So not only are we risking our own health, our presence in hospitals diminishes the care other groups may receive.
We’re also a generation that tends to opt out of buying health insurance, as it’s expensive and many of us — myself included — work gig economy jobs that don’t provide benefits. We often live in crowded apartments with roommates, which means our ability to mitigate risks is lower, and we must rely on and trust each other. We’re also more likely to live with our parents than other generations, and thus may risk spreading the virus to loved ones with less chance of surviving it.
Millennials are reported to care deeply about wellness and social justice. I know, because I run a popular events series about the intersection of the two topics. I wish individuals weren’t facing such a high burden of responsibility, but in the absence of early and appropriate action from our government, we have no other choice. Now is the time to walk the talk. There is much about our society that we are inheriting that we can’t control. Let’s try to make an impact where we can.
Fiona Lowenstein is a writer, producer, and yoga teacher and the founder of the queer feminist wellness collective, Body Politic.