Appearing before cameras sometimes multiple times a day to talk about the outbreak, the president has offered rosy assessments and unproven or even false assertions.
WASHINGTON — At a campaign rally this week in North Carolina, President Trump reassured the crowd that he had jawboned the nation’s pharmaceutical companies into quickly tackling the coronavirus.
“They’re going to have vaccines, I think, relatively soon,” he said.
But “soon” was correct only if it meant 12 to 18 months from now.
Both health officials and drug industry executives have repeatedly told Mr. Trump that a vaccine was still a long way off. Yet by promising a vaccine “soon,” the president almost certainly misled at least some of the public into thinking a solution to the outbreak was just around the corner.
In confronting the first major health crisis of his presidency, Mr. Trump has made himself the primary source of information to the public with mixed results. Appearing before cameras sometimes multiple times a day to talk about the coronavirus, he has offered a consistently rosier assessment of the situation than health experts and has put forth unproven or even false assertions.
He originally claimed that his travel restrictions on China would “shut it down,” preventing the spread of the virus to the United States, and he has undercounted the number of infections as they have emerged. He has suggested that the virus would most likely “go away” by spring, a prediction born more of hope than knowledge. And he has minimized any economic effects.
“The market’s in great shape,” he said after stocks plummeted on Tuesday.
At times, Mr. Trump has been corrected, gently but unmistakably, by the health experts standing next to him at the microphones. On Tuesday, they brought him to the National Institutes of Health for a tour and a Virus 101 seminar of sorts, flashing slides on a screen to make points they wanted him to absorb and repeat to the public — including the timetable for a possible vaccine that, while fast for this sort of drug development, remains in the distance.
Over the past week, Mr. Trump at times has seemed to follow some of that advice, appearing with experts and inviting them to take the microphone. Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the renowned director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, has joined the president for public statements and denied that he has been muzzled.
But Mr. Trump has made clear he will be the main voice on the coronavirus. He addressed it publicly four times on Tuesday alone, while cameras were barred from the daily briefing by Vice President Mike Pence, who is managing the response along with Alex M. Azar II, the secretary of health and human services.
Mr. Trump and his allies said the problem was the other way around, that the president’s critics were too eager to proclaim doom and gloom for the purpose of hurting him politically as he headed into his re-election campaign. The president last week went so far as to call Democratic criticism the “new hoax,” although he later stressed that he did not mean that the outbreak itself was a hoax.
It is unclear exactly how the virus entered the United States and whether it was carried from China, but Mr. Trump may have left the impression that he had successfully cut off its path into the United States.
The president has theorized that the virus is likely to dissipate during warm weather. “A lot of people think that goes away in April with the heat — as the heat comes in,” he said. “Typically, that will go away in April.” Many health experts say that it is true of some strains of influenza and may be possible in this case, but that too little is known about the coronavirus for such predictions.
“We have it so well under control,” he added.
More recently, Mr. Trump has taken to suggesting that drug makers are making rapid progress toward a vaccine. “They’re moving along very quickly. All of the pharmaceutical companies are moving along very quickly,” he said on Saturday and then repeated similar sentiments on Monday after meeting with drug company executives.
But health officials caution that, even under the best circumstances, a vaccine would most likely not be available for widespread use before mid- to late-2021. Dr. Fauci made a point of emphasizing that more than once on Tuesday, using the slide show at the National Institutes of Health to demonstrate that while safety trials on a vaccine will begin soon and progress has been strikingly fast compared with past health crises, it will take considerable time to move to mass production if it proves safe.
Mr. Trump did not quarrel with that, but urged Dr. Fauci to tell reporters about the progress toward “therapeutics” that will combat the infection once a person has it.
With fears of the coronavirus sending waves of concern through the country, Mr. Trump has focused as much on the economic consequences as the medical ones. He repeatedly demanded that the Federal Reserve cut interest rates to bolster the economy, but when the central bank did so on Tuesday, investors were unimpressed and markets tumbled another 3 percent.
The White House has bristled at the criticism, seeing it as insincere point scoring. Seeking to push back, Mr. Pence’s office has begun compiling praise for the administration’s handling of the crisis and sending it out to supporters and news organizations.
