We switched hotel rooms every few days so no one could track us. A Courtyard Marriott worker gave me an alias.
At times, it seemed as if we were characters in a thriller.
Our reporting began in early 2019 with a tip about a rich Canadian playboy accused of sexually abusing poor teenage girls in the Bahamas. By the time we finally went to press last month, the story had morphed into an epic fight between ultrarich neighbors in a hall of mirrors.
Along with the reporters Catherine Porter and Grace Ashford, I started digging into allegations against the Canadian, Peter Nygard, a fashion executive in his late 70s who had long surrounded himself with beautiful young women.
Mr. Nygard may have seemed like an eccentric has-been, with his long gray hair, low-cut V-neck shirts and obsession with stem-cell injections and cloning as ways of staving off death. But former employees and girlfriends worried about retribution from Mr. Nygard if they spoke against him. They thought of him as omnipotent, with spies everywhere.
A lawyer named Fred Smith introduced us to 11 young Bahamian women who told us that Mr. Nygard raped them as teenagers. The allegations were horrific: Some women said they were drawn to his home by the promise of luxurious parties or modeling work. Some said they were drugged. Some said he forced them to watch pornography with animals or human feces. None wanted to be identified.
Mr. Nygard has denied all these allegations.
Things got complicated quickly. We learned that Mr. Smith had worked closely with the hedge fund billionaire Louis Bacon, who happened to be Mr. Nygard’s longtime nemesis and neighbor in the Bahamas. Their decade-long fight spanned courtrooms in three countries.
Mr. Nygard was behind smears declaring that Mr. Bacon belonged to the Ku Klux Klan; Mr. Bacon and Mr. Smith accused Mr. Nygard of plotting to kill them. Mr. Bacon had even moved three of Mr. Nygard’s former girlfriends to the United States and hired bodyguards for them.
Media organizations with fewer resources might have given up. But The Times let us continue to dig.
In the end, we put together a timeline with more than 2,000 entries from court records, books and interviews. We talked to more than 270 people, some repeatedly. And we persuaded one strong woman to go on the record: Tamika Ferguson, the only woman who said she had been raped by Mr. Nygard in the Bahamas and agreed to let us use her name.
The truth can be messy: We found that Mr. Bacon’s money did help fuel the initial investigation in the Bahamas, which led to a lawsuit filed in New York last month. Those payments could be used to undermine witnesses and accusers. But we also found that Mr. Nygard, who had several homes and offices in the United States and Canada, had been accused of sexual misconduct repeatedly over the past 40 years, mainly by former employees.
Not only was that well before the feud with his neighbor, but it was also well outside the Bahamas, a country where many people asked us for money, even the government clerk who wanted $20 to search for a public court record. For obvious reasons, we couldn’t pay a cent.
