Readers, American and Canadian, take issue with an Op-Ed article.
“The Fantasy of Medicare for All,” by Scott W. Atlas (Op-Ed, March 10), did not mention that doctors are exhausted, dissatisfied and cynical dealing with private insurers’ regulations.
Pre-authorizations for medications, CAT and M.R.I. scans, and referrals to specialists, along with recording office visits on computers, have taken their toll on doctors. Patients suffer as well, for office visits are often rushed and impersonal, and patients leave without feeling that they have been listened to.
Worse, medical errors are more likely.
Patients do better when they feel that they have been treated as people and not as diseases. The chances of this happening would be greater with Medicare for All, which, although it would not be perfect, would have fewer regulations, fewer burned-out doctors, fewer unhappy patients and fewer risks of medical error.
So I strongly disagree with the statement that Medicare patients would be better served by the 28 private insurers that offer them private plans.
The writer is a general practitioner.
The true fantasy is Scott W. Atlas’s insinuation that the Canadian system delivers a lesser product; this is absolute conjecture (read: nonsense) on his part.
True, availability to a family doctor and wait times for tests or elective surgery may be issues, but it is not true that Canadians have restricted access to cancer and heart disease treatment.
It is not true that the same drugs are restricted north of the border. It is not true that Canadians have worse health care outcomes. It is not true that significant numbers of our citizens have died because of wait times.
Canada has some of the finest hospitals and medical schools in the world. Canadians have a longer life expectancy than Americans. Yet socialized medicine probably won’t be successful in the American capitalist system.
Scott W. Atlas’s analysis of Medicare for all makes it clear that the only ones engaging in fantasy thinking on health care are those, like him, who believe that our present system is serving us well.
When I debate conservative friends and family members on universal health care initiatives, I ask them one question. If universal health care is so horrible, why is it that countries like Britain, Canada and Australia don’t ever exchange their “socialist” systems for ours?
The answer is obvious, even with all of the problems and challenges they present: Universal health systems are preferable to ours.
Health care is a right. It’s time to take the profit out of the system and ensure that all Americans rich, poor or otherwise have access to quality care.
