The U.S. Geological Survey said the earthquake hit close to Magna, Utah, about 10 miles west of Salt Lake City. It was the strongest to hit the state since 1992, officials said.
A 5.7-magnitude earthquake struck near Magna, Utah, on Wednesday morning, knocking out power for tens of thousands of people in the largest earthquake the state has felt since 1992, the authorities said.
“I know the last thing we need right now is an earthquake, but here we are,” Mayor Erin Mendenhall of Salt Lake City said on Twitter. The city’s airport temporarily stopped flights, and the school district said it could not provide meals or food boxes Wednesday as planned to help students during the coronavirus outbreak.
Gov. Gary Herbert of Utah, urging people to stay home unless they work in public safety, said on Twitter that the earthquake was “felt across much of the state.” In the two hours after the earthquake, the U.S. Geological Survey said that 18 aftershocks had rippled through the area, the largest a 4.6-magnitude earthquake.
The region lies near the Wasatch fault system, but earthquakes of this size are somewhat rare, said Don Blakeman, a geophysicist with the U.S. Geological Survey.
“The larger the quake, the less frequently they occur, so this is uncommon, but not unheard-of,” Mr. Blakeman said.
He said the last time an earthquake of similar magnitude hit the Salt Lake City area was in 1962, when a 5.0-magnitude earthquake struck. Utah’s Emergency Management agency compared Wednesday’s earthquake to one of similar strength in 1992, which struck near St. George in the state’s south.
The earthquake rattled residents of Magna, a suburb of Salt Lake City with a population of 26,000 people. A member of the Magna council, Steve Prokopis, said he was in the shower when the tremors hit.
Mr. Prokopis said his two pet Labradors had been barking maniacally all morning. “We’re talking about giving them some medication so they’ll calm down, because they’re absolutely wound up,” he said.
The earthquake felt like a pile on after so much bad news about the coronavirus, the disease it causes, Covid-19, and the blows it has dealt the economy, Mr. Prokopis said. Because of the coronavirus, many people in Magna were likely staying at home when the earthquake hit, he said.
Sgt. Keith Horrocks of the Salt Lake City Police Department said that there was “minor structural damage here and there,” including crumbled building facades in downtown. “Luckily, there wasn’t anybody around,” he said.
He said the police and fire departments were still assessing the city.
Nancy Volmer, a spokeswoman for Salt Lake City International Airport, was at home when she felt the earthquake.
As she headed into the airport for work, she saw traffic lights out, accidents on the highway, and a blocked exit to the airport.
Ms. Volmer said the airport had briefly evacuated the Federal Aviation Administration tower and that the Transportation Security Administration had paused screening passengers because of the earthquake. She later said that besides a water main break, most of the damage appeared to be cosmetic.
Jeff Midgley, the owner of an emergency equipment company, TNT First-Aid, was home with his family, about eight miles north of Salt Lake City, when the quake hit.
