Sunday Review|Is Obsessing Over Daily Coronavirus Statistics Counterproductive?
Is Obsessing Over Daily Coronavirus Statistics Counterproductive?
Some amount of information is necessary to be prepared, but we also must avoid needless worry.
Dr. Peters is a psychologist.
My husband tells me that he looks at coronavirus statistics “once a day — or so.” I know he looks at the numbers at least two or three times a day, but he’s not willing to admit it. He’s a statistics stalker.
Some would contend that regularly checking to see how many people are infected and how many have died is critical to staying informed. But there is reason to think that doing so can be pointless or even counterproductive. We know that day traders who stalk the stock market often lose money because they mistake noise as a signal to buy or sell. While some amount of information about coronavirus cases is required for us to be prepared, does too much information distort our judgment and cause us to needlessly worry?
The psychologist Par Bjalkebring and I recently conducted research that suggests it does. About two weeks ago, we asked 1,279 Americans if they had spent time each day over the past week reading statistical information and looking at graphs about the coronavirus. About half (47.5 percent) said they did — we’ll call them the statistics stalkers — and about half (52.5 percent) did not. Men were more likely to stalk (55 percent) than women (43 percent).
We found that the statistics stalkers were more anxious. Thirty-eight percent of them reported worrying about the coronavirus, compared with only 18 percent of non-stalkers.
We also found that the statistics stalkers believed they were more likely to get the coronavirus. Fourteen percent of them said they were at least somewhat likely to get the coronavirus, compared with only 5 percent of non-stalkers.
Of course, we don’t know whether the stalkers were “wrong” to think that they were so likely to get infected, given the small amount of available data about infections in the United States at the time of our survey. However, according to data from Johns Hopkins University, Hubei, the Chinese province where the virus emerged, has reported 67,760 infected people out of a population of about 59 million, an incidence rate of 0.11 percent. This means that 99.89 percent were not infected, suggesting that the American stalkers are probably overestimating their level of risk.
Our findings suggest that people who look frequently at coronavirus statistics may focus too much on the scary stuff — the numbers of infected people and deaths — and not enough on the numbers of people not infected and of those infected who survived. The stalkers become unduly afraid, and their fear distorts their sense of how dangerous the situation is.
There is also no doubt that people can err by paying too little attention to the news. A student at my university recently asked why hand-washing signs were now posted everywhere. She had never heard of the coronavirus.
If we don’t know the precise point at which paying attention to the coronavirus statistics becomes harmful rather than helpful, we do know that paying attention can become counterproductive. So ask yourself: Do you feel much worse after reading the statistics? If so, consider taking a day or two off from following the news reports. Remind yourself of the large number of people who did not get infected and of those who, once infected, have now recovered.
My husband gets anxious when he checks the numbers, but he also feels reassured. He goes out of his way to notice that most people infected with the coronavirus have relatively mild cases.
