Arts|These Auction Items Are Out of This World. No, Really.
These Auction Items Are Out of This World. No, Really.
Collectors know that meteorites, proof of where art and science intersect, aren’t just for museums anymore.
After an immeasurable journey through time and space, a craggy gray rock fell to Earth, landing in the Sahara. No one saw it fall, and no one knows how long it lay in the sand before it was found three years ago by a nomad.
“It could have been 500 years ago, it could have been 5,000,” said James Hyslop, head of the science and natural history department at Christie’s, which plans to offer the rock for sale at its next online meteorite auction, tentatively scheduled for later this month.
It is a piece of the moon, and its recent journey here on Earth — from Northwest Africa to Christie’s in New York, where it and more than 40 other meteorites are expected to be part of the sale — charts the changes in the market for a rare and exotic class of collectibles: rocks that came from outer space.
Some of those — reminiscent of sculptures by Henry Moore and Umberto Boccioni and Alberto Giacometti — were in an auction at Phillips in 1995 that helped ignite this market. Mr. Pitt was later a consultant to Bonhams, Heritage and Christie’s when those auction houses entered the meteorite market. Several of his meteorites are in the Christie’s auction.
That’s the range for the Sahara meteorite that is the marquee attraction in the Christie’s auction, with a presale estimate of $300,000 to $500,000. It weighs about three pounds and looks like a miniature moon, but it didn’t fall to Earth that way. It was once part of large chunk of the moon that was blasted into orbit by an asteroid strike and that shattered into pieces when it hit Earth’s atmosphere and scattered across hundreds of miles of what meteoricists call a “strewn field” in Mauritania, Western Sahara and Algeria.
Cutting a meteorite is not as alarming to a meteoricist as cutting a toe off the Pietà would be to an art historian. “As long as there is enough material to go around, I don’t have a problem with it,” said Carl Agee, director of the Institute of Meteoritics at the University of New Mexico, who classifies many of the new meteorite finds.
The higher prices rise, the more nomads are looking for those odd black rocks that stand out so starkly against the desert sands. “Meteorites have become like the biggest cash crop for desert nomads,” Mr. Pitt said.
