204 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $25.
Subtlety is not something Ferrari has time for. He barrels through this blackly comic story the way his protagonist, Luis Machi, barrels through life: loud, crude and indifferent to the finer points of character and plot as he rushes inexorably toward doom. His novel tracks a day in the life of a grotesque oligarch who cares more for his collection of 300 silk ties than for his family, considers women as disposable as cigars and spends more on coke than he does on his workers. It opens in the morning, when, after partying all night with his mistress, Machi calls his wife to order breakfast, only to find that someone has punctured a tire on his $200,000 BMW. Even worse, there’s an unidentified body in the trunk.
Heavy on action and dark humor — fluidly rendered in West’s translation from the original Spanish — “Like Flies From Afar” is for those who like their noir fast, short and nasty. Ferrari, the author of several previous novels, works as a janitor in a Buenos Aires subway station, a job he obtained after he and his wife were deported from the United States in the 1990s. His disabused perspective peeks through the details: Machi tosses his college-age daughter’s book out the window; it’s “The Order of Things,” by Michel Foucault, the French philosopher who, unbeknown to Machi, is against everything he stands for. The novel’s title is drawn from Borges, whom Machi despises. And there are epigraphs from Marx and Jim Thompson, America’s homegrown noir genius, who specialized in characters caught in hells of their own making, even when, like Machi, they think they’re living in a capitalist paradise.
124 pp. Gallic Books. Paper, $14.95.
Garnier, the author of more than 60 books, died in 2010. His psychological thrillers are in the tradition of Georges Simenon’s romans durs, and Boyce’s lucid translation of this, his final book, feels true to that bleakly lyric vision, though one wonders about the “children’s books” listed in his oeuvre.
495 pp. Black Cat. Paper, $17.
Alone in the teeming metropolis of Hong Kong, Nga-Yee is a quiet, unassuming librarian, driven by grief to investigate her little sister’s suicide. At first, Chan’s novel moves at a lugubrious pace; there are many pages detailing Nga-Yee’s miserable family history before we get to the tragedy that triggers the plot. But if the road is long, there are twists and turns ahead. Meanwhile, enjoy the side trips, detailing everything from international venture capital and Hong Kong’s public housing rules to how to cook proper won tons and hack a stranger’s phone in a Starbucks.
“Second Sister,” in Tiang’s colloquial translation from the original Chinese, reads more like a mainstream mystery than a noir until we meet N, the enigmatic hacker Nga-Yee hires when her conventional private eye can’t hack the job.  But then he demonstrates his super tech skills, scaring off Triad gangsters who kidnap them and charging Nga-Yee exactly the amount in her savings account, which he just happens to know, before sending her out for won tons, of course.
Their investigation takes us from creepy commuter-train-gropers to the dark reaches of the internet, where evil festers in many forms — online bullies and sexual predators as well as shady tech businesses, fake websites and chat rooms, even voices in people’s heads. If you’re not nervous reading “Second Sister” on the subway, you will be when you venture online.
