Small animals, calico tea cozies and not a lot of men.
In the dense thicket of the internet lies a verdant patch of grass where dappled sunbeams peek through the leaves, resting fawns doze about, a troop of woodland mushrooms grows underfoot, and a brook faintly burbles in the distance. Freshly baked scones are just emerging from the oven in a thatch roof country cottage bordering the woods, while linen-scented laundry dries peacefully on a clothesline in the yard.
It could be the beginning of a Hans Christian Andersen fairy tale, before the inevitable darkness seeps in, but rather it’s the backdrop of a budding aesthetic movement called cottagecore, where tropes of rural self-sufficiency converge with dainty décor to create an exceptionally twee distillation of pastoral existence.
“It’s like Animal Crossing but in real life,” Emily Kellum, an 18-year-old from Belmont, Miss., wrote in an email (she’s not able to get phone service in her small town, she said). She was referring to the wholesome video game in which one plays a human living among adorable anthropomorphic creatures like bear cubs and deer.
Take modern escapist fantasies like tiny homes, voluntary simplicity, forest bathing and screen-free childhoods, then place them inside a delicate, moss-filled terrarium, and the result will look a lot like cottagecore.
It’s a Holly Hobbie illustration come to life, consisting of a coterie of young people, mostly in their teens and early 20s, who congregate online to swap bread baking recipes and photos of their foraged mushroom hauls, stare at pictures of farm animals and otherwise partake in an aspirational form of nostalgia that praises the benefits of living a slow life in which nothing much happens at all.
And yet access to the cottagecore universe is only through the very technology most of its adherents would rather eschew.
In the cottagecore universe, there are no phones pinging constantly with updates, no urgent work emails, no evenings spent responding to the onerous demands of a tyrannical boss. In fact, there is no labor beyond domestic, and workaday tasks are completed with a gauzy sense of fulfillment.
Each pie appears to emerge effortlessly from the oven with immaculate golden brown lattice crust. An obvious backlash to the hustle culture embodied by Fiverr ads, cottagecore attempts to assuage burnout with a languid enjoyment of life’s mundane tasks.
While bona fide prairie dresses had a moment circa 2018 thanks to designers of floaty, filmy frocks like Batsheva, Doen and the Vampire’s Wife, cottagecore embraces the analog existence these fashions merely imply. But unlike reactionary movements like “trad wives” — essentially right-wing mommy bloggers who advocate a return to regressive gender roles — cottagecore offers a vision of domestic bliss without servitude in the traditional binary framework.
After nearly a decade of interior design dominated by whitewashed walls, monstera plants and bland midcentury reproduction furniture (Kyle Chayka, a cultural critic, coined the term AirSpace to describe this aesthetic in 2016), perhaps the yen for minimalism is finally waning and a desire for something wilder and more pastoral is beginning to take root.
Architectural Digest has named something it calls Vintage Maximalism, characterized by “lots of color, warmth, antiques and eclectic touches,” a top design trend for 2020. And, a cohort of “grandmillennials” who gravitate toward chintzy wallpaper and lace curtains are currently enjoying a moment.
But if cottagecore’s dainty, precious visuals offer a corrective to the blank canvas of AirSpace, its preponderance of cabbage roses and doilies still falls prey to the same fallacy of minimalism: that by exerting control over one’s environment and making it appear perfect, one can regain control over one’s life.
Both minimalism and cottagecore are wholly unrealistic depictions of life: so filtered by perfection that they’re not possible to reproduce in real life. (Relatedly, other critics of cottagecore resist its nostalgia, based on colonialism’s original, and continuing, sins.) The only way to find satisfaction in life is to abandon all idealized depictions and acknowledge that messy humanity will always find a way to seep in.
Sarah Cavar, 21, a senior majoring in critical social thought at Mount Holyoke College, was drawn to the imaginary cottagecore lifestyle, following more than 600 farm animal-themed accounts on Instagram, until a reality check came in a visit to an actual farm.
Though cottagecore has existed in some iteration since 2017 (or arguably 1817), a TikTok video posted by a user named SoraBlu that featured a series of brief moments from her enviable bucolic rural existence brought cottagecore to wider attention in December 2019. There was a bowl of speckled brown eggs, footage of gentle fawns frolicking in a forest — all set to a swelling, cinematic score.
Ms. Hinze suffers from a chronic illness, which makes holding down a regular job impossible. She supports herself by selling barnacle-themed ceramics, and also earn money through Patreon, where monthly donations from fans help cover the expenses of “wonder based events,” like hosting foraged dinner parties to strangers who stumble across an invitation in the woods.
Phoenix Tweedy, who is 21 and from Forest Grove, Ore., discovered cottagecore five years after cowering under her desk during morning period while an active shooter killed one of her classmates at Reynolds High School in nearby Troutdale.
Things that do not exist in the cottagecore universe: frostbite, jobs and toxic masculinity. The rise of #MeToo — and, now, the inability of female candidates to get traction in the presidential race — has again stoked up buried rage for many women, and cottagecore offers a vision of the world where men are not consciously excluded; they are simply an afterthought. “Cottagecore is all about finally feeling comfortable and at peace, even if that peace is fake,” Mx. Cavar said.
