If you’ve done a musical in Marin County, you know the name Marilyn Izdebski, who has directed more than 10,000 kids over 41 years. Many cities have someone like her.
SAN ANSELMO, Calif. — When I arrive at the theater — a barnlike building on the leafy campus of the San Francisco Theological Seminary — to watch the dress rehearsal for “42nd Street,” a petite, bright-eyed woman in her mid-60s warmly greets me. She has perfect posture; her dark hair is in a bun with a pencil stuck through it, and a pair of reading glasses hangs around her neck.  This is Marilyn Izdebski’s uniform.
If you ask any kid who performs in musicals in Marin County, Calif., how they got started, the answer would be “Marilyn.” Everyone knows her. And they refer to her by first name only.
Marilyn produces six shows a year, typically casting 60 to 100 kids, ages 7 to 15, in each show. They are always in elaborate costumes — even the chorus members have several changes — and sometimes tap shoes. Most of “Marilyn’s kids,” as they call themselves, go on to do high school musicals and community shows, and a few become professional actors, usually in the Bay Area. Some return from college or as adults to help out in her after-school programs.
Over a 41-year career that’s included running her own business and directing elsewhere, Marilyn estimates that she’s worked with ten thousand kids. She has directed 153 shows and counting, including “Evita” four times, “Annie” six times, and “Guys and Dolls” six times. Her fourth “Tommy,” though her first featuring adult and young actors both, is playing through April 5 at the Novato Theater Company.
A vast network of people — both kids and adults — participates in musicals all across America. Broadway is the birthplace and the brand, but the lifeblood of musical theater is in local venues.
This slow, complexly collaborative, face-to-face artistic activity continues to thrive in our culture of big data and small screens. Marilyn Izdebski’s after-school program in California — along with dinner theaters in Colorado and Jewish summer camps in Maine and outdoor venues in Texas and Disney musicals in elementary schools — are key parts of the national ecosystem.
And though Marilyn herself is quirky and unique, her role is not.
The backstage diva — the female director who works with kids after school and on weekends, who teaches them dance or drama, and who directs them in shows — can be found in most American towns.
She is typically a disciplined leader and dependable mentor who shapes musical theater-obsessed kids into triple-threat performers. Though most of those kids won’t become professionals, that doesn’t diminish her importance. On the contrary, all of her kids are profoundly shaped by her.
“Diva” is the perfect moniker for these women, who, though they labor backstage, occupy a starring role in the lives of musical theater kids, and are a force in the after-school artistic life of their community.
The many such women I’ve met aren’t frustrated performers like their fictional counterparts, characters like the studio owner in “Bunheads” or Miss Patty in “Gilmore Girls.” Rather, the backstage diva’s ambitions are grander somehow.
She sees her role as nothing less than shaping children into people.
By the end of the 19th century, women frequently operated schools of dance that bore their name. Backstage divas also emerged during the children’s theater movement that took off in the 1920s. In that decade, the Association of Junior Leagues, run primarily by women, added children’s theater to its national agenda. By the 1940s, the association had opened over a hundred children’s theaters in cities across America, from Portland to Chicago to Nashville.
By the late 1960s and early 1970s, youth musical theater classes were offered by dance studios and music conservatories. Some programs added one musical theater workshop or dance class, while others expanded their offerings more broadly and became comprehensive performing arts schools.
Some studio owners made these changes because they wanted to offer a more “well-rounded” arts education. Others knew about Broadway’s new triple-threat (acting and singing and dancing) demands and felt that comprehensive training would better prepare their top students for the profession. Still others lived in towns where public school arts programs were lacking, so they sought to fulfill a need in their communities.
By the mid-1970s, more women opened performing arts studios that offered musical theater classes from the start, like Marilyn, who launched her school in 1979 with a mounting of “Oliver!” Like other teachers, she relies on the income from students’ tuition for her livelihood. Though many of her students are wealthy, others are not, and she never turns away a child who can’t afford to pay.
The dress rehearsal of “42nd Street,” two nights before the show opens, is controlled chaos. Set in 1933, “42nd Street” is the backstage story of a girl from Allentown, Penn., who becomes a Broadway star. It’s a perfect Marilyn vehicle, with a large cast of colorful characters and many chorus numbers.
I arrive at the theater before the kids, but after Marilyn and her crew of adult helpers. The place is buzzing with volunteers. Two people deal with a new sound system, and will eventually get the kids fitted with body mics.
Five women organize an astonishing array of costumes, tap shoes and feather boas into small, curtained-off, makeshift dressing rooms backstage. Another pair of women prepare sign-up sheets to order T-shirts and DVDs of the show. Two men in their early 20s adjust the floor-to-ceiling canvas backdrop — a sun yellow background over which “Pretty Lady” in large silver 3-D lettering is painted below an image of a 1930s iconic blond pinup girl.
The painted backdrop and the costumes feel simultaneously familiar and fresh. For a moment I forget where I am and what year it is. Something about this person, this place and this evening seems out of time, innocent. What is it? Except for Marilyn’s phone, which she mostly uses to communicate with her assistants, there are no phones at all.
She shows them how to stay in the light. Then she gestures for all of the kids to gather and they do a big group warm-up, a singsong, hand clapping game called “Bumble Bee,” which everyone seems to love and which calms and focuses them.
Through the run, I sit in the booth with Marilyn and Bobbi, her Maltipoo, a fixture at auditions, rehearsals and shows. Marilyn simultaneously manages to watch the kids perform; take notes on specific choreography or blocking mistakes, including a girl sitting a mere few inches too far stage right; run the lights and write new cues if she doesn’t like them. She communicates by headset with Fernando about lighting instruments that aren’t focused right; answers texts on her phone from another assistant; and occasionally shouts instructions to the actors.
She is doing what would normally be the jobs of five different people, at least.
On opening night, the kids’ families and friends, dressed in their theatergoing best and weighed down with congratulatory bouquets of flowers for the young stars, mill around the stage, sensing the children’s nervous excitement. Volunteers scurry around backstage, braiding hair and tying ribbons, sewing loose seams or taping up hems.
When it is time for the show to start, the packed-house audience settles in their seats. The house lights go to dark, the music begins and the kids dance onto the stage. The lights come up, shining on the children who worked so hard for weeks and weeks to make a show.
Where is Marilyn then? In the back of the house, watching quietly? Getting dressed for a post-show greeting? Among her own friends and family in the audience? No. She is in the booth, Bobbi by her side, headset on, running the light board, working. Tomorrow she will start rehearsing for the next show.
Stacy Wolf is a professor of theater at Princeton University. This article is an edited excerpt from her new book, “Beyond Broadway: The Pleasure and Promise of Musical Theatre Across America” (Oxford University Press).