A reader finds it immoral for senators to dump their stocks while “making cheery public statements about our readiness for Covid-19.” Also: Children who lose a parent early.
I worry less about the legality of the investment sales by Senator Richard Burr on the heels of a classified briefing about the coronavirus than I do about the morality of his actions, and that of other senators.
How is it that he could get a scary briefing, then profit from it while making cheery public statements about our readiness for Covid-19? President Trump was downplaying the threat, but the senators knew how serious the threat was. Yet they misled constituents. Mr. Burr even said the United States was more prepared than “any other country” to meet the threat. Really?
The senators’ oath requires them to “support and defend” the Constitution against enemies, foreign and domestic. Arguably, such enemies include Covid-19, a far larger danger than, say, Iran. In misleading us, Mr. Burr ignored his oath.
The writer was principal deputy assistant secretary of state for intelligence and research in the Reagan administration.
David Belcher’s article “My Father at 100, as Seen From the Age He Died” (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, March 4) struck a chord with me as I look back upon the death of my mother at 49 from breast cancer.
I was 23 when she died and had yet to experience all the joys, challenges and heartaches that adult life would deal me. Every year that went by, I marked her death and my clean bill of health as it pertained to breast cancer.
When I approached the age she died, I felt as if I were waiting for the other shoe to drop every time I had a mammogram or exam. I am now approaching 70 and have let go of that particular fear only to find it is replaced by others.
What I understand clearly now is that my mother died way too young, and sadly she missed many of those life events I have been blessed to experience. She never saw her grandchildren, grew old with my father, fostered her artistic talent or traveled to all the places she dreamed about.
As I prepare to enter another decade later this year, I can’t help but know how lucky I am.
South Deerfield, Mass.
Childhood is supposed to be our happy time. But perhaps like so many things, it is misunderstood. Children are not the darlings, bathed in love and tucked into covers of security. Some more than others carry hurt and loss throughout a lifetime.
David Belcher achieved the age when his father died. For many of us who lose a parent at any early age, that number is something we dwell with for years.
A friend reminded me recently that I celebrated my 39th birthday, as I had always felt that I would die young, as my mother had. I had love given by an angel in my young life, but the loss of my mother has been the central theme of my life.
Not sometimes but always, I have felt like a motherless child. What comes through so strongly in Mr. Belcher’s thoughts is that children of loss grow into adults of loss.
I thank him for articulating what is often buried deep in our hearts. It does not have to harm us, but it is there to be accounted for.
