Parenting|My Ex and I Fought About Everything. Then Came the Coronavirus.
Once the virus was here, his response shocked me.
Nearly two months ago, when the new coronavirus was upending life in China, I felt for those living through this nightmare. As the news became more and more dire, I began worrying about the virus making its way to the United States. I cycled through anxieties about illness and quarantine, but my biggest fear was how my soon-to-be-ex-husband and I would handle this.
We share custody of our two boys, ages 6 and almost 4, and at that time, we argued about almost everything. We both wanted our kids to be healthy, but we rarely agreed on what that looked like.  To me, meals shouldn’t be a battle. On sunny days, I slathered the boys in sunscreen. My ex wanted them to soak in the rays and get enough vitamin D.
Our constant fighting — about way more than just parenting — led us to file for divorce 18 months ago. Now, living apart, I hope he’s putting sunscreen on the kids, and I’m sure he hopes I’m making them eat all their veggies. But frankly, there isn’t much either of us can do about it.
Throw a pandemic into the mix of a fraught divorce, and who knows what might happen.
I had feared that when the virus came here my ex and I would be on different pages about how to handle it.  I imagined having no option but to send my children to his house, where they could get infected.
I couldn’t discuss any of this with him. So I did the only thing possible: I ordered more ramen.
As I read about families under lockdown, I imagined myself home alone with my boys. What would happen if one of them got a fever, and I needed to take him to the pediatrician, but I didn’t have a partner who could stay home with the healthy kid? I recalled scenes of Wuhan’s overrun hospitals. Would I have to bring both of my boys into a doctor’s office filled with ill patients?
I shopped more, ordering disinfectant wipes and laundry detergent.
What if I got sick? I wondered: How do single parents take care of themselves and their children?
Many other single parents haven’t been as lucky as me. I have friends living through what I had feared. One doesn’t want to send her son to his other mother’s house because she worries social-distancing precautions haven’t been in place, and she fears they all could have the virus. Others have primary custody of their kids and have little to no help.
So many divorced or separated parents now have to worry about their ex’s new partner who might be infected. This could be especially dangerous for those who have chronic medical conditions or live with elderly relatives. How can we protect ourselves and those in our home if we are sending our kids out into this world?
I’m part of an online support group for divorced and separated women in my area, and it’s now filled with comments by mothers trying to sort out how to handle such a stressful time. Some say they don’t know if they should prioritize keeping their kids isolated or ensuring they see the other parent. Many describe fighting with their exes about how each should be behaving, and say they feel helpless.
And then there are parents whose exes are no longer in the picture. A writer and mother in central Appalachia, Alison Stine, wrote in The Washington Post about the extreme difficulty of raising a child alone now.
Plus, this is only the beginning for those in the United States. We don’t know how different “shelter in place” requirements will affect families that share two homes. Or what this looks like when more and more people get sick.
One of my friends, Melanie, said she’ll keep seeing her boyfriend, and she knows her ex will see his fiancée, and the kids will be exposed to their families. It’s worth it for their sanity. “We all just need to make the best choices we can right now,” Melanie said.
For me and my ex, even if we get through the pandemic, I know we will have disagreements sooner or later. We’re not suddenly going to be that divorced couple who spends holidays together. But I do hope we can use this moment as an opportunity to turn the page a bit on our approach to co-parenting. I need to start trusting that my boys’ father will make the best decision he can. We share two amazing children, who need both of us. A pandemic doesn’t change that; it makes it clearer.
How Are Divorced or Separated Parents Co-Parenting During Coronavirus?