Readers offer their stories of coping: the county jail as a wedding venue, a father mourning from the safety of a car, remote piano lessons and more.
On Saturday we ran a sampling of letters we received when we asked readers how they were dealing with the disruption in their lives. Below are several more responses.
The grieving father sat in a car parked on the cemetery road, just a few feet from his daughter’s coffin. In his late 80s, he kept the car window most of the way up, afraid to mingle with the small group of mourners gathered by the open grave. He quietly wept and glanced up as I leaned in just a bit closer to tell him how sorry I was about his devastating loss.
Our local funeral home has wisely chosen to hold only graveside services during this surrealistic stretch of time, asking that only immediate family attend. It is the right thing to do for the health of our community, for all of us.
I said the proper prayers, talked about the 60 years this woman had lived, how full they had been, how many lives she had touched. At one point I looked up, and a strange scene met my eyes that I will never forget — the 15 mourners standing far from the grave, from the family, and, yes, far from one another.
We are reimagining what it means to hug, hold, touch, honor and cherish. These things define our humanity. We need them now more than ever.
In 2018, Ryan dropped to one knee and proposed, so we saved and planned for an amazing March 21 celebration. As Covid-19 dominoes started to fall, things changed quickly. To start, the first wave of travel restrictions took out the honeymoon, followed by a call from Katy’s multiple sclerosis doctor expressing concern, and finally, on March 11, we postponed our wedding.
With much bigger problems in the world, we were looking for a moment of positivity and were determined to make this thing official. As we walked into the courthouse, we quickly learned it was closing because of coronavirus risks and were redirected to the only place currently conducting weddings — the county jail.
Years from now, we’re sure it will make for a good story. But for now, we’ll start this chapter at home, quarantined together and hoping the world comes back around.
Some friends are worried about how they are going to occupy themselves for weeks staying in their home. My cousin is worried about not being able to get the chocolate ice cream that she says she cannot live without. My neighbor calls me often with rumors about other neighbors who may have the virus now. I listen quietly to their complaints, but my only thoughts are about my son, who is in the middle of his shift as an E.R. doctor.
I am a middle-class retiree with non-life-threatening health problems that require me to be homebound 75 percent of the time. Besides an element of fear, the coronavirus has not disrupted my life as much as it has for many others.
As one too experienced with self-isolation, I suggest that we reflect on the millions of people forced to flee their homes and live in refugee camps because of war and violence; people living in unsafe neighborhoods who always practice some form of self-quarantine for their physical safety; people around the world who live in abject poverty who are quarantined from a real life; the working poor who will forever feel the effects of this pandemic.
After such reflection, lucky ones like me can then spend their time reading books, listening to music, watching movies and eating takeout food. Luckier ones must agonizingly wait a spell to dine out and take in a show.
There has been a pleasant upside to our self-isolation. My husband, a retired infectious disease physician, and I are in our early 70s. So we have been distancing ourselves socially for a number of days.
Every afternoon we move into our small den to settle in and watch a foreign TV series like the one we’re watching now, “Trapped,” an Icelandic production. We binge watch several episodes, then return to the kitchen, pour ourselves a glass of wine, turn on the news and make dinner together.
I look forward to these afternoons in a way I haven’t looked forward to “normal” afternoons in a while. Closeting ourselves in has opened us up to the joys of spending time together. It’s a self-isolation habit we plan to extend.
I take piano lessons. On Monday, when I canceled my Tuesday lesson, I felt liberated: No more practicing — at least for a while.
Today my piano teacher called to tell me we would be starting remote lessons through one of the web-based videoconferencing services. At first, I was extremely skeptical, but I didn’t want the music studio to go out of business and I want to continue to learn to play the instrument. And I had taken two days off from practicing and was, believe it or not, ready to get back into it.
