Readers weigh in on many aspects of the pandemic, and we invite you to send in your own coping stories.
Credit...The locations of people who have tested positive in the U.S.
Quarantines. Flight bans. School closings. Sports cancellations. Broadway shutdown. Employee layoffs. Few people have not had their lives upended in some fashion. Tell us how your life, or that of your family, has been disrupted by the coronavirus, and how you have coped, in 200 words or less. The deadline is Thursday, at 10 a.m., Eastern time.
Please include your name, city, state and contact information, and put “disruption” in the subject line.
It’s 5 a.m., and as I see the moon out my window, I am deeply reminded of rising early each morning after 9/11. Back then, I stared up at the moon and took comfort that at least the moon was doing what it was supposed to do.
Most of us living in New York City and elsewhere were terrified. We didn’t know what would happen next. This pandemic is triggering many of those same feelings.
As a psychotherapist, I am asked by many patients to help them stay calm. I am a voice of reason for them when I sit with them in my office. But I can’t make decisions for them. All of us have to decide for ourselves if we should fly, see a friend for dinner or get on a bus to go to a medical appointment.
The majority of us will get through this. It will take time.  Keep your distance from others. And don’t forget to look at the moon. It is still there at night.
Though President Trump often takes credit for things he didn’t do, and he never accepts responsibility for problems he has created, it is important that we citizens not become inured to his dishonesty and ignorance.
Which is worse: The president’s not knowing what his administration is doing, or knowing about it yet lying to avoid responsibility? Frighteningly, the whole world now has to reckon with the impact of both his ignorance and his dishonesty in increasingly unchecked pandemic doses.
I’ll admit that I came late to the game. By the time I hit the stores in my Seattle neighborhood, the shelves were empty. There were no anti-bacterial soaps, sanitizers, wipes, plastic gloves or masks. I had no better luck with my shopping list online.
When I read that one of the first signs of coronavirus infection is a rise in temperature, I tried to buy a thermometer. Again, beaten to the punch, not a thermometer to be found.
It’s a huge mistake not to have thermometers and sanitizing products widely and readily available to the public. Having the ability to monitor your temperature is the front-line defense in fighting this virus.
Just as it is a massive failure that tests for the virus are not widely available, if we can’t take our temperature we are flying blind.
It’s about to get crazy real for most of you. For some of us, it already has.
Quarantines are real. Fear is real. Waiting for test results is real. Stocking up is real. But not everyone is stocking up on the right things.
Sure, make a toilet paper fort. I’d argue that hoarding is causing problems for those who actually need things. So just take what you do need. But overload on a few things. Because you are about to spend a whole lot of time with each other.
Overload on movie night in front of the TV. Overload on card games. Overload on reading time and calming fears and long-distance phone calls and homemade birthday cupcakes and listening to music and playing music.
Overload on the things that bankrupt you if you don’t invest in them. Make memories that will last forever.
In addition to what everyone knows about hand washing and social distancing to help mitigate the spread of the coronavirus, here are suggestions to help deal with stress associated with this pandemic.
Social distancing doesn’t mean social isolation. People can reach out to friends and family, talk and connect via phone or FaceTime.
Consider reaching out to neighbors who may need help. If they are in a high-risk population, they may need someone to go to the store for them or help out in other ways. Simple acts like these can go a long way to make everyone feel better.
Consume the news in moderation. While it is important to stay informed, too much information adds to our stress levels. The repetitive nature of the news cycle is not good for mental health. After receiving necessary information, people should consider turning off the news and reading a book or watching a television show or feel-good movie.
Most important, know that being anxious at this time is a completely normal response to stress. Should the stress begin to affect your ability to function, you should seek professional help.
The writer is president and chief executive of the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation.
Countries around the world must be amazed at our lack of testing equipment, misleading information from the White House and sluggish response.
Even more frightening than the current pandemic is another that will inevitably come. This could be the drill for the next one. That one might not, like Covid-19, spare children and only moderately affect most healthy people under 60. Everyone could be at risk. The thought of facing such a crisis with the current capacity of our federal health care system is terrifying.
Let us hope that responsible medical leaders will soon get the backing and support of the government to enable them to cope with this and future health crises.
It’s past time to mandate contactless point-of-sale across the United States. Every retail transaction is a disease transmission vector.
Some transactions we cannot do without: buying fuel for a vehicle, or groceries and sundries at the market. Transactions often require us to enter a PIN on a shared keypad, touch a dirty screen to start and end a transaction, or enter a ZIP code. When paying for meals at restaurants, we nearly always are forced to hand over our card to be handled by a server.
We need an incentive or mandate to add contactless readers to the chip and stripe readers, and allow the mobile phone to be the authenticator (bypassing the PIN entry keys).
Per the law of unintended consequences, this new virus could force some permanent changes throughout our global society. Could one of those changes be turning the tide away from the dreaded “open office” work space? Once held up as some golden mecca of collaboration, it is actually a sea of headphones and microaggressions over lack of quiet and personal space. I miss the oasis of focus and privacy of my long-gone cubicle.
I can only imagine how much easier it would be for office workers to steer clear of disease if we had cubicle walls between us, instead of just headphones.
