The number of coronavirus cases in New York State topped 75,000. Among them: Governor Cuomo’s brother.
Help is arriving as the death count grows, Mayor de Blasio said.
Governor Cuomo’s brother was among those to become infected.
The Elmhurst doctor featured in a video report has tested positive.
The city will investigate the firing of an Amazon warehouse worker.
Four in 10 New York tenants may not pay April rent. What then?
More than 500 paramedics and emergency medical technicians, 2,000 nurses and 250 ambulances are heading to New York City from across the United States to shore up a health care system that is being buried under an avalanche of coronavirus patients, Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Tuesday.
The mayor’s remarks came with the city’s death toll at 932 and more than 40,000 virus cases confirmed. Hours later, city officials reported that 1,096 people had died of the virus.
The mayor announced the arriving reinforcements while speaking at the U.S.T.A. Billie Jean King National Tennis Center in Flushing, Queens, which is being converted to an emergency hospital amid a surge in virus patients in the borough, especially at Elmhurst Hospital.
“Very soon this is going to be 350 hospital beds to protect the lives of New Yorkers,” Mr. de Blasio said, noting that 135 additional ambulances and 270 paramedics had already arrived.
As the number of cases and hospitalizations continues to rise rapidly, Mr. de Blasio said the city’s needs for equipment and medical workers remained vast, and immediate.
He said he had asked the White House for 1,000 nurses, 350 respiratory therapists and 150 doctors from the military and the reserves.
“I have reiterated that need and that request and I have to say in many ways it’s a demand because this is about saving lives in time,” the mayor said.
The mayor also said that the city would be closing 10 playgrounds where people had not been adhering to social-distancing rules. He did deliver a small piece of welcome news for the city’s car owners: Alternate-side parking rules would be suspended for another two weeks.
Governor Andrew M. Cuomo said on Tuesday morning that 332 more people had died in New York since the day before, bringing the state’s virus-related death toll to 1,550.
As he delivered the news, his younger brother, Chris Cuomo, 49, a CNN anchor, announced that he had tested positive for the virus. The governor later said his brother had a fever, shortness of breath and chills.
The governor has appeared on his brother’s show regularly since the outbreak began, offering their sibling rivalry to viewers as a humorous diversion from the drumbeat of grim news.On Sunday night, the governor even teased his brother for broadcasting from his basement, where, it turns out, the younger Mr. Cuomo was quarantined as of Tuesday.
“Everyone is subject to this virus,” the governor said on Monday. He added that his brother, whom he called his best friend, was strong — “not as strong as he thinks” — and that he would be fine.
Mr. Cuomo has invoked his family throughout the crisis as a reference point for others about how the disease was affecting their loved ones. But Tuesday was the first time the governor spoke about the disease striking his own family.
He used his brother’s illness to demonstrate the importance of social distancing, even from family members, saying that two weeks ago he had talked his brother out of letting their mother, who lives alone, stay at his house.
The daily number of new deaths in New York State has increased 31 percent a day on average for the past week, and the death toll has tripled in four days.
The statewide number of confirmed cases increased by 9,298, to 75,795.
The number of patients hospitalized passed 10,900, up 15 percent from Monday. Of those, 2,710 were in intensive care rooms with ventilators.
Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey announced 2,196 new virus cases, bringing the state’s total to 18, 696. There were 69 new fatalities, including two men in their 30s, bringing the total to 267.
Gov. Ned Lamont of Connecticut announced 557 new virus cases, bringing the state’s total to 3,128. Thirty-three more people had died of the virus, bringing the number of fatalities to 69, state health officials said.
Last week, with Elmhurst Hospital overwhelmed by the coronavirus crisis, Dr. Colleen Smith took The New York Times inside the emergency room, filming the struggle that she and her colleagues faced trying to treat the surge in patients.
On Tuesday, Dr. Smith disclosed that she had since tested positive for the virus. She was at home in quarantine with mild symptoms, she said.
In the video report, Dr. Smith described the concerns that workers at the hospital had because of their repeated exposure to the illness. Elmhurst, a public hospital, is among the hardest-hit hospitals in a city that has become the U.S. epicenter of the outbreak.
Mr. de Blasio said on Tuesday that the city’s Human Rights Commission would investigate the firing of an Amazon worker who led a walkout of a Staten Island warehouse over health and safety concerns.
The warehouse walkout on Monday preceded a sickout on Tuesday by Whole Foods Market employees. The two job actions underscored a fact of American life brought into sharp focus by the coronavirus outbreak: the inequality that defines the country’s work force.
While many white-collar workers answer emails and craft PowerPoint slides from home, service workers and laborers — those who still have jobs — have continued to report to work, putting themselves and their families in the path of the virus.
“There’s absolutely racial and class inequities baked into this crisis,” Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a Democrat who represents parts of Queens and the Bronx, said of the protests in a radio interview on Tuesday.
The Staten Island worker who was fired, Christian Smalls, said he had advised a visibly ill colleague to go home last week. She later tested positive for the virus.
Mr. Smalls said he told management that the center should close for two weeks because there was no way to know how many other workers had been infected.
He said the New York City sheriff’s office had visited the Staten Island warehouse to ensure that social-distancing rules were being followed and would do so throughout the week.
The true economic toll of all but shutting down New York City to stem the spread of the coronavirus is likely to become clearer on Wednesday when April rent is due.
In just a month’s time, the lives of millions of New Yorkers have been turned upside down, with many of them losing their jobs and now worrying about paying their bills.
“It’s gotten to this point where I really cannot pay rent because doing so would jeopardize my ability to buy food or basically survive,” said Henry True, 24, a musician and freelancer who pays $600 a month for a bedroom in a shared apartment in Brooklyn.
No one knows for sure how many renters in New York City will have a hard time paying, but landlords and the real estate industry say they are bracing for perhaps as many 40 percent of tenants, if not more, skipping their April payments.
There are about 5.4 million renters in the city, about two-thirds of the population. If a large share of them cannot make rent, landlords, especially smaller ones that operate on thin margins, will be unable to pay their own bills, property owners said.
A field hospital opens in Central Park.
Central Park, one of the world’s best-known gathering places, was to begin receiving hospital patients in its East Meadow on Tuesday as the city transforms itself in extraordinary ways.
With the help of the nonprofit group Samaritan’s Purse, a 68-bed tented field hospital was erected in the meadow to treat virus patients from Mount Sinai Health System’s hospitals in Brooklyn and Queens.
Although it will get patients from Mount Sinai, the hospital will be operated by Samaritan’s Purse, an evangelical Christian disaster-relief charity.
The charity is led by the Rev. Franklin Graham, a vocal supporter of President Trump’s who has been criticized for his anti-Muslim and anti-L.G.B.T.Q rhetoric.
As the hospital was being set up, Mr. Graham asked specifically for the help of Christian medical professionals on Twitter. That led some local officials to worry that those treating virus patients there might be expected to discriminate against members of groups that Mr. Graham has criticized in the past.
Mr. de Blasio, at a news conference on Tuesday, said that the city and Mount Sinai had received assurances from Samaritan’s Purse that it would follow the city’s anti-discrimination laws in providing treatment.
A spokesman for Mount Sinai, Loren Riegelhaupt, said in a statement that workers at the field hospital would be expected to adhere to Mount Sinai’s guidelines, which prevent discriminating against patients or staff members.
A federal judge ordered ICE to halt a policy on releasing detainees.
A federal judge has ordered U.S. immigration authorities in New York to halt what civil liberties advocates said was a computer-driven policy thatcontributed to crowding at the region’s detention centers and increased detainees’ risk of contracting the coronavirus.
In a preliminary injunction issued late Monday, the judge required U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE, to revisit the cases of thousands of detainees to determine whether they were eligible to be released on bond.
The order came after many employees at detention centers used by ICE, and at least four detainees held at three centers in New Jersey, became infected with the virus.
The order stemmed from a lawsuit filed in February by the New York Civil Liberties Union and the Bronx Defenders that claimed ICE’s “risk assessment” algorithm had led to the jailing of thousands of immigrants detained over the past three years. In the previous three years, the suit said, close to half of those detained were released on bond.
ICE, which is legally required to consider whether to release detainees within 48 hours of arrest, said it made custody determinations on a case-by-case basis after weighing factors like criminal record, immigration history and risk of flight.
The agency did not respond to a request for comment specifically about the judge’s ruling on the computer program.
Nearly 1 in 30 city police officers have been infected.
The coronavirus is taking a heavy toll on the nation’s biggest police department, with close to 1,200 New York City officers, more than 3 percent of the force, testing positive, Commissioner Dermot F. Shea said on Tuesday.
Commissioner Shea said that about 15 percent of officers were on sick leave, at least four times the normal rate. A desk for sick employees to call has gotten so many calls — “thousands and thousands and thousands,” he said — that the department has added about a dozen new phone lines to lessen wait times.
Five Police Department employees have died in the past week, and some employees have lost family members. “This thing does not discriminate,” he said.
Rep. Rose will deploy to the National Guard.
Representative Max Rose, a first-term Democrat from Staten Island, said on Tuesday that he would deploy to the National Guard starting Wednesday, with plans to work as an operations officer helping setting up field hospitals and other rescue operations in the borough.
“I am just trying to do my duty and my small part,” he said in a statement.
Members of Congress are working from home and are not expected to return to Washington for weeks. But Mr. Rose said that his deployment notwithstanding, he would be able to attend to his day job and vote on legislation if needed.
“That’s a privilege and responsibility that I take very seriously,” he said.
On Monday, officials said that a member of the New Jersey National Guard, Capt. Douglas Linn Hickock, 57, had died of complications related to the coronavirus, the first virus-related death of a U.S. service member.
The Empire State Building, honoring emergency workers, alarms some New Yorkers.
The tower lights of the Empire State Building blared red with a whirling red-and-white beacon on Monday night to pay respect to health care workers, police officers and firefighters who have confronted the spread of the coronavirus.
But while some New Yorkers appreciated the tribute, others found it less than comforting.
“The intention is great, but the effect is terrifying,” one Twitter user wrote. “TURN IT OFF. TURN IT OFF,” wrote another.
Many who said that they lived close to the building expressed alarm at the signal. Others made memes.
In an unintentional nod at the city’s anxious mood, the tower also broadcast “Empire State of Mind,” the anthem by Alicia Keys.
Alone, 105, and in a nursing home threatened by the virus.
For five years, twin sisters have visited their 105-year-old mother every night in her nursing home in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, feeding her dinner and overseeing her medications.
But two weeks ago, nursing homes barred visitors. Now the sisters have no idea what condition their mother is in or whether anyone is taking care of her.
New York’s nursing homes have long been chronically understaffed, leaving loved ones to fill critical gaps in care. Now those family members are locked out, and workers are getting sick, quarantined or quitting because the work has become too dangerous.
Some nursing homes say they cannot get the personal protective equipment they need because it is going to hospitals.
At ArchCare, which runs five nursing homes, workers wear rain ponchos and beauticians’ gowns. By Sunday the five homes had around 150 cases of the virus, and a number of deaths, said Scott LaRue, the president.
Two more homeless New Yorkers living in shelters died.
Two more men living in city homeless shelters have died of coronavirus, bringing the number of deaths to four, as city officials struggle to contain the spread.
The city Department of Homeless Services said that as of Monday, 107 people in 66 different shelters had tested positive. The men who died were all over 50, with at least one in his eighties, the city said. It did not release their names.
The Empire State of Mind is anxious, depressed and disconnected.
If in recent days you have felt like the collective anxiety in New York has been pervasive and overwhelming, a new survey suggests that you are right.
According to the latest week of data collected and analyzed by the CUNY Graduate School of Public Health & Health Policy, almost half of New York City residents — 44 percent — reported feeling nervous, anxious or on edge at least three days a week. And 35 percent of city dwellers said they felt down, depressed or hopeless a similar amount of the time.
The researchers had not asked those questions before, so it was unclear if the figures were higher than normal.
But the percentage of respondents who said they felt “not at all socially connected” in what is normally one of the world’s most bustling cities doubled in one week to 43 percent.
The data offers a measure of the city’s psychological well-being at a time when New Yorkers find themselves under extraordinary economic, emotional and health-related duress.
The survey found that the number of people reporting that they know someone who has tested positive for the coronavirus doubled in a week. And more than a third of respondents said they or someone in their household had lost a job.
“It is clear that the economic burden of coronavirus is falling disproportionately on the people in our city who are least able to afford it,” Dr. Ayman El-Mohandes, dean of the CUNY School of Public Health, said in a statement.
