Since last Friday, the news in New York about the spread of coronavirus has moved at a breakneck pace. There have been suggestions to stay home and restrictions on large gatherings as well as a near-lockdown as Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo today announced that all nonessential businesses would be closed and asked that all residents stay in their homes.
While adjusting to this new reality in the city — as fears over shortages of equipment and protective gear in hospitals intensifies — New Yorkers are quickly moving their social lives online.
But social distancing doesn’t mean giving up all social interaction. It is a reminder that we are all in this together, and participating in online events helps support newly economically vulnerable local businesses.
Here are some suggestions for maintaining a New York social life while keeping a safe distance from other humans.
Sydney Ippolito, a Brooklyn-based musician and dancer, will be streaming a concert series featuring herself and three other singer-songwriters: Sarah Murdoch, Eli Denby Wood and Richard Michael Hall. Each will play a half-hour set of folk and country music from their home.
Ms. Ippolito will stream the concert live via her Instagram account, starting at 7:30 p.m.
Visit pleasurejams.com/party starting at 8 p.m.
Hosts Rex Halligan and Nip Fury offer some “Burlesque and Chill” time at 9 p.m. A series of burlesque and go-go dancers will bring performances from their home to yours.
Stream “Home Is Where the Hearth Is” on Vimeo for $5 (or buy for $10) with the ability to tip straight from your couch. All the money will be split evenly between performers.
For opera fans — or the opera-curious — the Metropolitan Opera is streaming previously recorded performances. Saturday night at 7:30 p.m. you will be able to watch Donizetti’s “Lucia di Lammermoor,” the tragic love story of members of opposing houses in Scotland who are carrying on a secret affair.
The stream will be available for 20 hours after it premieres.
Since it has had to close, the Brooklyn venue Nowadays has created a whole virtual schedule. Thanks to some help from The Lot Radio, you can live stream D.J. sets while chatting with your fellow ravers.
On Saturday, Physical Therapy, a Nowadays resident, and Jubilee, a “Miami bass aficionado and a certified dance floor destroyer,” will be holding it down starting at 8 p.m.
During dance breaks, you can support Nowadays through its Patreon account.
Feeling anxious? Join Eric L. Adams, the Brooklyn borough president, in a 20-minute guided meditation.
Usually, when spring begins, New Yorkers look forward to rooftop and outdoor parties. Two mainstays of the outdoor Sunday circuit, Mister Sunday and Soul Summit, are joining forces to bring a special Sunday set to your living room, with streaming provided by Nowadays.
The music will go from 8 p.m. until midnight.