Its director, François Girard, is becoming the company’s go-to for Wagner, with “Lohengrin” to come.
At a rehearsal one recent afternoon, the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra was roaring out the final scene of Wagner’s “Der Fliegende Holländer” (“The Flying Dutchman”), which opens on Monday, the first new Met production of the work in over 30 years.
A man’s shadow, projected onto a screen at the back of the stage, stood several stories high behind the action. Watching it, it was hard not to think of another giant looming over this production, even in absentia: the commanding Welsh bass-baritone Bryn Terfel, who had been scheduled to return to the Met for the first time in eight years to sing the title role in Wagner’s early, torrid Romantic masterpiece.
Then, late in January, while appearing as the Dutchman in Spain, Mr. Terfel fell and fractured his ankle.
“Unfortunately I’ve been around long enough that I’m used to calls like that,” Peter Gelb, the Met’s general manager, recalled with a rueful chuckle.
Mr. Terfel must have some variant of the Dutchman’s curse, which in the opera has condemned the character to roam the oceans forever, allowed to leave his ship only once every seven years to try and break the spell.
The Met eventually found, in Evgeny Nikitin, an experienced replacement. He extricated himself from some engagements in Russia with the help of Valery Gergiev, who is conducting the new production and wields considerable clout in their homeland.
If this “Dutchman” — a co-production with Dutch National Opera, the Abu Dhabi Festival and Opéra de Québec, which premiered it last summer — isn’t the right thing, it’s hard to know what would be. The director, François Girard, has directed only a single opera at the Met, a vivid, sensitive version of Wagner’s “Parsifal” that was introduced here in 2013 and revived in 2018, but was one of the most acclaimed stagings of Mr. Gelb’s 14-year tenure.
Mr. Girard began his career as a film director (“Thirty-Two Short Films About Glenn Gould,” “The Red Violin”), but when he began to work in live performance, he was at first reluctant to incorporate film into his stagings. He’s gradually shrugged off that reticence, and the “Dutchman” overture introduces a heady mixture of painted elements, video and dance that continues throughout the intermissionless performance: “It’s like in a dream,” Ms. Kampe said.
Questions remain, and not just about how Mr. Nikitin will live up to the expectations of many in the audience who were eagerly anticipating Mr. Terfel. While Mr. Gergiev has done much Wagner, at the Met and elsewhere, his performances are notoriously uneven: sometimes inspired, sometimes phoned-in.
About Mr. Girard’s sensible symbolism and visual flair, however, no one takes serious issue. With the hit “Parsifal” under his belt and now a second Wagner opera, with a third to come — “Lohengrin,” currently in development for a future Met season — he is swiftly becoming the company’s go-to director for this challenging but rewarding composer. Not that that was the plan.
