WASHINGTON — So much has changed so quickly for Joseph Palma that he barely recognizes his life.
“Everything has changed in a matter of minutes — seconds,” said Tamara Holtey, 29, an accountant for an industrial services company in the Houston area, who was on a cruise to Cozumel, Mexico, as the coronavirus outbreak intensified in the United States and was laid off on her second day back at work.
Now she spends her days applying for jobs online from her home in Alvin, Texas, while she and her wife weigh whether to delay paying their mortgage for a month or two — only to have to pay more in interest.
In 17 interviews with people in eight states across the country, Americans who lost their jobs said they were in shock and struggling to grasp the magnitude of the economy’s shutdown, an attempt to slow the spread of the virus. Unlike the last economic earthquake, the financial crisis of 2008, this time there was no getting back out there to look for work, not when people were being told to stay inside. What is more, the layoffs affected not just them, but their spouses, their parents, their siblings and their roommates — even their bosses.
Julian Bruell was one of those who had to deliver the bad news to hourly employees like Mr. Kasanic. Mr. Bruell, 30, who helps run the company with his father, said that only about 30 employees are left running takeout and delivery at two of its five restaurants. He has not been earning a salary, his goal being to keep the business afloat through the crisis.
In many states, that has been its own wild odyssey. Mr. Kasanic said he had spent hours dialing and redialing four Ohio numbers: three wound through a maze of messages that ended with a dead line and a fourth was always busy. His strategy now is to call at four in the morning.
Going online has not been any easier.
“I’ve gone on their website and the site would crash or pages would disappear,” he said.
He still has not gotten through. But he is trying.
Many described a feeling of sudden economic helplessness that did not match how they saw themselves. In the space of two weeks, Olivia Fernandes, 26, and her husband, Fabio, both fitness instructors in Miami, went from earning $77,000 a year to frantically trying to file for unemployment online.
Now everything is on hold as the couple, who married three years ago, scramble to figure out their newly unemployed world — from next month’s student loan payment to the long-planned vacation to Belo Horizonte, Brazil, where Ms. Fernandes would have met her in-laws for the first time.
Before the outbreak, they had used much of their savings to chip away at student loans. Their health insurance coverage runs out at the end of March. Rent is due on April 1, and their landlord has made it clear that no extensions will be granted. By Ms. Fernandes’s calculations, they will have almost nothing left after April’s bills. Wearing gloves, they left their home to apply to Whole Foods and Target, but were then told to apply online.
Whether to opt for a high-risk job has turned into a common subject of conversation.
“It’s not worth a $13-an-hour job coming home and infecting my family — and then who else does that spiderweb to?” said Mr. Yates, who has two teenagers, and on Friday got his last paycheck, which was about half of what he normally makes with tips.
The last days of work came suddenly, and had a dreamlike quality. Spring Drake, 30, an events manager at a large hotel in Charlotte, N.C., said cancellations swept her department like a wave beginning around March 9 — first a large snack industry conference, then one by an aviation association. By week’s end, its book of business was almost entirely gone and employees were told they would be working only four days a week. On March 17, four out of five event managers were furloughed. One stayed on to handle the remaining cancellations.
The normally bustling hotel was unrecognizable. She said the lights had been turned off in the main banquet hall to conserve energy.
Someone started a GoFundMe for the employees. On Friday it stood at $17,000. She has received several checks in the mail, including one from a name she did not recognize. Her landlord has agreed to let her pay just half her rent until she starts work again.
Severe economic collapse, something like war, can bring changes so sudden that there is no time to adapt. Melissa Dellapasta, 45, was setting up a meal for executives of the Cleveland Indians on March 12 when everyone seemed to just get up and leave. An announcement had come: Baseball was postponed indefinitely. She has not worked since.
For now, as far as rent and food, she is OK because her boyfriend is still working. He has a job at an Amazon warehouse. But they are nervous about his safety.
Young parents said they now understood the extreme stress their parents experienced when they had been laid off, a mood they mistook as just another bout of grown-up grumpiness.
Nawaz Haraish, 26, said that when his mother lost her job in 2012 she was suddenly home all day and “super stressed” all the time.
He understands her now. Last week Mr. Haraish lost his job as a curbside assistance worker at Terminal 4 of John F. Kennedy Airport. He is deeply worried about providing for his daughters, ages 2 and 4, whom he called “my two sweethearts.” He said his first destination after leaving the airport the day he was let go was the store, to buy diapers and wipes.
His mother, he said, never quite recovered.
Sabrina Tavernise reported from Washington; Audra D.S. Burch from Miami; Sarah Mervosh from Canton, Ohio; and Campbell Robertson from Pittsburgh.