Travel|Are Frequent Flier Miles Killing the Planet?
Are Frequent Flier Miles Killing the Planet?
Climate activists say it is time to rethink loyalty programs that reward consumers for taking flights.
In October, a two-line recommendation buried on Page 35 of a report commissioned by the United Kingdom’s Committee on Climate Change garnered disproportionate attention in the world of frequent fliers.
“Introduce a ban on air miles and frequent flier loyalty schemes that incentivize excessive flying,” it suggested.
Message boards and blogs that serve points-obsessed, platinum-status-seeking travelers lit up. “Air miles should be axed to deter frequent fliers, advises report,” blared a headline in The Guardian.
But then, in December, hordes of passengers did what they do every year: took cross-country or transoceanic flights for little purpose other than maintaining elite status (and thus, access to lounges and upgrades) on their chosen airline for 2020. Many proudly posted about the deals on message boards or used #mileagerun and #statusrun hashtags to show off their business-class digs on Instagram.
At a time when the airline industry is bending over backward to be — or at least seem to be — concerned about climate change, can airline companies still justify loyalty programs that would seem to encourage people to fly more?
JetBlue declared in January that it will be carbon neutral for domestic flights by July. Last month, Delta said it was committing $1 billion to become carbon neutral. Dutch carrier KLM’s Fly Responsibly campaign asks potential customers, “Could you take the train instead?” — the equivalent of a Coke ad suggesting, “Why not try tap water?” Airlines are buying more efficient aircraft, experimenting with biofuels, and advocating more efficient air-traffic-control systems to reduce idling on the runway and circling before descent. And then, of course, there are carbon offsets, the controversial method by which travelers or carriers support projects designed to reduce their carbon footprint to make up for their share of jet fuel emissions.
But where almost all airlines draw the line is to stop encouraging people to fly. Carriers continue to partner with banks, for example, which then flood mailboxes real and virtual with offers of 50,000 to 100,000 airline points for signing up for a credit card. From a travel enthusiast’s point of view, that’s a nearly free international flight; for a climate change activist, it’s an unconscionable incentive to pollute the planet.
Projections from all quarters show the number of air passengers will double in the next 15 to 20 years. Industry leaders have argued (often in private but occasionally in public) that since aviation accounts for only 2 to 4 percent of worldwide greenhouse gas emissions, it makes more sense to focus on reducing emissions where it’s easier. Electric airplanes are a long way off, and high-speed rails don’t cross oceans, but you can far more easily switch your home heating system to solar and eat veggie burgers instead of beef. Climate activists say the difficulty of replacing air travel is all the more reason to reduce it.
In December, Albert Hsieh made two cross-country round-trip flights to maintain his status on Alaska Airlines: a weekend flight from San Francisco to New York to visit friends and a quick trip from San Francisco to Boston. Really quick: He had a lobster roll at Stephanie’s, an airport restaurant he’d been wanting to try, and flew back in the same airplane. Mr. Hsieh, 33, writes the JetAlbert blog and advises private clients on how best to collect and use points. “I’m deeply interested in flying, so it didn’t feel out of the norm,” he said. “It was more enjoyable than less.” And, like so many other frequent fliers, it’s part of his job to travel.
He hadn’t really considered whether it was a waste of jet fuel. “Yeah, that’s a great point,” he said. But he added that he felt comfortable flying with Alaska, a carrier he admired for being vocal about sustainability, and that he believes it is the role of the government and industry, not of consumers, to push toward carbon neutrality.
Mileage runs are now on the decline as airlines move toward rewarding customers based on the amount they spend rather than the number of miles they fly. Carriers may make money from mileage-run flights, but many see them as a hack for those who don’t fly enough — or spend enough — to merit higher status.
Mark Ross-Smith founded a company called Loyalty Data that has a similar objective, using a model to determine how much specific travelers might pay for the next status and offer it to them, eliminating the need for mileage runs altogether, in a win-win-win for the customer, the company and the climate.

It’s up for debate whether the impact of loyalty programs is significant or just symbolic. Volodymyr Bilotkach, an economist specializing in the aviation industry at the Singapore Institute of Technology, says that, in theory, doling out countless points that can be cashed in on flights should increase the overall number of passengers, though we can’t know how many people used points for flights they would have paid for anyway.
The very existence of status tiers and the endless chatter they engender about upgrades and comparative luxuries may also contribute to the demand for business- and first-class sections, whose very existence would seem to increase jet fuel consumption. (Airplanes without business-class sections carry far more passengers per flight and thus, at least in theory, burn less jet fuel per passenger.) Airlines encourage class envy, offering incentives to travel bloggers and other influencers to show off the wonders of the business- and first-class cabins.
In one video, the YouTube superstar Casey Neistat gets upgraded to a $21,000 first-class private cabin on Emirates. “This is caviar,” he says, holding up a plate he ordered off the complimentary, any-time-you-want-it first-class menu. “If you don’t know, caviar is fish eggs.” From an environmental perspective, it’s more or less like taking a Hummer along a high-speed rail route. The video has over 71 million views.
Mr. Neistat did not respond to multiple messages requesting comment.
Sophia Mendelsohn, JetBlue’s head of sustainability, said the focus should not be on the reasons people fly. “Mileage-run flights aside, most people are on an airline because they need to be,” she said. “The climate doesn’t care if you flew on a loyalty program or not. The incremental increase in flying is dwarfed by the industry’s growth across the globe.” The focus instead should be on reducing airlines’ per-passenger footprint, she said, as JetBlue’s initiatives aim to do.
Furthermore, airline representatives and loyalty experts all note that fewer and fewer miles are being spent on air travel, as the cost in miles of purchasing a flight has gone up consistently in recent years, and airlines are increasingly providing nonflight options for spending your miles on things like gift cards or iPhones.
Dr. Carmichael’s report actually has a potentially more significant recommendation than restructuring loyalty programs: an “Air Miles Levy,” or flight tax based on how much an individual has flown in the last, say, three years. It is, in essence, the opposite of a frequent-flier program: the more you fly, the higher the penalty. He believes the measure would have strong public support, as the taxes would fall almost entirely on a small percentage of people. “Families would not be penalized for an annual holiday in the sun,” the report says.
What that might look like could vary — Ms. Mendelsohn notes that members of JetBlue’s program can spend TrueBlue points on carbon offsets when they fly, a minor step. Dr. Carmichael would like airlines to prohibit customers from using their rewards points on flying and instead restrict them to low-carbon goods and services like e-bikes and gym memberships.
Seth Kugel is a travel writer and the author of “Rediscovering Travel: A Guide for the Globally Curious,” now out in paperback.
