He was, says Christopher Woodward, the director of London’s Garden Museum, which maintains a Pearson-designed miniature jungle of unusual botanical species, including snowflake-leafed Afghan fig and Canna x ehemanii, with its magenta trumpets, “truly a wonder child.” Over the years, Pearson has written five books, narrated a garden documentary series for the BBC, been a garden columnist at The Telegraph and The Observer and created landscapes for the fashion designer Paul Smith and the former Apple chief design officer Jony Ive. Now 55, he is among the most famous horticultural figures in the United Kingdom, a country where master gardeners have massive followings.
Although he travels the world on commissions much of the year, in 2010, he and his longtime romantic partner and collaborator, Huw Morgan, built themselves a country refuge amid the green hills of Somerset, a 90-minute train ride from London. Pearson speaks reverently of the area’s “sense of place,” and Hillside, his secluded 20-acre estate, is at once wholly original and a manifestation of Britain at its most indelible: a three-dimensional tapestry of woodlands, streams and meadows.
DOWN A ROAD barely wide enough for a single vehicle, Hillside’s farmhouse comes into view: a 1,500-square-foot two-story buff-colored stone building with small windows and a chimney at each end of a red-tiled roof. With the help of the London-based architect Adam Khan, the late 18th-century house, its plain facade set off by espaliered Comice pears, has been turned into a spartan lair where raw textures — stone, wood, concrete — prevail over minimal vintage furnishings.
Pearson leads us outside to experience that light, which is vivid and unfiltered. We walk past the terraced orchard and into a young stand of hazelnut trees, which he planted in 2012. “It’s important to plant trees as soon as possible because they map time,” he says. Once we pass the converted barn where Pearson spends each Friday writing at an oval Eames-designed wood-and-metal desk, we are surrounded by wildflower meadows, 14 acres in total; he considers their establishment among his greatest accomplishments at Hillside. The fields had been grazed into near nonexistence for decades, so to revive them, he oversowed with a local seed containing yellow rattle, a semiparasitic plant that over eight years weakened the grass, allowing wild geraniums, wild oregano and bedstraw to flourish. He bends to examine a low cluster of flowers at our feet: wild orchids with their violet petals and mauve spikes. A Gunnera manicata — giant rhubarb from Brazil — sits halfway down the hill next to a natural spring, its display of massive lobed leaves as shocking as a sculpture in the rough. Farther in is what Pearson calls his “Japanese moment”: a bridge-crossing in a wild environment of moss-covered rocks and various types of ferns, yellow daisies and late-blooming water irises, their delicately ruffled amethyst petals like tissue paper. Japan has been on his mind of late: He travels there every year to consult with the head gardener of the Tokachi Millennium Forest on Hokkaido, Japan’s northernmost main island, where, between 2004 and 2008, Pearson created a series of gardens with the local landscape architect Fumiaki Takano. The 600-acre expanse, featuring undulating hills and native perennials like Lilium auratum and Aralia elata, was commissioned by the publisher Mitsushige Hayashi to offset the carbon footprint of his newspaper business.
