It’s OK to let children indulge in their favorite foods while riding out the crisis. Plus: resources for food-insecure families.
As we slog through another week of self-isolation, quarantine or even total lockdown, parents stuck at home with young children are grappling with how to keep everyone well-fed … meal after meal, snack after snack, day after day. I’ve rounded up some common questions and sought answers from two dietitians, a pediatrician and an anti-hunger advocate.
It’s possible you’ll feel too stressed out to cook much and find yourself depending on easy pantry staples like your kids’ favorite crackers, cookies and boxed mac and cheese. This is also valid. Especially in these first few weeks of settling into isolation, give yourself permission to take some shortcuts and make dinner the thing you don’t have to stress about as much. “Parenting and self-care need to look different right now and we have to be OK with lowering some of the bars,” said Anna Sweeney, M.S., R.D., a registered dietitian who specializes in the treatment of eating disorders, in private practice in Concord, Mass.
It is important to reinforce normalcy, so sitting down together at the table to share meals, if you typically do that, will be helpful. If you can, put some fresh fruit or sliced cucumbers on the table, or stir a bag of frozen peas into the mac and cheese, so you’re continuing to expose kids to other food groups. But don’t stress if they don’t touch the produce. Remember that they are still deriving the main benefit of family meals — connection with loved ones — whether they’re eating a homemade salad or store-bought cookies for dinner.
Give yourself permission to enjoy all the carbs, too, if you’re so inclined. “People fear using food to cope, but it’s a beautifully orchestrated coping mechanism,” Sweeney said. But if you’re struggling with anxiety or depression and feel like food is your only escape, or find yourself frequently eating to numb your emotions, reach out to friends, family or a mental health professional for support (many are offering telehealth services right now).
Going easy on yourself means deciding not to get caught up in worrying about the #quarantinefifteen or other diet culture fears circulating on social media right now. A global pandemic is not the time to start a crash diet or otherwise pressure yourself to control your weight. Instead, try to reframe any anxiety about specific foods in your home as gratitude that you have enough to eat.
What should I do if we run out of my picky eater’s safe foods?
Giving kids more choices and control around what they can eat may help mitigate the stress of running out of their favorites. Offer two options for snack time and let them decide, Dr. Rowell suggested. Ask older kids to help you write up or decorate a meal plan for the week and be in charge of picking which fruit or side dish goes best with your main meal. Many picky eaters enjoy getting more involved in cooking, and may surprise you by tasting new foods in the process, though they may still decline to touch it once their dinner reaches the table.
If you have a child with food allergies, medical dietary restrictions or an extremely limited palate, it’s important to stock up on their safe foods when you can. Ask your grocer when the store is expecting a shipment, order online or reach out to neighborhood friends who may have some to share. (Online, the Mealtime Hostage Facebook Group is a great place to brainstorm and share resources with fellow parents of limited eaters.) Stock up on yogurt tubes, baby food pouches or electrolyte drinks if your child will eat those and you’re worried about simply getting enough calories in.
“Assess your child’s anxiety and let that be your guide,” Dr. Rowell said. Refrain from pushing your child to take bites, which will only increase her worry. And try to maintain a meal and snack schedule both because kids thrive on routine and because this will give them time to get hungry for meals. But get creative about what that looks like for your cautious eaters; you may need to ease any anxiety around unfamiliar foods by letting them eat while reading a book or watching a screen.
How can we help food-insecure families?
Emergency food banks will work to fill the gap short-term for most families. (Enter your zip code at feedingamerica.org to find one near you.) If you’re able, consider volunteering with your local food bank or school district distributing breakfasts and lunches.
Virginia Sole-Smith is the author of “The Eating Instinct: Food Culture, Body Image and Guilt in America” and co-host of the Comfort Food Podcast.