Here’s a list of great shows to keep kids ages 2 through 6, and their caretakers, occupied.
He was hooked at first listen and asked to hear it constantly. Eventually, I could recite the entire story, produced by Stories Podcast, along with the host, copying her intonations for the different voices. Our “Gingerbread Man” period peaked when my son was sick, and the only thing that could calm him down at 3 a.m. was listening to the podcast. I sat by his bed with phone in hand, and we listened over and over again, until he fell asleep.
My son is now 6, and fortunately, his taste in podcasts has expanded. He has many favorite shows and asks for episodes by name. It’s not a coincidence that he’s a dedicated podcast listener. His dad and I co-host “Tumble Science Podcast for Kids,” which we began producing just a few months after he was born. From this perspective, I’ve seen (and heard) the space grow from a handful of audio experiments to a big buffet of listening choices.
That’s great news, because once kids get into podcasts, they really get into them. A new study from the podcast “Brains On!” and the Science Museum of Minnesota of kids 3 to 17 and adults age 18 and over has found that 73 percent of listeners have heard an episode more than once. The study found that kids’ podcasts are a shared listening experience for kids and parents. Podcasts become part of the family routine, with the car the most popular place to listen.
All you need is a fresh playlist of shows that both you and your little one enjoy. I put together this list of great shows for kids ages 2 through 6 and their caretakers. They are all available free on nearly any podcast app.
There’s a lot more out there, and much more to come. So how can you help your young children keep their podcast playlist fresh and expanding?
The best way to discover new shows is through the shows that you already love. Often, podcasts will swap episodes, collaborate on special features or sponsor ads on each others’ shows. This allows young kids to participate in discovering new shows. Apple Podcasts also features a curated collection called “Shows for Kids,” which is updated periodically.
If you listen on your own app, I recommend making a unique playlist for your kids so you can always find their favorite shows quickly.
But as with podcasts for adults, word of mouth is still the tried and true discovery method. Ask your parent friends if they’ve heard about podcasts for kids, share your favorites and discover new shows together.