Our narrator did not expect to receive an unaddressed envelope containing the exhibition catalog of the novel’s titular show, nor did she expect it to be the work of her ex-fiancé, a man she hasn’t seen in 10 years. Opening at a Manhattan gallery on Sept. 12, 2001, it is a series of photographs of a naked woman asleep in a bed, her face turned away. Behind her the city’s most identifiable landmarks — the Chrysler Building, the Empire State Building, the twin towers — have been digitally removed from the skyline. Most surprising of all is that, on second glance, she realizes the woman in the image is her. “It should not take so long,” she thinks with muted shame, “to identify oneself.” This coming from someone who goes by the sobriquet Percy Q, eliding the name her mother gave her, one so ordinary it is “plain to the point of cruelty, as if she wanted me to disappear.” Being unnamed — or, rather, renamed — doesn’t seem to bother her. Being untitled is another story.
Percy lives in the Upper Manhattan neighborhood of Morningside with her husband of a few weeks, Misha. It is November 2001, and the city Percy wanders is full of missing faces plastered on brick walls, shrines to desperate grief or unreasonable hope — a population of people who never came home. Six weeks pregnant (she refers to the fetus as a “nebula,” an indistinct cloud of stars and matter), she has started, “in a small and violent impulse I still don’t understand,” pinching her husband’s nose while he sleeps, which somehow neither suffocates nor wakes him. In the apartment below is her boss, a self-help author; across the hall is Claire, the abandoned wife of a cartoonist who vanished around 9/11, his bank account cleared and his outstanding work assignments filed.
Percy’s life is populated by many people who could be considered psychic, perhaps least of all her actual psychic, a woman of dubious credentials but at least enough humor to say things like, “I knew you’d be back.” Misha, a math Ph.D., is also a prophet of sorts. He is preparing a presentation to sell his graduate thesis, a predictive advertising company called Insta-Ad, to venture capitalists. It is not, however, the accuracy of his online-shopping forecasts Percy is drawn to (“too often those things that seemed to me worthy of shock and surprise were not so notable to Misha”); it’s his certainty that the past can be left behind, the way he “sank beneath the surface of a day to reach a deeper kind of calm.” Whereas Percy lives life on repeat, long-gone years continuously reappearing on her doorstep.
And yet no one can answer Percy’s questions: Who sent the catalog? And is it truly her in this photo? Her research is limited to the internet of the time, and asking Jeeves provides no satisfactory clues. Stevens writes email correspondence and forum comments in the same way she writes voice mail messages, by turns hesitantly invasive or aggressively authoritative — whether the topic is a man’s right to turn his relationships into art, or how often to get a bikini wax.
Love isn’t the only force that rearranges the planes of a subject’s face; so does narrative. Stevens gives Percy’s satellite characters relatively few identifying features, weaving their staccato dialogue throughout her blunt narration without quotation marks. Even Percy herself lacks identifying marks (she has no tattoos or scars), so that she sees in everyone she meets the chance to find her own reflection.
Stevens’s writing proves that both time and technology are best understood in retrospect, sequences made logical long after each moment has passed. The novel has a romantic slowness, unfurling gracefully, little by little, to show how quickly the present gives way to the future, or concedes to the past. A book about newlyweds is almost by necessity also a book about breakups. Percy’s fear of being forgotten is really a fear of being abandoned. “We heartbroken people are so easily left behind,” she mourns, noting the way grief works against the clocks. Always a little too early or a little too late, Percy is caught between anticipation and dread; she knows only that change might come suddenly, or it might come slowly, but either way she will have to recognize what’s right in front of her face.