Michelle Au works at Emory St. Joseph’s Hospital in Atlanta,. These days she feels like she works at Chernobyl.
Those invisible risks — a trace of the coronavirus under a fingernail or on a strand of hair — don’t give Dr. Au nightmares just because she is worried about her own health and that of her colleagues. It’s because waiting at home she has a husband and three children.
Dr. Au’s situation is not the exception, but the rule, among doctors and nurses treating coronavirus patients.
Living at home allows Dr. Marshall to see his sons — 11, 13 and 15 — for the hour or two a day when he isn’t sleeping or working at the hospital, where dozens of patients with Covid-19 are being treated. But others in his hospital have sent their families to safer ground or chosen to protect them by staying alone in an Airbnb.
As soon as next week, Columbia University is planning to turn some of its dorms over to doctors and other health care workers so they can avoid long commutes and the risk of infecting others, according to a university spokesman.
Some doctors already have the virus. Dr. Richa Bhardwaj is a gastroenterology fellow at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan; her husband is also a doctor. He tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday. They have a 5-month-old daughter who is breastfeeding.
The family has now split up.
Dr. Bhardwaj’s husband is at her brother’s house in Yonkers; she is in her bedroom waiting for her own test results; and the baby is in the guest room with her in-laws.
“I haven’t seen my baby since yesterday,” she said. She wonders if the baby would be safer living somewhere else. “I’m so conflicted,” she said. She’s pumping milk so her in-laws can feed the baby, but she’s terrified of getting her — or her in-laws — sick.
“If I could marinate myself in sanitizer I would,” said Dr. Sharon Levine, the section chief for geriatric medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
These are the kinds of conversations that many doctors have spent their careers urging patients facing serious illness to have. They are now showing us how it’s done.
Her colleague, Dr. Levine, has spent the past couple of weeks talking to older patients about whether their wishes for end-of-life care have changed in light of the coronavirus.
Every doctor I spoke to talked about the fear of running out of ventilators and protective gear like masks. They are universally shocked by the way this pandemic has revealed the precariousness of the American health care system.
“In first world medicine, there are certain supplies we assume are there,” she said, comparing it to turning on the faucet and assuming water will come out. She said it was “very, very shocking to see how close we were to the knife’s edge.” This is part of the reason she said she is running for the Georgia State Senate this year.
