But the virus can still be stopped if nations are willing to take aggressive measures, said the organization’s director-general.
Wuhan and surrounding cities, the outbreak’s epicenter, have been shut down since late January, and travel elsewhere is strictly limited.
Everyone must wear a mask outdoors and submit to constant temperature checks, which are administered at the doors to every office building, store and restaurant, as well as bus, train and subway stations — even at the entries to apartment houses and residential neighborhoods.
The use of sanitizer or hand-washing on entry is mandatory.
People who think they are infected are screened at special “fever clinics,” not at doctors’ offices. They get temperature checks, flu tests, white blood cell counts, CT lung scans and laboratory tests for the virus, according to Dr. Bruce Aylward, leader of the W.H.O. observer mission that visited China in February.
Anyone who appears to have the new virus, instead of flu or bacterial pneumonia, is held until the lab results are in or while testing is repeated. Some are held at repurposed hotels.
If they are found to be infected, they may not return home — almost 80 percent of infections were within families, studies in China found.
 Those with milder cases recuperate in isolation centers with hundreds of beds and nursing care. The centers are segregated by sex and age; even children who are infected must go.
No visitors are allowed, but there activities like dance classes to fight the boredom and keep people active.
As difficult and aggressive as they are, such measures “reduce the number of cases that are wheeled through the doors of hospitals,” said Dr. Michael Ryan, head of the agency’s emergencies program.
The largest number of deaths in China occurred in Wuhan, because its hospitals were overwhelmed in early January, when the authorities were suppressing news of the danger.
The fact that 90 percent of the world’s cases are in four countries — China, Italy, Iran and South Korea — indicates that the pandemic can still be contained if countries act fast, Dr. Tedros said.
There are only about 1,100 confirmed cases in the United States, but experts fear that is only a fraction of the real prevalence, because testing for the coronavirus has been unavailable or haphazard in the United States.
The number of cases in the world doubles every six days, epidemiologists have estimated.
The epidemic is thought to have begun with a single infection of a person in Wuhan, presumably by a butchered animal, in mid-November last year. Without any containment measures, it would now be at about one million cases; by the end of April, there would have been over 250 million.
The goal of an aggressive containment response, W.H.O. officials explained, is to hold down the number of deaths and critical illnesses until a vaccine can be rolled out, possibly by early next year.
