Yes, his new Broadway play is called “Hangmen.”  But at heart, he said, he likes a good laugh.
At a corner table in a snug Theater District restaurant, the lighting was soft, the wait staff attentive and the sauce on the appetizer a delicious crime-scene red. Perfect conditions for a friendly chat about how best to hang a man.
“His head would come off if he was a really heavy guy,” my dinner companion said, between sips of a Diet Coke.
The ghastlier aspects of an uncomfortable subject — the killing of a human being by order of the state — might not seem to pair well with fried burrata in a house marinara. But dinner was with Martin McDonagh, the pre-eminent director and playwright of pitch-black comedy, so execution was on the menu, along with a few postprandial explanations for why the McDonagh canon is populated with violence, mayhem and white rabbits.
Black is certainly how McDonagh went with “Hangmen,” which is now in previews on Broadway and opens at the Golden Theater on March 19. This is not a musical. Feet don’t tap; they dangle.
The play’s ingenious setup centers on Harry Wade, England’s second-best hangman, on the day in 1965 that the country effectively abolished executions. The owner of an old-fashioned pub in northern England, he chafes under the consensus that he was inferior to Pierrepoint, and barely abides a gin-drinking wife, an unhappy teenage daughter and a few barflies who seem more intoxicated by the presence of a man who kills for a living than by the pints he pulls.
But the news that the services of hangmen are no longer needed attracts fresh faces to the pub, including a mod young stranger from London with a gift for vexation. It is as if England’s future has taken a seat, ordered a pint and some peanuts, and is now ready to disrupt its own past.
And since this is a McDonagh play, things will become — untidy. 
He and his older brother, the screenwriter and director John Michael McDonagh, grew up in south London, the children of working-class Irish immigrants from counties Sligo and Galway. Their parents returned to Ireland in 1992, when the brothers were in their early 20s, leaving the family’s London home to become a two-man frat house for writing.
McDonagh’s struggle to find his voice ended when he stopped blocking out the Irish clatter in his head. “Once I did that, I think it freed something, in that it allowed me to write how I thought my uncles spoke — without it seeming like a rip-off of Pinter or Mamet,” he said.
His first play, a success called “The Beauty Queen of Leenane,” was followed by several others also set in the west of Ireland. His dark-humored themes and settings have broadened since then, as evidenced by the three feature films he has written and directed: “In Bruges,” “Seven Psychopaths” and “Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri,” which won two of the seven Academy Awards for which it was nominated in 2017.
But McDonagh said that “Hangmen” is a bit of a departure. While his stories normally spring from an imagined character or riff of dialogue, this one grew from a desire to say something important about a topical matter (capital punishment and the very real potential for miscarriages of justice). It is an admirable ambition that does not often translate successfully to art.
He wrote a few pages, found them wanting, and set the project aside for a decade. But after more research on the colorful Pierrepoint and his assistant, as well as on the questionable executions in the ’50s and early ’60s that led to abolition, he struck upon a way to tell a tragicomic thriller that flicked at his feelings about capital punishment.
And what are his feelings about the death penalty?
“Oh, I wouldn’t be a big advocate of it,” McDonagh said.
But in “Hangmen,” the end to England’s dickie-bow-tie past is abrupt and threatening. The slick stranger Mooney, played by Dan Stevens of “Downton Abbey” fame, embodies an ominous, uncertain future.
McDonagh flashed a sly smile before offering two responses.
First response: Some have argued that hanging was quicker and more compassionate than, say, the protracted drama and preparations for death by electric chair. Among these defenders was Pierrepoint, who hanged between 400 and 600 people before retiring in 1956, and who supposedly once hanged a man in seven seconds.
“Hangmen” on Broadway is being directed by Matthew Dunster, who oversaw the play’s previous productions, as well as McDonagh’s most recent play, “A Very Very Very Dark Matter”(It imagines that Hans Christian Andersen’s stories were written by a diminutive Congolese woman whom he kept in a cage; critics reached no consensus on whether it was offensive or brilliant or both, but it hasn’t had a further production.) He will also be directing the West End revival of another McDonagh play, “The Pillowman,” in July.
Dunster knows this firsthand. He is from Oldham in northern England, where “Hangmen” is set. But McDonagh has never been to Oldham. And when Dunster asked whether he wanted to visit the setting for his own play, he responded: Why would I want to go to Oldham?
Not that McDonagh is afraid of going places. For a quarter-century now, he has been that dinner-party guest willing to clear the room with shocking observations that also happen to be funny — and true. He intends to provoke thought, and if there’s a laugh in it, all the better. Or is it the other way round?
To engage McDonagh in a graduate-student deconstruction of his oeuvre — the themes, the tropes, what the artist is trying to say — is to invite the repeated invocation of one of his favorite obscenities.
Still no arrests. How come, I wonder? ’Cause there ain’t no God and the whole world’s empty and it don’t matter what we do to each other? I hope not.
McDonagh’s work has often courted controversy, but “Three Billboards” became a particular Oscar-season target, in part for seeming to offer redemption to the racist white cop played by Sam Rockwell.
What about the fair, even excessive, amount of violence in his films and plays? 
Lastly, what’s up with the rabbits? The many rabbits that comfort the serial killer played by Tom Waits in the film “Seven Psychopaths”? The rabbit that loses its head in “Six Shooter,” his Oscar-winning short film from 2004?
“Bergman has shadows and fog, and I have white rabbits with their heads blown off,” said McDonagh, a vegetarian.
The dinner neared its conclusion, the Diet Cokes consumed, the marinara crime scenes cleaned up, the matters of headless rabbits and proper hangings dispensed with. Then, from a nearby table, a fallen glass exploded on the floor, making a sound like gunfire.
“Oh Jaysus,” said the slightly startled Martin McDonagh.