As we continue to publish new student-centered resources related to this pandemic every weekday, you can find all our coronavirus content all in one place, in this column.
Stay updated on the outbreak.
Think critically about information.
Consider essential questions about the pandemic and what it tells us about our world today.
Teach and learn when schools are closed.
The Learning Network will, as always, continue to publish our own new features for students every weekday, all of which are free, and many of which are interactive.
Post answers to our daily writing prompts. Scroll through them, or check out this list of 1,000 prompts, categorized by subject.
Engage in our weekly What’s Going On in This Picture? and What’s Going On in This Graph? interactive discussions, which bring a global audience together to “notice and wonder” about images and ideas.
Learn with our Lessons of the Day, which cover everything from front-page news to the Renegade dance, and are written in a way that allows students to work with them on their own.
Watch and comment on our Film Club documentaries, most of which are under 10 minutes.
Take part in our contests, including our current Student Editorial Contest, and our upcoming Podcast Contest.
Please post a comment to let us know how else we might help, especially if yours is one of the schools that has been closed.
During a public health emergency, staying informed is more important than ever. All New York Times reporting on the coronavirus is free and can be found in one place, at nytimes.com/news-event/coronavirus. This page includes the Live Updates post, which features several new stories a day, and is the longest-running 24-hour news briefing The Times has done.
A map for tracking the spread of the outbreak.
Your Questions About Life Under Coronavirus, Answered: Answers to common questions on health, money, daily life, politics, science and travel.
A chart that explains why “flattening the curve” to slow the spread of the infection is nearly as important as stopping it.
The World Health Organization, which has a page of basic protective measures we all should take.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which includes a page of Frequently Asked Questions about Covid-19.
Learning Idea: A glance at the front page of The Times or any other paper right now will show you that this global pandemic is impacting everything from the world economy to our social rituals. It is raising questions about how we work and how we play; what responsibilities governments have to prepare for pandemics and keep their citizens informed; how we care for our most vulnerable; how the outbreak fuels racism and xenophobia; and what role schools play in our societies.
British Prime Minister Boris Johnson has been moved to intensive care.
That’s a lot to get your head around, so students might start with a version of the classic K/W/L chart: What do you know, or think you know, about this pandemic and its impact? What else do you want to know? Make a list of as many questions as you can on as many aspects of this outbreak and its effects and implications as you can think of, then choose one to investigate. What is known? What is still unknown? Use some of the resources above, or other reliable sources listed throughout this post, to find and share what you learn with others, either in a classroom setting or, if you’re working from home, virtually.

Is there a “miracle mineral solution” that can treat it?
Did Corona beer sales drop sharply because of fears about the coronavirus?
Here are some resources for staying on top of what’s true and what’s not — and for learning key news literacy skills useful not just in this context, but for thinking critically about any information you encounter.
Snopes, which calls itself “the internet’s definitive fact-checking resource,” has a special Coronavirus Collection that makes it easy to check viral rumors.
As part of its Covid-19 advice for the public, the W.H.O. has a “Myth busters” page.
The News Literacy Project also has a “Rumor Review” that helps students look critically at how coronavirus hoaxes continue to spread.
Learning Idea: Choose a coronavirus-related claim you find on social media and use the techniques suggested by the Infodemic Blog to investigate. What did you discover? How well did it work to apply the suggested process to this particular claim?
Beyond following the news and understanding the facts about this pandemic, thinking about this pandemic through the lens of “essential questions” might offer ways to make connections as you navigate an onslaught of information.
What weaknesses — and what strengths — is coronavirus exposing in our society?
What lessons can we learn from this crisis? How should we apply those lessons?
What role should leaders, in government and elsewhere, play during a crisis like this one?
What ethical issues does this pandemic raise — for each of us personally, for our immediate communities and for us all as global citizens? What does it mean to be a “good citizen” in the context of this outbreak?
What historical parallels, like to the 1918 flu pandemic and to the plague, can we find, and what can — and can’t — we learn from them?
What are the causes and effects of this pandemic? What future effects can you predict, whether they happen in days, weeks, months or years? Why?
How will this crisis change us?
How can you best help yourself, your friends and family, or any other communities your are a part of that are affected by the pandemic?
Learning Idea: Which of these questions interests you most? Choose one of them, or another big question of your own, then read the news through that lens, finding articles, videos, social media posts, photographs, maps, graphs or anything else that might address it. What answers do those sources suggest? What additional questions or issues do they raise? What conclusions, if any, can you draw?
The spread of the coronavirus is shutting down school systems across the country, but the federal government is offering little clarity on when they can reopen and what they should offer meanwhile.
Their struggles were hard enough before the coronavirus outbreak. The pandemic hasn’t helped.
Here are some resources from around the web that may help both teachers and students navigate the uncertainty. We welcome suggestions for additions to any of these lists.
Note: Because our own site serves students 13 and up, this list focuses on those most suitable for learners from middle school through college.
What else should we add to this post? Please let us know by posting a comment, or writing to us at LNFeedback@nytimes.com.