U.S.|Stuck at Home, You Can Still Explore the Zoo or Aquarium. Some Penguins Could, Too.
Stuck at Home, You Can Still Explore the Zoo or Aquarium. Some Penguins Could, Too.
Hippos, otters and penguins can be viewed through webcams, virtual tours and “home safaris.” And at one aquarium, penguins strolled through the exhibits.
As Americans adjust to staying home during the coronavirus pandemic, which has closed schools around the country, zoos and aquariums are trying to fill the void of children’s activities with “home safaris,” virtual tours and webcams.
With U.S. health officials urging the public to practice social distancing and pare down gatherings during the outbreak, zoos and museums are offering more remote programming.
The Dallas Zoo, which is closed at least through March 20, began sharing behind-the-scenes footage and educational videos on social media, using the hashtag #BringTheZooToYou.
The zoo is operating with essential staff only, which includes about 100 employees who care for more than 2,000 animals. Mr. Hudson said the zoo had started to stagger shifts, to contain staff members in designated areas and to train employees to replace one another in the event that someone tests positive for the virus.
The zoo, which normally only closes to the public on Christmas, plans to keep the seasonal and part-time staff members on the payroll, he added.
The Shedd Aquarium, one of the most visited cultural institutions in Chicago, is closed through at least March 29 and has reassured the community that the animals will continue to receive care.
The aquarium always has enough food in stock to feed the animals, both carnivores and herbivores, for up to four months, said Bridget Coughlin, the aquarium’s president and chief executive. And additional provisions have been ordered, she added.
“This is absolutely unprecedented,” Ms. Coughlin said, noting the aquarium is normally open seven days a week except for a handful of holidays.
While the public was unable to visit in person, the aquarium let some of the penguins out of their exhibits to explore the aquarium and visit other animals. People watching from home were delighted to see footage of the penguins’ escapades on social media.
The aquarium encouraged people to check its social media accounts for behind-the-scenes posts, and to learn more about aquatic animals through its digital resources. Ms. Coughlin said the aquarium would also provide teaching videos to educators as field trips were canceled and classes had moved online.
About 100 critical staff members will be required to physically go to the aquarium to keep the animals healthy and the building functioning. Ms. Coughlin said work schedules would be more flexible and materials would be provided to help the staff process the situation mentally and emotionally.
Despite the dialed-back staff, the animals’ lives will proceed as normal. “We are taking care of the animals and taking care of the people who take care of the animals,” Ms. Coughlin said.
The Cincinnati Zoo & Botanical Garden is live-streaming a home safari on its Facebook page each weekday at 3 p.m. Eastern time. The first broadcast featured the zoo’s 3-year-old hippopotamus, Fiona.
The zoo is closed indefinitely because of the outbreak. “Let us help make your children’s hiatus from school fun and educational,” the zoo said on its Facebook page.
At the Oregon Zoo, which is closed through April 8, staff members assured the public that the animals were being cared for and promised to keep the zoo’s social media accounts updated with videos of the creatures.
“We are figuring out how we can create content so kids staying home can receive education materials and entertainment from the animals,” said Sheri Horiszny, the zoo’s deputy director of care, connection and conservation.
Educators from the zoo used to take animals to classrooms to teach children about them, Ms. Horiszny said, but now the zoo would have to find ways to take that content to people’s living rooms.
On a typical day, about 150 staff members would be on site, Ms. Horiszny added, but there were only about 50 people now. The zoo has enough food and medication for the animals to last through at least June.
“It’s going to be financially difficult, but we are trying to keep people feeling cared for in a time that is uncertain and scary,” she said.
The San Diego Zoo, which is closed through March 31, directed people last week to 10 live webcams that feature the zoo’s koalas, penguins, tigers and other animals. There was also archival footage of giant pandas that were returned to China.
At the Monterey Bay Aquarium in California, which is closed through at least April 8, the aquarium’s executive director, Julie Packard, invited people to view the aquarium’s webcams.
People can watch live videos of jellyfish, penguins and sharks from their homes. The aquarium’s Monterey Bay Cam also offers viewers a peek at the birds and sea mammals — like harbor seals and sea otters — that find refuge in the bay.
For the first time, people can view the aquarium’s sea otter exhibit via webcam to see rescued sea otter pups interacting with their foster moms. Normally, guests aren’t able to watch the pups learn and explore because they aren’t supposed to get comfortable around humans, according to Emerson Brown, an aquarium spokesman.
While the facilities remain closed to the public, the aquarium will undergo a deep cleaning. Security staff and animal care teams will continue to maintain the building’s operations, according to the aquarium’s website.