The Wing Is a Women’s Utopia. Unless You Work There.
The social club’s employees have a story to tell about the company that sold the world Instagram-ready feminism.
The idea was born in a Starbucks bathroom. Audrey Gelman, then a 28-year-old public-relations savant and New York personality, was tired of dashing between meetings in New York and Washington, charging her phone in hotel lobbies and freshening up in the public restrooms of fast-casual chains. She envisioned a kind of feminine pit stop she would call Refresh — a private club where women could blow their hair out and check their email in comfort and peace.
But the Wing’s real draw is the women who gather within. Wing members — there are now around 12,000 — call themselves “Wing women” or “sistren” or “Winglets.” Among them are actress and model Hari Nef; the Women’s March co-founder Linda Sarsour; social media influencers; C.E.O.s; best-selling authors. (Multiple employees of The New York Times, including of this magazine, are Wing members.) When Gelman sent an email inviting an intimate crew of women to join the Wing as “founding members” in summer 2016, she announced a new echelon of New York elite. The club’s grand opening was styled as a slumber party, where women who made the cut wore luxe white pajamas, sampled face masks and staged a pillow fight. Gelman is the Wing’s chief executive but also the avatar of its ideal member: a meticulously fashionable, intensely driven woman who has managed to make her mark in the world in a way that strives to uplift other women at the same time.
The Wing has labeled itself a coven, not a sorority, and Winglets have found at the Wing business associates, friends, even wives: Two members who met at the Flatiron location later became engaged on its roof. Women have written books and launched companies at the Wing. The club’s sorbet-tinged interiors have become a coveted backdrop for female-focused public-relations efforts: The Wing is where Hillary Clinton was greeted like the victor in her post-campaign press tour, and where Jennifer Lopez dropped the news of her new skin-care line.
If in the 1960s a segment of the feminist movement was concerned with advancing women in the work force, that impulse has now been so thoroughly individualized that a woman’s career can be cast as a kind of feminist statement in and of itself. In this mode, consumer luxuries take on a feminist valence too, signifying power and the mechanism for accruing more. The Wing’s merchandise — key chains that read “girls doing whatever the [expletive] they want,” tote bags that say “TAKING UP SPACE,” socks that read “PAY ME” — invite members and nonmembers alike to telegraph that feminized mode of ambition, coyly aestheticizing the kind of entitlement that comes so easily to many men.
Though the Wing’s motto is “empowering women through community,” it also builds marketing relationships, plugging companies like American Express, Land Rover and Amazon Prime into its ready-made feminist branding apparatus. These companies are eager to seed the Wing with their swag and minister to well-connected members at sponsored events, images of which percolate across Instagram like modern infomercials. The place is an influence machine: Wing members effectively pay to advertise products to other women in front of the club’s feminine backdrops, and along the way, burnish their own brand power too.
Women represent both a consumer demographic and a political constituency, and the wires of politics and consumption are easily crossed. At the Wing, progressive politics themselves are recast as one more luxury product — something to be worn rather than enacted. Its programming can feel like a self-affirming simulation of political engagement. After Brett Kavanaugh’s Supreme Court confirmation hearing, the Wing’s San Francisco outpost emblazoned Christine Blasey Ford’s name onto a conference room; Valerie Jarrett and others stopped for selfies in front of the door, as if compensating for the loss of judicial power with a ticket to a feminist Instagram mu­seum. In February, as the Iowa Caucuses unfolded, the Wing staged its own “caucus” in which members role-played exercising their civic duty. Gelman stumped passionately for Bernie Sanders, but Elizabeth Warren swept fictional “Wing County.” It would be the only 2020 contest she would win.
In February 2018, the Wing opened its first Brooklyn location, an expansive space in Dumbo with a sunken velvet conversation pit, Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s face etched into pink wallpaper and a golden welcome note embedded in the floor that read: “YOU HAVE ARRIVED.” On many days, perched behind the curved wooden front desk was Vei Darling.
But soon they became disillusioned. Some staff members hired to work the front desk or run events saw their job duties inflated to include scrubbing toilets, washing dishes and lint-rolling couches. As the company rapidly expanded and new members flooded into crowded spaces, a chasm opened between members and the staff. While some members had friendly or unremarkable interactions with the employees, others seemed to hold them personally responsible for delivering on the brand’s promise of feminist entitlement. “I was the connector, the friend, the therapist, the mother, the sister, the live-in coach,” one former employee says. “I was treated like a human kitty-litter box.” Another says: “We were ‘the help.’” When staff members tried to exercise their membership privileges, on breaks or after their shifts, members would hand them dirty dishes or barge in on them in the phone booth. Some screamed at employees about crowding in the space and cried over insufficient swag. A common member refrain was that it was anti-feminist not to give her whatever perk she desired.
Despite the impression of diversity promoted on the Wing’s Instagram feed, employees working events could find themselves to be the only black women in the room. Members and their guests could be casually racist. One eyed a photo board of Wing employees and remarked, “There’s a lot of colored girls that work here.” Another overheard some local teenage girls, who had been invited to the Wing for an event, speaking in Spanish, and complained that they were ridiculing her. (The member said she herself did not understand the language.) At one community event, planned at the suggestion of a friend of Gelman’s, black employees served a crew of redheads as they discussed the societal woes of gingers. According to two employees who were present, the women demanded a total of 18 free bottles of wine and stayed past the club’s closing time.  Luxury products were missing from the beauty room after they left. Employees observed few consequences for this kind of behavior. “It was always members first,” Raichelle Carter says.
Through all of this, some of these very same Wing employees could be seen on Instagram, grinning from the Perch or gladly pouring lattes in Wing-logo shirts. “You learn the game very quickly with the Wing,” one former employee says. “As long as everything looks Instagram-ready, we’re good.” An enticing visual presentation — owning clever accessories, wearing a cute outfit, maintaining an attractive side hustle — was seen as a plus. Staff members noticed that Gelman was drawn to such women.
The drive for perfection created “a culture of fear and secrecy,” one former employee says. Until recently, Wing values posted in the spaces reminded employees that a requirement of the job was to act in a “utopian” manner. Each club sent a daily report to executives, but employees learned to avoid flagging problems, sensing that the leadership treated every surface flaw as a disaster. During an extended bout of construction on the SoHo space, the ceiling cracked and leaked, and while employees were told to stop alerting higher-ups to the problem, they say they were also expected to make it appear solved. Staff members placed buckets around the space during storms, but if Gelman was heading over with guests, they embarked on a vaudevillian routine of removing the buckets just in time for Gelman’s arrival and replacing them before a puddle had formed. “We used to call SoHo ‘the Rainforest Cafe,’” says Cass Alcide, a former community manager. Employees were instructed not to clean in front of members, lest they ruin the illusion. At the Wing, outside appearances could be obsessed over while internal feedback was stigmatized or ignored. “It was Gaslighting 101,” one employee says.
This incessant P.R. drive extended to the Wing’s internal communications. After the New York City Commission on Human Rights began an investigation into the Wing’s gender policy and a Washington man sued over being denied access to the club, the company instituted a policy of allowing men through its doors. But when the leadership announced the change to staff members, they framed the new guidelines as an effort to generously school its community on inclusiveness toward nonbinary and trans members. “It was worded like someone had just skimmed the Wikipedia for Judith Butler,” a former employee says. But soon the real impact of the policy became clear, as men entered the spaces, tagging along with their girlfriends and colonizing the phone booths.
Once, Gelman noticed a few dirty dishes in the beauty room of a club while Venus Williams was visiting the space, according to an employee who was working the event. She said Gelman shut the doors to the beauty room and raised her voice, saying a C.E.O. shouldn’t have to clean. The employee left rattled and crying. Two employees who were present in the club that day confirmed that the employee tearfully described the incident to them shortly after it happened. (The Wing spokeswoman denied that it occurred.) Last year, Gelman told the website the Cut that “the most fun I’ve had in the last few months” involved rolling up her sleeves and doing dishwashing shifts at the Wing. “She washed three dishes and Instagrammed it,” a former employee says.
On a recent Thursday morning, I followed a trail of curvy white W’s painted along a Williamsburg sidewalk up to the entrance of the Wing’s newest club. In the elevator, I witnessed a real-life Winglet meet-cute: One woman read auras for GOOP; the other made $45 soaps for GOOP; they bonded over a healer they both knew. An eager young Wing employee met me at the front desk, and then I headed into the pink belly of the club, where Audrey Gelman was waiting for me.
Gelman wore a golden Wing necklace and an inviting smile. Flanked by the Wing’s senior vice president for operations and an outside public-relations professional, she listened to the accounts of her employees and nodded thoughtfully. Despite their intention to build a women’s utopia, she acknowledged, the ills of society at large had seeped in. “It’s hard to hear that people have had this experience,” she said. “These are familiar themes for us.” Every employee concern, she assured me, had already been incorporated into a sweeping business recalibration. Even as it expanded, the Wing was overhauling its organizational structure, raising wages, extending benefits and instituting a code of conduct for members which, if violated, could result in the “clipping of wings” — termination of membership.
Gelman reiterated an article published on Feb. 26 in Fast Company, in which she wrote that she had tried to play the role of the perfect “girlboss,” promoting the “fantasy” that a female founder could “have it all.” But behind the scenes, she wrote, her “fear of failure” had led her to obscure the “real challenges” unfolding at the Wing. Wing workers, who had for years raised those very issues internally, wondered why the Wing only seemed to acknowledge them as members spoke up and journalists circled. But when Gelman posted her mea culpa on Instagram, glowing reviews flooded into the comments: “So important.” “I didn’t know I could love and admire you even more.” “Bravo.” Whatever improvements might be in store for its employees in the future, the Wing had already successfully fixed the flaw in its public reputation.
As the start-up world has reeled from the dizzying falls of toxic male founders like Uber’s Travis Kalanick and WeWork’s Adam Neumann, it has set its sights on a new kind of hero figure. Female entrepreneurs are paraded in the press as saviors of the market, even though they still receive relatively paltry sums from venture-capital firms. In their hands, the tensions of capitalism may be laundered through feminist messaging and come out looking bright and new. At the very least, corporate feminism can be defended as an incremental good. Yes, it may co-opt a political movement for profit, but it is moving the levers of capitalism for the benefit of women, tailoring products for female consumers and transferring cash into the coffers of women leaders.
When these women inevitably fail to secure female empowerment through retail offerings and exclusive hospitality experiences, it is suggested that it is perhaps sexist to criticize them. Men get away with so much. And yet this outpouring of sympathy rarely extends beyond the executive suite. When a feminist company falls short of its utopian vision, it is the workers who must toil to maintain the illusion. And they are women, too.