The president’s comments could derail a bipartisan deal to extend three F.B.I. tools for national security investigations. They expire Sunday.
WASHINGTON — Three F.B.I. tools for investigating terrorism and espionage will expire at least temporarily on Sunday after President Trump suggested on Thursday that he might veto a bipartisan surveillance bill to extend them and the Senate left town without voting on it.
The intervention by the president — known for his unpredictability on surveillance policy — potentially disrupted an agreement to resolve a broad debate over national security and privacy related to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, or FISA.
Mr. Trump’s comments came a day after the House had passed a bipartisan bill to extend the expiring tools while also adding safeguards to national security wiretapping under FISA.
Several of the president’s most vocal allies backed the legislation, and Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, enthusiastically urged swift passage of the House’s bill. But on Thursday, the Republicans whom Mr. Trump had referred to in his tweet raised objections that prevented the Senate from passing the bill on an expedited basis. An attempt to extend the expiring authorities for 45 days to buy more time also fell apart.
By the day’s end, senators left town for the weekend and Republican leaders had plans to pass the House’s agreement early next week when they have more time — with hopes that Mr. Trump would ultimately relent and sign it into law.
Because the bill will not be passed by Sunday, the F.B.I. will at least temporarily lose three powers that lawmakers created after the Sept. 11 attacks. They include the authority to get a court order for business records that are relevant to a terrorism or espionage investigation.
The powers lapsed briefly once before — in 2015 — because of a similar stall in the Senate. The impact of a short-term gap may be small. Any existing court orders for business records and special types of wiretaps, for example, will still be valid during the lull. And the F.B.I. can most likely use other authorities, like grand jury subpoenas, from its criminal investigative toolbox as a workaround.
Still, the lapse could cause some operational headaches, and the spectacle of governing dysfunction arising from Congress in the national security arena and a measure for which there is very likely majority support was striking.
In this case, Senator Mike Lee, Republican of Utah, threatened to use procedural tools to hinder its passage if Mr. McConnell brought the bill for consideration on Thursday. Mr. Lee does not believe the House’s language sufficiently protects Americans’ civil liberties from government spying, and he said on Thursday afternoon that “rights are at stake” and that all he was really demanding was a full debate.
“This is unjust, this is unrealistic, this is unsustainable,” Mr. Lee said.
Civil libertarians on the right and the left made similar objections in the House, but several of Mr. Trump’s staunchest conservative allies, including Representatives Jim Jordan of Ohio and Devin Nunes of California, who have led the attack on the F.B.I. over the Page spying case, lent their approval to the bill. So did Attorney General William P. Barr.
When Mr. McConnell took to the Senate floor earlier Thursday to endorse the bill, he indicated that he knew that Mr. Lee and other civil-libertarian-minded lawmakers would objected that the bill did not go far enough, but made clear he did not intend to let them win.
