Opinion|Defending Bernie Sanders’s Sister-City Efforts in the U.S.S.R.
Defending Bernie Sanders’s Sister-City Efforts in the U.S.S.R.
A former U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union notes that sister-city programs were strongly supported by the U.S. government. Also: Voting rights in Florida; New York’s plastic ban.
“Papers Detail Soviet Hopes for Sanders” (front page, March 6) is a distortion of history. The truth is that Bernie Sanders, then the mayor of Burlington, Vt., opened a sister-city relationship with Yaroslavl in 1988 with the encouragement and strong support of the United States government.
The visit was not used as propaganda by the Soviet Union. I know because I was U.S. ambassador to the U.S.S.R. at the time and gave strong official support to Mayor Sanders’s effort, along with those of other American mayors, to establish ties with cities in the Soviet Union.
The explanation the Soviets gave to local Communist officials in Yaroslavl — that sister-city relationships are useful for “carrying out information-propaganda efforts” — was actually an effort to justify Mikhail Gorbachev’s new openness to people who had no contacts with Americans and were trained to see all Americans as spies.
In 1985, three years before Mayor Bernie Sanders of Burlington, Vt., visited the Soviet Union to set up a sister city link, The Times reported that President Ronald Reagan was urging “bold new steps to open the way for our peoples [Americans and Soviets] to participate in an unprecedented way in the building of peace.” Sister cities were among the initiatives he promoted.
This call came despite the fact that, as your article claims, the Soviet Union was “a country many Americans then still considered an enemy.” Will you next publish an article about how President Reagan was the tool of a Soviet propaganda effort?
The writer is a professor of history at Durham University.
“Florida Voting Barrier Could Tip Election” (editorial, Feb. 22) discusses how Republicans are trying to undermine Florida’s Amendment 4, which restored voting rights to Floridians convicted of most felonies who have finished serving their sentences. That undermining consists of efforts to prevent those with outstanding fines and court costs — a population that, as you point out, is “not, as a rule, flush with cash” — from voting.
Removing structural barriers to voting — not just these and not just in Florida — should be the key primary objective, of course. But how wonderful it would be if our former billionaire Democratic candidates, Mike Bloomberg and Tom Steyer, would spend a fraction of their remaining fortunes helping such people pay off the debts. It would help those burdened thus to move toward financial independence, and it would help the former candidates’ achieve their professed aim of doing what they can to ensure that a Democrat is elected president in 2020.
Your editorial posits that Republican lawmakers “will be forced to confront the reality that they cannot sustain a major political party in the 21st century on a strict diet of voter suppression, discouragement and disenfranchisement,” and I hope you’re right about that. But I think that deceit — the party’s current go-to strategy, regardless of the issue — should head that list.
I used to think Republican’s goals were limited government, fiscal prudence and social conservatism. Now the only goal seems to be to attain and hold onto power, and anything — anything — done toward that end is OK with the once-Grand Old Party.
New Yorkers should celebrate the start of their plastic bag ban. I live in Osorno, a small city in southern Chile, which was one of the first in this country to adopt a similar ban, which became national law in 2018.
People here overwhelmingly support the measure. Our rivers and parks are noticeably cleaner. I applaud New York, such a powerful international symbol of the United States, for finally getting on board.
The writer is president of the Center for Environmental Education, a nonprofit.