Mr. Prewitt is a former director of the Census Bureau.
America has had 23 successful censuses despite wars, natural disasters, budget shortfalls, political interference and legal challenges. Like the military, the census, the nation’s largest peacetime mobilization, cannot fail. The stakes are too high, its numbers too consequential. It has a constitutional obligation —— reapportionment of congressional seats, and with them Electoral College votes — that underpins our democratic republic.
Along with allocating political power, the census in recent decades has been used to allocate federal money. Billions of dollars in federal funds will be allocated to the 50 states each year in proportion to their population as determined by the 2020 census.
The Covid-19 epidemic might seem like an overwhelming challenge, but innovations begun 20 years ago should help the census maintain its string of success. One of them could even transform the way the nation is counted in 2030 and beyond.
The first innovation was a vast civic mobilization to overcome a steady decline in cooperation — and rising costs — in the 1980s and 90s. The enumeration had become more difficult as Americans spoke more languages and became more mobile and their households became more unconventional. As they grew busier and more distracted, many Americans did not want to be bothered with the census.
To overcome these problems for the 2000 count, the Census Bureau paid for its first advertising campaign and enlisted trusted voices and volunteers from thousands of civic and commercial organizations to urge people to fill out their forms. It worked. Response rates ticked up. The 2010 census expanded this initiative with greater success. This year it has become even more sophisticated.
The face of the census was once a government bureaucrat. Now it’s a neighbor, supervisor, teacher, minister, fellow club member. There are 10,000 Complete Count Committees. States, counties and cities are spending millions of dollars to raise their response rate, and philanthropies are adding millions more.
This huge network was not, of course, devised with a frightening epidemic in mind. But if it gets more Americans to reply to the census by risk-free internet, phone or mail, fewer workers will be needed to go door to door at a time of possible quarantine and isolation.
A second innovation could not only lessen the need for face-to-face contact, it might eliminate it in the future.
The bureau has made significant progress in determining how government administrative records can be used to count residents who have not responded to the census. These records contain information that households have already shared with other agencies, like the Postal Service, the Social Security Administration and so on. The bureau will use such data in the current census to reduce the number of visits to people who haven’t responded by removing addresses that are known to be vacant and counting only homes for which there are trustworthy administrative records.
It is possible that administrative records will have to enumerate a much larger share of the population as the virus spreads. While it might seem risky to insert new operations into a census already underway, the bureau has convincing evidence that administrative records can improve census-taking.
It is simple. Count a household using administrative records, then compare that count with the census response from that household. The bureau has gotten better at this with time. In 2010 the match rate was around 90 percent —— that is, if the 2010 census had been conducted using only administrative data, nine out of 10 people would have been accurately counted. Of course, the census is responsible for a 100 percent count. That accuracy would be easier to reach if nine out of 10 are already counted through records. In fact, the bureau estimates that “in-office enumeration,” as it is called today, will be 93 percent accurate this year.
This achievement has involved about 150 census employees, with 25 trained to verify that records match census responses. Each verification, incidentally, occurs in seconds.
Even at 93 percent accuracy, the use of administrative records is a more accurate method than longstanding alternatives. For decades, when census takers were unable to get a response from a household, the bureau used answers from proxies, that is, neighbors whose information may or may not have been accurate (there is no way to test). Or a statistical process assigns to a nonresponding household characteristics common to the neighborhood.
In the context of today’s viral threat, when millions of residents worry about who comes to the door and thousands of census takers hesitate about putting themselves at risk, the census will weigh its options, possibly making greater use of administrative records than initially planned.
This new process has an unplanned side benefit. The bureau is already fighting disinformation that could stop people from cooperating. For example, a recent Twitter post warned residents in one area that census impersonators with fraudulent IDs were robbing people. The report was fictional, but that was not determined until after a local TV station had amplified it with advice on how to protect against strangers knocking at the door. Such disinformation, even when quickly corrected, increases mistrust. However, they would be no match for the office workers using administrative records to count those people who didn’t fill out their census forms. It might also count immigrants who have been scared away from the census by the Trump administration’s failed effort to include a question about citizenship.
The use of administrative records is not the only innovation available. The bureau has started to explore whether digital data sources can be successfully incorporated — as they already are in various government economic statistics. If this happens at scale, the 2030 census will look less like the current census than this 2020 census looks like the 1790 census.
A careful curated use of digital data would extend beyond government surveys and administrative records, though those data sources remain crucial. A new platform would include an expanded American Community Survey, which is a source of trusted statistics on housing conditions, education, income, race and ethnicity, as well as related surveys from 15 federal statistical agencies, and about 90 smaller federal statistical programs. State and local data can be incorporated, as can data from academic sources and related reputable nonprofit sources.
Banks, chain stores, social media and other business are the largest sources of digital data, with many times the volume of government sources’ data. To be used, this information needs to be curated to be sure that it is highly accurate and that it protects privacy.
I believe the Census Bureau can develop the needed expertise for this task, as we move to an even more robust census in 2030.
Kenneth Prewitt, the Carnegie professor of public affairs at Columbia University, was director of the Census Bureau from 1998 to 2001.