BMike takes societal misinterpretations and stereotypes and flips them, putting historical figures in unexpected settings.
NEW ORLEANS — Usually, as groups of schoolchildren file through Studio BE here, they tip back their heads to gaze at the massive portraits of blackness painted by artist Brandan Odums, known as BMike — of civil-rights activists, Black Panthers, men mistreated by the criminal justice system, and everyday New Orleanians with important messages.
Chronicles of this mistreatment, compounded with high rates of wrongful convictions, can be viewed on the walls of Studio BE, like portraits of Angola 3 prisoners, Black Panther activists and cultural critics like the Free Southern Theater playwright Kalamu ya Salaam, who pushed back against the New Orleans Police Department.
BMike takes societal misinterpretations, tropes, and stereotypes and flips them, creating images of revolutionaries, artists and social-justice figures, often placed in unexpected settings.
Now, five years after an arts benefactor handed over the use of a former coffee warehouse to BMike, allowing him to found Studio BE there, he is known nationally for his work. He collaborates with some of the nation’s highest-profile activists and artists, including Colin Kaepernick, the director Ava DuVernay, Dave Chappelle, Chris Rock and the singer Usher.
BMike in front of Studio BE, a 35,000-square-foot former warehouse near railroad tracks, about a mile downriver from the French Quarter. His hoodie is printed with one of his favorite catchphrases: “I am my ancestors’ wildest dreams.” He attended high school about a block away, studying classical painting at the New Orleans Center for Creative Arts.
In the gallery’s first room, BMike created a corridor of images about incidents with police, starting with some historical images of the Algiers 7, a deadly police-brutality case in the early 1980s. But an artist’s duty is to reflect the times, BMike said, quoting the singer Nina Simone. And so several years ago, after the police shot and killed a number of people, most of them young men, he painted portraits of some of the dead. “I was seeing all these images of Trayvon Martin and Mike Brown and Eric Garner and Oscar Grant and seeing these horrific images of their bodies,” he said.
From the entrance of the second gallery, it appears as though a long, continuous wall is painted with a single image, of Coretta Scott King facing her husband, Dr. King. Instead, walking closer, it becomes apparent the image is a diptych: each spouse is painted on a separate section of wall with a large space between them.
KIPP Morial students explore the studio, twisting the heads and bodies of sculptures to create unexpected combinations.
The ship that emerges from a wall in the third gallery is left to interpretation, though it’s painted across the hull with the word “refugees,” a term used to describe Katrina evacuees, who saw it as a slur. This boat, a collaboration with the sculptor Rontherin Ratliff, may or may not be a reminder of that.
