The fast-spreading virus has put an end to movies, date nights and other economic activity, prompting some economists to call a U.S. recession.
With the stock market tumbling and anxiety coursing through many communities, President Trump on Monday afternoon announced federal guidelines that he said were meant to “blunt the infection now.” He warned against gatherings of more than 10 people, saying people should work from home when possible and avoid restaurants and bars.
Also unanswered by the White House was the question of precisely what individuals and local governments should do, as well as how business owners and workers might survive financially, at a time when vast sections of the economy were ceasing to function.
Even before the White House guidelines were released on Monday afternoon, school districts, towns, localities, cities and states were urgently pushing ahead with a chaotic hodgepodge of mandated restrictions and suggestions about how to keep the virus from spreading. Business groups, local and state leaders and a growing chorus of lawmakers and economists begged the federal government to spend trillions of dollars to pay workers to stay home and funnel money to companies struggling with an abrupt end to consumer activity.
The administration floated several ideas for helping industry without conveying a clear plan to provide financial assistance. While the main trade group for airlines suggested a $50 billion bailout might be needed for carriers, Mr. Trump’s chief economist, Larry Kudlow, said he did not expect the airlines to need a rescue but said the government would do what it could to help with cash flow issues.
“We don’t see the airlines failing, but if they get into a cash crunch we’re going to try to help them,” Mr. Kudlow told reporters on Monday.
Without concrete assurances of financial assistance from the federal government, employers and employees are torn between fears of being exposed to the virus and fears of running out of money to pay for food and electricity. And government officials are left with the unhappy task of shutting down businesses that provide wages for large swaths of their communities, while wondering what steps their neighbors are taking.
“You can’t have one state taking actions that are different from other states,” Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said on Monday morning, echoing the frustration of officials and business owners across the country who want a federal directive on how to respond. What good is it if New Jersey closes its bars, if people just drive across to New York or Connecticut to drink and then return home. “This is a national pandemic and there are no national rules,” he said.
In California, Gov. Gavin Newsom told all residents older than 65 to stay in their homes, banned nearly all visits to hospitals and nursing homes and announced plans to buy hotels to house some of the state’s 150,000 homeless people. He also closed bars, wineries and nightclubs.
Schools are closed in West Virginia but bars in Charleston, the capital, are still open. In Sun Prairie, Wis., Sunday services were held as usual at one church, even though three members of another church two miles away tested positive for the coronavirus last week.
“In case you’re wondering, we’re still on this morning,” Focus Church posted on its Facebook page.
In Chicago, some movie theaters are open, though they have instituted “social distancing plans” that block off seats in every other row. Regal Cinemas, by contrast, announced it was closing all its outlets after the White House guidance.
Although many restaurants, airlines and entertainment venues were shut down and many office workers stayed home on Monday, millions of Americans were still at work. Lowe’s, the home improvement chain, said all of its more than 1,700 stores were open for business. The company employs more than 270,000 people around the country. Home Depot, which employs about 400,000 people in its roughly 2,200 stores in the United States, was also open for business on Monday.
Boeing, the embattled aerospace giant, was continuing to assemble airplanes at its major factories in Everett, Wash., and North Charleston, S.C. UPS, which employs some 413,000 people in the United States, was still sending trucks out to deliver packages and processing orders. Merck, the pharmaceutical company, was continuing to produce and distribute drugs from facilities spread out across nine states.
Then the central question becomes what should be done to counter the resulting widespread and potentially devastating economic hardships.
In Washington, lawmakers are working on a new fiscal stimulus package that could help workers and companies weather the storm. The House approved changes on Monday to its sweeping economic relief legislation, and its bill will head to the Senate, where it is unclear how quickly the legislation will pass.
Other businesses in addition to airlines are pushing for loans or direct government grants to fill the void of lost sales. Momentum is growing among Senate Republicans for more direct aid to workers who have been laid off or had their hours reduced. On Monday, Senator Mitt Romney of Utah called for the government to cut a $1,000 check, immediately, to every American.
Roughly four out of 10 Americans don’t have enough cash on hand to cover a $400 emergency expense like an unexpected car repair or medical bill without borrowing money, the Federal Reserve reported last year. And that was when the economy was running unimpeded with record-low jobless rates.
Steve Coffie, owner of Helix Rotation Services in Atlanta, which cleans Airbnbs and other private rentals, said he told his contract employees he would try to help them out as the $80-a-gig jobs evaporated. “I’ve got enough floater cash to keep them going for another week or two, but that’s about all I can handle if I can’t get some revenue in,” he said.
Many businesses decided to close, including MGM Resorts International’s casinos on the Las Vegas Strip, Jose Andres restaurants in Washington and beyond, and iconic independent bookstores like Powell’s in Portland, Ore., and the Strand Book Store in New York. The Strand guaranteed to pay all employees scheduled to work through March 22.
Starbucks said on Sunday afternoon that it would temporarily close stores in high-traffic areas like shopping malls and eliminate seating in others; Blue Bottle Coffee said it would close all locations in the United States. On Monday, McDonald’s said company-owned restaurants would close seating areas, including the use of self-service beverage bars and kiosks.
Reporting was contributed by John Eligon, Stacy Cowley, Conor Dougherty, Michael Wines, David Gelles, Julie Bosman and Emily Cochrane.