Trainers, teachers and gyms are worried about their business. The pricey stationary bike and other home exercise systems are among those that stand to benefit from social change around the new coronavirus.
Under normal circumstances, Nicole Mereshensky works out about five times a week at various indoor cycling and high intensity interval training studios around Manhattan.
But in the last week, she has been trying to weigh the anxiety of not working out against the worry of being sweated on or otherwise potentially exposed to the new coronavirus.
Ms. Mereshensky, 39, has reduced her schedule to three classes a week, and, in an effort to avoid germs on public transportation, will go to classes only within walking distance of her New York apartment.
When she goes to one-hour classes at Barry’s Bootcamp, where the protocol is four 15-minute intervals of treadmill running and floor weight exercises, she brings a spray bottle of sanitizer and four pairs of latex gloves.
So far, she hasn’t seen anyone else working out with gloves on, and some people have noticed when she walks in. “I’m sure to make a funny joke when I walk in so everyone knows I’m not infected but I’m preventing,” she said.
As schools and universities are closing around the country in recommended efforts to slow the spread of the coronavirus and companies are scurrying to implement remote-working strategies for employees, daily rituals of fitness buffs across the United States, and the businesses that they support, are also being upended.
Angie Beis, 39, is a physical therapist and personal trainer hired by individuals for one-on-one sessions at their homes, and by corporations who bring her to their offices to give group training to employees. As more people work from home, her corporate business is already drying up.
“It’s frightening,” Ms. Beis said, “As a single mom with a mortgage, it’s going to put a strain on my income.” She plans to start offering 30-minute personal training sessions over FaceTime to people working from home. “People still need to work out,” she said.
Large gyms and franchised studios are messaging members to try to calm panic about germs.
Equinox, which has about 100 fitness clubs in the United States, Canada and Britain, announced over email last month that employees are wiping down the clubs three times daily with hospital-grade cleaners. The company also reminded members to wash their hands after going to the bathroom and sneezing.
“We have asked our instructors to remain as vigilant as possible about the above and eliminate skin to skin contact (for example, adjustments in yoga, high fives and partner work that requires the passing of equipment, etc.),” a company spokeswoman said in a statement.
CorePower Yoga, which has more than 200 studios nationwide that turn up the heat to 100 degrees for some classes, sent an email to its community in early March to assure that the company is taking a hands-off approach to touching and bending over backward to clean up all the sweat.
Ishta Yoga, a studio in Greenwich Village, alerted students that the studio would suspend mat rental and sharing of communal props like blocks, straps and eye pillows. Namastes are still OK, but not hugs and handshakes.
Orangetheory Fitness is asking members and trainers to substitute fist pumps for high fives.
There are other ways to reduce risk. Jonathan Rein, a 45-year-old investor and father of two in New York, works out about four times a week in a communal gym in his Manhattan apartment building and in another gym: lifting weights and using cardio machines. A few weeks ago, he began to reconsider his schedule (and now he’ll have to do more rescheduling because the building just closed its gym).
However sore his biceps may be, his hands may be worse. “They’re pretty beat up from the alcohol content in the sanitizer and all the constant hand washing,” he said.
For 14 years, Amanda Rubinstein-Stern has been leading a Monday morning yoga class at a community center in New Orleans for about 20 students, ranging in age from about 50 to 91.
For the last two Mondays, they had class-wide discussions about ways to maintain the community of their weekly class while protecting themselves against germs that could lead to Covid-19. “What we have decided to do, all of us, is to buy our own yoga bags. They’ve gone to Five Below, T.J. Maxx and Walmart and each have purchased a belt, two blocks, a mat and a towel,” Ms. Rubinstein-Stern said. A hospital has provided disinfectant wipes.
“I’m not a medical authority, but stress can weaken the immune system, and in their time in class I can see change in disposition and a greater sense of optimism,” she said.
Those who invested in expensive home fitness equipment are now seeing it pay off in unanticipated ways. “I’m happier than ever to have my Peloton,” said Andrea Morganroth, of Birmingham, Mich., who has been riding daily at home for a year.
Obé, an acronym for Our Body Electric, was founded by Mark Mullett and Ashley Mills, former talent agents who said on Tuesday that they had seen “thousands and thousands” of new sign-ups.
Courtney Simmons, a member of Obé’s private Facebook group who lives in Orlando, Fla., wrote in a Facebook post that she had recently canceled her Planet Fitness membership and returned to the platform because of her concern about Covid-19.
Other higher-end home exercise companies are also reporting a surge in usage and interest. Tempo is a home exercise system that includes a free-weight set, a 42-inch touch screen display and a 3-D motion tracking mechanism; it costs $1,995. The company’s chief executive, Moawia Eldeeb, said that starting in mid-February, its users were working out 35 percent more often than they had in the previous six months.
Last week, the company increased its spending on advertising.
Asked if he was concerned about the appearance of taking advantage of pandemic panic, Mr. Eldeeb argued that the company was providing a necessary service.
The Mirror, another home exercise system, costs $1,495, with classes for $39 a month. It too, is attracting more interest, according to its founder and chief executive, Brynn Putnam. In an email, Ms. Putnam said that the company had seen a fivefold increase in exercise frequency relative to years past over the previous several months, as well as a “noticeable uptick” in new purchases.
But there are those in workout-related industries who say little has changed, at least for now. Joshua Somers, the executive director of Indoor Hoops, a pickup basketball organization service with a membership of about 30,000, said that he and his colleagues were continuing to monitor the virus’s progress but saw no reason, as of Tuesday, to halt games.
Mr. Somers said that while his network had seen a slight dip in overall reservations, only a handful of the 125 games scheduled for this week in New York City had been canceled.
