Even in a crisis, doctors should not abandon the principle of nondiscrimination.
Mr. Ne’eman is a disability rights activist and author.
Some plans single out particularly severe conditions, like Alabama’s decision that people with severe or profound intellectual disability “are unlikely candidates for ventilator support” or Tennessee’s listing people with spinal muscular atrophy who need assistance with activities of daily living among those excluded from critical care.
Others just lay out a broad goal, counting on clinical judgment to do the rest. Newly issued allocation guidelines from the University of Washington Medical Center argue for “weighting the survival of young otherwise-healthy patients more heavily than that of older, chronically debilitated patients.” The existence of the nonelderly disabled, a group increasingly in fear for their lives, goes unacknowledged.
People with disabilities have a long and complicated history with the medical profession. While many disabled people need ongoing medical care, many doctors view life with certain disabilities as unworthy of living. Disabled people who require ongoing ventilator care and other forms of expensive lifelong assistance are used to being asked by medical professionals if they would rather abandon life-sustaining treatment — often with the clear implication that “yes” is the right answer.
With visiting restrictions in place and many prominent authorities explicitly allowing the denial of care to disabled people, will that message now get through? I worry it will not.
Even when discrimination is not based on perceptions of quality of life, but instead on seemingly “rational” considerations of resource intensity, we should object to abandoning the disabled to second-class medical status.
Adopting such an approach would be a mistake. Even in a crisis, authorities should not abandon nondiscrimination. By permitting clinicians to discriminate against those who require more resources, perhaps more lives would be saved. But the ranks of the survivors would look very different, biased toward those who lacked disabilities before the pandemic. Equity would have been sacrificed in the name of efficiency.
Not only is such an approach poor ethics — it can also interfere with efforts to combat the pandemic.
I spoke to a colleague of mine, Alice Wong of the Disability Visibility Project, on these issues. As a 46-year-old who uses a ventilator on a regular basis, she has a lot at stake.
This is a sacrifice — but not so great as some might imagine. Maintaining nondiscrimination does not require hospitals to treat those who would die anyway. Even under nondisaster situations, clinicians can withhold care that is deemed futile — medically ineffective. But those who can be helped should not be given lower priority because of pre-existing disabilities, even those that will require more scarce resources.
I recognize that this approach imposes a cost. By maintaining “first come first served” for the provision of nonfutile lifesaving care, we may save fewer lives than through ruthlessly efficient optimization. If someone needs twice the average amount of time on a ventilator, maintaining that we shouldn’t turn them away — or deprive them of a ventilator they are already using — means that we are potentially costing the lives of two people who come into the I.C.U. after them.
But even in a crisis, can we not ascribe some value to maintaining our principles? I argue yes — though it may cost lives. This is an unorthodox position, and one that may earn me the ire of the esteemed bioethicists who crafted the rationing protocols now on the verge of deployment.
But I fight for it, because I believe that nondiscrimination is not just a tool to accomplish an end — it also is an end in and of itself. Federal authorities, like the Health and Human Services Office of Civil Rights, must defend the equality of disabled Americans, even now.
Ari Ne’eman is a visiting scholar at the Lurie Institute for Disability Policy at Brandeis University and a doctoral student in health policy at Harvard University. He is at work on a book on the history of American disability advocacy.
Disability is a series of essays, art and opinion by and about people living with disabilities.
A collection of 60 essays from this series is now available in book, e-book and audiobook form: “About Us: Essays From the Disability Series of The New York Times,” edited by Peter Catapano and Rosemarie Garland-Thomson, published by Liveright.