ISTANBUL — Turkish officials on Wednesday announced the indictments of 20 Saudi nationals on charges of murder and incitement to murder in the killing of the dissident writer Jamal Khashoggi, concluding their investigation into the case.
In a statement, the Istanbul prosecutor’s office said the indictments, which have yet to be made public, would show the attack had been planned. It said Mr. Khashoggi had been strangled and dismembered in a planned murder inside the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul on Oct. 2, 2018. The same conclusion had been reached by American intelligence.
But Saudi Arabia has not granted Turkish investigators access to the accused in Saudi Arabia, and is unlikely to cooperate in any extradition. The case is also unlikely to come to trial since none of the men are in the country and Turkish law demands the presence of the defendants for a trial.
The killing of Mr. Khashoggi, 59, a well-known former Saudi official and writer who became a critic of Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, Saudi Arabia’s de facto leader, drew condemnation around the world. United States intelligence officials had concluded that since his close aides were involved, the prince had ordered Mr. Khashoggi’s killing.
A United Nations investigation completed last year also found that the killing had been carefully planned and endorsed by high-level Saudi officials. The United Nations expert on extrajudicial killings, Agnes Callamard, called for an international investigation.
The Turkish indictment was based on evidence from cellphone location records of the accused, records of their entry and exit from Turkey and their presence at the consulate, the statement said. Evidence was also drawn from searches of their hotel rooms, the consulate and the consul’s residence; from Mr. Khashoggi’s cellphone, laptop and iPad; and from witness statements, it said.
Mr. Khashoggi had entered the consulate to obtain papers that would allow him to marry. He was killed, Saudi officials later said, by Saudi officials after a scuffle.
With the indictment, the Turkish prosecutor announced, the investigation has been completed, although Mr. Khashoggi’s body has never been found and a local facilitator that Saudi officials said had helped dispose of the body has never been named.
Ms. Callamard welcomed Turkey’s indictment, telling Reuters on Wednesday that it was needed as a “counterbalance to the travesty of justice at the hands of Saudi Arabia.” She also urged the U.S. authorities to release their findings on the killing of Mr. Khashoggi.