It is the first time the event, which draws about 150,000 marchers and two million spectators, will not go on as planned in more than 250 years.
New York City’s St. Patrick’s Day Parade, the largest such celebration in the world, was postponed late Wednesday over concerns about the spread of the coronavirus, the first time in more than 250 years that the event will not go on as planned.
The announcement, made in a statement by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and parade organizers, followed the cancellation of St. Patrick’s Day celebrations in Chicago and Boston. Ireland on Monday canceled all parades nationwide.
The parade, traditionally held on March 17, draws an estimated 150,000 marchers and two million spectators a year to Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, including many police and military groups, firefighters, Irish musicians and student groups from across the United States. It is one of the city’s largest recurring public events.
The celebration was first held on March 17, 1762, 14 years before the signing of the Declaration of Independence, and over the decades it has transformed into a freewheeling festival of Irish heritage that draws revelers of every race and ethnicity.
That history weighed heavily on parade organizers and other Irish-American leaders, who agonized over breaking with more than two centuries of tradition even as celebrations in other cities were scrapped.
On Monday, Mayor Bill de Blasio said the parade would go on as planned. But on Wednesday, he said his thinking on the subject had changed because of the “ancillary realities” surrounding the parade, such as the large number of people who would use public transport to get there.
Neil Cosgrove, an official with the Ancient Order of Hibernians, an Irish diaspora group, who was not involved in discussions over the parade, said that the organizers had been looking to the city for guidance.
On Wednesday, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said he had spoken to Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, whose “strong recommendation” was to “reduce large gatherings” like the parade.
“If you listen to the experts, they are saying you should not have a St. Patrick’s Day convening at this time, which I believe makes sense,” the governor said.
St. Patrick is the patron saint of both Ireland and the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, the second-largest diocese in the United States, which has traditionally played a role in the parade. Each year, the parade is reviewed by Cardinal Timothy Dolan of New York from the steps of St. Patrick’s Cathedral as it marches past.
Organizers and co-sponsors of the parade, which is led each year by the New York Army National Guard’s First Battalion 69th Infantry, said as recently as midweek that the parade would go ahead as planned.
But that likelihood grew increasingly remote as New York emerged as an epicenter of coronavirus infection in the United States, with most of its infections centered in Westchester County, north of New York City.
Mr. Cuomo declared a state of emergency in the state on Saturday and deployed the National Guard three days later to a “containment area” in New Rochelle, in Westchester County.
That area, with a one-mile radius, was designed to limit public gatherings by forcing schools and other buildings to close. It also focused the state’s resources on the area around a synagogue that has been at the center of the state’s largest cluster of cases.