The galaxy cluster Ophiuchus was doing just fine until WISEA J171227.81-232210.7 — a black hole several billion times as massive as our sun — burped on it.
If there were ever sentient beings in the Ophiuchus cluster, a faraway conglomeration of galaxies in the southern sky, they are long gone. A few hundred million years ago, a mighty cosmic storm swept through that region of space. Hot gas suffuses the cluster, but the storm blew a crater through it more than a million light-years wide, leaving just a near-vacuum, a nattering haze of ultrahot electrical particles.
In a statement issued by the lab on Feb. 27, Dr. Giacintucci compared the effects of the explosion to the eruption in 1980 that ripped the top from Mount St. Helens in Washington. Except that “you could fit 15 Milky Way galaxies in a row” into the crater punched out of the gas by this eruption, she said.
The alleged outburst would rank as the biggest explosion yet discovered in the history of the universe: the energetic equivalent of one billion supernova explosions, unleashed in a torrent that probably lasted 100 million years. A hundred million years of bad space weather.
In 2016, a sharp discontinuity appeared in Chandra’s X-ray maps of the Ophiuchus cluster. Dr. Werner, then at Stanford, wondered if it represented the edge of another black hole bubble. He and his colleagues ultimately concluded that it was not, “because it would have to be the result of the most powerful outburst that we have ever seen in the universe,” he wrote in an email.
But Dr. Giacintucci and her colleagues persisted. They examined data from the European Space Agency’s XMM-Newton X-ray satellite, which also revealed an “edge,” and from a pair of radio telescopes: the Murchison Widefield Array in Australia and the Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope in India.
“The radio data fit inside the X-rays like a hand in a glove,” said Maxim Markevitch of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., and a member of Dr. Giacintucci’s team.
Dr. Werner said that the black hole would have had to swallow about 270 million solar masses of material to have created such a big blast. The storm could have raged for 100 million years. It takes a long time to digest a small galaxy worth of suns.
