In contests for party control between progressives and moderates, electoral and governing results speak for themselves.
WASHINGTON — Congressional Democrats are very familiar with the political dramaturgy now playing out in their party’s White House primary and know of its lessons and consequences.
Voters appear to be in a death match between those who crave an aggressively progressive policy agenda with little tolerance for dissent and more moderates whose central goal is to undermine the populist movements in both parties and defeat Donald J. Trump. Both believe theirs is the winning formula to unseat President Trump.
On Super Tuesday, this played out at the presidential level across the country between Bernie Sanders and Joe Biden. But it was evident at the congressional level as well. On Tuesday, Jessica Cisneros in Texas, the highest profile primary challenger of the Justice Democrats, a very progressive group, lost to the moderate Democratic incumbent, Henry Cuellar. Left-wing-activist-backed Senate candidates in Texas and North Carolina were crushed by more moderate candidates.
The first dress rehearsal for this battle was the 2018 midterm elections, when the Justice Democrats put its muscle behind nearly 80 Sanders-like insurgent candidates to target House seats, many of them held by less liberal Democratic incumbents. That year, scores of Democrats ranging from left of center (like Katie Porter of California) to fairly conservative (Anthony Brindisi of New York) took advantage of waning support for Mr. Trump in America’s suburbs to make a run for House seats held by Republican incumbents.
The results were pretty unequivocal. Justice Democrats lost virtually every primary race in 2018 when they fielded a homegrown liberal candidate, but they won one very important race: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez upset Representative Joe Crowley in a New York seat he had held for years.
At the same time, scores of middle-of-the-road Democrats were able to get through crowded primaries and win over Republican and independent voters in the general election, giving their party a net gain of 40 seats and flipping the House.
The theory of the case for progressive candidates is that they galvanized the Democratic base, and if people would just give them a chance, they will force through policies that most of the country supports. But the data — and many of the experiences of the 116th Congress — tell a more nuanced story.
A 2019 Gallup poll found that from 1994 to 2018, the percentage of all Democrats who call themselves liberal had more than doubled, to 51 percent from 25 percent. But Gallup also found that between 1993 and 2016, the percentage of Americans identifying as conservative rested between 36 percent and 40 percent, holding at 35 percent in 2018.
Looked at another way, in this Congress, the size of the Progressive Caucus, representing the House’s most liberal members, reached historic size — just under 100 of the chamber’s 235 Democrats — but the New Democrat Coalition, a more moderate group, also grew to historic levels, to roughly 100 members.
Part of the issue is definitional. Socially liberal but fiscally conservative is now far too pat a description for contemporary moderate Democrats, many of whom would be to the left of the last Democratic president, Barack Obama.
Max Rose of Staten Island, a typical freshman who picked off a Republican in 2018, is a veteran who was awarded a Purple Heart and Bronze Star in Afghanistan. He cares little about the deficit and is strongly against the Green New Deal. Like the vast majority of freshman Democrats who won in 2018, he does not like Medicare for All, but he supports a public option on the Affordable Care Act’s insurance exchanges, which was considered a far left position not so long ago. He and the rest of the freshman Democrats support abortion rights, which was not true for many moderates before this class.
Further, racial and geographic dynamics often get conflated with generational ones among Democratic voters.
The 2018 races illuminated this as well. The Ocasio-Cortez victory was considerably more complicated than the postelection analysis, which focused almost completely on shifting demographics in her district. While the narrative of her victory portrayed younger, nonwhite and working-class voters as her secret base, in reality Ms. Ocasio-Cortez had soundly beaten the incumbent in the areas of the district that were by and large more wealthy and educated, in particular parts of Queens filled with white residents fleeing overpriced Manhattan.
Mr. Crowley prevailed in most working-class corners of the district, including the district’s Hispanic and African-American enclaves; he beat Ms. Ocasio-Cortez by more than 25 points in her own Parkchester section of the Bronx.
In short, deeply blue areas, especially with young and affluent voters, may be seeking political representation far to the left of the Democrats who were once easily re-elected. But as scores of Democrats saw in 2018, and still more saw on Super Tuesday, much of the rest of the country’s Democrats, especially older African-American voters who are a major component of the base, prefer more centrist candidates. This is the dichotomy that hangs over the party today.
The 116th Congress also demonstrated that political influence outside of Washington does not always translate into legislative victories, as progressives are promising.
Without question Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s influence on the Democratic Party also is striking in modern politics for a freshman House member. In her first few months in office she got normally skittish Democrats and some early presidential candidates to sign on to her Green New Deal (introduced with Senator Edward Markey of Massachusetts), forced a national conversation about marginal tax rates and Medicare for All, helped tank a plan for Amazon to move to Queens, and catalyzed a vast rejection of corporate PAC money for incumbents who had just a year ago eschewed that plan as impractical at best, unilateral disarmament at worst.
But here was the reality for progressives: Medicare for All got little more than a hearing or two, while the House passed bill after bill pressing more incremental health care changes (but none of which the Republican-controlled Senate would even entertain). The Green New Deal had a messy if high-profile roll out, then fizzled. Ms. Ocasio-Cortez did not have even the modest legislative victories enjoyed by other freshman Democrats like Joseph Neguse of Colorado, Deb Haaland of New Mexico and Lauren Underwood of Illinois, who ran on getting health care bills on the floor.
What is more, many Democrats began to fret early on that the far left was going to do to them what the Tea Party had done to Republicans a few years back: Run them out of town, one primary at a time. Ms. Ocasio-Cortez previously suggested that Democrats who were not sufficiently loyal to an emergent brand of progressive politics should have others like her run against them in a primary. She is now suggesting that, exit polling be damned, Mr. Biden’s latest string of successes is because of the strong-arming of corporate lobbyists, something Mr. Sanders has underscored by repeatedly calling Mr. Biden the establishment candidate.
But the results speak for themselves. Ms. Ocasio-Cortez threw her weight behind Cristina Tzintzún Ramirez in her Senate primary campaign in Texas to defeat the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee’s chosen candidate, M.J. Hegar. Ms. Hegar ended up easily outpacing a crowded Democratic field.
