Gov. Andrew Cuomo said one million face masks were being sent to hospitals in New York City and another 500,000 to Long Island.
Javits Center and three other sites are being eyed for temporary hospitals.
Disaster Declaration gives New York access to billions in aid.
New York City health department moves to curtail testing as pandemic overwhelms hospitals.
There was a brief ground stop at area airports.
New York City reports 60 dead, 1,450 hospitalized.
Empty streets and rainbow windows.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said Saturday he expects as many as 2,000 patients who test positive for the virus to receive care at the sprawling, glass complex in Manhattan, known for hosting large scale events like The New York Times Travel Show and New York Comic Con.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is also seriously looking at other locations including two at State University of New York campuses on Long Island, and at the Westchester Convention Center. Doctors have said the number of hospital beds available will dwindle as cases of the virus soar.
The officials visited more than a dozen locations before zeroing on the four sites, officials said.
The Army Corps is expected to outfit the centers with hospital equipment as soon as Mr. Cuomo tours and green lights the locations, officials said.
New York hospitals have continued to see a sharp increase in COVID-19 cases, surpassing 10,000 as of Saturday. The relentless spike is thrusting the medical system toward a crisis point, officials have said.
In the Bronx, for example, doctors at Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center said they had only a few remaining ventilators. In Brooklyn, doctors at Kings County Hospital Center said they were so low on supplies that they were reusing masks for up to a week, slathering them with hand sanitizer between shifts.
As of Saturday, 10,356 New York state residents had tested positive for the virus. With 6 percent of the U.S. population, the state now accounts for nearly half of the cases in the country, as tallied by The New York Times.
The designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which was announced by Senator Chuck Schumer of New York on Friday night, gives New York access to billions of dollars in aid from the Disaster Relief Fund.
State officials and doctors have been sounding the alarm about an impending shortage of supplies, hospital beds and ventilators as the number of confirmed coronavirus cases continue to climb.
Earlier Mr. Cuomo, speaking to reporters from Albany, said he welcomed the federal government’s assistance.
Mr. Cuomo said that included sending one million N-95 protective masks to hospitals in New York City and another 500,000 to Long Island.
The state had also identified about 6,000 ventilators from “places all across the globe” for purchase, the governor said. He estimates the state would need about 30,000 ventilators to keep with the demand of new patients.
Weeks after demanding that the federal government send more coronavirus test kits to New York City, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the public health system would soon be conducting 5,000 tests a day.
Legions of anxious New Yorkers responded by lining up at hospitals, including about 100 outside the emergency room at Elmhurst Hospital in Queens.
But by late Friday, the city’s health department seemed to reverse course: It moved to curtail widespread testing, saying it was undermining the broader strategy to stop the virus’s spread.
“Outpatient testing must not be encouraged, promoted or advertised,” the health department said in an advisory. Facilities were asked to “immediately stop testing non-hospitalized patients” for the virus unless medically necessary.
Mark Levine, a City Council member who leads the health committee, said he understood the desire to make testing widely available, but that it was too late for that.
City officials said they were worried the testing centers were drawing sick people out from isolation in their homes. To perform each test, health care workers must use fresh protective gear, including masks, which are already in short supply.
The Health Department also discouraged hospitals from testing asymptomatic health care workers, alarming some doctors who believe it could lead to increased transmission within hospitals.
Outgoing flights were temporarily halted on Saturday afternoon at the airports serving New York City after a trainee in an air-traffic control center in Long Island tested positive for Covid-19, the Federal Aviation Administration said.
Flights resumed nearly two hours after the reported standstill. Earlier, the agency had ordered a ground stop at the region’s airports and rerouted flights bound for them while the center was cleaned, the F.A.A. said in a statement. The center, in Ronkonkoma, N.Y., remained “open and operational,” it said.
The infected trainee had not been in the center since March 17, and the F.A.A. said it was working with local health officials and employee representatives to determine how many personnel might have interacted with the trainee in recent days.
Sixty people died in New York City from complications related to the coronavirus, city officials announced Saturday evening. Earlier in the day, city officials said that figure was 45.
The number of people who tested positive for the virus was 8,115, up from 7,530 earlier in the day, city officials said. Of those people, 1,450 were hospitalized and 370 of them were in intensive care as of Saturday evening.
Brooklyn has the most number of cases, with 2,484; Queens has 2,254 cases; and Manhattan has 1,868 cases. In the Bronx, there are 1,071 cases and Staten Island has 437 cases. And one case is not attributed to a borough.
Mr. Cuomo, dressed casually in a white polo shirt, offered hints of optimism during a briefing with reporters on Saturday morning. For the first time since the pandemic reached New Rochelle, New York’s first virus hot spot, cases had been rising more slowly when compared with other suburban areas, he said.
There were 294 cases reported there Saturday, fewer than the number of cases in Nassau County, which saw 480 people test positive for the coronavirus.
Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey said on Saturday that 1,327 people in that state had tested positive for the virus, and that 16 had died, up from 11 on Friday. In Connecticut, officials reported 35 new confirmed cases on Friday, bringing the state’s total to 194. Four Connecticut residents have died of the virus.
Mr. Murphy ordered all nonessential businesses to close by 9 p.m. on Saturday, and suggested that schools could be closed even longer than two weeks. He asked all people to remain indoors unless exercising or shopping for food or medicine.
Even as life slowed and streets emptied, New York City retained a bit of its quirky charm.
In Brooklyn, the pandemic has prompted a heaven-sent scavenger hunt. Children home from school began hanging drawings and paintings of rainbows in windows. As word spread, an interactive “quarantine rainbow map” sprung up for walking tours.
“A lovely reminder for all of us that in a storm there is still something to look forward to,” an organizer wrote. Lovers and dreamers can expand the rainbow connection map by adding addresses here.
In Manhattan’s Yorkville neighborhood, residents have hauled exercise equipment into Carl Schurz Park to help fill the gap created by the shutdown of exercise centers. Ropes, a balance ball and some weights are available for communal use. B.Y.O. sanitizing hand wipes.
A couple who had been planning a May wedding and a reception for 120 guests shifted gears last week to lock in health insurance for the groom. A handful of guests were invited to an impromptu wedding on Wednesday in Riverside Park. “Love in the time of Corona,” the invitation read. A friend, a Brooklyn schoolteacher with an online ordination through the Universal Life Church, officiated as the 14 guests all stood a safe 6-feet apart.
About 90 miles south in Long Beach Island, a popular Jersey Shore destination, officials were cautioning those looking to escape the coronavirus by retreating to the beach to think again and stay away.
A commissioner of Long Beach township, Dr. Joseph Lattanzi, said people were flocking to the area.
“We are strongly recommending that you remain in your primary service area and DO NOT relocate to the shore area,” Dr. Lattanzi, a past president of South Ocean Medical Center, wrote on the township website.
Mr. Murphy offered a similar warning. “I urge those who have homes at the Jersey Shore to not go to them at this time,” he said.
What to expect on Sunday when new restrictions start.
When the clock strikes 8 p.m. Sunday, the most populous city in the country will all but come to a halt.
That’s when a broad executive order by Governor Cuomo aimed at slowing down the spread of the highly contagious coronavirus is slated to take effect in New York State. Other states around the nation grappling with the epidemic, including California, Connecticut and New Jersey, have enacted similar restrictions.
Businesses considered nonessential must keep all of their workers at home.
Those older than 70 and those who have compromised immune systems or have underlying illnesses should stay indoors as much as possible to limit their exposure to the coronavirus. Plus, stronger restrictions for these groups, including having to wear a mask when in the company of others.
Those under 70 and healthy may leave the house for short periods of time to exercise, take a walk and participate in non-contact physical activities as long as they stand six feet apart, enough distance to keep contagion at bay.
Public transportation will remain open, but roads and mass transit should only be used as a last resort.
Gatherings of any size will be prohibited.
A number of businesses deemed essential will remain open during the pandemic, officials said.
They include grocery stores, restaurants offering takeout or delivery, pharmacies, health care providers, banks, gas stations, liquor stores, child care providers, funeral homes and others.
Airport workers are getting pink slips as travel slows.
More than 1,200 airport workers at restaurants and stores operated by OTG at La Guardia, Kennedy International and Newark Liberty International have been laid off, according to the union that represents them, Unite Here Local 100.
OTG said the closings and layoffs were necessary because of the travel restrictions that had virtually grounded airlines.
But relief is on the way for some New Yorkers struggling economically because of the pandemic. Seventeen major foundations and philanthropists have pooled together $75 million which they plan to give to small and midsize nonprofit organizations in New York City struggling amid the coronavirus crisis.
Applications for aid from the NYC Covid-19 Response & Impact Fund are now available from the New York Community Trust.
Eligible organizations must be registered as 501(c)3s, in New York City, with an operating budget of $20 million or less (excluding government contracts). The money will be given as either interest-free loans, or grants.
Reporting was contributed by Annie Correal, Luis Ferré-Sadurní, Joseph Goldstein, J. David Goodman, Patrick McGeehan, Matthew Haag, Jeffery C. Mays, Jesse McKinley, Andy Newman, Azi Paybarah, Brian Rosenthal, Edgar Sandoval, Ed Shanahan, Liam Stack, Tracey Tully, Neil Vigdor and Andrea Zagata.