The rule, struck down by a bipartisan majority, sought to rewrite Obama-era debt relief measures, which allow students misled by schools to request that their loan debts be forgiven.
WASHINGTON — In a bipartisan rebuke, the Senate voted on Wednesday to overturn a major Trump administration rule that would sharply limit debt relief for students misled by schools that lured them in with false claims about their graduates’ career and earning prospects.
In a 53-to-42 vote that included 10 Republicans, the Senate struck down a revised Education Department rule completed in September by the department’s secretary, Betsy DeVos. The House passed a companion resolution in January. The legislation will now go to President Trump, who will decide whether to uphold the rule with a veto or side with Congress over his own education secretary.
If Mr. Trump does not sign it, Democrats say they will press for a veto override. Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois and the minority whip, successfully recruited Republicans for Wednesday’s vote after veterans groups — which he called a “critical ally” — backed his resolution.
“These are men and women that we praise around the clock, around the calendar, and here was our chance to stand with them, and a number of Republicans wanted to do that,” Mr. Durbin said.
“We found 10. I think we can find 10 more,” he added.
Ms. DeVos’s rule was one of several efforts to rewrite Obama-era debt relief measures, which allow students who attended schools that committed serious fraud to request that their loan debts be forgiven. The changes raised the bar for borrowers’ relief claims, requiring applicants to individually prove that a school knowingly misled them and that they were financially harmed by the deception. It also set a three-year deadline on claims.
“It’s disappointing to see so many in Congress fooled by misinformation from the left and the fake news narrative about our efforts to protect students from fraud,” said Angela L. Morabito, a spokeswoman for the department.
Critics said the DeVos regulations would effectively kill the department’s loan forgiveness program by imposing requirements that almost no borrowers would be able to meet.
“The burden of proof for these students is so absurdly unrealistic,” said Representative Susie Lee, Democrat of Nevada, who sponsored the companion resolution in the House.
Democrats emphasized that the original loan forgiveness rule, on the books since 1995, was little used until for-profit chains starting imploding in 2014.
“These for-profit colleges are the coronavirus of higher education,” Mr. Durbin said on the Senate floor.
Ms. DeVos called Mr. Trump after he expressed ambivalence about the rule to senators, according to two people with knowledge of the conversation. One person close to the president said he supported finding a solution to the loan problem but did not feel strongly about Ms. DeVos’s approach. A policy statement issued in February by the Trump administration defended the DeVos rule as a change that “restores due process, the rule of law and student choice,” and said that the president’s advisers “would recommend that he veto” attempts to overturn it.
The Senate action poses a political quandary for Mr. Trump. He has pressed the Education Department for a proposal to match sweeping college debt plans put forth by Democratic presidential candidates. And veterans, who backed the Senate measure, have been key political supporters.
Democratic leaders have also noted that Mr. Trump’s own for-profit college venture, Trump University, had to settle fraud claims.
The rule change she finished last year is scheduled to take effect in July. In December, Ms. DeVos’s department added further restrictions, adopting a complicated formula for calculating relief that limits nearly all applicants to only partial relief and requires the majority to repay most of their loans.
Toby Merrill, the director of Harvard Law School’s Project on Predatory Student Lending, praised the Senate action and said she hoped the president would “put the voices of students above the interests of for-profit colleges” and overturn the rule. Ms. Merrill’s organization represents a borrower-advocacy group that filed a lawsuit last month in federal court in Manhattan challenging the legality of Ms. DeVos’s new rule.
But a crucial Republican lawmaker opposed the Senate measure: Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee and the chairman of the Senate’s education committee, who said the Obama-era rule went too far.
Mr. Durbin responded on Wednesday to those comments by pointing out that Ms. DeVos’s rule also bars most students from suing their schools.
Veterans have long been considered among the most vulnerable groups for predatory recruitment tactics because of their lucrative G.I. Bill benefits. The benefits are particularly attractive to for-profit schools, because federal law requires those schools to obtain at least 10 percent of their revenue from sources other than Education Department-backed student loans. G.I. Bill benefits help schools meet that quota.
Standing alongside Democratic lawmakers last month at a news conference, seven organizations representing veterans and their families called on Congress to overturn Ms. DeVos’s rule.
Nicholas Fandos contributed reporting from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York.