On social media, outpourings of generosity during the coronavirus pandemic are part of a shift toward direct giving.
Shortly before midnight on Thursday, the author Shea Serrano was at his home in San Antonio, lying comfortably on his sofa watching television. He could not shake a bad feeling about all the low-wage and hourly workers losing desperately needed tips and shifts because of the coronavirus outbreak.
What for many would be a futile act — venting into an endless stream of chatter, jokes and invective — meant, for Mr. Serrano, activating his dedicated following of 345,000 Twitter users. By Sunday night he had raised $10,000 — not for a traditional charity like the Red Cross but to send directly to people who posted screenshots of student-loan statements and past-due medical bills.
Mr. Serrano’s tweet (which contained an obscenity) asked “who has a bill coming up that they’re not sure they’re gonna be able to pay,” then requested a copy of the bill and a Venmo connection. It has been retweeted nearly 10,000 times.
The way that people are responding to direct requests for assistance online is just the latest example of how crowdfunding platforms like Kickstarter and GoFundMe have changed the way people look at cries for help over the internet. For younger people, the collection plate has moved online.
Retailers resist calls to provide their employees with masks.
Stocks drop as investors brace for more damage to come.
The Federal Reserve eased a key rule for big banks.
An American expatriate living in Taiwan, Adedoyin Oyelaran, was watching the coronavirus spread across the United States when he saw a Twitter thread by the writer Roxane Gay. She had announced that she would help 10 needy people with $100 each to stock up on groceries, adding, “Maybe others can help if you have a little extra.” Mr. Oyelaran decided to join in, and ended up sending four people $100 each.
He said he still gave money to traditional charities, like the United Way, but preferred the immediacy of giving directly, given urgent demand. Mr. Oyelaran cited a survey by the Federal Reserve that found that four in 10 American adults wouldn’t be able to cover an unexpected $400 expense with cash.
“It just takes one episode, and there’s a tailspin from there,” he said.
Mr. Oyelaran said he performed some due diligence — looking up people on Google and reading back into their social-media feeds — to see if anything about the requests seemed amiss. One woman sent photographs of the diapers she had bought with the money he sent and a time-stamped receipt. He said he found the verification reassuring but not necessary.
“If people are bold enough to come out and ask strangers for help, they probably need it,” Mr. Oyelaran said.
Ms. Gay ultimately doubled her initial pledge, giving 20 people $100 each to help with their bills. She described herself as “really encouraged and heartened” by her followers who donated to others in need.
In recent years, philanthropic giving has gone the way of the rest of the economy, with bigger and bigger gifts and bequests by the ultrawealthy, and lower- and middle-income workers squeezed to the point where making ends meet trumps charity as a matter of necessity. The 2017 rewrite of the nation’s tax code also meant that fewer taxpayers have been itemizing their deductions and therefore can’t claim donations to reduce their tax bill. But paying someone’s heating bill isn’t tax deductible, anyway.
Mr. Serrano, 38, grew up in south San Antonio, with his father driving a bus for the city and his mother working at a corner store. He ended up in Houston working as a middle school science teacher, explaining cellular structure and the periodic table to eighth graders. His wife was also teaching, and they made a comfortable enough living on their two salaries until she gave birth to twins and had to stop working after medical complications.
“All of a sudden, it’s one person making $42,000 a year for four people,” Mr. Serrano said. Housing costs and car payments took up $2,000 of the $2,200 he brought home each month. Everything else was a hustle, including writing blog posts at night for as little as $20 each.
He landed a job with the website Grantland, since shut down by its parent company, ESPN, that enabled him to quit his teaching job and begin developing his fan base.
Mr. Serrano’s Twitter feed is highly personal, with photographs of his wife and three children, posts about the ups and downs of his beloved San Antonio Spurs and observations about his favorite TV shows.
He has included charitable giving drives on his Twitter feed for some time, whether for a local nonprofit, relief for hurricane victims or simply help for people who need money to buy their children Christmas presents. When Mr. Serrano started sending money last week, he quickly hit Venmo’s daily $3,000 transfer limit. A contact at PayPal, which owns Venmo, helped him get an exemption, he said.
Mr. Serrano said he thought part of the reason he led the charity drives on Twitter was to recapture some of the good feeling he got from working as a teacher, but also to fight the same feeling of helplessness that Mr. Oyelaran experienced.
