Art & Design|It Was Their Big Debut. Then a Pandemic Hit.
It Was Their Big Debut. Then a Pandemic Hit.
Artists, actors, dancers and authors search for a silver lining as openings are disrupted by the virus outbreak.
Most of New York’s culture system — and indeed the country’s — shut down all at once last week. The impact of indefinite closures to the public or by-appointment hours won’t be fully understood for a while, nor will it be uniform. Certainly there’s less at stake in the Donald Judd show at David Zwirner being put on ice, but for young and emerging artists whose openings were scheduled this week, some of which represented large scale debuts in their field, the personal disruption can feel profound.
She’s not the only one asking those questions. Across the country, artists, playwrights, dancers and authors are grappling with seeing their projects waylaid, many of which took months or years to realize. Preparing for celebration, they told culture reporters for The New York Times that they are instead reconciling the accomplishment of their work with the demands of a public health crisis.
Ms. Tinkler, who is 42 and has worked as an associate producer on Matthew Barney’s film “Redoubt,” among his other projects, began assembling five small watercolor and gouache paintings on paper last July. They’re intricate and surreal, nominally still lifes but removed from a material plane. She paints from aggressively lit photographs, so her compositions of melted candles and roses and Christmas string lights become warped. Saturated washes whorl into psychedelic compositions, as if seen through a fugue state. Ms. Tinkler finished the paintings in January, before concerns about coronavirus had really touched the United States, but they feel appropriate to the moment, shot through with a kind of ungraspable dislocation that resonates with the collective mood.
Across town, the photographer Ruben Natal-San Miguel sat alone inside Postmasters gallery in Tribeca on Saturday, before it closed. He had just finished installing his solo show, “Women R Beautiful,” 50 lushly colored portraits of New Yorkers, the bulk of which were made last year. It’s his response to Gary Winogrand’s “Women Are Beautiful” series, expanding its narrow view of race and sexuality. By contrast, Mr. Natal-San Miguel’s portraits comprise an ebullient spectrum of race, age, and gender identification. His humanistic approach extends to presentation; the images are dye sublimation prints on aluminum hung without glass, expressly, he said, so viewers could feel closer to his subjects, a choice that now most people won’t experience.
Latest Updates: Coronavirus Impact on Life in the U.S.
We want to see your acts of kindness in a difficult time.
After 12 days on a ventilator, a chance to FaceTime hello.
A dancer’s homecoming is stalled.
Ms. Mitchell’s New York debut was deferred on Friday when the company announced that its engagement at the Ailey Citigroup Theater scheduled to begin March 25 will no longer take place. The company said performances may be rescheduled to later this spring, but for the moment, a journey that began for Ms. Mitchell almost a year ago has been disrupted just before its culmination.
For dancers, whose art form is as physical as it is spiritual, artistic development requires long hours in the studio. Ms. Mitchell was working hard to get back to full fitness when the cancellation was announced.
For a Los Angeles author and an illustrator, April is now a mystery.
Katie Orphan moved to Los Angeles 11 years ago, struggled to find work, and became the first employee of The Last Bookstore, a downtown independent bookstore. As the store’s head buyer, she spent years promoting other people’s books, entrenching herself in the city’s literary scene.
Last year, Ms. Orphan quit her day job to focus on her own debut, “Read Me Los Angeles,” a guide to the city’s book culture. She spent years writing at night and on weekends after long retail shifts, finding a publisher last year in Prospect Park Books. It was standing room only at her reading at Skylight Books in Los Feliz on March 10, the day her book was published. It was her first, and for the foreseeable future, last promotional event.
Across the city, and across mediums, Lorenzo Diggins Jr., a self-taught illustrator and zine publisher, finds himself at a similar crossroads. “Everything seems to be transitioning,” said Mr. Diggins Jr., who was preparing for his debut exhibition at the Los Angeles edition of The Other Art Fair before it, too, was canceled.
Mr. Diggins, 31, was banking on the power of the pre-eminent online gallery Saatchi Art, which produces the event. The pandemic has wiped all that away.
One Off Broadway debut canceled, another postponed.
Noah Diaz was in the middle of rewrites for his play “Richard & Jane & Dick & Sally” when the theater company The Playwrights Realm canceled the show’s New York run. Set to open April 3, it would have been Mr. Diaz’s Off Broadway debut.
From New Haven, where he is an M.F.A. candidate at the Yale School of Drama, Mr. Diaz, 26, said he had anticipated the news. The day before, he had watched in surprise as Yale Repertory Theater scrapped the final two shows in its season because of the pandemic — an action that came Wednesday, before the cascade of shutdowns that followed the closure of Broadway on Thursday.
Still, he spoke of the “shared grief” of artists like him “who have experienced such a massive shift in their income, their artistry, their personhood.” Mr. Diaz’s play, which imagines the classic children’s book characters Dick and Jane as estranged adult siblings in a moment of family crisis, is a coproduction with Baltimore Center Stage, where it was already seen this season. The New York run was meant to be his introduction to the wider industry, something he said he will have to seek elsewhere.
Sandra Okuboyejo, 23, sounded optimistic as she discussed the delay of her New York stage debut in Jocelyn Bioh’s romantic comedy “Nollywood Dreams,” which was set to start previews this week at MCC Theater on West 52nd Street in Manhattan. The company has vowed to reschedule it later this season.
“It’s a scary, scary time,” Ms. Okuboyejo said from her family’s home in southern New Jersey, where she has been using the unexpected limbo to indulge in her composer-lyricist side and to count her blessings, including that her production wasn’t one cut short by the pandemic.
