Richard Grenell, prone to pique and caustic tweets, is running the intelligence agencies in an acting capacity. He could be there for a while.
WASHINGTON — For a diplomat, Richard Grenell has a remarkable record of being undiplomatic.
Facing rejection for a job a few years back at a global bank, he responded with a series of cutting email denunciations. Unhappy working as a foreign policy spokesman for Mitt Romney’s presidential campaign in 2012, he exited in a wave of recriminations.
His confrontational style touches such raw nerves that one top Obama administration official, Susan E. Rice, recently called him “one of the most nasty, dishonest people I’ve ever encountered,” and some German politicians demanded that he be recalled from his post as United States ambassador to Berlin. His career was built on media relations, but his Twitter attacks on journalists have led some to mute him or skip his briefings.
Bombastic perseverance and ostentatious attention-seeking may be problematic traits for some employers, but they have helped fuel Mr. Grenell’s rapid rise under President Trump.
In 2017, the president nominated him to be ambassador to Germany, a perch that Mr. Grenell has used to spread his brand of combative conservatism and emerge as an outspoken Trump loyalist. Last month, the president made Mr. Grenell the most powerful spymaster on earth, naming him the acting director of national intelligence for the United States — the least-experienced, most overtly political person ever to occupy the post, which oversees the Central Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency and 15 other departments.
On Friday, Mr. Trump announced that he would nominate Representative John Ratcliffe, Republican of Texas, as his permanent choice for the job, selecting someone Senate Republicans said last summer was unqualified. Under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act, Mr. Grenell’s tenure as acting director can extend past the original legal deadline of March 11 as Mr. Ratcliffe’s nomination moves forward. If the Senate blocks Mr. Ratcliffe’s nomination, Mr. Grenell’s tenure could be further extended.
Mr. Grenell initially said he would return to Berlin and continue as ambassador after a permanent director is confirmed. But this week he told the conservative Daily Wire that he intends to resign from his post as ambassador once Mr. Ratcliffe is confirmed, an outcome that is far from certain.
Mr. Grenell’s ascension has been applauded by allies who see him as the embodiment of Mr. Trump’s efforts to shake up European diplomacy and cut through what the president sees as “deep state” opposition to his “America First” agenda.
Mr. Grenell, 53, grew up in Jenison, Mich., the son of evangelical Christians. He attended Evangel University, a Christian college, and received a master’s degree from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.
After graduation, he cycled through political communications jobs in California and New York and on Capitol Hill. In 2001, he joined the United States mission to the United Nations as a spokesman.
At the U.N., he worked for four U.S. ambassadors during the Bush administration, including John R. Bolton, who would go on to serve as Mr. Trump’s national security adviser. Mr. Grenell was frequently in the room for policy debates, and was steeped in the national security issues that preoccupied the administration after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
He developed close, often fraught relationships with reporters, publicly berating those he did not like and delivering scoops to those he did.
With President Barack Obama’s election in 2008, Mr. Grenell, working his Republican connections, applied for a public relations job at Deutsche Asset Management in New York.
Mr. Grenell’s interviews went poorly, two people familiar with the process said. Facing rejection, he fired off angry emails to Deutsche executives from his Blackberry, according to Mark Groombridge, who was Mr. Bolton’s senior adviser at the U.N. Mr. Groombridge warned him to stop.
“I can understand Ric’s annoyance but I subscribe to the philosophy that you don’t create an enemy and you don’t burn a bridge unnecessarily,” Mr. Groombridge said in an interview.
Mr. Grenell moved to Southern California, where he worked as a spokesman-for-hire. He expanded his media profile, blasting Democrats and journalists so often, and in such antagonistic terms, that some blocked or muted him on Twitter.
He became a contributor at Fox News, which paid him $80,000 in the nearly two-year period before he was nominated as ambassador to Germany, and joined the board of the conservative media outlet Newsmax, which paid him $13,000 during that period, according to a personal financial disclosure filing.
In 2012, when Mr. Obama nominated Ms. Rice, then his U.N. ambassador, to be secretary of state, Mr. Grenell joined an effort to sink her confirmation by pointing journalists toward her support for Rwanda’s president, Paul Kagame, who was actively sponsoring violence in the neighboring Democratic Republic of Congo. Mr. Obama later appointed Ms. Rice as his national security adviser, and Ms. Rice and Mr. Grenell have been scrapping ever since.
“The problem is not just that Ric Grenell has absolutely no preparation, no background, no knowledge to be the D.N.I.,” Ms. Rice said in a public appearance after Mr. Trump installed him as acting director of national intelligence. 
His elevation to overseeing U.S. intelligence has increased scrutiny of his private-sector work.
During the 2016 election, Restoration PAC, funded largely with $3.75 million from the conservative megadonor Dick Uihlein, announced it had retained Mr. Grenell “to help formulate content.” At the time, the political action committee was airing ads including one accusing Hillary Clinton of lying about the 2012 attack on the diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya that killed four Americans.
Mr. Grenell also claimed on a now-defunct website that he had worked with clients based in China, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Iran, Kazakhstan and Somalia, among other places. Democrats are now raising questions about whether he was fully forthcoming in his financial disclosure statements and whether some of his work ran afoul of the Foreign Agents Registration Act, or FARA.
Last month, Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the minority leader, called on the Justice Department to investigate whether Mr. Grenell’s efforts speaking out in support of foreign interests should have been disclosed under FARA.
“Any illegal activity would obviously disqualify him from serving as the director of national intelligence or in any other position of public trust,” Mr. Schumer wrote in a letter to the department.
In opinion pieces, Mr. Grenell defended Vladimir Plahotniuc, a Moldovan oligarch and politician, casting the accusations of corruption against him and his political party as Russian propaganda, as first reported by ProPublica. Mr. Plahotniuc fled Moldova last year and was sanctioned by the State Department in January.
Mr. Grenell did not list income from Mr. Plahotniuc or any Moldovan interests on his personal financial disclosure statement. But he did disclose that the consulting firm he started, Capitol Media Partners, was paid by the consulting firm of Arthur Finkelstein, a pioneering Republican political consultant who worked extensively in Eastern and Central Europe.
Mr. Finkelstein died in 2017. His clients included Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary and the Moldovan political party that Mr. Plahotniuc led, according to someone familiar with the work.
Mr. Grenell “has never worked for a foreign government or politician, paid or unpaid,” and “is proud of the hundreds of opinion pieces he’s written at no one’s direction but his own to highlight Russia’s malign activity in Eastern Europe,” Mr. Berke said.
Tax filings show that Mr. Grenell’s company was paid $103,750 in 2016 by a nonprofit group called the Magyar Foundation of North America, which was funded mostly by the far-right Hungarian government of Mr. Orban. The payments from the foundation, which were first reported by the Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft, also were not listed on Mr. Grenell’s disclosure form.
He enlisted Republican allies and donors to get him an administration job, ultimately winning the coveted role of Mr. Trump’s man in Berlin.
Mr. Grenell, who does not speak German, also embarked on a charm offensive in Berlin, particularly among media that might be friendly to him, including a German magazine called “Dogs,” a “premium lifestyle magazine for dog lovers.” He invited journalists to lunch on short ribs, expounded on his love of German cars, and circulated a video of his dog Lola’s first year in Berlin.
He has been pressing Germany to increase its defense budget to meet NATO guidelines, and to exclude Huawei, the Chinese telecommunications giant, from participating in building Germany’s 5G network. He succeeded in getting Berlin to accept a 95-year-old Nazi camp guard who had been living in New York, who died shortly after he was expelled from the United States, and arrived in Germany.
Such outspokenness has won applause from Trump world.
Mr. Grenell has tried to calm fears that he will politicize his new role.
David Enrich contributed reporting from New York. Kitty Bennett contributed research.