Widespread use of nonmedical masks could reduce community transmission. But recommending their broad use could also cause a run on the kind of masks that health care workers desperately need.
Should healthy people be wearing masks when they’re outside to protect themselves and others?
Both the World Health Organization and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have repeatedly said that ordinary citizens do not need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. And as health care workers around the world face shortages of N95 masks and protective gear, public health officials have warned people not to hoard masks.
But those official guidelines may be shifting.
The coronavirus is probably three times as infectious as the flu, Dr. Redfield said. Some people are infected and transmitting the virus probably as long as two days before showing any symptoms, he said. “This helps explain how rapidly this virus continues to spread across the country, because we have asymptomatic transmitters and we have individuals who are transmitting 48 hours before they become symptomatic,” Dr. Redfield said in the interview.
“That’s important, because now you have individuals that may not have any symptoms that can contribute to transmission, and we have learned that in fact they do contribute to transmission,” Dr. Redfield said.
A federal official said Tuesday that the C.D.C.’s review of mask wearing for the public stemmed from a request by the White House coronavirus task force, which is leaning toward recommending it.
One concern, which Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, voiced in an interview with CNN, is that such a recommendation could cause even worse shortages of N95 and other medical masks for health care workers, who need them most.
“You don’t want to take masks away from the health care providers who are in a real and present danger of getting infected,” Dr. Fauci, a member of the task force, said on CNN on Tuesday morning.
In the radio interview, Dr. Redfield also emphasized that social distancing, staying at least six feet away from others in public spaces, and staying home, were important measures to keep in place for now.