Manuel Liñán’s “Viva!” represents something new to mainstream flamenco audiences: a frank and joyful expression of gay identity.
A dancer in a long red dress stands alone in the darkness, facing away from the audience. A keening voice rings out and the dancer’s arms flutter slightly, as if awakened by its mournful sound. “Eres una rosa,” you are a rose, the singer intones. The dancer’s body sways slightly, as if gathering energy, before turning around in one swift motion.
Flamenco being what it is — a centuries-old music and dance that developed out of the collision of cultures in southern Spain — what follows is as surprising as it is refreshing. A performance executed entirely in drag, by Mr. Liñán and six extraordinary male dancers, wearing colorful dresses and the fringed shawls known as mantones, hair done up with peinetas (decorative combs) and flowers. While one dances, the others accompany with songs, exhortations and palmas, the rhythmic clapping of hands.
Mr. Liñán’s dancers perform traditional alegrías, tárantos and bulerías, dances full of exciting, rhythmic footwork, curving arms, slaps to the thighs, snapping fingers and sharp turns; as well as dances from the more academic escuela bolera, with its quicksilver, balletic steps.
Nuevo Flamenco, the “new flamenco” that has dominated the scene since the 1980s, has shifted away from the ruffled dresses, shawls and tightly pinned hairdos worn by Mr. Liñán’s dancers in “Viva!” And also from the traditional format of songs and dances that “Viva!” follows.
But for Mr. Liñán, this backward glance represents something intensely personal, a way of looking at his own awakening to flamenco. “It’s what I grew up watching when I was 11 or 12,” Mr. Liñán, 39, said in a phone interview from Madrid, where he lives.
Ms. Molina is a lesbian in a field in which female homosexuality is still mostly under the radar. She is also a famously intense performer. “My dancing has always been very physical, very extreme,” she said. “I have sought out pain in order to reach a trancelike state.” She takes her time, drawing the viewer into her world, then explodes in sustained passages of searing footwork, her body driven forward with a singular force.
Male cross-dressing was seen as something dangerous. The flamenco critic Estela Zatania said in an email that in the late years of Franco’s rule and for a time after, Spain had a law — Ley de la Peligrosidad Social (or law of social endangerment) — that resulted in persecution and jail for immoral behavior, and which was used mainly to target homosexuals. Dancing in drag was not only uncommon, it was also perilous.
Spain has changed. Fifteen years have passed since it became one of the first countries in the world to legalize gay marriage, despite the strong opposition of the Roman Catholic Church. Mr. Liñán’s show is a product and expression of this cultural shift.
