Self-Care|Is It OK to Take a Walk?
Yes, experts say. Equal parts transit alternative and therapy, contemplative strolls are helping people’s mental and physical health. Just stay six feet apart.
Not anymore. With Mayor de Blasio’s closure of the city’s restaurants (except for takeout), bars and gyms, which took effect this morning at 9 a.m., along with schools, movie theaters and any other place where people congregate, the stroll, it seems, is all that’s left.
But that is hardly nothing. Both transportation and meditation, the leisurely New York walk, long celebrated in literature, has come to symbolize not only a crucial thread in the city’s social fabric, as we migrate our social and, in many cases, work lives online, but a thread to sanity itself.
Trump says U.S. election will take place on schedule in November, but opposes voting by mail.
New York State records its biggest daily death toll, and De Blasio pleads for the nation’s help.
Another writer, Erin Khar, who recently published an addiction memoir called “Strung Out: One Last Hit and Other Lies That Nearly Killed Me,” said that long meanderings through her increasingly empty neighborhood, Greenwich Village, or along Hudson River Park, may now come with plastic gloves and a pack of sanitizing wipes, but they seem crucial now that she has stopped taking the subway and hanging out with friends.
Ms. Khar, 46, is hardly the first writer to discover the medicinal value of a New York walk.
This past Friday evening, as tension in the city began to crest, Taylor Davies, a 34-year-old copywriter who lives in the East Village, took a stroll from her apartment on Second Avenue through Alphabet City to the east.
Social distancing, as we all should be aware of by now, means “maintaining distance (approximately 6 feet or 2 meters) from others when possible,” according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Even in times of pandemic, that is easier said than done on Broadway at 5 p.m. on a Monday.
People looking to get out of the house for a jaunt should at least take extra steps to maintain their personal space cushion, said Carolyn C. Cannuscio, a social epidemiologist at the Center for Public Health Initiatives at the University of Pennsylvania.
Even on the wider sidewalks of the borough’s main arteries, any attempt to avoid a near-brush with pedestrians passing the other way would require serpentine-style evasive maneuvers typically associated with soldiers dodging gunfire on the battlefield.
But as caution increasingly trumps carefree meandering, even public health officials who specialize in risk assessment recognize the need to blow off steam for those confined between apartment walls.
