As a narrator informs viewers at the start of “The Sands of Modesto,” a tongue-in-cheek soap opera, “With the outbreak of COVID-19, otherwise known as the Coronavirus, the producers of today’s episode of ‘The Sands of Modesto’ would like to remind viewers that the staging of certain scenes has been altered for the actors’ safety.” That meant that when two long-separated lovers (played by Craig and McKinnon) were reunited, they conducted their affair through a pane of plexiglass and a layer of Saran Wrap.
When Cecily Strong caught them in the act, she thoroughly sanitized her hands before air-slapping her romantic rival.
Over at the Weekend Update desk, the anchors Colin Jost and Michael Che continued to riff about the 2020 presidential election.
and this week it’s become like my dad’s favorite radio station — just the oldies. Joe Biden is now the front-runner and just picked up an endorsement from Michigan’s governor only days before the state’s primary. And it makes sense that Michigan would love Biden, because it kind of looks like a hand trying to touch a lady’s hair.
I’ve got to say, honestly, I could not be more excited for Biden-Trump debates. They’re going to be the first debates that have to be moderated by a Jamaican nurse. As well as the only debates that air on the Turner Classic Movies channel. And I don’t want the moderator to ask them about anything political. I want all the questions to be like, “Who was the greatest slugger of the 50s? Who’s your favorite white boxer?” At this point, between Bernie, Biden and Trump, I think the next debate should just be on that cruise ship. And whichever one of them can beat coronavirus becomes our next president.
I don’t know who’s going to win the nomination, but watching white people fight over these old dudes is hilarious. I don’t even care who wins, just as long as they beat Trump. I’m not even really a Democrat, I just vote not-Republican. Democrats are like condoms to me. I mean, I’ll use them because it’s safer, I guess. But it doesn’t feel good.
In another sketch that began with a clever fake-out, a group of partygoers at a wedding reception asked a fellow guest to remove her obtrusive gas mask and — surprise! — it was Debbie Downer, the perpetually morbid character whom Rachel Dratch first portrayed back in 2004, spawning a slang term for that person in every group who always has to be the buzz kill.
Naturally, she was fretting about the coronavirus. And also feline AIDS.
And if you like comically irritating “S.N.L.” characters of a different vintage, Cecily Strong appeared on Weekend Update as The Girl You Wish You Hadn’t Started a Conversation With at a Party.
If you’ve already got the Weeknd as your musical guest, you might as well put him to work on an irresistible slow jam about guys who can’t quite understand how they found themselves in the doghouse with their significant others. “On the Couch” is sung — quite well, one might add! — by Kenan Thompson, Chris Redd and the Weeknd, but its closing verses belong to Ego Nwodim, Melissa Villaseñor and Heidi Gardner, who clarify why these chumps deserved their punishments (and probably worse).