Opinion|I Am Burning With Fury and Grief Over Elizabeth Warren. And I Am Not Alone.
I Am Burning With Fury and Grief Over Elizabeth Warren. And I Am Not Alone.
She might not be bound for the presidency, but she has lodged herself in another powerful place: the female psyche.
WICHITA, Kan. — Consider every moment, since the dawn of woman, when a female aspired but to no avail. She asked to attend school but was denied. She raised her hand but wasn’t called on. She applied but wasn’t hired. She enlisted but wasn’t deployed. She created but wasn’t credited. She ran but wasn’t elected.
Imagine the sadness and frustration of every such instance as a spark, their combined energy the size of many suns. That is the measure of grief and fury I felt rise inside me as I watched Elizabeth Warren’s bid for the Democratic nomination wane.
When Hillary Clinton lost in 2016, it hurt in similar ways but didn’t surprise me. Out here in the red hinterlands, it was plain to some of us that centrist ideas did not excite in times of historic inequality. This election, though, I thought Senator Elizabeth Warren — a class revolutionary to match the moment — might go to the White House.
It turns out that she won’t even go to the general election. Now the same pundits who in 2016 proved they know very little will list the reasons, without realizing they’re among the reasons.
Such yapping is forgettable, but one bit of political analysis from this election has stayed with me. It was March 2019, about a month after Ms. Warren had entered the race, and my father and maternal grandmother were talking politics at my kitchen table in Kansas.
“Ten years from now,” said my grandma, a white, 70-something retiree who grew up in poverty and spent decades on the farm where I grew up.
“No, it’s now. It’s now,” Dad replied.
“Hey, I’m game,” Grandma said.
“They cannot do it wrong, and I believe that Elizabeth Warren is the chance,” he said, tapping his finger on the table. I had hit record on my cellphone. The year-old audio’s rambunctious sound indicates that alcohol was involved.
“I hope so,” Grandma concluded.
What breaks my heart about this exchange is that my grandmother, deep down, never really believed Ms. Warren or any woman would get the nomination. Maybe that’s because she had watched cable news repeat a self-fulfilling prophecy about electability. Maybe it’s because, as a woman who has seen so much, she knew that electability was a valid concern. Or maybe it’s because it hurts so dang much to let yourself harbor a dream that you might not see come true. Whatever her motivation, you know what? Grandma was right.
Nonetheless, their conversation was a mark of progress — my previously apathetic family now votes with gusto and would consider campaigning for a candidate, and my father must not be the only man who wore a hard hat and rooted for Ms. Warren.
The event organizers shared with me that their impressive new health facility, ensuring reproductive health care for regional women, had been kept secret from the broader, conservative community throughout a capital campaign and construction. The men who built the structure, for instance, were told it would be a dentist’s office. Such measures were crucial to avoid blowback, vandalism or worse from anti-choice contingents. I understood, hailing from the area where the abortion provider Dr. George Tiller was murdered by a religious zealot in 2009.
After the fund-raiser and after watching Ms. Warren’s dismal returns on a hotel television, I spent the next day on the beach with a Geraldine Brooks novel I’d randomly purchased at a bookstore on Sanibel Island. The book, it turned out, was about a bright girl in the Massachusetts Bay Colony who is indentured as a servant in Cambridge to pay for her brother’s academic studies. Along the way, she tends the miscarriage of a girl whose rapist goes unpunished.
I looked out at the sea and considered that, for all our advancing on gender matters, the novel’s story is alive today: A woman must step aside as a man ascends to the presidency, and a “pro-life” activist would sooner bomb an abortion facility than let a raped girl cross its threshold.
My grandma might not get to see our first woman president. Ms. Warren might not, either. I’m 39 — will I? I feel certain of it, yet many women have died after a lifetime of such certainty.
A few nights before the Super Tuesday primaries that ultimately squashed Ms. Warren’s chances, I had a dream that I was in a crowd watching her onstage. She glowed like someone who has won in a way that has nothing to do with numbers. We spoke afterward. She was clearly at peace with whatever happened with the election.
Ms. Warren might not be bound for the presidency, but she has apparently lodged herself in another powerful place: the female psyche. The countless little girls with whom she famously “pinkie swore” that women should run for president will remember.
If this supposed democracy is worth lasting, at least one of them won’t be denied.
