Wirecutter|Coronavirus Has Caused a Hand Sanitizer Shortage. What Should You Do?
Coronavirus Has Caused a Hand Sanitizer Shortage. What Should You Do?
Using hand sanitizer helps prevent the spread of coronavirus. So what do you do when it’s sold out?
Do wash your hands frequently and thoroughly. This is the smartest thing you can do to prevent the spread of viruses.
Do make sure that if you are able to buy a lesser-known brand of hand sanitizer, it’s made of at least 60% alcohol, as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (C.D.C.) That rules out some of the so-called “botanical” options and popular kid-friendly options.
Do make sure that if you decide to try and make your own hand sanitizer, it also contains at least 60% alcohol. This recipe (two parts rubbing alcohol, one part aloe) sounds like it should achieve 60% alcohol. Keep in mind that some recipes call for using liquor (like vodka), which is usually 40% alcohol, and might not reach the threshold you need. For instance, Tito’s Vodka has been urging people not to use its product in DIY sanitizer solutions.
Do dry your hands before applying any hand sanitizer. A 2019 study published in the American Society for Microbiology’s publication, mSphere, found that wet mucus protected the influenza A virus, rendering hand sanitizer less effective.
Don’t rely on DIY recipes based solely on essential oils. They won’t work.
Don’t be conservative with your sanitizer, even if you’re down to one small travel-size bottle. For it to work, you need to cover every surface of both hands entirely with the sanitizer and rub until dry, according to the C.D.C.
Don’t use any hand sanitizer on greasy or dirty hands; it’s less effective, according to the C.D.C.
Don’t assume all anti-bacterial wipes will do the job. Benzalkonium chloride, the active ingredient in Wet Ones, was found to be less effective than ethanol (as in alcohol, the active ingredient in some sanitizers), hydrogen peroxide, or sodium hypochlorite on coronaviruses in an analysis of 22 studies published in February 2020.
Don’t expect baby wipes to work as well as handwashing or hand sanitizer. Baby wipes don’t have alcohol in them, and rubbing won’t remove germs from your hands the way simple soap and clean running water can.
