Zalmay Khalilzad, the Afghan-born veteran American diplomat, earned the trust of the militants, if not of Afghan officials.
DOHA, Qatar — It seemed a thankless and impossible assignment: negotiating a deal with the Taliban that offers the United States an exit from its longest war.
But Zalmay Khalilzad, the Afghan-born American envoy and architect of the deal, drew on everything he had to pull it off: broad autonomy from his bosses in Washington, nearly four decades of experience in U.S. academia, government and diplomacy, and a lifetime of dealing with tumultuous Afghan politics.
A year and a half of difficult — often criticized — diplomacy, under a ticking clock set by President Trump, had brought success where several previous attempts at a peace between the United States and the Afghan insurgents failed. The historic deal sealed on Saturday paves the way to start a gradual withdrawal of American forces from Afghanistan.
A key difference in what Mr. Khalilzad was willing to do was this: He embraced the move to talk with the Taliban directly, hear them out at length, and agreed to their divisive demand to discuss a troop withdrawal without the U.S.-allied Afghan government at the table.
And more, he pushed to define who would be at that table.
After nearly a decade stuck in a Pakistani jail, Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, the Taliban’s deputy chief, had returned to pick up the insurgent group’s case in large part because of Mr. Khalilzad’s ability to put the weight of American diplomacy behind his release.
As soon as Mullah Baradar arrived in Doha, Qatar, to lead his side, Mr. Khalilzad put another tool to test — his charm. He sought to put the Taliban leader at ease, something on display throughout the process even during some of the most tense moments in the negotiation.
The two men began small group discussions and Mr. Khalilzad, who is fluent in local languages, would speak to Mullah Baradar in Pashto.
They often met in Mullah Baradar’s room at the venue for the talks, a posh resort where vacationing Russian couples sunbathed by the pristine pool outside and a musician played the piano in the lobby under a large chandelier.
“This must be the closest you have come to heaven,” Mr. Khalilzad joked with Mullah Baradar during one of those early meetings. Mullah Baradar quickly closed the curtains.
On Saturday, right before signing the deal, Mullah Baradar glanced at Mr. Khalilzad, who was seated next to him, and the two men nodded with subdued smiles.
After more than a year of talks, the U.S. and the Taliban have signed an agreement to end the war in Afghanistan. But will it work?
Today: After years of false starts, the United States has signed a historic peace deal with the Taliban to end the war in Afghanistan. My colleague Mujib Mashal traveled to the front lines in Afghanistan and the signing ceremony in Doha to find out whether peace is actually possible.
It’s Friday, March 6.
Mujib, what was the situation heading into this peace deal?
This conflict has gone on for about 40 years. It kind of began with the Soviet invasion in the ‘70s, and it dragged on. It became a civil war. And the chaos of the civil war became a safe haven for terrorist groups like Al Qaeda that use it as launching grounds to attack the United States. And in retaliation, the United States invaded Afghanistan. And they toppled the Taliban government that was hosting Al Qaeda. So now we’ve got mostly three main players. One is the Taliban that feels that they are a government-in-waiting because they were toppled. And then it’s the U.S. military that’s been on the ground for 18 years, and they want out. And so that’s the second player. And the third player is the Afghan government that has been propped up by the United States over the past 18 years. And they are in the middle because they haven’t been part of the negotiations. So the effort to find a way out that can satisfy all the three players, it’s been a difficult process.
Right. And Mujib, the last time you and I spoke, a peace deal was on the brink of happening. But the Taliban carried out an attack. It killed an American. President Trump, who was involved in those negotiations, was furious and at the last minute, called the talks off.
Exactly. But that process was picked up again in recent months. And in the past few weeks, it finally felt like it was seriously coming together that we may have a way out of this conflict.
The way it happened is that they took the same deal that they almost finalized last September. They put a condition in front of it. The condition was that for seven days across Afghanistan, the violence level needed to be significantly reduced just to build some trust so ordinary Afghans could finally get to imagine what the dividends of peace could look like. And when that temporary truce started, the first thing that came to my mind was, what does it mean to the soldiers who have been fighting for years with no respite? So I thought of this guy I had sat next to on one of my flights, earlier flights, from southern Afghanistan. I had sat next to this guy, and I started making small talk with him. And he was like, yeah, I’m a highway police commander, posted in this stretch of highway between Zabul and Kandahar provinces, both very, very badly hit areas of the war. And so I was like, hey, would it be OK for me to come visit you at some point? He was like, sure. So I got his number. And we were always nervous to go visit a place like that for security reasons. So when this truce went into effect, the first person that came to my mind was him. I want to go see what this would feel like for these guys who have constantly faced loss and fire. To go see, engage their emotions, and how they were experiencing this very rare breather from daily violence and daily attacks.
So the photographer Kiana Hayeri and I, we flew to Kandahar. And from there, we found this old, really seasoned taxi driver who had done the road for about 40 years. And he drove us to the commander, to the base on the highway. And it’s a beautiful drive. But every couple miles of the drive getting to this commander, was seeing bridges blown up, the road blown up.
So we arrived at this outpost on top of a hill, and we’re met by the commander. And he sort of oversees this 40, 50-mile stretch of the highway.
^: The one good thing he has is good weather.
He’s got about 300 men spread out in a dozen outposts because what the Taliban do is plant a bomb when a convoy is driving. They blow up the bomb. And then once the convoy sort of gets disoriented with the explosion, they attack them from all corners.
This is the main way the Taliban come here.
So every morning, they come out, and they just patrol along the highway, look for any wires, look for any pieces of the asphalt dug up.
— the mines. That’s the reason [INAUDIBLE].
The actual mine or the cables?
The cables. That’s how they dig it up.
This is what they dig the cable with.
And this commander — something that really, really got to me in the sense of how bad they’ve been suffering was, he was like, listen, I’ve lost more men fetching water than I have in face-to-face fighting.
My men come out, and they make their way down to get water in these buckets. And a sniper takes them out.
So that’s how badly they’ve been surrounded. That’s the kind of fire they were receiving. And I asked him, I was like, how has it been this couple days of — we visited them on day three, I think, of this violence reduction. And he’s like, it’s been beautiful.
These are the latest [INAUDIBLE].
[LAUGHS] I was like, is that thing still packed? He was like, yeah, if I push it right now, it’s — I’m like, please don’t.
Seeing them walk around. Seeing them just — some of them having their weapons down.
He’s just been engaged three days ago.
It felt like they were breathing a little relief.
And then he said, let’s go for a drive.
He was showing us a couple other outposts.
Like, of the 300 other people he has, he probably doesn’t have a single one who hasn’t been wounded at some point during the war.
And the amazing part was a lot of his fighters were really young — 20, 22, 23, 25.
A lot of them had started as child soldiers — 14-, 15-year-olds. And many of them were really badly broken. Somebody was missing a finger. Somebody was missing a leg. Somebody was missing an eye. Some were wounded two, three times by the time they’re 24, 25 now.
Let’s see, there are these two brothers, actually three brothers.
The one was home, had already lost a leg. Their father had served in the police for a long time. And he’d just died last year clearing roadside bombs. And so that job and been passed down to his sons. And both of them were in their early 20s. One was, I think, 21. The other one was 23.
And one of them, his only interaction with the Taliban, was when he was detained by them for three days and tortured. And he still has the scars of that torture to show.
The village they come from, in different neighboring province, it is entirely contested by the Taliban. So these brothers can’t really go home often. One of them actually even arrived late to his own wedding because his family had prepared all the festivities. He tried to find the truck driver that could smuggle him to his own village for the wedding. By the time he got there, the festivities were over. So he missed his own wedding, basically.
They are so young. And they’re so shaped by this war, that when I asked them even basic questions of what peace could mean to them, they would just smile and just grin. And they couldn’t mentally get into the details of it. So I pushed them a little. I was like, listen, peace means that 50,000, 60,000 Taliban fighters out there, either laying down their arms or integrating into the army and the police, and basically sitting across from you, sharing this barrack with you. And one of them was like, I don’t like them. I don’t like the way they look. And I was like, well, that’s what peace means. It means those Taliban fighters who need to be accommodated somehow. So he thought about it again. And he was like, well, peace is good, but we’ll think about it.
The commander is just 29 years old. But he seems so sort of seasoned and so experienced and so wise. And he got a little more reflective as we were driving between outposts.
And one of the stories you told us as we were driving was, as an example of what pains him about this war. And he said, listen, I wish I was fighting people who were from a different country. The people we’re fighting, they’re not even from a different village. They’re not even from a different district. And he told us the story of this local guy he said had come to his outpost for tea and for lunch with other elders maybe even a dozen times. And then they discovered him planting roadside bombs during one of their operations. And he didn’t even know the guy was a Taliban.
To him, that was a point of how localized, how interlinked and interwoven this conflict is. It almost seems that the easier part of the peace is between the Taliban and the Americans. But we’re talking about peace between people who are sharing the same stretch of the highway.
And sharing tea, in fact.
Or sharing tea. Yeah.
And he said, the most basic thing, the most important thing in human life is freedom. And he said, life is nothing without freedom. And he said, the way we live, these targets on our back wherever we travel, constant fear of attacks and violence — he said, this is not life. This is not life.
As I was with them and hearing their stories, it was very clear that the truce was working. They hadn’t faced any fire in several days. And the truce working meant the peace deal would go ahead and be signed between the U.S. and the Taliban in Doha. So we got back in our taxi, drove to Kandahar. We took a flight from Kandahar to Kabul. I spent the night in Kabul, and then from there, fly to Doha to make it in time for the signing.
It’s the day before the agreement is supposed to be signed. And the dignitaries are arriving from around the world in the Sheraton Doha. It seems like it’s happening.
They’re putting final touches at the venue.
So Mujib, you are in Doha getting ready to report on this historic peace agreement. What is the scene like there?
So the event is supposed to happen at the Sheraton in Doha.
There’s a podium where the signing is going to happen, and two sides are going to give speeches.
And this ballroom is prepared.
And people are slowly trickling in to find their way.
The most high-profile guest is the U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and the emir of Qatar.
— dozens of Taliban started arriving for the occasion.
And a lot of more unusual noise and clamor than you would see at a normal diplomatic event, and because this wasn’t a normal diplomatic event. It was an insurgency that was only known for blowing stuff up and fighting in the battlefield. And now sitting in the same room as the secretary of state and world leaders and getting ready to sign as equals with a world power.
Ceremony just gets underway. All the dignitaries have arrived.
And then as the proceedings started, I found a seat in the balcony upstairs.
Good afternoon. I want to start by thanking his highness, Sheikh Tamim for Cutter’s invaluable role as host for these historic talks.
And Secretary of State Pompeo gets up, and he gives brief remarks.
This effort only became real for the United States when the Taliban signaled interest in pursuing peace and ending their relationship with Al Qaeda and other foreign terrorist groups. The agreement that we will sign today is the true test of this effort.
So Mujib, what’s actually in the agreement that’s about to be signed?
The most concrete thing in the agreement is an American commitment to start withdrawing the remaining of its troops. So right now, there’s still about 12,000 American troops in Afghanistan. And the agreement lays out a 14-month timeline for a gradual withdrawal of those troops.
Here’s our take on what steps by the Taliban will make this agreement a success.
There is some basic language of conditionality attached to it.
First, keep your promises to cut ties with Al Qaeda and other terrorists. Keep up the fight to defeat ISIS.
That in return, the Taliban are making some commitments — that they would not allow terror groups, they’ll not allow Al Qaeda. The other pieces are that the Americans will help release up to 5,000 of the Taliban prisoners who are in the Afghan government. And those prisoners will get released in the next couple weeks before the Taliban sit down for direct negotiations with the other Afghan side.
And start the difficult conversations on a political roadmap for your country.
And then in that future negotiations, at the top of the agenda, would be a comprehensive cease-fire.
The Taliban’s deputy gets up.
He seems nervous, and he’s struggling to read the text. But he basically says the same thing — that we want a peaceful future. We are committed to the agreement that we’ll sign.
There is muted cries of “allahu akbar” from the Taliban guys, which is sort of victory cry. And then the deputy Taliban leader takes his place at the desk. And the American chief negotiator takes a seat next to him.
— as if to make sure there isn’t some sort of a last-minute trick. And after the American signs the first page, the Taliban opens his pen, and he starts signing also.
And that was it. They had signed an agreement that had taken a year and half of negotiations. And there was a sense of expectation that this momentous signing between the U.S. and the Taliban would open the way for peace.
But as soon as the two sides signed, the Taliban have started attacking again.
Cracks are now starting to appear in the agreement.
Appears to be unraveling.
It’s already unraveling just four days after it was signed.
Back to Taliban launching attacks on Afghan outposts. Back to Taliban stopping people on the highways.
Afghan police say that at least three people have been killed earlier.
Dozens dead every day since.
Earlier this week, Defense Secretary Mark Esper warned that violence will continue in Afghanistan.
Mujib, why would the Taliban begin launching attacks days, hours after signing a peace deal?
The Taliban say the deal makes it clear their violence is only ending with the Americans.
And there’s nothing in the deal about reducing attacks on Afghan government, on Afghan security forces. And I’ve posed this question to the Taliban. And I was like listen, so for 18, 19 years, you’ve been saying this is a jihad against foreigners, right? But the foreigners just signed with you. They’re leaving. So how do you legitimize the shedding of Afghan blood now?
And he was like, wait, wait, wait, wait, hold on, hold on. Just because we got the foreigners to agree to leave doesn’t mean we can give up already that the structure they created, the government they propped up, the system they put in place will inherit everything, and we will be left out here without correcting that system that is in Kabul to include our wishes also. So they’re very clear that they’re going to continue to use violence as leverage to bring political change also.
So in their mind, they need to keep waging a war on these kind of extensions and projections of American power. And they are allowed to do it under this agreement because it only explicitly says you cannot attack U.S. forces.
Precisely. So there’s an interesting thing that happened just on Wednesday. After three days of violence, the U.S. military got back into action. They carried out an air strike against the Taliban. And the U.S. military’s justification was, listen, the agreement may have just ended the violence explicitly between us — meaning, between the Taliban and the Americans — but there’s a sense in the agreement that if you all of a sudden start attacking the Afghan security forces, we, as the U.S. military, reserve the right to go to their defense.
That feels like a very significant structural flaw in a peace deal to have left so much ambiguity that your former enemy can go on to destroy the government that the United States has built there.
There’s a structure flaw in that for sure. But getting around that structure flaw, there were two possibilities. One was you can ensure that doesn’t happen by getting the enemy to agree to a cease-fire, right?
The Taliban in no way were going agree to a cease-fire. So you either kept negotiating for months to try to force them to a cease-fire. Or they have agreed to this structurally flawed agreement, but hoping that because the U.S. reserves the right to carry out airstrikes, would mean the Taliban will carry out fewer attacks to risk being killed by American airstrikes. So what we’re seeing right now is the Taliban testing how much they can get away with in this ambiguous area of how far the U.S. will go to defend the Afghan government. But they’re also testing something else. So as part of the deal, the U.S has committed to helping release 5,000 of Taliban prisoners. And the Afghan government said, no way. Those are our prisoners. The U.S. doesn’t have the right to commit to something like that. And the Taliban now are like, we don’t care. U.S., you sort it out. You committed to us. But at the same time, it almost feels like they’re using violence to remind the Afghan government that if they drag their foot on the prisoners issue, the Taliban are still a reality in the battlefield. That they still have the same sort of firepower.
Mujib, I wonder if you have talked to those police officers that you had visited before the signing?
The number you are calling is not in service.
I mean, it was a bit of a struggle to get back in touch with them, because that area where they’re serving — what the Taliban do is they cut off cell towers, and you lose cell phone signal.
But when I got back in touch with them.
They say they’ve been facing fire for the past three consecutive nights.
One of the outposts they showed us and I toured, they had two people wounded in that outpost. Their commander that we went to see, he was ambushed. So the commander’s like, it’s back to the same levels as a attack for us.
But he said something really interesting that I think summed up the mood after the recent Taliban attacks.
He said, the one thing that is good about their attacks now is that it makes things clear. It makes our fight clear that until now, the Taliban were saying, oh, the foreigners are here. We’re fighting the foreigners. And that kind of give their fight a little legitimacy, right? And they said now that they’ve gotten their agreement with the foreigners, and they’re still deciding to attack us, we have a more open hand to return fire, as their attacks don’t have that same legitimacy anymore. So it’s almost crystallized the fight for them a little bit.
But the fact that their daily reality after the signing has been no different from their reality before the signing seemed heavy on them, that they were back to the same being shot at and returning fire.
It feels like nothing about this peace deal actually looks like peace to them. In fact, it’s just the beginning of a new phase of the war.
At the moment, it doesn’t. It actually feels like a continuation of the war they were fighting already. But one thing that came out of this peace deal was a brief pause, even if it was just for seven days. They felt and experienced a new reality. And maybe, maybe for a long time, they won’t experience that again. Maybe their reality will be violence. But at least they have a reference point now. They can think back to seven days. And maybe that will serve as a reminder of what is still possible and what they could still get to.
Mujib, thank you very much.
I will not be running for president in 2020. But I guarantee I will stay in the fight for the hardworking folks across this country who have gotten the short end of the stick over and over. That’s been the fight of my life, and it will continue to be so.
Elizabeth Warren dropped out of the Democratic race for president on Thursday, saying, that after a series of disappointing primaries, there was no longer a place for her in the race.
I was told at the beginning of this whole undertaking that there are two lanes — a progressive lane that Bernie Sanders is the incumbent for, and a moderate lane that Joe Biden is the incumbent for. And there’s no room for anyone else in this. I thought that wasn’t right, but evidently I was wrong.
Warren declined to endorse either Biden or Sanders for now. And during a news conference in front of her house, expressed regret that there was no longer a woman in the race.
And I wonder what your message would to the women and girls who feel like we’re left with two white men to decide between.
I know. One of the hardest parts of this is all those pinkie promises, and all those little girls who were going to have to wait four more years. That’s going to be hard.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc George, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, Jazmín Aguilera, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow, Robert Jimison and Mike Benoist. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnak, Mikayla Bouchard, Stella Tan, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Nora Keller, Mahima Chablani, and Faheem Abed.
Mr. Khalilzad, 68, arrived in the United States as an immigrant teenager when the upheaval in Afghanistan started, and as President George W. Bush’s ambassador to the United Nations, he was the highest-ranking Muslim in the U.S. government when he left office.
That he would gamble his legacy on resolving a conflict that had stymied many other seasoned diplomats left many wondering whether this was done at least somewhat out of personal obligation.
Here was a man who had become the diplomatic face of two of America’s most contentious involvements in the Muslim world in recent times, serving as the cleanup ambassador after the invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan.
He even had an advising role in the Reagan administration as the United States abandoned Afghanistan after supporting guerrillas who were fighting the Soviets. Mr. Khalilzad has written critically of how that was handled in the end: It helped drive Afghanistan into the chaos that groups like Al Qaeda subsequently exploited.
James Dobbins, a former American special envoy to Afghanistan and Mr. Khalilzad’s one-time boss, said a sense of regret over that abandonment has perhaps reaffirmed Mr. Khalilzad’s commitment. When President Bush appointed him as ambassador to Afghanistan in 2003, he conditioned his acceptance on a larger aid package for the impoverished country.
Even before he returned to government to lead the Afghan talks, Mr. Khalilzad, a member of the Republican national security elite, had for years been in Mr. Trump’s orbit — even if on its outer rings.
In April 2016, the three-time ambassador was asked to introduce Mr. Trump ahead of the then-presumptive Republican presidential nominee’s first foreign policy speech — to bring “gravitas” to the Washington event. His appearance set off speculation that he was angling for a diplomatic post, or a cabinet position, inside a Trump administration.
But he did not rejoin the State Department until September 2018, when he became one of only a half-dozen of Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s envoys granted broad autonomy. Mr. Pompeo assiduously promoted his efforts.
When Congress demanded briefings on the Afghan peace talks, Mr. Pompeo blocked that to protect Mr. Khalilzad’s tightly guarded process.
For a period early in the process, it felt as if Mr. Khalilzad had a free hand in how he shaped the deal. But once President Trump got more involved directly, the envoy went largely silent in public.
In September, just as Mr. Khalilzad was on verge of finalizing his deal, Mr. Trump abruptly called off talks. Publicly, the president cited the Taliban’s continuing attacks. But part of the reason appeared to be the Taliban’s refusal to agree to his grand gesture of a meeting at Camp David before an American troop withdrawal was announced.
“Zal and his team really grappled, after the September decision to break off Taliban talks, with how to keep it on life support,” said Dan Feldman, who served as special representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan under President Barack Obama.
A key hand in helping put the talks back on track was Robert C. O’Brien, the White House national security adviser. He took that post in the tumultuous stretch when the negotiations had been called off and John R. Bolton, who had advocated against the deal, was fired.
In an interview on Sunday, Mr. O’Brien said he and Mr. Khalilzad were close after working together on several hostage release efforts over the years.
In addition to the American troop withdrawal, that deal also ensures ending terrorist sanctuaries in Afghanistan and starting negotiations between the Afghan sides over a power sharing government — something that could end the insurgency altogether.
Mr. Khalilzad continued shuttling the world on his mission, balancing skeptical allies, clashing interests, and a multitude of potential spoilers. Wherever he is, he “tends to take up all the oxygen in the room,” one senior administration official said.
In the Afghan capital, Kabul, some at the U.S. Embassy referred to him as “Hurricane Zal.” When he is on the ground, it is events and meetings around the clock — at the ambassador’s residence, on rooftops of politicians over traditional delicacies, or even in the mansions of warlords in faraway provinces.
The government of President Ashraf Ghani in Afghanistan has remained deeply suspicious of him throughout the talks, despite Mr. Khalilzad’s history with Mr. Ghani dating back to their teenage years when both were students on study-abroad programs in the United States.
Mr. Ghani’s officials often described the American envoy as being vague on details of what they feared might be concessions he was making to the Taliban, such as promises of prisoner releases — something under the authority of the Afghan government.
In essence, Mr. Khalilzad has been juggling several negotiations at once — discussions with an extremely divided Afghan political elite in Kabul, shuttle diplomacy with countries of a region in turmoil, and talks with the Taliban insurgents in Doha.
Once the Taliban came to the table, the problem was not just the deep mistrust. There was also the challenge of negotiating complicated legal texts with a group that, when in power, had run a government through basic chits. It required a lot of explaining to the Taliban, for example, that their demands — among them dismantling in a matter of months a military presence of 18 years — were logistically not possible. Much of that work fell on Mr. Khalilzad’s deputy, Molly Phee, also experienced in negotiating with irregular forces in places like Iraq and Sudan.
But in session, the talk was often tough, with negotiations frequently coinciding with an uptick in violence back in Afghanistan. On several occasions early in the process, Mr. Khalilzad got into shouting matches over the violence with the Taliban’s deputy negotiator who led the day to day, Sher Mohammad Abas Stanekzai.
Mr. Stanekzai, in response, would point to American airstrikes.
“And it is not your village that is being bombed,” he responded in one session, according to officials briefed on the talks.
In the end, the relationship Mr. Khalilzad and Mullah Baradar developed was instrumental for troubleshooting when negotiators got stuck. The two chiefs met at least a dozen times one on one or accompanied by just a few others.
When the signing ceremony commenced on Saturday, in a ballroom packed with nearly a dozen foreign ministers and at least 10 rows of other dignitaries and Taliban members, the two men took their seats at the desk.
Mullah Baradar wore a black turban, his reading glasses and a small shawl around one shoulder. Mr. Khalilzad was in a blue suit and maroon tie.
They exchanged quiet, easy smiles. But this day, the Talib chief was taking no chances. He watched closely until the American envoy signed first, seemingly unwilling to put pen to paper until he was sure there was no trick.
After the ceremony, the usually animated Mr. Khalilzad walked quietly down the steps, and into the hallway, the copy of the agreement he put his signature — and legacy — to tucked under his arm.
Mujib Mashal reported from Doha, and Lara Jakes from Washington. Michael D. Shear contributed reporting from Washington.