The nation’s 2.1 million federal employees have been left unsure of whether they are expected to report to work during the coronavirus outbreak.
Facing mounting criticism and anxiety from federal employees, the Trump administration on Sunday night issued new guidance that allowed some to voluntarily work from home. That memo replaced an earlier directive that said only people at high risk of health problems could telework, and it came days after waves of schools, libraries, restaurants, churches, arenas and other businesses had shuttered to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus.
Attorney General William P. Barr directed U.S. attorneys to work with the chief judges in their districts to “continuity of operations” while taking “every appropriate precaution” to protect the health of those who must come before the court; but he gave no further details.
But some agencies, insisting it was impossible for their employees to carry out their responsibilities outside the office, were slower to encourage their staff to work from home.
For some federal workers, like those who routinely handle classified and sensitive information in secure facilities, working at home is simply not an option. That leaves large numbers of government employees at risk of being exposed to the virus or of exposing others.
The Pentagon, a hive of activity on most days with more than 25,000 military and civilian employees, was decidedly quieter on Monday after the Defense Department’s request for thousands of “nonessential” employees to telework. Still, many thousands of other defense employees who needed to work on classified computer systems sat next to one another in cramped cubicles or secured offices to carry out their duties.
Many of the federal government’s health workers were left wondering who needed to report to the office. In the more than 80,000-person Department of Health and Human Services, Washington-based employees reported on Monday morning without any kind of uniform plan, unsure of how long they might be in the office or whether their colleagues had already decided to stay home.
In the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health, which includes the surgeon general and a group of key health programs, some employees, faced with unclear directions, simply decided to stay home without waiting for an official directive.
Attempts by the Association of Administrative Law Judges, a union that represents a majority of administrative law judges, to hold Social Security disability hearings via video conference and to screen claimants for possible symptoms have been rebuffed. Video conference or hearings by telephone, a Social Security Administration official replied, are “generally limited to incarceration, institutionalization,” and natural disasters.
At the Justice Department, a sprawling bureaucracy with offices in several buildings, Mr. Barr sent an email last week to all staff saying that he was monitoring the fast-moving situation. He empowered managers to allow optional telework depending on immediate risk factors.
Employees in the Justice Department and the F.B.I. have tested positive for the virus or been presumptively diagnosed based on their symptoms. A census employee who works at the Commerce Department has also tested positive. The department said the employee had not been in contact with the public.
Noah Weiland, Erica L. Green, Katie Rogers, Zolan Kanno-Youngs, Ana Swanson, Eric Schmitt and Alan Rappeport contributed reporting.