Amid the spreading pandemic, thousands of employees of businesses in the airports around New York City may have their benefits cut off.
Maria Campos had worked as a waitress at La Guardia Airport for more than 30 years until Tuesday, when her career came to an abrupt halt that left her scared and empty-handed. She was ordered to turn in her airport access badge and told she would receive no severance pay and would soon run out of health insurance.
With air travel in free fall as the coronavirus pandemic worsens across the country, thousands of workers like Ms. Campos have been laid off from their jobs at the major airports that serve New York City.
More than 1,200 of these laid-off workers were employed in restaurants and stores operated by OTG at La Guardia, Kennedy International and Newark Liberty International airports, according to the union that represents them, Unite Here Local 100.
OTG said the closings and layoffs were necessary because of the travel restrictions that had virtually grounded airlines. One of its senior executives is Lawrence Schwartz, a close ally of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.
“You can’t pay people” when the company is taking in very little revenue, said Mr. Schwartz.
Many workers said they resented the way OTG handled the layoffs.
Edith Muzquiz, a bartender in Terminal C at Newark Liberty, said she was called into a meeting in an OTG restaurant there at 11 p.m. on Monday and told, along with a few dozen other employees, that they were being laid off immediately.

Ms. Muzquiz, who had worked for OTG in the airport for five years, said she understood the predicament the company was in, but she took issue with the message and the way it was delivered: a curt dismissal that offered no compensation or benefits to help employees left jobless in an economy that is cratering.
Waves of workers at airports across the country are losing their jobs as travelers evaporate, but some companies are offering their employees a financial lifeline, including extending their health care coverage.
Many restaurants and shops in once bustling airport terminals have closed with business essentially having come to a standstill.
Arthur Phillips, a spokesman for Unite Here Local 100, said the union estimated that at least 2,400 of its members had been laid off from jobs in concessions or catering at the three airports that serve New York City.
He said about 1,280 of them had worked for OTG — about 700 at Newark Liberty and the balance at La Guardia and in two terminals at Kennedy. In addition to the OTG workers, about 650 other members of the union have been laid off at the airports, he said.
Other airport concessionaires, Mr. Phillips said, have been more generous to laid-off workers.
Hudson Group, which operates Hudson News stores in many airports, was extending health insurance for two months, he said. LSG Sky Chefs, the largest airline-catering company in the country, agreed to extend health insurance benefits for three months, he said.
Mr. Schwartz said that OTG was “in financial-survival mode” and he and other executives were taking pay cuts of 50 percent and would have to forgo bonuses. Mr. Schwartz, OTG’s chief strategy officer, is also a member of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority board, a position he was appointed to by Mr. Cuomo.
He said he understood how upset the company’s workers were, but explained that the company could not afford to provide severance pay or benefits.
Some operators of stores and restaurants at the airports have similarly sought relief from their rent as the coronavirus pandemic has wiped out their revenue.
The three airports are operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which is jointly controlled by Mr. Cuomo and the governor of New Jersey, Philip D. Murphy. A Port Authority spokesman said the agency had tried to ensure that some shops stayed open to serve travelers.
Unite Here has asked the Port Authority not to extend that relief to airport businesses unless they in turn provide aid to laid-off workers.
“We would strongly suggest that rent relief only be granted when concessionaires are extending health benefits to all their workers at the airports,” Mr. Phillips said.
The Port Authority’s executive director, Rick Cotton, who has been working from his Manhattan home since he tested positive for the coronavirus, could not be reached for comment.
