President Trump held a news conference on Friday with health and business leaders during which he declared a state of emergency over the coronavirus. Here are his opening remarks.
“Today I’d like to provide an update to the American people on several decisive new actions we’re taking in our very vigilant effort to combat and ultimately defeat the coronavirus.
“We’ve been working very hard on this. We’ve made tremendous progress. When you compare what we’ve done to other areas of the world, it’s pretty incredible. A lot of that had to do with the early designation and the closing of the borders.
“As you know, Europe was just designated as the hot spot right now, and we closed that border awhile ago. So that was lucky through talent or through luck, call it whatever you want. But through a collective action, and shared sacrifice, national determination we will overcome the threat of the virus.
“I also announced Wednesday night following the advice of our medical professionals, who were doing a tremendous job, and we appreciate it very much, that we’re suspending the entry of foreign nationals who have been to Europe in the last 14 days from entering the United States. Citizens, primary residents and our families, and any of the families returning from Europe will be subject to extra screening as well as self-isolation for a period of 14 days.
“As the World Health Organization confirmed today many of the things that — what we said were 100 percent correct, including our designation before them of Europe. Like our earlier very aggressive actions with China, this measure will save countless lives. I appreciate a number of the folks behind me — uh, number of the people behind me — said that that saved a lot of lives, that early designation. But it is only the beginning of what we’re really doing, and now we’re in a different phase.
A day of mourning in China, amid doubts over its virus toll.
“We had some very old and obsolete rules that we had to live with. It worked on certain circumstances but not under mass circumstances. They were there for a long time and in place for a long time, and we’re breaking them down now. And they’re very usable for certain instances, but not for this.
“To unleash the full power of the federal government in this effort today, I’m officially declaring a national emergency. Two very big words. The action I am taking will open up access to up to $50 billion of, very importantly — very important and a large amount of money for states and territories and localities in our shared fight against this disease.
“And in furtherance of the order, I’m urging every state to set up emergency operation centers effectively immediately. You’re going to be hearing from some of the largest companies and greatest retailers and medical companies in the world. They’re standing right behind me and on side of me.
“I’m also asking every hospital in this country to activate its emergency preparedness plan so that they can meet the needs of Americans everywhere. The hospitals are very engaged. New York and various other places are also very engaged. I just spoke with Governor [Andrew M.] Cuomo; we had a very good conversation, and we’re working very strongly with many states, including New York.
“Emergency orders I’m issuing today will also confer broad new authority to the secretary of health and human services. The secretary of H.H.S. will be able to immediately waive provisions of applicable laws and regulations to give doctors and all hospitals and health care providers maximum flexibility to respond to the virus and care for patients.
“This includes the following critical authorities — the ability to waive laws to enable telehealth, a fairly new and incredible thing that’s happened in the not-so-distant past. I tell you, what they’ve done with telehealth is incredible. It gives remote doctors visits and hospital check-ins the power to waive certain federal license requirements so that doctors from other states can provide services and states with the greatest need.
“No. 2, the ability to waive requirements that critical-access hospitals limit the number of beds to 25, and the length of stay to 96 hours. The ability to waive the requirements of a three-day hospital stay prior to admission to a nursing home, big thing. The authority to waive rules to hinder hospitals’ ability to bring additional physicians on board or obtain needed office space. They can do as they want. They could do what they have to do. They know what they have to do. Now they don’t have any problem getting it done.
“The authority to waive rules that severely restrict what hospitals could care for patients within the hospital itself, ensuring that the emergency capacity could be quickly established. We’ll remove or eliminate every obstacle necessary to deliver our people the care that they need and that they’re entitled to. No resource will be spared, nothing whatsoever. Ten days ago, I brought together the C.E.O.s of commercial labs at the White House and directed them to immediately begin working on a solution to dramatically increase the availability of tests.
“Other countries have called us and worked with us, and they’re doing similar things or will be doing similar things. As a result of that action today we’re announcing a new partnership with private sector to vastly increase and accelerate our capacity to test for the coronavirus. We want to make sure that those who need a test could get a test very safely, quickly and conveniently, but we don’t want people to take a test if — if we feel that they shouldn’t be doing it. And we don’t want everyone running out and taking — only have if you have certain symptoms.
“Using federal emergency authorities, the F.D.A. approved a new test for the virus. We did this within hours after receiving the application from Roche, a process that would normally take weeks. We therefore expect up to half a million additional tests will be available early next week. We’ll be announcing locations probably on Sunday night.
“I want to thank Roche, great company, for their incredible work. I would also like to thank Thermo Fisher. The F.D.A.’s goal is to hopefully authorize the application within 24 hours. It is going very quickly, which will bring additionally 1.4 million tests on board next week and five million within a month. I doubt we’ll need anywhere near that.
“At the same time, we’ve been in discussions with pharmacies and retailers to make drive-through tests available in the critical locations identified by public health professionals. The goal is for individuals to be able to drive up and be swabbed without having to leave your car.
“I want to thank Google. Google is helping to develop a website. It is going to be very quickly done, unlike websites of the past, to determine whether a test is warranted and to facilitate testing at a nearby convenient location.
“We have many, many locations behind us, by the way. We cover the — this country and a large part of the world. By the way, we’re not talking about the world right now. But we cover very — very strongly our country, stores in virtually every location. Google has 1,700 engineers working on this right now. They’ve made tremendous progress.
“Our overriding goal is to stop the spread of the virus and help all Americans who have been impacted by this. Again, we don’t want everybody taking this test. It is totally unnecessary. And this will pass. This will pass through, and we’re going to be even stronger for it. We’ve learned a lot. Tremendous amount has been learned.
