Opinion|Will the Supreme Court Protect Agencies From Trump’s Reach?
Will the Supreme Court Protect Agencies From Trump’s Reach?
A case before the court could expand the president’s power to remove their leaders.
Dr. Manners and Mr. Menand are lawyers.
President Trump has repeatedly used his office to further his personal political interests. But so far, he has been unable to interfere with the “independent agencies,” those parts of the government intended by Congress to operate outside of the president’s direct authority. A case set to be argued at the Supreme Court Tuesday threatens to change this.
The court’s decision in the case, Seila Law v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, could strip these agencies of their independence by expanding the president’s power to remove their leaders.
Independent agencies regulate important aspects of our lives. They issue our money, prevent unfair and deceptive business practices, distribute Social Security checks, protect workers and deliver the mail. They include the Federal Reserve, the Federal Trade Commission, the Social Security Administration, the National Labor Relations Board and the Postal Service.
While their leaders are nominated by the president, they do not report to him. The law permits the president to fire them, but generally only for “inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office” — eight words embedded in dozens of statutes that have historically been interpreted narrowly to cover ineptitude or objectively bad behavior, like taking a bribe or deliberately failing to carry out a job’s basic responsibilities.
Seila, a California law firm under investigation by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau — an independent agency with the job of protecting consumers from harmful financial products — argues that these limits on the president’s ability to fire the head of the bureau unconstitutionally restrict his authority. The bureau, now led by a Trump appointee and represented by the Justice Department, agrees.
Seila is asking the court to either hold that Seila does not have to comply with the bureau’s investigation into the firm’s marketing of debt-relief services, or abolish the bureau. The Justice Department proposes a more surgical remedy: striking the part of the law that limits the president to removing the bureau’s director only for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. While the Justice Department argues that the court could leave other independent agencies intact (by resting its decision on unique aspects of the bureau’s design), both the department and Seila invite the court to conclude that similar restrictions on the president’s power to remove officials at other agencies are unconstitutional as well.
Such a general ruling, which would overturn 85 years of settled law, seems unlikely to garner five votes. But another position the court may consider is nearly as dangerous: that those eight magic words, “inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office,” don’t actually make independent agencies all that independent after all.
In this view, the president can fire officials for “inefficiency” or “neglect of duty” when they fail to accomplish the agency’s particular ends — as understood or dictated by the president — or when they transgress or appear to transgress the president’s will.
If the court accepts such an argument, versions of which have been made by Judge Thomas Griffith on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and by Paul Clement, who filed one of the briefs in the Seila case, it will preserve independence for agencies in name only, while leaving them open to unending interference by Mr. Trump and his successors.
To appreciate how misguided this reading of “inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office” would be, you have to understand the history of the words and the relevant statutes.
As far back as the 18th century, courts and legislatures used “neglect” and “malfeasance” to define what it meant for sheriffs and other officials to violate their statutory duties. “Neglect of duty” was a willful or repeated failure to fulfill statutory responsibilities; “malfeasance in office” meant committing some unlawful act, such as extortion or bribery, under color of law. In the 19th century, states tackling big projects, like building schools, prisons and railroads, that required diligent oversight and presented ample opportunities for self-dealing made “neglect” and “malfeasance” grounds for removing officers authorized to serve for fixed terms.
Starting in the mid-19th century, states began adding “inefficiency” to that list. The term was often used as a synonym for ineffectiveness in connection with a technical task: a lawyer drunk at his client’s trial, for instance, might be judged “inefficient.” In the aftermath of the Civil War, reformist lawmakers zeroed in on political patronage that rewarded loyalists with government jobs. The spoils system, as they called it, had filled the Civil Service with inept employees. “Inefficient” officials were those who were unable to do the jobs they’d been hired to do.
Congress first used inefficiency, neglect and malfeasance together in a statute in 1887, when it established the Interstate Commerce Commission to regulate railroads. Experts warned that populist political pressure and lax removal standards had resulted in state railroad commissions run by biased or incapable commissioners. To guard against that, Congress gave federal railroad commissioners secure six-year terms. And to avoid saddling the government with a six-year mistake, Congress copied state law and allowed the president to remove commissioners for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office — circumstances in which commissioners were objectively harming the public welfare.
When the Supreme Court hears arguments this week in the Seila case, it should remember our country’s long tradition of independent administration and reject arguments that would water it down. Times like these are precisely why Congress made agencies independent in the first place.
Jane Manners and Lev Menand are academic fellows at Columbia Law School.