At least 17 statehouses have postponed their legislative sessions, and others, including Albany, have special rules in place to limit contact.
ALBANY, N.Y. — In New York’s State Capitol, lawmakers voted one at a time or in small groups in nearly empty chambers. In Boston, legislators postponed public hearings, promising to take virtual testimony on bills. State lawmakers in Mississippi, California and Nebraska gaveled out, holding hope of returning once the crisis passes.
As the coronavirus continues to radically change the day-to-day rituals of tens of millions of Americans, state lawmakers across the country are scrambling to balance their sworn duties with fears of infection and legislative priorities that have been upended and reshuffled.
That was especially the case in Albany, where two members of the State Assembly from Brooklyn, Helene Weinstein and Charles Barron, have tested positive for the virus, leading to canceled legislative sessions and a surge of lawmakers and staff who are seeking tests.
Indeed, passionate debate of social issues like criminal justice reform and climate change has quickly given way to more pressing financial concerns, as states grapple with swelling unemployment figures and the prospect of plummeting tax receipts.
Around the country, legislatures rushed to pass costly emergency funding to beef up local health departments on the front lines of the response, trampling ambitious agendas laid out at the beginning of the year.
At least 17 statehouses have postponed their legislative sessions, with lawmakers effectively retreating from public view, reshaping a core function of government and the way constituents are able to access their elected officials at the height of a pandemic.
The decision to shutter drew a stark contrast to Congress, whose leaders remain resistant to closing the Capitol. In the Senate, lawmakers continued to meet in large groups in defiance of guidance from public health officials, though they attempted to impose social-distancing restrictions on the Senate floor.
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said last week that members of Congress would be the last to leave, like captains of a ship. And Representative Steny H. Hoyer, Democrat of Maryland and the majority leader, said remote voting would set a bad precedent, even as a dozen or so members are in self-quarantine.
On Wednesday, Representative Mario Diaz-Balart, a Republican from South Florida, confirmed that he had tested positive for coronavirus after suffering from a fever and a headache over the weekend. He is the first member of Congress to test positive and said he was quarantining in his apartment in Washington.
Virus deaths are going uncounted as more people die at home.
‘They let us get sick’: The M.T.A. staggers under the impact of the virus.
More live coverage: Global Markets U.S.
Later, on Wednesday evening, Rep. Ben McAdams of Utah tweeted that he had tested positive and was self-quarantined.
Outside the nation’s capital, governments big and small, from village councils in Florida to the Massachusetts statehouse, were taking extraordinary measures to retrofit traditional and often recalcitrant ways of governing to the age of the coronavirus. Many statehouses have shut their doors to the public.
Utah is looking to allow lawmakers to convene digitally. The Connecticut Legislature revised its rules to permit committees to vote by phone. Other states were also considering changes to rules that require members to be physically present to cast a vote.
The State Legislature in Washington, which has seen the second-highest number of confirmed cases and highest number of deaths, adjourned its session last Thursday as scheduled. But the outbreak forced it to approve $200 million in virus-related spending and to scrap ambitious plans for new climate change and gun control laws.
California lawmakers went into recess on Monday night until at least April 13, even as the San Francisco Bay Area fell under a shelter-in-place order, which sharply limits residents’ mobility. State senator Toni G. Atkins, the San Diego Democrat who leads Sacramento’s upper chamber, said that the decision to recess gave lawmakers a chance to return to their districts to address mounting constituent concerns.
“I think we have a critical role to play whether in Sacramento or San Diego,” she said.
In Albany, New York’s capital, lawmakers grappled with fears that the coronavirus could cripple the state’s finances and its progressive agenda. There were 2,382 positive cases in the state as of Wednesday, and 20 deaths linked to the disease.
On Wednesday, Assembly and Senate members warily returned to Albany to find a different kind of Capitol: its usually bustling hallways empty, its cocktail bars shuttered and its fund-raisers canceled, with normally gregarious legislators avoiding shaking hands or hugging.
The transformed landscape led veteran lawmakers to wonder aloud whether their tradition-bound rules needed to be adapted for the outbreak.
About 200 miles south, New Jersey lawmakers passed a rush of 29 coronavirus-related bills and resolutions in under an hour on Monday, as just two spectators watched from the gallery.
The bipartisan bills, if approved by the New Jersey Senate on Thursday and signed into law by the governor, will fund extra cleanup at schools and nursing homes and offer job protections for workers affected by the coronavirus.
They would also give lawmakers the ability to vote remotely if they cannot make it to Trenton, the capital.
In New York, lawmakers were ordered back to the Capitol — now closed to the public — on Wednesday to pass an emergency bill to guarantee sick leave to those under quarantine. Such issues have taken on more urgency in New York, which has the nation’s highest number of confirmed cases and a mandatory statewide shutdown of many businesses.
The legislation, which Mr. Cuomo signed Wednesday evening, requires government entities and private businesses with 100 or more employees to provide workers in mandatory or precautionary quarantine at least 14 days of paid sick leave. Smaller businesses would be able to tap into state insurance programs to help cover their employees’ leave.
With a state budget due on April 1, legislators were also pushing to accomplish the once unthinkable in Albany: reach an early budget agreement, perhaps within the next week, though questions of how much revenue the state had lost from the virus-related economic swoon were complicating negotiations.
Tax revenues will be $4 to $7 billion lower than originally projected, according to new estimates from the state comptroller.
Lawmakers also returned after being chided by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who has taken a leading role among national leaders in responding to the crisis. Mr. Cuomo dismissed concerns that returning to the often close quarters of the legislative chambers was dangerous.
That call to duty was answered on Wednesday, albeit under unusual circumstances; in the State Assembly, lawmakers were told to stay in their offices before being called to the chamber to vote in small batches of a dozen or so.
“Group 6, please come to the chamber and cast your vote,” said Jeffrion L. Aubry, a Queens assemblyman and the Speaker pro tempore, calling in one delegation.
Carl E. Heastie, the Assembly speaker, said that with members trying to balance their “constitutional duties” with health protocols, the legislative agenda may have shrunk as the crisis has grown.
“I would say the list isn’t as big as it was before,” he said of budget priorities.
In the 63-member Senate, no legislative staff was allowed on the chamber floor on Wednesday. In a speech before a mostly vacant chamber, John Flanagan, the Senate Republican minority leader, announced his support for the bills — which passed with largely bipartisan support — and acknowledged the solemnity of the occasion.
One of those overseeing the strange procession was Senator Michael Gianaris, a Democrat from Queens who serves as deputy majority leader, who said the Senate was trying to keep the “critical mass of actual humans” in the chamber as low as possible.
Catie Edmondson and Tracey Tully contributed reporting.