Seventeen people were injured in the blaze at the 110th Street Central Park North subway stop that officials believe was deliberately set.
Growing up in Brooklyn, Garrett Goble dreamed of being a police officer. But as he got older and started a family, he decided law enforcement was too dangerous. Instead, he found a job as a subway train operator — a much safer option, he thought.
Danger found him anyway.
As Mr. Goble pulled his No. 2 train into a station along the northern edge of Central Park early Friday, he heard the train’s conductor yell that there was heavy smoke and fire in the front of the train, one car away from where Mr. Goble sat.
In a mad dash, he and the conductor rushed to evacuate passengers as fire consumed the car. His colleague then managed to escape the smoke-filled station.
But Mr. Goble did not. When emergency workers arrived, they found him lying unconscious on the tracks, officials said. They believe he was trying to flee from the burning train into the subway tunnel when he was overcome by smoke and collapsed.
Mr. Goble, 36, was pronounced dead at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhttan. Investigators think the fire was started intentionally.
“I wouldn’t have expected it to be any different,” said Earl Holland, 59, his longtime neighbor in Brooklyn after hearing reports that Mr. Goble was trying to save passengers.
Police investigators said that the fire, which broke out around 3:15 a.m., might be connected to two other fires in Manhattan early Friday: one at the 86th Street station on the No. 1 line, and another at the 96th Street station on the Nos. 1, 2 and 3 lines.
A third fire on the street level was reported later in the morning at the 116th Street station on the Nos. 2 and 3 lines.
As the fire at the 110th Street Central Park North stop raged, a second subway car stopped just short of the station. Workers evacuated its passengers out of the tunnel through an emergency exit, transit officials said.
A photo circulating among emergency workers of the burned train shows a shell of a car, with blackened walls, melted seats and loose wires hanging down.
Sarah Feinberg, interim president of New York City Transit, confirmed there was “extensive damage” in the car at a news conference.
Seventeen other people, including five firefighters, were injured in the blaze, according to a spokesman for the New York Fire Department.
Four people were in critical condition on Friday morning after suffering from smoke inhalation, and another person was in serious condition, but the injuries were not life-threatening. The five firefighters sustained minor injuries.
News of the fatal incident shook the community of transit workers — two other colleagues died in the last two days after contracting the coronavirus — and devastated Mr. Goble’s family and friends.
Mr. Goble grew up in the Flatlands neighborhood in Brooklyn, Ms. Gray said. She and his mother, Victoria Goble, raised him after his father died of an illness when he was in elementary school.
“He wasn’t my biological son, but I considered him my son,” Ms. Gray said in her doorway with tears in her eyes.
Mr. Goble was a standout gymnast at South Shore High School in Brooklyn, which no longer exists. Ms. Gray said that he was of such slim build that her son and his friends, who played football, would lift Mr. Goble for weight training. He loved being around his friends, she said.
After he finished school, Mr. Goble initially wanted to be a New York Police Department officer, Ms. Gray and two other neighbors said.
Yolanda Strudwick, his cousin, called Mr. Goble “ hard worker.” “He just wanted to provide for his wife and kids and make sure they had everything they needed,” she said.
Shirley Holland, 84, a neighbor, said Mr. Goble encouraged her grandson to consider a career with the M.T.A., which runs the subway. Mr. Goble considered his profession “something I can do to make a decent living,” she said.
When he was not working, his family said, he spent time tossing a ball around in his yard with his oldest son, who is 11, and taking his youngest son, who is a few months old, to soccer games.
The police said that as of Friday evening no arrests had been made, but they were investigating the deadly fire as a crime. It was unclear how the fire began or whether it started inside or outside the car, said Lieutenant Thomas Antonetti, a Police Department spokesman.
The M.T.A. announced that it was offering up to $50,000 for information that could help the police identify anyone who may be responsible for the fire.
The fatal fire comes at a particularly painful time for the transit agency: The train operator killed on Friday morning was the third death among the transit authority’s front-line workers in just 36 hours.
On Thursday, a 61-year-old bus operator, Oliver Cyrus, and a 49-year old train conductor, Peter Petrassi, died from the coronavirus, according to transit union officials. As of Wednesday, 52 transit workers had tested positive for the virus.
Maria Cramer and Edgar Sandoval contributed reporting. Alain Delaquérière contributed research.