OK, you’re gonna hear a lot about Joementum.
Hey, things are going great. Take it easy.
Our former vice president is on a roll. A man who’d never won a primary before in three presidential campaigns pretty much swept the board on Super Tuesdays I & II. This was probably the best week of his entire political career.
Except maybe for the visit to an automobile plant in Detroit, where Biden called a union worker “full of shit” while shushing an aide who tried to get him to calm down.
Biden’s supporters are quick to note that said union member popped up on Fox News the next day, claiming the former vice president had gone after him for supporting the right to bear arms. Or actually, the right to bear semiautomatic weapons.
One way or another, it was a bad moment. But hey, Biden is 77 and he’s been schlepping all over the country, giving speeches, eating bad food, shaking hands. (Don’t shake hands!) During his big, celebratory appearance after the primaries last week, his wife had to fight off a sign-wielding vegan who stormed the victory podium.
So the Detroit incident is hardly a moment that’s going to live on in history. We could forget about it instantly were it not a reminder that Biden is not great at spontaneous back-and-forth, like you get in … a debate. One of which is scheduled for Sunday, when he meets Bernie Sanders one-on-one.
Which is kinda the whole point. Truly, if it was a choice between nominating the reincarnation of George Washington or the candidate most likely to defeat Donald Trump, Democrats would know which way to go.
Forget the part about not being a dope! Exactly where we are trying not to go.
Sure, it’s unlikely that debate teams of the future are going to be studying his rhetoric. Remember the time an 83-year-old Iowan claimed Biden was “too old” to be president and Biden challenged him to a push-up competition? But we’re talking choices here. Who wouldn’t rather have a president with a habit of babbling than one who’d move into the Oval Office and start deconstructing the government’s pandemic control team?
Try to imagine Donald Trump doing something like that.