A psychologist offers tips tailored to age.
Dr. Levine is a clinical psychologist and author.
As child psychologists, we agreed that the mother was way off base in this exchange. What might have seemed like a lighthearted response to her could have been confusing or even terrifying to her son.
But it doesn’t have to be this way. Parents can take steps to avoid letting our own anxiety interfere with how we communicate with our children about the national emergency that has upended our routines. This starts with being aware of their developmental stages, anticipating how they might be processing what they’re hearing, and being ready with responses that are both honest and age-appropriate.
Less is more here. At this age, children think magically — Santa Claus and monsters are still real for many of them. Coronavirus is a vague but terrifying thing they can’t possibly understand. They need to know that they can depend on the people around them for comfort and stability. If you’re OK, they’re OK.
If they ask you a question, answer their concerns calmly and directly. They will read your face, your tone of voice and your body language more carefully than your words.
Note use of the word “concerned.” Stay away from “panicked” “terrified” or other high emotion words. Answer questions directly and oversee public health directives (hand washing, social distancing) with matter-of-fact language — “It’s especially important to wash your hands now” or “We’re doing this to make sure we stay healthy.” That will suffice for most youngsters.
Over the past couple of weeks, friends and colleagues have sent me over a dozen examples or exchanges like the one at the beginning of this article, and they’ve all been about grade school kids. This may be because while children in this age group have considerably more advanced thinking skills than preschoolers and most can think logically, their thinking still tends to be concrete. They don’t quite understand abstraction, sarcasm or irony yet.
It is important that we do not promote an apocalyptic narrative. Kids this age are less self-involved than younger kids, and so they worry about the impact not just on themselves but on others around them. Yes, you want to educate, but you also want to know what they’ve heard and how they’ve interpreted that information. Make sure to ask questions.
At this age, most children have begun to hone far more sophisticated thinking skills. They think both logically and abstractly. They also can understand sarcasm and irony. It is not helpful to talk carelessly about doomsday scenarios, but an older child is far more likely to see the humor in sarcasm than a younger child.
Remember that adolescence is very stressful even in the absence of a national emergency. Kids in this age group are likely to have concerns that feel much more pressing to them than how many people have the virus or how much toilet paper is stocked in the house.
Tap into the part of your child who understands that there are others in the world besides him or her. Adolescents can be very self-centered but also socially conscious. Remind them that their aunts and uncles and grandparents need their help. Sympathize with their lack of access to friends. This is really tough for young teenagers.
And finally, as parents, our first order of business must be to calm ourselves. This does not mean sticking our heads in the sand, but it might mean limiting our own exposure to frantic and frightening media. For many of us, it will require pulling out those behaviors that serve us well in other times of stress — meditation, gardening, exercise, nature. We are showing our children what it means to tolerate emotional discomfort. This is not the last time in life we will face a global threat. And it certainly is not the last time our children will.
This is not the apocalypse. The crisis will pass. In the meantime we will have to teach our children how to deal with uncertainty. We don’t have to love it. But we do have to model it.
