In New Rochelle, the early epicenter of the coronavirus in New York, the state’s first drive-in facility serves those at risk or with symptoms.
NEW ROCHELLE, N.Y. — Any other place, any other time, the three white tents set against the Long Island Sound in the middle of a public park, with a line of vehicles waiting to get in, could have easily been the scene of a wedding or a garden party.
It is the state’s first drive-through coronavirus testing center, set in the middle of Glen Island, a 105-acre park connected by drawbridge to the mainland in New Rochelle, an epicenter of the outbreak when coronavirus first emerged in the state earlier this month.
We visited New Rochelle, N.Y., a hot spot of infections, and asked: Are the containment efforts working?
Today: A suburb north of New York City has become one of the largest clusters of the coronavirus in the U.S. My colleague, Sarah Maslin Nir, went there.
It’s Thursday, March 19.
Sarah, tell us about the past few weeks in this town of New Rochelle, New York.
It began with a local man. His name is Larry Garbuz. He’s a lawyer. He’s about 50, lives in New Rochelle, which is this suburb about five or so miles north of New York City’s border. And he falls ill about February 27, and he starts to decline pretty rapidly. He asks a neighbor to drive him to the hospital and spends several days there really spiraling. Then on March 2, they find out what was wrong with Larry Garbuz, and it was coronavirus.
Cases of coronavirus are growing nationwide, and New York state is no exception.
He’s the first person in this suburb that is diagnosed.
Investigators scrambling to retrace the patient’s movements from the Bronxville hospital where he was first treated.
And disease investigators then have to trace his movements.
The week before he knew he was contagious, the married father of four traveled around the New York City area. He also attended temple services back in Westchester.
And found out that he had attended religious services, just as anyone would — a wedding, a bar mitzvah — about a week before.
Synagogue Young Israel of New Rochelle ordered to close, and hundreds of people who attended services there have been told to quarantine themselves at home.
And the Westchester County Health Department ordered a hundred families, congregants at that synagogue, to self-quarantine.
So I’m sitting in our offices at Times Square when we hear about this diagnosis, and I immediately get in my car and head up to New Rochelle. Because this is going to have huge ripple effects in his town. We know it.
And when I arrived, people didn’t even know it had happened. There was a man pushing at the door of Young Israel, Mr. Garbuz’s synagogue, trying to get in for evening prayers, not understanding why it was locked. There were restaurants, where people should be turning up for evening hours, not understanding why their customers were calling in takeout instead. This was a town where the news that they were part of this global pandemic was just settling in.
But there’s nothing we can do about it. I think it’s another flu that’s going to go away, hopefully.
People were barely understanding that this had happened to them.
And I’m still going to go out. I’m going to go to CVS, the post office, the bank, because — I’m going to wash my hands. I’m going to try never to ever touch my face. 
So to the degree that something is happening here in New Rochelle, it’s dawning on people very slowly.
I think it’s dawning on America very slowly, and New Rochelle was a reflection of the lack of seriousness with which the country was taking this threat.
But from that quiet first evening in New Rochelle, things rapidly began to change.
Good afternoon. New Rochelle is a particular problem.
And on March 10, something unprecedented happens.
A one-mile radius containment zone is designated in New Rochelle, surrounding the neighborhood of this first patient.
Facilities within that area, schools within that area would be closed for two weeks. We’ll go in, we’ll clean the schools and assess the situation. This can’t be a political decision. This is a public health decision.
That containment zone is the red hot center of New York’s coronavirus outbreak.
We’re also going to use the National Guard in the containment area.
And then, in comes the National Guard.
It is a dramatic action, but it is the largest cluster in the country. And this is literally a matter of life and death. That’s not an overly rhetorical statement.
You have people holed up in their homes, people needing testing, needing health care, needing the basic necessities of life and affected by this virus that dramatically curtails their movements. I wanted to understand, how is the government keeping us safe? How are the health care workers carrying out testing? And how are the people of New Rochelle coping?
So Sarah, why exactly is the National Guard there? What is their official mission? When I think the National Guard being dispatched, it’s usually after a natural disaster and they are literally there to pick up the pieces.
Yeah. These men and women had been to floods. They’d been to earthquakes. They’d been to hurricane zones. This is the first-ever time they were called to an epidemic event.
And they were called here for two main purposes, which is to deliver meals to people bound in their homes by quarantine, and to clean.
So I’ve just walked into the Jewish Community Center on Wilmot Road in Scarsdale. Inside, 60 members of the National Guard are doing a deep clean.
I watched them clean at a community center, and the meticulousness was really incredible.
I’m currently going to inform the process of sanitizing the equipment. First, you have to take the equipment and put it into the solution of water and bleach.
I walk into a classroom for children, and there are these men and women squeezed in their military gear into teeny, tiny plastic seats for toddlers, poring over piles of building blocks and Legos and scrubbing each block by hand.
The National Guard is scrubbing children’s toys?
Yeah, it was an uncanny sight. They did this kind of thing throughout the containment zone — cleaning synagogues, city facilities, community centers, scrubbing ceilings, floors, chairs, anything that a sick person may have touched.
You know, Sarah, as you’re describing this, the National Guard is on the ground. Local officials are still theoretically in charge. Right? Like the people who run the city, probably even the county. So is it clear to you who is in charge, and is this all coordinated?
In the early moments of New Rochelle coming to terms with this new reality, it was a lot of moving pieces. It was a city in turmoil with no real leadership structure in place at that moment. But I get in my car, and I drive down to downtown New Rochelle to the headquarters of the Westchester County Health Department and discover that something had been building here all along.
I’m standing inside of the incident response center in New Rochelle, and there’s a group of about 30 nurses on folding chairs getting a briefing about their deployment to test people who are quarantined at home.
And there I come upon a huge, bustling incident command center.
They’re going out in groups of three, in protective gear with swab kits.
The Department of Homeland Security is there. The room is filled with nurses. There is an assembly line of test gear, and test kits, and what’s called P.P.E. — personal protective equipment. People are filing around the room equipping themselves to get ready to deploy to the houses of sick people to test them for coronavirus.
And they’re all asking lots of very understandable questions.
Is there going to be an influx of testing, or it’s just, like, we’re only doing New Rochelle?
How do we make sure these people feel safe? How do we make sure that we’re safe as we go out onto the front lines?
Handwritten signs all over the room.
And what are you thinking when you see this?
I think I’ve finally found the coordinated response that this situation seems to call for.
This is a room full of all the layers of government, from the state, to different agencies, to health care workers in their scrubs, coordinating to take on this crisis head-on. And after nearly a week of frightened townspeople and scared kids, this is exactly what you wanted to see. It was a relief.
So Sarah, what happens next?
Think of it this way. We have 173 cases in the entire state. Right? We have 108 in New Rochelle.
At this point, things are starting to get up and running in New Rochelle. We’re about two weeks out from the first diagnosis, and the National Guard is here. There is the incident command center. And that command center is sending people out to do in-home testing.
— do what we have to do. But you know, Jake, this is a microcosm of what we’re going to be looking at. The numbers are going to go up consistently, because our testing is way behind the reality of what the situation is.
But still, it’s not enough. The numbers of people tested at this point are only in the hundreds.
China was doing 10,000 tests per day. This country, in total we’ve done about 5,000 tests. So we really have to get that testing capacity up if we’re going to make the difference.
New York state recognizes even what they’re doing there in New Rochelle, it’s not enough. We have to ramp up testing.
And so how do they actually do that?
Actually, they saw what was happening in South Korea, where they’ve created these highly effective drive-through testing centers, managing to churn out 275,000 since diagnosis. And that happened, actually, around the same time that our country had its first case. So New York state decides we need these centers. And so I went to see this myself.
So I’m recording this now standing outside the mobile drive-through testing center in a public park called Glen Island in Rochester.
When you get to this beautiful island park, there’s seagulls wheeling overhead. There’s the Long Island Sound glinting. You arrive at what looks like three beautiful wedding tents. They’re tents that could be for any garden party. And you only realize what this is because of the cop who stops you at the drawbridge to this island with his megaphone blaring.
Are you here for testing? Yes? OK. Keep your windows rolled up at all times. Have your ID ready. Windows rolled up at all times, windows closed at all times. Have your ID ready. You’re going over the drawbridge, and stay to the right.
My guide was a gentleman by the name of Chuck Hamilton. He was in charge of operations at that site.
There is three tents with six lanes. We’re being directed by our National Guard personnel right now.
And as we pulled up, you head down a meandering lane lined with orange cones and members of the National Guard and other police forces.
— will advise us to keep our windows closed at this particular point.
They demanded I put my ID on the windshield.
Windows closed up.
Put your IDs up on the dash.
OK. All identification must now be put on the dash.
 So groups of people in Tyvek aprons, those respirator masks, lean over, peer through your windshield, tap your name and info into a tablet, and make sure you’re confirmed for your appointment at the drive-through testing center.
— stage two.
These people are in full Tyvek hooded suits.
Next, you’re waved from this first zone where they check you in, called a cold zone because there isn’t a risk of contamination there, to the hot zone.
— full body suits?
Yes, these are all registered nurses, paramedics, or E.M.T.s. She’s indicating when you’re — you keep the window closed.
In the hot zone, I was approached by two nurses in full, what looked to me like hazmat suits, eye shields, heads covered, every seal wrapped up tightly to make sure nothing could get through. I rolled down my window.
And they told me what they would do if I were in fact sick, which was tip my head back, thread a swab into my nostril and then another into the back of my throat with a tongue depressor, put those swabs in vials, and send those off to the lab.
I’d tell you to lean forward and tilt your head a little bit backwards, take a deep breath. I’m going to put the swab in. And that’s it. The other swab is the backup control.
I imagine that everybody else going through that line needed that sign real bad.
So you’re in total protective gear. You’re doing this work.  How do you feel?
I spoke to one nurse who was in that hazmat suit in the hot zone. And she appeared to me to be the age demographic that is at risk from coronavirus, which is 50-plus. And yet she felt this was the moment to step up.
I feel compelled to help, compelled to help. And you know, we have to be careful. One mistake could be a big problem, obviously. We can become contaminated. But this is the time — this is why we became nurses. This is the time to help. If we don’t do this, what do we do?
If I’m not here, what am I doing?
Can you spell the last name?
So has this testing site been effective? Is it making a difference in containing and combating the virus?
It is making a difference in figuring out who has this illness — and a tremendous difference. They have hustled, since it opened on Friday, 2,849 people through that drive-through as of our conversation, Michael. This is charging ahead and vastly increasing New York’s capacity to test these people. This is how we’re going to get a handle on this disease. To understand how it spreads, who’s affected by it, to model it forward, to know what we’re up against.
Right. You really can’t stop it until you can measure it.
Exactly. And you can’t protect people unless you know who’s got it.
So Sarah, at this point, the system that you have described to handle this acute crisis in New Rochelle is containment zone, the National Guard to keep it contained, but more importantly, keep people safe, clean, fed. And now there’s this mobile testing center nearby trying to figure out just how widely the virus has spread. Overall, is this starting to feel like a model for other places?
More than just feel like a model, it is the model for New York state’s response. In the coming week and weeks, more of exactly what’s happening in New Rochelle is going to be set up all over the state. Nassau County, Jones Beach, which isn’t too far, just got its first mobile testing center modeled off this. It’s coming to Staten Island in New York City, to Rockland County, another place not far away.
I met a man while I was out there in New Rochelle. We were standing outside a classroom where National Guard were scrubbing Legos. And he said to me, you know, they talk about reinventing the wheel, but this is inventing the wheel. And when we look back at how to handle these things in the future, people are going to look back and say, how did they do it in New Rochelle? And he might be right. The whole country might end up looking at this as a model, because the whole country might be in New Rochelle’s position soon. And this may be just what they have to go on.
And do you get the sense that what’s happening in New Rochelle — this invention of the wheel when it comes to how to deal with a pandemic in the United States — do you get the sense that it’s working and that this is basically all on the right track?
It’s hard to know. Every day there are new cases. I don’t think we’ll know for a while what’s working. But it’s deeply comforting when you look out across the nation and the world and see this patchwork of responses that barely hang together, to know that here in this state, in this city, in New Rochelle, a herculean effort is being made to get this thing right and keep people safe.
You know, Sarah, we have been talking about how this town has been totally transformed in what’s really just a matter of days, a couple weeks. A lot of outsiders coming in — National Guard, volunteers parachuting in to help. But what about the community itself? The people who are there in the city, in this containment zone, how are they handling this?
Michael, this is a hard time to be anyone, in or out of the zone. And we are all looking for a dose of human goodness.
And we were just talking outside. It’s a little intimidating, huh? A little scary?
Because people’s dying.
If you go to New Rochelle and you see people asked unimaginable things, asked to cut themselves off from everyone they love to protect everyone else, you see people willingly doing it.
We’ve been doing a lot of deliveries. As you can see, there’s no one in the restaurant right now except you and I and some staff.
People, as much as they’ve been put upon and wish it were otherwise, they are resolute and resilient. And they’re accepting this because they know it’s for a greater purpose.
We just want to make sure that the stress level and the anguish that the public might be feeling, that they feel that everything that can be done is being done for their health.
Are you helping out too?
Are you going to pack any bags or give any bags to any of the families?
What we’ve been doing, as I’ve coined the phrase, the drop and dash.  And that’s it.
Everybody gets it. Everybody just wants everyone else to get better.
— feel like someone cares about them. Yes, they’re quarantined. It’s a terrible thing. And when I pick up the phone, and I see a name that I recognize, I speak to them. I say, how are you holding up? And they ask me the same thing. How are you holding up? And we both crack a joke and we laugh and that’s it. You got to keep a sense of humor with this whole thing. And it’s terrible for everyone. It really — my heart is aching for them, and they feel the same way about me.
This whole thing is just bringing everyone together, hopefully not literally because that’s how corona spreads.
You got to laugh, huh?
Yeah. You got to laugh.
It’s the only way to get through it.
Are you going to go out on another delivery now?
Um, I don’t have anything at the moment.
Here’s what else you need to know today. On Wednesday, the United States and Canada said they would close their shared border to all but essential travel, becoming the latest countries to restrict border crossings to slow the spread of the pandemic.
In both our countries, we’re encouraging people to stay home. We’re telling our citizens not to visit their neighbors if they don’t absolutely have to. Well, this collaborative and reciprocal measure is an extension of that prudent approach.
Meanwhile in Washington, the Senate approved a relief package already passed by the House, that provides sick leave, unemployment benefits, free coronavirus testing, and food and medical aid to Americans affected by the pandemic. President Trump quickly signed the legislation into law, the first of several congressional bills related to the coronavirus that he is expected to support.
The Congress has an enormous role to play in responding to this challenge, and we are determined to do that duty.
In a speech from the Senate floor, Republican majority leader Mitch McConnell called for a bipartisan approach to the crisis.
This is not a challenge anyone wanted for our nation, but it is a challenge we will overcome. Someday, hopefully soon, our nation will have this virus on its heels.
New York is among roughly 10 states that have set up their own drive-through testing centers, as state and local leaders look to compensate for an acute shortage of tests in the United States.
That shortage has set back the country’s efforts to respond to the pandemic, concealing the spread of the virus as unidentified cases multiply.
In the United States, only about 25,000 people had been tested as of March 11, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. South Korea has been able to test at least 10,000 people a day, for a total of 274,000 people so far, even though the two countries discovered their first cases around the same time.
Part of South Korea’s aggressive approach to testing includes drive-through facilities, and New York officials said they used South Korea’s efforts as a model for the center in New Rochelle, a Westchester County suburb five miles north of New York City’s border.
Since it opened on March 13, cars have snaked across the drawbridge here, filled with anxious people waiting to find out if they have the virus.
The cars pulled underneath the white tents where medical personnel in full-body hazmat suits, with yellow tape around their wrists and ankles to seal off any gaps, were waiting. Then the drivers were asked to roll down their window, tip their head back and submit to a series of nasal and throat swabs.
“We have to be careful, one mistake could be a big problem,” Lisa Baez-Alessandro, a nurse from Staten Island said, wearing a silver Tyvek suit inside the tent’s “hot zone,” where the swab tests are performed.
In its first four days of operation, the drive-through center tested 1,882 people in New Rochelle, in which a one-mile radius was declared a containment area by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo last week.
The numbers of those tested who were found to be infected are not yet available.
The declaration became necessary after a lawyer who lives in New Rochelle and works in Manhattan attended public gatherings, including at least one at his synagogue, Young Israel of New Rochelle, before he knew he had the coronavirus.
The testing center in New Rochelle is a model for facilities being rolled out across the state; a second, in Jones Beach State Park in Nassau County, opens Tuesday, with centers to follow in Suffolk and Rockland Counties as well as Staten Island in New York City.
Federal officials are planning to open more, as well as to enable 2,000 commercial labs to use high-speed machines that can process multiple samples at the same time.
“That we are surprised in March and still scrambling to get testing in place and getting a health care system in place is inexcusable,” Governor Cuomo said on Monday.
The governor said the state’s drive-through centers, as well as state-run laboratories that have been authorized to conduct tests, are part of New York’s efforts to supplement the federal response.
Since the state began testing on Feb. 29, over 10,000 people have been tested statewide. To qualify for a drive-through or other test in New York State, patients must have qualifying symptoms or be in high-risk pools, like people who are older or those with pre-existing conditions.
They must then get a referral from a doctor to the State Health Department, which issues an appointment. But officials said that people without appointments were not being turned away.
The state is working on streamlining the process: Soon, patients will be able to call a hotline, where they can explain their symptoms. They will receive a call back with an appointment if they are eligible for testing.
As cars pulled up to the small island on Monday, police stationed at the drawbridge called out over megaphones to remind drivers to keep their windows closed. Visitors remain in their cars as they pull through the testing tents and through a series of steps. Around the tents stood uniformed members of the state’s National Guard, which had arrived as part of the governor’s containment zone efforts.
At the opening of the tents, health care workers in protective aprons — employees from Northwell Health as well as staff from state and county health departments — approached each vehicle.
They instructed the occupants to place their identification cards on the dashboard, peering through the windshield and tapping the information into tablets they carried.
Next, the staff waved each car forward to the middle of the tent, known as the hot zone, to get tested by medical personnel.
Finally, as vehicles pulled out of the tent, those tested were given a confirmation number. The samples are sent to BioReference Laboratories in northern New Jersey, and patients would get results in two to three days.
Teams of volunteers from across the state’s agencies had spent a week or so setting up the center, a process that needed to account for the state’s immediate needs and future goals.
“It was basically building the airplane while you were flying it,” said Geza Hrazdina, an administrator in the state’s Office of Health Insurance Programs, who had spent six days helping construct and run the drive-through.
At the drive-through’s third and final stop, where patients get a confirmation number, one volunteer, her mouth covered by a N95 mask, stood at the exit and waved each car goodbye. She held up a handwritten sign.
“Feel better,” it said.