He’s alive, but he still needs some work.
Joe Biden’s presidential candidacy is back from the dead, in the sort of electoral turnaround that makes pundits’ heads explode. With the party’s moderate wing now coalescing behind him, Mr. Biden has suddenly gone from being gently ignored — like the dotty uncle who’s forever talking nonsense at family get-togethers — to being touted as the man to beat.
While this is obviously cause for rejoicing in Bidenland, it should also be a time for low-grade panic. (It certainly is for many other Democrats.) Overnight, Mr. Biden has been strapped back into the hot seat, with Republican and Democratic rivals alike raring to savage him. Bernie Sanders is mining Mr. Biden’s decades of Senate votes for ammo. President Trump literally got himself impeached over his obsession with taking down Joe.
No matter how super Mr. Biden’s Super Tuesday, it did not magically erase all the factors that kept his campaign becalmed for so long. Joe is still Joe, with all his charms and foibles. And even as his team prepares for external threats, they also recognize that a key part of their job going forward is to protect the candidate from himself.
The Hunter thing. This is the single issue keeping many, many Democrats up at night. It’s not that they place any stock in Mr. Trump’s unfounded claims that Mr. Biden or his son behaved corruptly in their dealings with Ukraine. It’s that the candidate has not yet figured out how to confidently parry attacks, or even awkward questions, about the issue. In the early debates, the very mention of Hunter’s work for Burisma, the Ukrainian gas company on whose board he sat, would cause the former vice president to seize up, then ramble incoherently. He looked not only unsteady but cornered. He hadn’t improved all that much by the time he sat down with The Times’s editorial board in December.
It’s not as though his campaign failed to prep him for such inquiries. But family is touchy territory for Mr. Biden — as one might expect of a man who has had to bury two children — and he clearly has trouble approaching the issue rationally. Which is what Mr. Trump is counting on. His advisers need to take a tough-love approach on this one. The candidate cannot continue to go around ducking, weaving and insulting random voters who broach the topic.
Verbal incontinence. Mr. Biden likes to talk, a lot. And he tends to wander off on tangents, switch directions and erupt in non sequiturs. Every time he speaks, Democrats hold their breath.
This isn’t necessarily the fatal flaw that many political and media types think.  It makes them seem less condescending and more authentic. And there’s an argument to be made that Mr. Biden’s rambling is preferable to the rhetorical stylings of his younger days, when he often came across as a senatorial blowhard — which he was.
Besides, unlike candidates known for their rhetorical precision (R.I.P. Elizabeth Warren), Mr. Biden has long been seen as a loose cannon. Recall his 2006 commentary on the growing Indian population in Delaware? “You cannot go to a 7-11 or a Dunkin’ Donuts unless you have a slight Indian accent. I’m not joking.” Or his January 2007 observation that Mr. Obama was such an “articulate and bright and clean” African-American fella? During Mr. Biden’s vice-presidential days, his press people often wore a look of perpetual wariness, especially when he was out mixing it up with the public. To some degree, people get that this is Joe being Joe.
So extra media training might be a smart investment. Some party strategists have been pleading with his campaign to keep him on the Teleprompter during big speeches. And when answering questions, they say, brevity is better. In his debate responses, Mr. Biden tends to be great for the first 20 seconds, solid for the next 20 — then he starts going off the rails. Blame it on age, his stutter or ill-fitting pants, he needs to tighten things up in more formal settings.
The Creepy Joe meme. Hugs, kisses, hair sniffs, nose rubs — Mr. Biden has always been a touchy-feely guy. It goes with his personal, I-feel-your-pain brand of politics. But it also is glaringly out of touch in the age of #MeToo.
Ground rules must be set. Handshakes and back slaps are OK. Shoulder massages and waist squeezes are not. There will be gray areas. If a supporter requests a hug, it could be tricky for the candidate to decline. But there should be no kissing anyone other than his wife. Period.
Work on the defensiveness. As we saw in the debates, Mr. Biden can get snappish when someone questions him about his age, his record, his values and so on. Crabby old guy is Mr. Sanders’s shtick. Mr. Biden is supposed to be the happy warrior. Thin skin has no place in his candidacy.
Still, the campaign needs to avoid being overprotective. Swaddling Mr. Biden in Bubble Wrap and stashing him in Representative Jim Clyburn’s basement until November is not an option. His aides cannot shield him from scrutiny. But they know he does better in situations that call for more connecting and less pontificating, more interaction with voters and less debate-stage combat.
The Biden campaign has indeed resurrected itself. But it could still use some intensive care.