A nest is “a disordered stick bomb,” resilient in ways that humans have hardly begun to understand, much less emulate.
The term “bird’s nest” has come to describe a messy hairdo, tangled fishing line and other unspeakably knotty conundrums. But that does birds an injustice. Their tiny brains, dense with neurons, produce marvels that have long captured scientific interest as naturally selected engineering solutions — yet nests are still not well understood.
One effort to disentangle the structural dynamics of the nest is underway in the sunny yellow lab — the Mechanical Biomimetics and Open Design Lab — of Hunter King, an experimental soft-matter physicist at the University of Akron in Ohio.
Dr. King and his colleagues seek to answer simple questions: What is the underlying mechanical principle behind the bird nest’s construction strategy? What are the statistically robust characteristics of “the nest state”? That is to say, what separates a nest from the same sticks and twigs collected into a tight bundle or scattered helter-skelter?
A nest has a certain chemistry — an alchemy, almost. From humble parts, a greater sum emerges and coheres. And, presumably, its generic principle would not be exclusive to nests. Rather, it would be widely applicable to structures in architecture, packaging, shock-absorption and more.
In modeling the delicate interplay of the nest geometry, elasticity and friction, Dr. King and a graduate assistant, Nicholas Weiner, fashioned a tabletop experiment with “a little bit of a steampunk style.” They built an artificial nest: a cylinder containing hundreds of bamboo skewers, laser cut and bought in bulk. Then around it they created — from the components of an apparatus previously used to characterize the mechanical response of rubber — a chamber to measure the response of the nest when it was repeatedly compressed.
Although the goal is simple, Dr. King calls the experiment “ugly” because the rich system has an overabundance of factors at play. “This makes the problem not easily amenable to elegant theory or simple analysis,” he said.
Dr. King has been pursuing this line of investigation for several years. As research problems go, it’s a bird’s nest of a bird’s nest: All the input parameters and boundary conditions are interwoven, in ways that prove difficult to tease apart.
The paper recently published by Dr. King and his collaborators primarily reviews the field of nest research, such as it is.
One reference on Dr. King’s bookshelf is a classic title by Mike Hansell, “Bird Nests and Construction Behavior.” Dr. Hansell, a professor emeritus of animal architecture at the University of Glasgow, conducted field work in museum collections around the world. At the Natural History Museum in London, for instance, he found “an unremarkable looking cup nest of grass and rootlets” by the now extinct piopio (Turnagra capensis) of New Zealand.
In cascading chapters and subsections, Dr. Hansell explored topics like nest shape, decoration and size, and the nest as a factor in mate selection. For the blue-footed booby, nest-building is “reduced to the exaggerated presentation of tiny pieces of vegetation by the male to the female, a trait that might well be expected to be under the influence of sexual selection,” he wrote, with a nod to Charles Darwin.
Dr. King is more optimistic. In his paper, he surveyed the array of materials, from the round grains of sand to the slender filaments in cotton balls, that possess emergent properties: When the elements are packed together randomly, they behave collectively, in a process called jamming.
“If we think of the bird-nest material as a bunch of sticks that are just jammed together, which to some very crude degree is accurate, then as a material it would fall somewhere in the spectrum between sand and cotton,” Dr. King said.
Easier said than done. The Beijing National Stadium, known as the “Bird’s Nest,” was initially designed to be an accretion of truly randomly placed pieces. But the conceptual goal ultimately failed, owing to engineering restrictions: The structure is a highly ordered 42,000 tons of steel, a mere “monument to a metaphor,” the researchers noted.
“Stability is established only through random contacts, not local adhesive mechanisms, such as glue or screws,” Dr. Dierichs said.
The term “hysteresis” is derived from the ancient Greek, meaning “deficiency” or “lagging behind.” Simply put, it describes how a physical system behaves differently depending on what was done to it previously — the system has a history. Hang two one-pound weights from a rubber band, then remove one. With only one weight remaining, the band will be still stretched farther than if only one weight had been added in the first place. That is hysteresis. The rubber band is not behaving like an ideal spring; there is an energy loss to the system.
Something similar happened with the “nests” in Dr. King’s plexiglass cylinder. The sticks were slowly compressed to maximum stress, and then released, repeatedly. During each cycle, the sticks compressed a little more and then bounced back, but only partway; this was hysteresis happening. Eventually, for any given skinniness of stick — its aspect ratio, diameter divided by length — the system founds its maximum, or steady state, density.
This phenomenon might be exactly what the investigators are after: A process that underlies a nest’s machinations — its fundamental mechanical response under force — and one that should be present in other systems.
These are just preliminary findings, which Dr. King will continue to explore in the lab, and with further simulations by Mattia Gazzola, a mechanical engineer, and his Ph.D. student Yashraj Bhosale, at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign’s National Center for Supercomputing Applications.
Dr. King also aspires to find birds that are willing to collaborate. Recently he attended a bird biology conference in the United Kingdom, in search of advice. A year earlier, he had sequestered cardinals at the Akron Zoo, to monitor them as they built nests, but they showed little interest in the materials he brought from the local arts and crafts store.
After he gave his talk, he was approached by Shoko Sugasawa, a research fellow, and Maria Tellos-Ramos, a postdoctoral researcher, in Sue Healy’s Cognition in the Wild lab at the University of St Andrews. They suggested that zebra finches might be better candidates.
Dr. King will also roll the dice again at the zoo, with sticks and fibers of varying flexibility and length, although he’s not counting any nests before they hatch.
