Lawmakers unanimously approved a historic government aid package, but the debate was vicious.
WASHINGTON — After a four-year stretch marked by an acrimonious fight over a Supreme Court vacancy, the poisonous Kavanaugh confirmation and a bitter impeachment trial, was it too much to hope that a global health and economic crisis could suddenly rid the Senate of its own partisan infection?
True, the Senate voted 96 to 0 late Wednesday night to deliver a sweeping $2 trillion response to the coronavirus pandemic, a remarkable show of unanimity for the biggest government aid package in history. The House passed the measure and sent it to President Trump on Friday after having to hustle lawmakers into town to overcome a sudden Republican threat to hold it up.
The outcome was never in doubt. Members of Congress are as worried as every other American about the pandemic, and have the power and the money to do something about it, so significant action was inevitable. Lawmakers also knew they would be quickly run out of office if they failed to respond adequately to the gravest national health emergency in a century.
The test was in both the final contents of the package and how members of the Senate, which took the lead on assembling wide-ranging legislation that touched nearly every facet of the economy and the health care system, would get it done. Could they come together as they did in the days after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and put aside their political differences in a show of strength and solidarity, or would they continue to wage the political war that has been intensifying for years?
Tension filled the Senate floor as Republicans and Democrats argued over what should, and should not, be included in a stimulus bill for coronavirus relief.
Are you kidding me? This is the moment to debate new regulations that have nothing whatsoever to do with this crisis? That’s what they’re up to over there. American people need to know it. Democrats won’t let us fund hospitals or save small businesses unless they get to dust off the Green New Deal. I’d like to see Senate Democrats tell New York City doctors and nurses, who are literally overrun as we speak, that they’re filibustering hospital funding and more masks because they want to argue with the airlines over their carbon footprint. We’ve been working on a few outstanding issues that are no surprise to everyone. From the very beginning, Democrats have insisted on a Marshall Plan for our medical system: more money for hospitals, community health centers, nursing homes and urgent medical supplies like gloves and masks. You know what the American people are thinking right now, Mr. President?  You know what the American people are thinking right now, Mr. President? They’re thinking, Why do the members of the United States Senate continue to double down on stupid? I’d like to suggest to my friends on both sides of the aisle that we first assume the appropriate distance and then secondly take a deep breath. The emotions that we’ve seen on the floor on both sides of the aisle are reflected in homes across America, where families are very emotional at this moment. The country is burning. The country is burning, and your side wants to play political games. It’s time to get this done. The American people expect us to act. They need action. We need to work together to get this done for the American people. Is there objection? Thank you, Mr. President. I object. Oh, come on. I object. The Democratic leader’s objection is heard. This is unbelievable.
On the floor, at least, it was the latter. Glowering senators, hands on hips and fingers wagging, spent a good part of three days castigating one another across the aisle as Democrats held up the emergency aid to wring what they saw as essential concessions from the White House.
The accusations and the tone were ugly. Democrats accused Republicans of being callous and trying to jam through legislation that would have enabled corporate corruption while giving short shrift to American workers. Republicans stepped it up a notch and essentially accused Democrats of killing their fellow citizens.
“When you will look back on this in a day — in a week, in a month — you will just ask: How many deaths could have been prevented if this bill had been passed yesterday instead of today,” Senator John Barrasso of Wyoming, the No. 3 Senate Republican, said on the floor as he pounded Democrats for blocking the measure.
The whole episode was discouraging to longtime senators such as Pat Roberts, the veteran Kansas Republican who is retiring.
In some ways, the legislative dynamic was a reverse of the situation 12 years ago when the House, in fits of acrimony and blame, got tied in knots over the 2008 economic rescue and left it to the Senate to more calmly go about its business despite deep divisions of its own. This time, it was the Senate that became bogged down in fighting while the House seemed more grown up — something no self-respecting senator ever wants to contemplate.
Perhaps the most troubling aspect of the toxic spectacle that unfolded on the floor was how manufactured all the outrage appeared to be. Negotiations were continuing just steps away in the leadership offices of both Republicans and Democrats, and virtually everyone knew that there was going to be a resolution at some point soon — though majority Republicans were up in arms that Democrats were using their leverage to extract more of what they wanted. The harsh attacks — and the Republican suggestion that Democrats were pushing extraneous provisions that really were not part of the relevant negotiations — were in some ways pure political theater.
“What Americans didn’t see yesterday and today is the intense dialogue and debate and discussion around the third coronavirus response bill — by far the largest,” Mr. Kaine said.
One reason for the furious show of partisanship was obvious: Senators are engaged in a fierce battle for control of the chamber in November. Several Republican incumbents are in serious trouble and were not going to miss the opportunity to try to score points against Democrats for irresponsibility and to show voters back home they were fighting the good fight in Washington. With Senator Chuck Schumer of the New York, the Democratic leader, organizing the campaign against them, Republicans were particularly agitated when discussing him. Mr. Schumer, who was at the center of the negotiations, drives Republicans into a frenzy.
“It is despicable. It is infuriating. It is immoral, and it must stop,” she said of the delay.
There were some bright spots, almost all of them behind the scenes. Given the rare opportunity to legislate, Republican and Democratic Senate committee leaders did come together to quickly draft major emergency aid efforts. Members of the Small Business Committee, not usually a hotbed of Senate action, were but one example.
Having watched the crisis tear through China and Italy, Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, who leads the panel, and Senator Ben Cardin of Maryland, the top Democrat on the committee, began working on their own plan in late February. They were joined by Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine and a former Small Business Administration official, and Senator Jeanne Shaheen, Democrat of New Hampshire, in producing a new $377 billion program to provide forgivable loans to small businesses.
But such successes also came with issues, as Democrats complained they were later blindsided by a provision added to the small-business package that was meant to make sure that nonprofit groups such as Planned Parenthood received none of the money.
Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, sought to focus on the big picture of the passage without dissent of the huge bill in such a short period of time — though he noted some “stupidity” on the floor from the Democratic side.
Senators did do something consequential, but they were a long way from putting aside their differences. They seem to have more and more trouble doing so, a fact that does not bode well if the partisanship remains so intense even in times of crisis.