Plugging into the art-world conversation while museums and galleries are closed.
Many museums and galleries have closed in attempts to slow the spread of the coronavirus, but the conversation about art keeps going — and you can get your fix of the art talk (and also the gossip) through a growing number of art podcasts. Hosts include curators, art writers and artists. Here are my picks for 10 art podcasts worth subscribing to, from one in Los Angeles showcasing the music that moves local artists to another, out of Sydney, focusing on Aboriginal culture.
On Talk Art out of London, Russell Tovey, an actor-collector, and Robert Diament, a musician-turned-gallerist, host freewheeling and wide-ranging talks with some big visual artists (think KAWS, Tracey Emin, Grayson Perry) and bold-name creator-collectors (Lena Dunham, Michael Stipe). It’s trendy, gossipy, fast-paced conversational fun, and occasionally frustrating for the tangents left unexplored. When Kaws admits to being arrested, could someone please follow up and ask him where and why?
Produced by a division of Sotheby’s called Art Agency Partners and hosted by Charlotte Burns, In Other Words comes closer than other podcasts to the intimacy and insider feeling of being seated at a chic gallery dinner next to a hotshot dealer or curator. Some episodes are issue-driven, focusing, say, on the rise of the Los Angeles art scene (to which I contributed) or the myth of gender progress in the art world (the subject of a major 2019 investigation In Other Words undertook in partnership with Artnet). But most segments are personality-driven, sharing the views of a single art-world figure, whether the mega-dealer David Zwirner or the Metropolitan Museum of Art director Max Hollein.
Mosaic of Theodora at Basilica San Vitale in Ravenna, Italy.
In these podcasts, Dr. Janina Ramirez presents herself as an art-object sleuth, “your chief investigator of images,” but she acts more like that memorable college teacher — the one who shared such enthusiasm for her topics that you found yourself interested in dusty corners of art history that had never intrigued you before. Her academic specialty is medieval culture and several episodes skew that way. She brings on scholars to discuss the stunning Byzantine mosaic of Empress Theodora from the Basilica of San Vitale in Ravenna, or the reconstruction of the Staffordshire Hoard Helmet — “possibly the single most exciting Anglo-Saxon find of the last 10 years,” she says. And yes, she is also a professor at Oxford, as well as a popular host of BBC art and archaeology documentaries.
Imagine the ever-popular BBC radio program Desert Island Discs with an artist-only guest list and a feminist bent and you’ll get What Artists Listen To. The London artist Pia Pack started this podcast shortly after moving to Los Angeles in 2017 to explore “the stories and soundtracks of artists’ lives” and get to know female artists in her new community. Like Desert Island Discs (but with rougher sound engineering), each episode consists of an interview with an artist, interspersed with passages from songs that she chooses. Artists include Alison Saar, Alexandra Grant, Kim Schoenstadt, Shizu Saldamando and Galia Linn.
Jason Arkles is an American figurative sculptor who settled in Florence because of his work, and his show is a deep dive into the giants of the past who inspire him, from the ancient Greeks through Donatello and Michelangelo to modern legends like Rodin. A good place to start is Episode 65, the first of his two-parter on Augustus Saint-Gaudens, the 19th-century master of high relief sculpture who gave the public monuments and coins that had the expressive quality of line drawings. This is podcasting at its simplest: one microphone, one voice, much to say.
The Art Newspaper, a London publication that reports on international art, has created one of the most topical podcasts around. Hosted by Ben Luke, the weekly show is not a digest of recent articles, but a chance to hear experts talk in depth about new developments or trends. A recent episode featured an interview with Art Basel’s director Marc Spiegler on the effect of the coronavirus on the art market and another with the Tate Modern’s curator Catherine Wood on the legacy of Ulay, the German photographer and performance artist who long explored issues of “masculinity” and “vulnerability” and died in March.
