Long-ignored vertical slabs all over the city are having a moment.
In a park along the Hudson River in Manhattan’s Battery Park City, New Yorkers are queuing up — six feet apart, of course — for their turn to play with a wall.
It’s a gray slab surrounded by a chained fence that looks like it might have once been part of a racquetball court. A month ago, the drab-looking wall would have been easily overshadowed by the sleek Equinox or Asphalt Green gyms close by.
But now, it’s become the belle of the ball. Locals are lining up to have their turn with it.
An avid tennis player, in normal times he would be playing at a tennis club in Westchester. But now that it’s closed and he’s isolating, which means no tennis partners, he’s playing against the wall.
“I don’t have any other choice,” he said. “But it’s actually fun. The ball comes back to me quickly, so I can do volleys and backhands. It’s also good for concentration.” It’s such good exercise, he said, that he only needs to use it for about 20 minutes.
Zara Chadowitz, 35, a senior program manager at Amazon who lives in the West Village, refuses to disclose the location of her wall.
She discovered it last week on a grocery run when she saw people playing racquetball against it. She returned a few days later with her tennis racket and a few balls.
Lauren Wire, 31, a publicist who lives on Manhattan’s Upper East Side, has never given much thought to the brick walls that line her building’s courtyard. “I’ve definitely never touched these walls before,” she said.
Now they’re part of her daily routine.
Everyday she sets up her yoga mat against one to do exercises she would normally do at CrossFit. Sometimes she does wall-sits and headstands. Other times she focuses on stretching. She even ordered a weighted ball so can squat, throw it against the wall, catch it, and return to a squat.
Some neighbors even cheer her on when they see her.
Shelly Eichas, 33, a personal trainer and registered dietitian who also lives on the Upper East Side, said she’s been amazed at how New Yorkers have incorporated various city objects into their workouts.
She also understands the draw to the wall and is encouraging her clients to find one to use for resistance in doing burpees or push-ups. “I could go on forever about what you can do on a wall,” she said.
Walls are also doing their part to help parents entertain their children, too. Noah Coslov, 38, a freelance sportscaster, introduced one as a new playmate to his five year-old daughter, Eden. Two weeks ago they went to an empty basketball court in Midtown East with tennis balls. There they found a wall, not in use. So they summoned their imaginations.
But he did come to worry about other people. He said that he and his daughter left the basketball court once another person arrived who wanted her time with the wall.
Some New Yorkers are hooked, they said, and intend to keep playing with their favorite walls, even when the city becomes fully operational.
“I am going to keep doing this,” Ms. Chadowitz said. “In New York, it’s hard to get a tennis court, and it’s hard to find someone to play with who is the right level — not too good and not too bad,” she explained.
