With children cooped up at home because of the coronavirus, experts warn they may be at higher risk for bumps, scrapes, broken bones and more.
As coronavirus continues to spread across the globe, we’re working to answer the questions on many parents’ minds. For the latest updates, read The New York Times’s live coronavirus coverage here.
I was on a work call last week when I first heard her wails. I peeked out the window next to my desk and saw my 5-year-old splayed across our driveway, next to her bike, screaming. Then, I saw my 8-year-old help her stand up. I texted my husband: “I think she’s hurt.” Two minutes later, he was carrying my daughter inside.
When I came downstairs, I realized it was bad. I felt terrible that I hadn’t run outside immediately. My daughter was shaking, and the bandage across her forehead was dripping with blood.
Welcome to my worst nightmare. This all happened on the third Friday of March, eight days after my husband and I had pulled our children out of school before it closed because of the new coronavirus. We had been taking the outbreak seriously; we hadn’t been to a grocery store in six days. So a hospital or doctor’s office was absolutely the last place we wanted to go.
First, we made a telemedicine appointment. “Oh, that definitely needs stitches,” the doctor said immediately after I peeled back the dripping bandage. I drove my daughter to an emergency room at a children’s hospital in Westchester County, N.Y. — just 17 miles from the ongoing coronavirus outbreak in New Rochelle — and told her not to touch anything. Still, within the first five minutes, I used hand sanitizer seven times.
It’s a tough time for everyone right now. But parents have to be superheroes. Many of us are expected to do several jobs at once — follow the news, cook family meals, stay calm, care for our kids and teach algebra. So kids are doing what kids do when they can get away with it: Climbing on things they shouldn’t be climbing on, riding bikes without helmets, doing somersaults on the backyard trampoline, throwing dangerous objects at their siblings’ heads.
“You can’t work and provide adequate supervision, especially for younger kids — so something’s got to give,” said Dr. Benjamin Hoffman, M.D., a professor of pediatrics at Oregon Health & Science University School of Medicine and chair of the American Academy of Pediatrics’ Council on Injury, Violence and Poison Prevention. That could be a broken arm, a twisted ankle or, in my daughter’s case, an inch-long cut to the forehead. When I called Dr. Hoffman on the afternoon on March 23, he had just finished treating a child who had been injured while wrestling at home.
According to Dr. Hoffman and other emergency room doctors I spoke with, there’s not yet data showing that children are getting more injuries because of the lack of supervision during self-isolation at home. But that’s probably because most families haven’t been cooped up for long enough. “We’re so new into this that there’s just not enough data, other than people’s anecdotal stories,” said Dr. Brad Sobolewski, M.D., a pediatric emergency medicine physician at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.
The health care providers I spoke with said that at the same time, they may not be aware of such injuries because parents may be delaying trips to emergency rooms or doctor’s offices until they absolutely must go. Christine Peterson, a mother in Wyoming, said her 3-year-old ran into her truck’s tailgate on March 13, but she downplayed the injuries at first because she didn’t want to risk being exposed to the new coronavirus in a pediatrician’s office. “Had it been any other time, I’m sure we would’ve taken her in to get stitches on her face and then had someone look at her foot, but it didn’t seem that bad,” Peterson said. It turned out her daughter had fractured her shinbone.
Ultimately, some doctors and childhood injury organizations worry that the new coronavirus outbreak will lead to a rise in accidents and injuries involving children at home. “We are anticipating that, as kids have more unstructured time at home in the coming weeks and months, and parents are focused on everything from watching their children to teleworking to constantly sanitizing, childhood injuries are likely to go up,” said Torine Creppy, president of Safe Kids Worldwide, a nonprofit that helps families and communities keep kids safe from preventable injuries. Marie Snodgrass, the injury prevention program lead at the University of Michigan’s C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital, agreed. “We’re expecting this huge spike,” she said.
It’s not just that parents are distracted; some are making different choices because of the new coronavirus. Rajendrani Mukhopadhyay, a mother in Washington D.C., felt so bad that her 9-year-old son wouldn’t be able to celebrate his upcoming birthday with friends that she bought him an electric hoverboard as an early birthday present — a type of gift she wouldn’t normally have given him until he was older. Within half an hour, he’d fallen off and landed awkwardly on his hand. Hoping the injury was just a sprain, and worried about coronavirus exposure at a doctor’s office, Mukhopadhyay bandaged it herself and waited six hours before finally taking him to the pediatrician. The doctor “took one look at his hand, and she was like, ‘I think you need an orthopedic specialist,’” Mukhopadhyay said. Her son had broken his hand.
Given that many kids are bubbling with pent-up energy (school recess, it turns out, is really important) and are largely being looked after by busy, stressed-out parents, families might want to take steps now to minimize potential injury risk. “It’s important that we continue social distancing to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, but we must make sure children remain safe,” said Dr. Sally Goza, M.D., president of the A.A.P.
Instead of both parents trying to work at the same time, for instance, parents might consider making a shift schedule so that one parent is always “on duty” and paying attention to what the kids are up to. “Supervision is the number one way to prevent accidental injury,” said Dr. Alison Tothy, M.D., a pediatric emergency physician at the University of Chicago Medicine. Creating and maintaining some structure to their day, as well as being engaged, can help too, Dr. Sobolewski said.
If your child is small, make sure your home is properly childproofed. Confirm that heavy dressers, bookcases and televisions are attached to walls and can’t topple over if they’re climbed. Pad sharp furniture corners in well-trafficked areas. If you have firearms in the home, make sure that they are locked away safely — unloaded and with ammunition securely stored separately. Keep prescription and over-the-counter medicines in locked cabinets or stored high enough up that children cannot reach them. If windows can be opened, make sure that window guards or stops are in place, because screens won’t protect kids from falling out. Otherwise, keep windows securely closed. If your home is near an ungated pond or pool, always keep an eye on your kids when they go outside. If you have a trampoline, go over safety rules — no somersaults, and only one person can jump at a time.
And my own personal advice: If your child is bicycling or skateboarding, make sure that they not only wear a helmet but that the helmet fits properly. If my daughter’s helmet had been just a little bit tighter, it wouldn’t have shifted back to expose her forehead when she fell headfirst off her bike.
If your child does get hurt, first tend to the wound and then call your child’s pediatrician — or, better yet, set up a telemedicine appointment. Your child’s doctor will not only help you assess whether you need in-person care but can also advise you on where to go. Pediatric facilities are often better than general emergency rooms or urgent cares, because they’re fairly empty and often free of coronavirus patients; kids can and do get coronavirus, but their symptoms tend to be mild. When my daughter and I arrived at our local pediatric urgent care at 3 p.m. on March 20, before we went to the emergency room, the receptionist told us we were the first people to walk in that day.
If you do end up in an emergency room, rest assured that most hospitals are following procedures to keep patients safe and protected from exposure to the new coronavirus. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have advised all U.S. hospitals and health care facilities to separate patients who have respiratory symptoms from those who don’t.
When my daughter and I arrived at the E.R., we were whisked out of the lobby and into a quiet area before we even had a chance to sit down in the waiting room. “Every big pediatric emergency department that I know of has had extensive thoughts and planning in how we protect patients,” Dr. Sobolewski said.
 So if you do have to visit an emergency room or doctor’s office — especially with handsy kids —bring disinfectant wipes and plenty of hand sanitizer, and regularly clean your hands and your phone.
And try to remain calm. My daughter was given a double dose of sedative to help with the pain and anxiety of 10 stitches to the forehead; I wish they’d offered me some, too. Instead, I did the next best thing: I asked my husband to have a margarita waiting for me when I got home.