Technical glitches disrupted Mr. Biden’s virtual town hall with voters in Illinois on Friday. Bernie Sanders held an online “fireside chat’’ on Saturday. It’s the new paradigm for candidates amid a health crisis.
For Joseph R. Biden Jr., campaigning these days means virtual fund-raisers. Shuttered field offices. And rallying support by live stream, a tactic vulnerable to severe technological difficulties, as he discovered on Friday evening.
As the sound cut in and out and the audio often came out garbled, Mr. Biden sought to host what his campaign had called a “virtual town hall with Illinois,” in which he spoke to supporters and voters via video in place of an originally scheduled Chicago get-out-the-vote event — or at least, that was the goal.
“I’m sorry this has been such a disjointed effort here because of the connections,” Mr. Biden said as he wrapped up his final answer, to a question about whether he supports the Endangered Species Act. (He does, he said. “Oh, I love you,” the questioner replied.) “There’s a lot more to say, but I’ve probably said too much to you,” Mr. Biden added.
As the nation confronts the coronavirus crisis, the presidential candidates are facing a new challenge to their pursuit of the Democratic nomination: how to connect with voters during the height of the presidential primary campaign — from a safe distance. Both Mr. Biden and Senator Bernie Sanders, his chief rival in the primaries, have had to pull back from large-scale events this week and allow their staff members to work from home.
The Biden campaign had arranged “virtual events” to replace planned appearances in Chicago and Miami ahead of primary contests in Illinois, Florida and two other states on Tuesday. On Saturday night, Mr. Sanders held a self-styled “fireside chat” from his home in Burlington, Vt., in which he talked about how the government should respond to the virus.
For Mr. Biden, the limits of such an approach were on vivid display Friday night.
The first questioner remarked only that “Mr. Biden’s speech was garbled the entire time.” The second questioner “seems to have dropped,” an organizer of the event said.
“Thank you for your patience as we continue developing our virtual town halls and ensure voters have the opportunity to connect with Vice President Biden as he lays out his vision for America,” read a statement from the campaign sent to reporters later Friday evening. On Saturday, the campaign released an edited and smoothed video of the event with clearer audio.
Behind the technological challenges was evidence of the anxiety Americans are feeling about the virus — and the ways that the outbreak has overtaken the 2020 contest.
Mr. Biden began the town hall event by discussing the virus, detailing his vision for fighting it and praising the deal reached between the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, and the White House on a coronavirus relief package. He was also joined at the virtual town hall by Vivek Murthy, the former United States surgeon general who is part of Mr. Biden’s public health advisory committee.
Mr. Biden fielded questions about health care, too, including about how his plan would deal with the “crisis that we’re all facing right now.” He spoke of his proposal to expand Obamacare with a public option, and took a chance to draw a contrast with Mr. Sanders and his support for “Medicare for all,” a sweeping single-payer system that Mr. Biden has suggested would be unfeasible to pass and put in place.
“We need to assure people we can do this quickly,” he said, even as, at other points, he emphasized areas of agreement with Mr. Sanders amid hopes that the senator’s supporters will back Mr. Biden should he be the nominee. He also indicated that he now supports a plan by Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts to overhaul the consumer bankruptcy system.
The Biden campaign was not alone in seeking to navigate the realities of a radically altered presidential campaign trail landscape.
Mr. Sanders discussed the response to the coronavirus and the need to change the nation’s health care system — a policy argument that is at the center of his progressive agenda. “More and more people, as a result of this crisis, see the dysfunctionality and the stupidity and the irrationality of the current system,” he said.
Mr. Shakir noted that the Sanders campaign had “moved to a completely remote operation” without field offices, and he said the campaign would hold a virtual rally on Monday night that included musical guests. At one point during Saturday’s appearance, he said 100,000 people were watching online.
