SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea launched two short-range projectiles off its east coast on Monday in the country’s first weapons test in three months, returning to its provocative behavior a year after Kim Jong-un’s failed summit meeting with President Trump.
The projectiles were launched near Wonsan, a port town east of Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, South Korean military officials said. They flew 149 miles before landing in the waters between North Korea and Japan, the officials said, adding that they were analyzing data to determine the type of projectiles used in the launch.
South Korean officials said the launch on Monday appeared to be part of a military drill North Korea began on Friday.
In its previous weapons test on Nov. 28, North Korea launched two rockets from its east coast, firings that were overseen by Mr. Kim, the country’s leader. South Korea later said the two short-range projectiles were fired from what North Korea called a “super-large multiple rocket launcher,” a new weapon the North had developed to target South Korean and United States military bases farther from North Korea’s border with the South.
The Monday launch came three days after Mr. Kim fired one of his closest aides for corruption during a meeting of the Political Bureau of his Workers’ Party. The meeting focused on “enforcing top-class anti-epidemic measures to contain the viral epidemic spreading rapidly across the world,” although the North itself has not reported any cases of the new coronavirus.
Mr. Ri was one of the most prominent North Korean officials to fall out of Mr. Kim’s favor in recent years. As vice chairman of the Central Committee, Mr. Ri has helped Mr. Kim in monitoring the loyalty of the party elites and helping Mr. Kim decide whom to promote or demote. Mr. Ri has also led the party’s powerful Department of Organization and Guidance, which does the same work.
The North’s latest launch, the first in three months, came at a time when South Korea was grappling with an explosive outbreak of the coronavirus, with more than 4,000 cases, the largest number outside China.
North Korea’s first weapons test this year came days after the United States and South Korea postponed their joint annual military drills, originally scheduled for this month, because of the coronavirus outbreak.
South Korea holds its parliamentary elections on April 15.