Better than many cities, it turns out.
Mr. Wallace is author of “Greater Gotham: A History of New York City From 1898 to 1919,” from which this article is adapted.
In 1918, New York went up against an influenza pandemic that ranks among the worst in world history. The way our forebears responded to that crisis might be of interest now as the city deals with the coronavirus onslaught.
The virus arrived on Aug. 11, 1918, aboard the Norwegian vessel Bergensfjord. The ship had wired ahead that 10 passengers had taken ill and three had died at sea. The boat was met at the pier by ambulances and health officers, who whisked the sick to Brooklyn’s Norwegian Hospital. On Aug. 16 the Nieuw Amsterdam out of Rotterdam made landfall bearing 22 stricken, and on Sept. 4 the French liner Rochambeau brought in 22 more. The city’s Department of Health placed the afflicted in isolation at the Willard Parker Hospital on East 16th Street and the French Hospital on West 34th.
On Sept. 15 the first death from what was being called the Spanish influenza was recorded. (There was nothing Spanish about the supremely contagious disease; it was rampant among all Europe’s combatant armies and countries, but under reported, due to military censorship, except in neutral Spain, where coverage was unchecked).
On Sept. 17, Royal S. Copeland, a homeopathic physician who in April had been appointed the city’s health commissioner, required doctors to report instances of flu and pneumonia. The number of cases began multiplying rapidly, as did the daily death toll. On Sept. 30 physician reports showed that 48 people had died the previous day. And they were hard deaths, with patients gasping for breath as their lungs filled with bloody, frothy fluid. As often as not, flu victims were finished off by pneumonia, a secondary infection that followed closely upon the flu virus’s trail, constituting a lethal one-two punch.
In October the pandemic struck with full force. On Oct. 4 physicians reported 999 new cases during the previous 24 hours. On Oct. 9 that doubled to 2,000. On Oct. 11 the count rose to 3,100. The next day there were 4,300 new instances. And on Oct. 19 4,875 new cases were tallied.
Fatalities followed along. On Oct. 6, 126 died; 297 perished the following day. Over 400 succumbed on Oct. 16, and the daily death count fluctuated between 400 to 500 from Oct. 16 to 26. On Oct. 30 Mayor John Hylan dispatched 75 men to the Calvary Cemetery to help inter bodies that had overflowed the facility’s receiving vault.
Copeland’s Department of Health opted for a two-part response to the epidemic: attempting to slow the spread of the disease and treating the infected.
In practice, home quarantine was voluntary, given the lack of a sufficient number of physicians to oversee compliance. And hospital quarantines may have separated the sick from the general population, but couldn’t isolate them from one another. Bellevue patients were laid out on cots jammed together in every nook and cranny; children were packed three to a bed.
Other venues were pressed into service — armories, gymnasiums and the Municipal Lodging House, which was converted from homeless shelter to sick bay for the duration of the epidemic. Hard-hit military installations like Camp Mills, Camp Dix and Camp Upton set up their own facilities. Upton hospitalized over 100 new patients every day between Sept. 15 and Oct. 9 — admissions peaked at 483 on Oct. 4 — in huge tent wards holding 900 infected; over 500 died at Upton alone.
On the slowing-the-spread front, Copeland also tackled what he considered the biggest and least-escapable dangers confronting still-healthy New Yorkers — the concentration and circulation of residents. Nothing packed bodies together as dangerously as the mass transit system. Subway and elevated cars almost certainly contained infected passengers who couldn’t afford to skip work and stay home. The most menacing moments of the day and night came during morning and evening rush hours. To de-concentrate the crush, Copeland arranged with businesses to stagger work hours. White-collar offices would open at 8:40 a.m. and close at 4:30 p.m.; wholesalers would start their days earlier, non-textile manufacturers would start later. Stores selling food and drugs were exempt.
Other obvious congestion points were schools and theaters, but where most American cities simply shut both down, Copeland went with a different strategy.
Schools, he reasoned, were often more sanitary than housing, particularly in the slums. New York City schools, moreover, boasted a well-established system of child health monitoring and care. Copeland, accordingly, kept the schools open. Under the direction of Dr. S. Josephine Baker, head of the Department of Health’s Bureau of Child Hygiene, school physicians inspected children each morning and sent sick students home. It worked — few children caught the disease — and in addition the schools handed out printed material on how to avoid the flu, for passing along to parents.
Theaters seemed a more unequivocal danger, but Copeland eschewed total closure. Many modern theaters were, after all, clean and well ventilated, and could be used to exhort audiences, urging them to adopt flu-prevention measures. On Oct. 11 Copeland announced that approved venues could stay open if they did not allow patrons to cough, sneeze or smoke. Dirty and stuffy “hole-in-the-walls,” as he called them, could be and were closed if they failed to meet sanitary standards.
Public health education campaigns, based on the city’s experience with mitigating infectious diseases, were another effort to slow the epidemic. By Sept. 24 at least 10,000 posters had been placed around the city in railway stations, elevated-train platforms, ferry landings, streetcars, store windows, police precinct houses, hotels and other public places. They explained how the virus was transmitted and instructed the citizenry to cover their coughs and sneezes, and to refrain from spitting. A small army of Boy Scouts was detailed to hand out printed cards to caught-in-the-act spitters, reading “You are in violation of the Sanitary Code.”  On Oct. 4, 134 men were fined one dollar each at the Jefferson Market Court.
When it came to treating the infected, the terrible truth was that no effective medical intervention existed; doctors were virtually helpless. But nurses were not. The best that could be done for the afflicted was to provide them with soups, baths, blankets and fresh air, until the disease subsided or the patient died, which could happen within 24 hours of onset. This enormous task was taken on by a large army of women, commanded by the indefatigable Lillian Wald, who had pioneered the visiting-nurse service that would now be writ large.
Wald mobilized a multitude of nurses’ organizations, church groups, municipal bureaucracies, civic entities and social agencies into a Nurses’ Emergency Council. The group assembled volunteer nurses (a dangerous commitment — in October roughly 20 percent came down with the disease) and enlisted women who could support them by answering phones, accompanying them on home visits, and arranging for and driving automobiles to carry linens, pneumonia jackets and quarts of soup.
Responding to Wald’s call were the Bureau of Communicable Diseases, the Bureau of Child Welfare, the Red Cross, the Maternity Centers, the Association for the Aid of Crippled Children, the Milk Stations, the New York Diet Kitchen, the Social Service Department of Mt. Sinai, Presbyterian, and Beth Israel Hospitals, the Catholic Nursing sisterhoods, the Salvation Army, the Teachers College Department of Nursing, and virtually every social settlement and social agency in the city.
The Department of Health provided additional backup. On Oct. 7, Copeland established more than 150 emergency health centers in neighborhoods around the city, whose chief function was to coordinate the work of nurses making home visits in their district.
From Oct. 26 onward, the number of deaths from both influenza and pneumonia first slackened, then swiftly declined. By early November, influenza and pneumonia fatality rates had returned to levels typical of the previous year’s. The crisis was over.
More New Yorkers had died of disease in the city (roughly 30,000) than had died in World War I (about 7,500). This civilian-military fatality ratio actually understated the disparity, because the flu had sickened millions of soldiers, too. Of the 7,500 New York City soldier deaths, more than 2,000 were due to disease.
More pertinent is the fact that New York’s death rate per 1,000 residents was 4.7, a figure dramatically lower than that of comparable cities – Boston’s was 6.5 and Philadelphia’s was 7.3. How to account for Gotham’s relatively low mortality?
Health Commissioner Royal Copeland had his critics then, and he has them now, but it’s hard to avoid seeing his work as being a major contributing factor. Not only did he personally rise to the occasion, he was able to mobilize a constituency of distinguished public health activists.
When asked in a New York Times post-mortem interview to account for the quantitative results, Copeland attributed them to Gotham’s long history of public health work, in particular its efforts to alleviate or eradicate epidemics. Beyond that, he was able to draw upon the much bigger network of the city’s civil society — social workers, labor unions, medical researchers, feminists, housing reformers, progressive activists of all kinds — and these, happily, are resources we have with us still.
We live in a very different historical moment. We have greatly improved medical and communication and organizational resources available for dealing with such a crisis. But it’s worth remembering the alacrity with which the city’s civil and political society rallied to grapple with a deadly menace.
Mike Wallace is a Pulitzer Prize-winning historian and the author of “Greater Gotham: A History of New York City from 1898 to 1919,” from which this essay is adapted.