Try ‘spousal distancing’ to minimize coronavirus conflict when you’re stuck at home with your whole family 24/7.
Remember how, mere days ago, the most annoying person in your office was Steve from accounting? It seems almost quaint now. Meet your new co-worker in this surreal new world: your spouse. With many companies having their employees work from home (#WFH) to help slow the spread of the new coronavirus, scores of people are trying to navigate being stuck working at home alongside a loved one.
On the plus side, your new co-worker will not ask how your weekend was, nor must you slap a proprietary Post–it on your favorite mug. But how do you communicate, maneuver and create personal space when your house is your new WeWork — and your kids’ school? And what do you do when you realize your partner is much more like Dwight Schrute than you had ever noticed?
From there, Dr. Winch said, establish office rules, and get granular: What are our work hours? Where do we go in the house when one of us needs to take a call? Where will our individual workstations be? Who keeps an eye on the kids and when?
I’ve personally been training for this moment for years. My husband, Tom, and I are freelance writers. For a decade, we have worked, Monday through Friday, at opposite ends of the kitchen table. Over the years, we have developed a series of rules. I now refrain from impulsively sharing random thoughts such as, “We really need to replace that screen door” or showing Tom the latest Instagram post of unlikely animal friends, until we break for lunch, which is designated chit-chat time. Luckily, we have had years, not days, to craft an efficient system to work together.
Once you fine-tune your routine, keep it consistent, said Julie Morgenstern, a New York productivity consultant and author of “Time To Parent.” “Structure and routine during a time when everyone feels unmoored is critical to your mental and physical and relational grounding,” she said. “If you were working from 9 to 5 in the office, that becomes your edges.” Ideally, those newfound 2-3 hours normally spent getting ready for work and commuting, she added, should not go to your job, but to self-care and relationships.
With kids in the mix, anchoring your new routine in what existed before is even more important, Morgenstern said. If possible, try to recreate their school schedule. “Embrace the hell out of structure and routines, which will keep them happy and stable and calm,” she said. If you have no child care and two partners at home, Morgenstern added, trade off watching the kids.
Now that elementary schools have closed in New York City, and our daughter is also at home all day, Tom and I have found it helpful to organize kid maintenance around our levels of productivity. I am most productive in the morning, while Tom typically has a surge of output in the afternoon — so he keeps an eye on our 10-year-old’s makeshift home-schooling schedule in the morning, while I take afternoons, when I’m fried.
Make a concerted effort to enjoy this family time by creating new rituals. We’re trying out new recipes and cooking semi-elaborate meals together. “While you’re socially distancing from the rest of the world, you’re investing more in your home life experience,” Dr. Hall said.
While tensions may be high, try to give your partner the same basic level of courtesy and tolerance you would give a coworker if your boss were on the premises. Hand him or her a collared shirt if they’re doing a Zoom call. Don’t leave dishes in the “break room” sink. Respect each other’s boundaries, and save conversations about re-upping your paper towel supply for after work hours.
“We’re all trying to get through this together, and the importance of kindness and respect cannot be underestimated, even if you think your partner is acting like a piece of work,” Dr. Hall said.