Job growth was steady last month. The economy lost some momentum, though, as the trade war hurt manufacturing and global growth cooled.
The cavalcade of payroll gains continued for the 108th month in September, pushing down the jobless rate to a half-century low and countering anxieties that had been piqued by slowing global growth, declining factory orders and a jittery stock market.
Employers kept hiring at a steady if unremarkable pace, adding 136,000 jobs, the Labor Department reported on Friday. And the unemployment rate fell to 3.5 percent.
The report capped a week of otherwise disappointing economic news. Manufacturing activity in the United States fell for the second month in a row, while the World Trade Organization predicted that the growth in global trade would slacken significantly. A key measure of activity in the services sector — which accounts for two-thirds of the country’s output — also cooled.
“It’s great news to hit a record low on unemployment,” Diane Swonk, chief economist at Grant Thornton, said. The tightening labor market, though, failed to lift wages; the 12-month growth rate fell to 2.9 percent, from 3.2 percent in August.
Clearly, the economy’s employment engine has lost some of its spark. Last year, an average of 223,000 jobs were created each month, thanks in part to the temporary pick-me-up delivered by tax cuts and increased government spending. The average for the first nine months of this year is 161,000.
That falloff alone is not cause for alarm. A decline was expected now that the recovery has passed its 10-year anniversary, and there are more job postings than job seekers. The unemployment rate has been skimming along the baseboards. The jobless rates for Hispanics and for workers without a high-school diploma were the lowest on record. And many Americans who had dropped out of the labor force because they were too discouraged to look for work or couldn’t find sufficiently attractive offers, have now rejoined.
President Trump celebrated the report, while taking a swipe at critics who want Congress to impeach him.
Still, the government’s monthly roundup contained enough conflicting data that optimists and pessimists around the country and in Washington could find evidence to support their outlook.
Federal Reserve policymakers will be parsing its contents before their scheduled meeting at the end of October.
On Wall Street, expectations that the Fed would pare borrowing costs have been building this week as news about slowing growth rolled in.
Carl Tannenbaum, chief economist at Northern Trust, described the latest report as reassuring. “All of us have been on edge a little bit with declines on readings in the service sector, fearing that the trade problems would jump the fence from heavy to lighter industries,” he said.
Friday’s report revised job figures for July and August, adding 45,000 to the totals. “We’re on a three-month track of over 150,000 jobs per month, and that says to me that the economy is still expanding well,” Mr. Tannenbaum said.
The report helped buoy investors, after the S&P 500 had fallen more than 2 percent in the first three days of October. The index was up 1.4 percent Friday afternoon.
Other analysts, though, focused on Mr. Trump’s continued trade feud with China, which has roiled financial markets and pinioned business investments.
Mr. Trump set off another retaliatory volley in his trade war last month when he increased tariffs on consumer goods from China and threatened to extend the import tax to even more products.
Mr. Trump has repeatedly placed manufacturing at the center of his economic strategy. Nonetheless, that sector is suffering the most from prolonged trade tensions. Companies in the business of making goods — as opposed to those that deliver services like hospitals and restaurants — are much more dependent on sales to other countries and supply chains that wend around the globe.
But Becky Frankiewicz, president of ManpowerGroup North America, a staffing firm, is not persuaded that trade friction is responsible for the drop.
With a little less than 13 million workers, the manufacturing sector accounts for roughly 11 percent of the country’s output, but it tends to loom larger in policy debates.
The health and education sectors are among the economy’s most potent job creators.
Before this month’s stall, wage growth over all had been picking up, putting more money in consumers’ pockets. As long as Americans continue to spend, the economy will keep humming.
But economic confidence can be fickle. Worries about tariffs and the general direction of the economy are spooking those outside the manufacturing sector, according to the Institute for Supply Management, which conducted the survey of service businesses.
The dissonant economic cues are pulling some employers in different directions.
“What I’m hearing is different from what I’m seeing,” said Tom Gimbel, chief executive of LaSalle Network, a staffing firm in Chicago. With so much uncertainty, some chief executives say they are afraid of having too much capital invested in their business.
“But what I’m seeing is that people are still hiring,” he said. His firm’s revenue, he said, is up 15 percent from last year, and placements are up 8 percent.
Hiring in professional and business services has kept pumping jobs into the economy at a steady rate, averaging 35,000 a month since the start of the year.
The retail trade sector, by contrast, continued to contract, losing 11,000 jobs.
The government’s monthly estimates, which are based on two separate surveys, one of households and the other of employers, will be revised twice more.
The president’s trade strategy has support from some sectors that embrace his get-tough approach — even if they are suffering from the fallout. But several industries and small businesses are worried.
Adam Briggs, vice president for sales and marketing for Trans-Matic, a precision metal stamper in Holland, Mich., said the family-owned firm is feeling the strains of the tariffs and a slowing economy. The company has had to raise prices because the cost of raw materials not available in the United States has gone up, Mr. Briggs said. At least one of his clients left to look for a supplier in Europe.
“We’re struggling, but our customers are struggling with it, too,” he said.
Last year, the company employed more than 300 people in Holland. That number is down to 275, through a combination of attrition and voluntary separations, Mr. Briggs said.
Unpredictability disquiets business managers and markets. “Anything that relates to uncertainty is not good for business and household spending, said Ellen Zentner, chief United States economist at Morgan Stanley. And trade tensions — as well as the political turmoil surrounding Mr. Trump as congressional Democrats pursue an impeachment inquiry — fuel uncertainty, she said.
Matt Phillips and Jeanna Smialek contributed reporting.