The opera star, who has been the company’s general director since 2003, resigned, saying allegations had “compromised” his ability to continue.
The opera star Plácido Domingo resigned on Wednesday from his position as general director of Los Angeles Opera, a company that he helped found, and withdrew from his upcoming performances there. They were his last scheduled engagements in the United States after others were canceled amid allegations that he had sexually harassed multiple women over several decades.
His departure from Los Angeles Opera raised the possibility that the storied, five-decade American opera career of Mr. Domingo, 78, could be drawing to a close. The announcement came a week after he agreed to withdraw from a run of performances at the Metropolitan Opera and said that he would not return there, and after several other prominent American arts organizations canceled his appearances. His European calendar, however, remains full.
Mr. Domingo said in a statement that his ability to continue with the Los Angeles company had been “compromised” since The Associated Press in recent months reported allegations that he had sexually harassed numerous women over the years.
The accusations against Mr. Domingo were first reported in August by The A.P., which wrote that he had frequently pressured women into sexual relationships, and sometimes professionally punished those who rejected him. (In addition to being one of opera’s biggest stars, he has held leadership positions at Washington National Opera as well as in Los Angeles.) The news agency reported allegations by 20 women, two of whom were named.
Mr. Domingo — a star tenor who branched into conducting, administration and a late career singing lower baritone roles — has been key to opera in Los Angeles for decades.
Christopher Koelsch, Los Angeles Opera’s president and chief executive, who has handled the day-to-day duties of running the company, wrote in an email to employees on Wednesday that the company had “received and accepted” Mr. Domingo’s resignation. He thanked Mr. Domingo for his “decades of service” and noted that the investigation into his behavior, which is being conducted by Gibson, Dunn and Crutcher, would not end.
“Both the board and the senior staff believe strongly that it is important for that investigation to continue until its resolution — and it will do so,” Mr. Koelsch wrote.
The accusations against Mr. Domingo have divided the opera world — and divided the United States and Europe.
Two American institutions, the Philadelphia Orchestra and the San Francisco Opera, immediately canceled his upcoming appearances, citing the need to provide safe workplaces for their employees. The Dallas Opera followed later. The Metropolitan Opera initially planned to go ahead with Mr. Domingo’s performances in Verdi’s “Macbeth” this fall, saying that it would await the results of Los Angeles Opera’s inquiry before taking any action. But after an outcry among members of the company, Mr. Domingo withdrew on the eve of opening night — the Met’s statement suggested that it had asked him to do so — and Mr. Domingo made it clear that he did not intend to return to the Met.
But no European presenters have canceled Mr. Domingo’s engagements, and several have said they would wait to see what Los Angeles Opera’s inquiry determines. A second investigation is being conducted by the American Guild of Musical Artists, the union representing choristers, soloists, directors, dancers and other opera house employees.
Now Mr. Domingo’s calendar lists upcoming engagements in Zurich; Moscow; Vienna; Hamburg, Germany; Valencia, Spain; Milan; Cologne, Germany; Krakow, Poland; Berlin; Madrid; London; and Munich. With his withdrawal from Donizetti’s “Roberto Devereux” in Los Angeles in February and March, none remain in the United States.