Politics|Zuckerberg Hates Warren’s Plan to Break Up Facebook. She Doesn’t Care.
In leaked audio, Mark Zuckerberg said he would sue over Elizabeth Warren’s antitrust plan if she was elected president. She shot back.
For months, Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts has made “big, structural change,” the rallying cry of her presidential campaign. And when it comes to the tech sector, that has meant taking square aim at giant companies like Facebook — companies she says have become so large that they are stifling competition.
Ms. Warren rolled out a proposal to break up Facebook, Amazon and other tech giants in March. To ensure that tech workers got her message, her campaign paid for a billboard near a major transit station in San Francisco. It read “Break Up Big Tech,” in capital letters.
On Tuesday, nearly seven months after Ms. Warren first unveiled her plan, The Verge offered a window into what Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, thinks about it. In leaked audio recordings of open meetings with employees this summer, Mr. Zuckerberg can be heard saying that the company would sue if Ms. Warren were to enact the plan as president.
“If she gets elected president, then I would bet that we will have a legal challenge, and I would bet that we will win the legal challenge,” he said.
Shortly after The Verge published Mr. Zuckerberg’s remarks, Ms. Warren responded by renewing her criticism of Facebook.
The surfacing of grievances between Ms. Warren and Mr. Zuckerberg has the effect of publicly pitting one of the leading Democratic candidates for president against the head of the world’s largest social network, at a time when Silicon Valley in general and Facebook in particular continue to be scrutinized for their efforts to combat disinformation and prevent election interference in 2020 and beyond.
In the audio recording clipped and published by The Verge, Mr. Zuckerberg ties his criticism of Ms. Warren’s plan to concerns about election interference.
After the leaked audio was published and Ms. Warren responded, Mr. Zuckerberg commented on the episode in a Facebook post.
Her plan calls for legislation that would prohibit platforms like Amazon from both offering a marketplace for commerce and participating in that marketplace; appointing regulators to undo some tech mergers; and rolling back some acquisitions by tech giants, such as Facebook’s deals for WhatsApp and Instagram.
“Facebook is doing pretty well right now,” Ms. Warren said, citing its acquisitions as evidence that tech companies had amassed significant power and face little competition.
By offering a steady diet of detailed policy proposals, Ms. Warren has grown her following significantly and risen to the top of the polls. Her plans to reshape the government extend to areas like the economy and education, where she has called for a wealth tax and canceling student loan debt.
