Sam Mondry-Cohen, Washington’s 32-year-old assistant general manager, used his field-level understanding of baseball’s culture to modernize the club’s approach.
WASHINGTON — His job was to make life easier for the best baseball players in the world. For seven seasons, starting at age 16, Sam Mondry-Cohen worked in the visitors’ clubhouse in San Francisco, shining cleats, hauling equipment, filling coffee orders. At game time he would be the bat boy, in full uniform, as he was for the Washington Nationals the night Barry Bonds broke the career home run record in 2007.
None of the players passing through asked Mondry-Cohen about the book of statistics he read during rare moments of downtime. But he thought he had found a kindred spirit in Carlos Delgado, the curious first baseman for the Mets who kept a notebook with observations of pitchers’ tendencies.
Perhaps, Mondry-Cohen thought, Delgado would like to dig deeper. He brought Delgado over to the clubhouse computer, mainly used for filling ticket orders, and showed him an array of advanced data on the pitcher he would face that night.
Delgado was unmoved. “Too much information,” he said, dismissively. He had his process for understanding the game, and a screen full of numbers was not part of it.
This did not sway Mondry-Cohen, now 32, from believing those numbers could help. He studied at the University of Pennsylvania and devoted his career to the implementation of data in baseball, joining the Nationals as an intern in 2009 and soon becoming the team’s first full-time analyst. He created the Nationals’ research and development department — which includes eight people, three with Ph.D.s — and was promoted this year to assistant general manager. At every step, he has balanced data with his field-level experience.
Rizzo, 58, is a former minor league infielder who scouted for years before taking over the Nationals. He proudly employs three former general managers and five former managers as advisers, including Jack McKeon, 88, who has worked as both. Rizzo’s 89-year-old father, Phil, is another longtime scout and adviser.
Most teams have eliminated the position of advance scout — relying solely on video analysis — but not the Nationals. They had three people tracking the Houston Astros in the American League playoffs, and six at some games in the A.L.C.S.
Yet even the Nationals have found a way to blend traditional scouting with a sophisticated approach to the numbers. The scouts write reports in the team’s proprietary database, called The Pentagon, where they can find statistics, video and input from the coaching staff.
For Mondry-Cohen and his staff, the job is to challenge conventional wisdom while respecting how it came to be.
“The long-held beliefs in baseball, for the most part, are long-held beliefs for good reason,” he said. “What we try to do is question these orthodoxies to see if there’s a better way to do some of these things that have been taken for granted.
The scouts work with the analysts to sharpen their perspective on the game. Mike DeBartolo, an assistant general manager for baseball operations who started as an intern and analyst, said the scouts encourage him to join them on road trips and to write his own reports.
The context is invaluable, he said, and helps him understand the organization’s ethos. In an era when most general managers are painstakingly deliberate, waiting and waiting for a bargain or a lopsided trade, Rizzo has the conviction to act quickly.
Last year, in a notoriously slow-moving off-season for the rest of the industry, the Nationals acquired two catchers — Kurt Suzuki and Yan Gomes — and a top starter, Patrick Corbin, before the start of the winter meetings in early December. They persuaded Corbin by adding a sixth year to their offer, a sweetener Corbin’s other suitors resisted.
The Nationals also knew that Corbin had benefited from the advanced game-planning of his previous team, the Arizona Diamondbacks, and made sure to include their analysts as part of their presentation. Corbin said he appreciated the Nationals’ approach to data, empowering the players to consume it on their terms.
Max Scherzer is one of the team’s most ardent students of data, though he would rather not talk about it. “A poker player never shows his cards,” Scherzer said. The team’s other ace, Stephen Strasburg, said he uses the numbers to reinforce his gut.
Mondry-Cohen calls it a bottom-up strategy, rather than top-down, a lesson he learned from those years in the clubhouse. The data matters only if the players are open to consuming it in their way.
The Nationals have succeeded more than ever this season, with a roster that stuck together after a woeful start to reach its statistical projection for the regular season, and then thrive in October.
It did not happen just because the numbers said it would. In baseball, Mondry-Cohen knows, nothing does.
