We asked all 19 Democratic presidential candidates for their views on assault weapons, gun licensing and other policies.
The New York Times asked all 19 Democratic presidential candidates to complete a survey on gun policy. Following are the full responses we received, unedited except for corrected typos and punctuation.
Julián Castro, John Delaney, Tulsi Gabbard and Andrew Yang did not complete the survey. Where possible, we determined their positions from published plans, interviews, debates and forums.
If applicable, please list any restrictions you support that are not on the above list.
If you support an assault weapons ban, how would you define ‘assault weapon’? Do you support a ban on any non-assault weapons?
If you support an assault weapons buyback program, would it be voluntary or mandatory? If mandatory, how would you enforce it? How much would it cost?
If you support a red-flag law, how would it work? For example: What criteria would a person have to meet in order to have their guns removed? Who would be allowed to flag them? Who would decide whether to grant the request? How long could guns be removed for? What would the process be for a subject to get their guns back?
If you support a gun licensing plan, would you require a license for all guns, or only some? If only some, please specify which types.
Would the licensing requirement apply retroactively? If so, how would you enforce that?
If you support a registration requirement, would it apply retroactively? If so, how would you enforce that?
How much funding would you allocate for research on gun violence, and which agencies would receive it?
Would you expand the A.T.F.’s regulatory authority? If so, how?
Without a filibuster-proof majority in the Senate, how will you make your gun policies a reality? Would you support eliminating the filibuster for this purpose?
“As president, I will work to build a broad coalition to place maximum pressure on the Senate to pass gun safety legislation. This will involve traveling across the country, especially to rural communities, to bring unlikely voices together and build a consensus around gun legislation. Ultimately, if Congress refuses to act, I will use my executive authority to make our schools and communities safer.
Do you agree with the Supreme Court’s decision in District of Columbia v. Heller, which held that the Second Amendment protects an individual right to bear arms outside of the context of a militia?
What do you think the Second Amendment means? What, specifically, does it prohibit?
“The Second Amendment protects the right of law-abiding citizens to bear arms. But with any right, there are reasonable limits. This should include background checks, red flag laws, limits on magazines, and a ban on military-style assault weapons.
The founders never intended for our children to wake up every morning scared to go to their school, a concert or the movie theater. They never expected that mass shootings or daily acts of gun violence would plague our communities.
“Vice President Biden is deeply committed to making lifesaving progress on ending the senseless gun violence epidemic that tears too many Americans away from their loved ones. He is the only presidential candidate who has defeated the N.R.A. on the national stage — and he’s done so twice. As president, he’ll defeat the N.R.A. again.
If applicable, list any restrictions you support that are not on the above list.
“Bring real oversight to gun manufacturers by allowing the Consumer Product Safety Commission to make safety warnings and issue recalls for faulty firearms.
Require handgun microstamping that allows law enforcement to identify the source of ammunition used in crimes by making a shell casing traceable to the specific gun that fired the round.
If you support a red-flag law, how would it work?
If you support a gun licensing plan, would you require a license for all guns, or only some?
Without a filibuster-proof majority in the Senate, how will you make your gun policies a reality? Would you support eliminating the filibuster?
What do you think the Second Amendment means?
“As president, I won’t wait for more thoughts and prayers for communities that have been shattered by gun violence — from Pittsburgh to Parkland to El Paso to communities like mine where kids fear the fireworks of Fourth of July because to them they sound like gunshots. To make justice a reality for all, we have to end the epidemic of gun violence and invest in communities that have been shattered by the trauma left in its wake.
Mr. Castro did not complete The Times’s survey. The answers below are based on his gun plan and his public statements.
Mr. Delaney did not complete The Times’s survey. The answers below are from his gun plan and public statements.
Ms. Gabbard did not complete The Times’s survey. The answers below are from her website and public statements.
Ms. Harris’s campaign completed the yes/no section of the survey but only one of the open-ended questions.
These responses are from Carlie Waibel, a spokeswoman for the Klobuchar campaign.
If applicable, list any restrictions you support that are not on the above lists.
Mayor of Miramar, Fla.
These responses are from Chris Evans, a spokesman for the O’Rourke campaign.
“End influence of N.R.A. through the No PAC Act, which would ban PAC contributions to members of Congress or those seeking federal office.
Ban assault weapons, trigger cranks, silencers, bump stocks and high-capacity magazines.
Implement a MANDATORY buyback program for assault weapons.
Direct A.T.F. to deem any individual or business that sells over five guns in a single year a gun ‘dealer.’ Subject dealers to background check requirements.
Undo regulatory action that allows access to the 3D printing of guns.
“Assault weapons are defined as those guns listed in the 2019 Assault Weapons Ban, which includes all AR and AK variants. It also includes semiautomatic rifles with the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds, or those that can accept a detachable magazine plus any one of the following enhancements: a pistol grip, forward grip, folding/telescoping/detachable stock, grenade launcher, barrel shroud, or threaded barrel; semiautomatic pistols with the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds, or those that can accept a detachable magazine plus any one of the following enhancements: a threaded barrel, second pistol grip, barrel shroud, the capacity to accept a detachable magazine outside the pistol grip, a manufactured weight above 50 ounces when unloaded, or a stabilizing brace; semiautomatic shotguns with any of the following: a folding/telescoping/detachable stock, pistol grip, the capacity to accept more than five rounds, the capacity to accept a detached magazine, forward grip, or a grenade launcher.
These responses are from Joe Calvello, a spokesman for the Sanders campaign.
“As was the case with workers’ rights, the civil rights movement, the women’s movement, the gay rights movement and the environmental movement, the only way transformational change happens is when millions of people stand up and demand it.
As Bernie has said previously about Medicare for All and the Green New Deal — before we even get to the issue of the filibuster, we need 50 senators who are prepared to do what we, as a nation, have a moral obligation to accomplish, and that is to pass comprehensive gun safety legislation.
Once we have, and Bernie believes it will be sooner than later, a Democratic majority that is prepared to take on the greed and the corruption of the fossil fuel industry and vote for sweeping gun safety reform in the House and the Senate, we will pass it. That means enacting real filibuster reform, including the return to requiring a talking filibuster. It is not right that one senator can grind the entire legislative process to a halt.
“Over the last two election cycles, I led the largest effort to engage and mobilize young voters. No other group of Americans understands the damage that guns can do better than our young people. It is an issue that they care about deeply, because it is something that has affected them firsthand. They’ve had to run the school shooting drills, they’ve seen members of their families and communities hurt by gun violence, and had it not been for them speaking out with such moral clarity and refusing to quiet down, too many would not now feel an urgency to act. That is why I was proud to partner with Giffords: Courage to Fight Gun Violence and Everytown for Gun Safety on a nationwide initiative to register high school students to vote ahead of the midterm elections.
By and large, the American people agree on how we should solve this problem. They want Washington to act, pleaded with their representatives, and begged them to do something — anything. But the N.R.A., armed with money and lots of lobbyists, has corrupted our democracy, and instead, Washington politicians write the rules that put corporate profits over people.
Over 90 percent of Americans agree that there should be universal background checks for gun purchases. They support stopping dangerous people from buying guns, waiting periods, and support federal databases to track gun sales. But because Congress refuses to cross a gun lobby that fill politicians’ campaign coffers, we see more senseless and preventable deaths.
“The majority of Americans support sensible gun legislation, but even the most basic proposals, like universal background checks, are consistently blocked by far-right ideologues in Congress who are bought and paid for by the gun industry, their N.R.A. partners, and a supporting army of lobbyists and lawyers. But we are not incapable of solving big problems. We’ve done it before.
Mr. Yang did not complete The Times’s survey. The answers below are from his gun plan and public statements.
