The director who surprised even friends with his confessional new drama, “Pain and Glory,” has turned inward, in life and on the screen.
Pedro Almodóvar is fun at parties, but parties aren’t always fun for Pedro Almodóvar.
It was a surprising thing to hear from a director whose early films, including “Law of Desire” and “Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown,” often possessed the anything-goes spirit and mischievous cast of a crowded bacchanal. Even over two days in Toronto, I had watched Almodóvar breeze through an ambitious schedule of press obligations as if he were born to make small talk in a second language.
The startlingly personal “Pain and Glory” will change that for him: After trying his hand at a pair of adaptations in “Julieta” (2016) and “The Skin I Live In” (2011), as well as a fizzy farce (“I’m So Excited!” from 2013), Almodóvar has turned inward. A look back at the desires and deep feelings that have shaped him, all sprung from a body that has begun to turn on him as he exits middle age, “Pain and Glory” is a quiet, career-capping masterpiece.
Antonio Banderas stars in the film as Salvador Mallo, a filmmaker patterned so obviously on Almodóvar himself that he wears the director’s own clothes and lives in a replica of Almodóvar’s chic apartment. Mallo made his name on sensational Spanish sex comedies, but when we meet him, he’s so racked with the pains of getting older that he doesn’t have the energy to create anymore.
That’s not to say that Almodóvar was ever shy: Forged by a raucous countercultural movement that swept through Madrid when he arrived there in 1969, Almodóvar has long held one of the most provocative points of view in moviemaking. 
“But the character doesn’t moan about his ailments, and I’m not a person who complains, either,” Almodóvar noted. To use the parlance of pain, Almodóvar decided to rip the Band-Aid off: If he was going to let the whole world know what’s been hurting him, he had no intention of milking any of it for sympathy. Instead, he spends a minute and 20 seconds of “Pain and Glory” listing all of his physical troubles in a tidy animated sequence.
It’s a gut punch of grievances, though he couldn’t help but make it colorful, too.
SOCIALIZING MAY TAKE its toll on Almodóvar these days, but I’ll be damned if he’s not still good at it. When I sat down with him in Toronto, he was talkative and funny, and he pumped me for details on a party he’d skipped the night before. (“Was Jennifer Lopez there?” he asked, ready to gossip.) Across from us sat his translator. Though Almodóvar speaks fast, fluent English, he frequently toggles over to Spanish like someone breaking into song in a musical.
Before long, Almodóvar had offered Banderas a role in his next movie, the comedy “Labyrinth of Passion,” kicking off a juicy collaboration that would span several decades and bring them both international fame. Almodóvar was the button-pushing auteur, Banderas was his sex-bomb male muse, and they lived colorful lives that spilled across Madrid’s night life.
As their profiles rose, especially after the Oscar-nominated “Women on the Verge” and “Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!,” Hollywood came to court both men. Only Banderas made the leap, working in major films including “Philadelphia” and “The Mask of Zorro.” Almodóvar, offered the chance to direct studio comedies like “Sister Act,” decided to stay in Spain.
But it would take two decades for that reunion, and when it arrived, things did not go smoothly. Almodóvar cast Banderas as a sociopathic plastic surgeon in “The Skin I Live In,” and both men had changed considerably in the interim. Almodóvar was in a new phase of his career, directing polished, Oscar-winning melodramas like “All About My Mother” and “Talk to Her,” while Banderas had become a Hollywood star, blossoming outside Almodóvar’s tutelage.
Eventually, Banderas acceded to his director’s demands, and once he saw the final cut, he said he was impressed by what Almodóvar had pulled from him. Still, after all that, he had no reason to expect that his old collaborator would give him another starring role. Time had passed, and perhaps their moment had, too.
“PAIN IS PASSIVE,” Almodóvar told me. “Someone suffering from pain isn’t easy to film — it’s not cinematic at all.” So when he began writing “Pain and Glory,” he did not have Banderas in mind to play the lead: What use would the actor’s boundless vitality be in a muted role like that?
Then, Almodóvar happened across a photo of Banderas as he was recovering from surgery after a 2017 heart attack. “I saw the experience of pain in his face, and that was something very important to the character,” Almodóvar said. He knew he had his Mallo, and now, in an irony worthy of his movies, it would be Almodóvar serving as the muse for Banderas.
This time on set, director and actor were in sync: Instead of impersonating Almodóvar, Banderas should go small. “He still ended up stealing the scenes from other characters because of that subtlety!” Almodóvar said, laughing. But the role served an olive branch: Banderas played it as a tribute to the man who had transformed his life, and when Almodóvar went to embrace his actor on the final day of shooting, he burst into tears.
Almodóvar was as surprised as anybody. Despite the fact that he had drawn so much of the film from his own life, when he was on set, he had tried to treat Mallo as a character, someone separate from himself. Now, as he embraced Banderas, that all fell away, and he couldn’t stop crying.
Instead of remaining stoic in his 70s, then, “I think I need to break away from that,” he told me. “I need to open up more.” It’s true that Almodóvar has found his pain hard to share with other people. It’s also true that in that moment, he found it harder not to.