Books|When Did Everybody Become a Witch?
When Did Everybody Become a Witch?
Witch parties, witch protests and a bevy of new books: We have reached peak witch.
Fifty-one years ago, a group of protesters calling themselves W.I.T.C.H. staged a Halloween “hex” on Wall Street. Dressed in all black, with long peaked hats, the women sneaked through the narrow streets of downtown Manhattan late into the night, making their way to the entrance to the New York Stock Exchange, where they oozed glue into the latches of its doors. The next morning, the male bankers couldn’t get in — and the Dow reportedly fell 13 points.
“We didn’t consider ourselves real witches, but we used the moniker because of what it represented: a powerful woman,” said the author Robin Morgan, one of the protest organizers, noting that the acronym — which stood for “Women’s International Terrorist Conspiracy From Hell” — probably wouldn’t go over so well today.
Today, there might be no need to sneak around. Real witches are roaming among us, and they’re seemingly everywhere.
“I think everyone probably is the son or the daughter of a witch,” said Augusten Burroughs, the best-selling memoirist, whose new book, “Toil & Trouble,” tells the story of his own witchy coming out.
Some of the books are political, such as Lindy West’s “The Witches Are Coming” (based on a similarly titled Times column), which is not actually about witchcraft but misogyny in the #MeToo era. There is “Modern Witchcraft,” by the Wiccan high priestess Deborah Blake, which argues for witchcraft as a female-focused religion, and “Revolutionary Witchcraft,” by Sarah Lyons, a guide to the history and practice of politically motivated magic.
There is fictional witchery in “Hex Life,” a collection of witch stories written by female fantasy authors, and also plenty of self-help. “Bitchcraft: Simple Spells for Everyday Annoyances and Sweet Revenge” is pretty much what it sounds like; “Wild Witch: A Guide to Earth Magic” focuses on magic through plants and herbs. And for those who feel they may need some basics in horticulture to make use of those spells, not to worry: There’s “The Modern Witchcraft Guide to Magickal Herbs” by Judy Ann Nock, the founder of a goddess spirituality group, and “The Witch’s Herbal Apothecary,” by the master herbalist Marysia Miernowska.
And yet it seems the time has come to come out of the so-called broom closet.
There is no perfect way of tracking witches in America, but we do know that Wicca — the religion that has its roots, at least partially, in 1950s England, with a retired civil servant named Gerald Gardner who once tried to hex Hitler — is more popular than ever, according to a number of studies.
Not all witches are Wiccan (some are pagan), and not all Wiccans or pagans practice witchcraft, but you get the point.
Additionally, Americans of all ages and genders are more spiritual than ever: According to a 2017 survey from the Pew Research Center that examined New Age beliefs, 60 percent of Americans believe in one or more of the following: psychics, astrology, the presence of spiritual energy in inanimate objects (like mountains or trees) or reincarnation. More than a quarter of adults in the United States say they think of themselves as spiritual but not religious.
Perhaps it should come as no surprise that witchcraft is attracting people, particularly millennial women: Interest in spirituality tends to increase in periods of upheaval, said Helen Berger, a sociologist at Brandeis University and the author of “Solitary Pagans: Contemporary Witches, Wiccans, and Others Who Practice Alone,” which came out in August.
And, of course, witches have long been linked to women’s issues, which are front and center in the present political moment.
For more than 40 years, W.I.T.C.H. has been more or less dormant. Yet over the last couple of years, Morgan said, she has received inquiries from young activists wanting to start their own groups.
Two years ago, a group of witches in San Francisco hexed City Hall in favor of a “healthier future”; last October, a Brooklyn occult shop called Catland held a public ritual to hex Brett Kavanaugh, at the time a Supreme Court nominee. Who knows what this Halloween will hold.
