The five-minute scene Alia Shawkat had to perform in her New York theater debut, “The Second Woman,” was fairly straightforward.
By the time the show ended at 5 p.m. on Saturday, Shawkat, best known for “Arrested Development” and “Search Party,” had done the scene for 24 hours straight.
Rinse, repeat for a whole day and night, with a 15-minute break roughly every two hours.
After removing her Rowlands-inspired blonde wig immediately after the performance, Shawkat, 30, ably covered up what must have been bone-deep exhaustion. “These flowers are as alive as I am,” she muttered, showing off a wilting bouquet in her dressing room at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.
What do you think you got out of the experience?
I haven’t slept, O.K., I’m going to get poetic [laughs]. Here we go! What lives inside all of us, but definitely inside of me, is genderless, shameless, doesn’t feel guilty about her body, about her sex, doesn’t feel incompetent, doesn’t feel like she has to perform — just gets to play, just gets to have fun. Gets to connect no matter what anyone has that they’re willing to offer. And if they don’t offer anything, I get to turn off the music, so it’s time for them to leave.
Did you spot patterns of behavior among the men?
Yeah, 100 percent. They’re all different, but there’s also three categories that I’d be like, “Oh, it’s that one.” There was the young boy who was excited but nervous and couldn’t really look me in the eye, really sweet but shy. Then there was the older man who was really set in his ways, who had a whole story line in his head. The third was miscellaneous where I didn’t fully know, and those were the best ones.
Could you predict if they’d say they loved you or not?
Were you surprised by how many men helped themselves to the food and didn’t bother handing you a carton?
Yeah, that was a big one. And there was only one guy who cleaned up [the mess after she spills the noodles]. He was a young, black queer kid early on, who was unbelievable — we were dancing. He was so fun and giving and playful. And then he cleaned up the food.
One man was especially intense, and at the end he threw the bill at your face.
Yep, and he said, “You’re weak.” He was acting to me, he was being a character, a New York actor. The energy was real, but he was coming in strong with that character of his — he wasn’t allowing me to access him.  I just stood there because I wanted him to know he was in my [expletive] space. I was like, “Do you want to hit me? Is that what you’re going to try to do?”  It was tense. I was slightly disappointed in myself that I didn’t handle it differently. I didn’t know what else I could have done.
The great part is that 15 minutes is long enough to pee, have a cigarette, drink, shove some grilled chicken in my mouth and go back again. I never had too much time to sit. Nat and Anna gave me notes: “Focus more on the energy they’re giving you.” “With the dance, do something physical.” “With the noodles, give me options. Shove them in their pocket if you need to.” By the end of it, I wasn’t even planning anymore, I was only thriving off what was given me.
The dancing got increasingly energetic as time went on.
Exactly: It was all about energy. Nat and Anna planned each break really well, so they were like, “This is the one where it’s O.K. if it’s not funny, if it’s a little dark.” I felt frustrated by one round because at first I was trying to chase the laughs. And they were like, “Actually, that was a really great round” — because I could feel that person came in with a lot of heaviness.
How has this experience changed you as a woman and as a performer?
