A sci-fi serial killer movie is streaming on Netflix. And “Donnie Brasco” airs on Showtime.
IN THE SHADOW OF THE MOON (2019) Stream on Netflix. Mysterious, bloody, possibly paranormal murders come with an order of cheese steak in this hard-to-categorize movie. Set in Philadelphia, the film opens in 1988 with the grisly deaths of a steak-slinging diner cook, a concert pianist and a bus driver. Each person collapses on the job, blood streaming from their ears, eyes and mouths. Neck wounds point to a serial killer’s involvement. Seeing a chance to prove himself, a young police officer (played by Boyd Holbrook) throws himself into solving the bewildering case at the same time that his detective brother-in-law (Michael C. Hall, an expert in fictional serial killer stories onscreen) is doing the same thing. Where the story goes next, though, is more unusual than that premise might suggest — the relationship between investigators and killer (Cleopatra Coleman) becomes a decades-long affair that eventually involves time travel.
THIS CLOSE Stream on AMC Premiere. The actors Josh Feldman and Shoshannah Stern created and star in this dramedy, which recently released its second season. Feldman and Stern play Kate and Michael, best friends who live in Los Angeles. She’s an entertainment publicist; he’s a graphic novelist. The plot revolves around the pair’s struggle to balance their close friendship with their mutual need for self-discovery, plus the discrimination they encounter because they are deaf (as are the actors who play them).
BLACK SWAN (2010) 6:10 p.m. on HBO. Natalie Portman plays a New York City ballerina under pressure in this thriller from Darren Aronofsky. The movie, which gives a highly dramatized peek at the world of ballet, won Portman an Academy Award. “Aronofsky makes this world (or his version of it) exciting partly by pulling back the velvet curtains and showing you the sacrifices and crushingly hard work that goes into creating beautiful dances,” Manohla Dargis wrote in her review for The New York Times.