This Oscar-nominated short documentary profiles Paul and Millie Cao, who reunited in California after the Vietnam War. Forty years later, they are rediscovering themselves on the dance floor.
Paul and Millie Cao lost their youth to the aftermath of the Vietnam War. Forty years later, they are rediscovering themselves on the dance floor.
And we’re starting with a twist exercise, slowly. And 2, 3. Very slow. Cha, cha. One, two, three. And Cha cha. 1, good, 2, 3. Cha cha, 1, 2, 3. Cha, cha, 1, good, 2, 3. Cha, cha. Welcome back. 2, 3. Good. I brush my foot. I brought it back. Number eight. Number eight to the side. Cha, cha, 1, 2, and 3 and 4 and single. 2 and 3, 4 and double. 2 and 3 and 4 and 1, 2, and 3 and 4 and single. Very good. 2 and 3. I don’t hear the feet. 2 and yes and 4 and 1, 2 and 3 and 4 and 1. Back 2, 3, cha, cha, 1, legs, 2, 3. Cha, cha, 1, 2. Yea, yeah. Eyes up. Cha, cha, 1, 2, 3. Cha, cha, 1, 2, 3. Cha, cha, 1, 2, 3. And cha, cha, 1, good, 2, 3, and cha, cha, 1, good, 2, 3. [music] Before I learned dancing, you know, I can only use my body to walk, to swim, to run. Today, I can use my body to reach another level of freedom. I wish I could have danced earlier at my age. But better late than never. We’re lucky to have an opportunity and the right time, maybe the last time. Back in Vietnam, we dance to rock and roll. I love Bee Gees. And I can sing all Carpenters song. What was called the foreign music, foreign music tend to be very romantic, very, very sexy. When I first met Paul, he was shy, so shy. I didn’t think he is my type. But I remember he invited me to his birthday party. You have to remember that dancing, in those day, in Vietnam, it is illegal to have dance party at home. You can get in trouble. But we organize a party anyways. He being gentleman, stretch out hand, shall we dance?  I feel he shaking. I am too. I vividly remember he can dance. I start becoming his girlfriend, because we in love so much, so in love. I told my father, we have to leave the country to escape the communist Vietnam. The communist, something very soon right now, anytime. If you do business, they go after you. But my mom was a real business woman. So soon enough, they start to come to arrest my mom, say, you have to give up your house. You have to give up your factory. When we escape, we know we take the chance of the lifetime. Either we die on the ocean or if we get caught and we get sent home, we’d have nothing left. Is that O.K., my hair? Yeah. O.K. One day he came. He say, tomorrow, I have to leave. I’m sorry. I could not bring you. And then, he left. We were not sure whether we would see each other again. (SINGING) Oh, my love. My darling. Santana. (SINGING) Oye como va. Yeah. Cha, cha? You know? (SIGNING) Where do I begin? I don’t have — No. I don’t think so. On the record. Hey, hey. What are you talking about? We already at that age. You already — We already there. [music] I am an auditor for the state of California. Some people, they think, oh, yeah. It’s good, good exercise, they say. But then they know we go compete. We go perform. We have the best professional teacher from Ukraine. If one day my co-worker, they will see me dance, they will be shocked. They will never think I can dance the way I dance with my husband. Totally different two people. I work as an engineer. We work full time. We can afford to retire. Our daughter has her own life right now. So we go to the club, at least four nights per week, taking group lesson, private lesson, and dance on the floor, three hours in the evening. Why am I spending so much time dancing? Am I crazy? When I came to America, I was scared. We got nothing, really. I love her and care for her. I felt very sorry that I couldn’t bring her with me. But I don’t want to give empty promise or anything. It felt really, really hard to accept. I didn’t hear from him for six months. And then, I get a letter from him. So romantic. He say, even in his dream, he remember my name. I started writing a lot of love letter to him. I was so eager to get out. I talked to lawyer about the immigration petition process. I prepared to argue my case for her. I told her, there’s a possibility that I can get you out. It might not be successful. The letter become so slow. He cannot always think of me, right? But then, I received a notice from the embassy saying that I was allowed to leave Vietnam. I was so happy. Paul did so much effort. I was excited. But you know, after this long separation, there’s a lot of uncertainty. I don’t know whether we will be still the right kind of person for each other. We only met for six months. And we were separated for about six years. Los Angeles, California. Once I got out from the plane, I saw Paul. I don’t know how to feel. He looked a little bit like distant. He took my hand. And I feel weird, because we lost that feeling. After a few days, he says, why don’t we start over? Stretch.  Don’t mess up — my shoulder. Good. And then, it goes on her head. 3, take her head. Take it.  I got it. Make it real. And to 2. Take it very slowly. 2 across and ronde, 3. Good. Very solid. [inaudible] walks, 4, and ronde, 1. Walking out when. She does the spiral, remember, we close. Don’t send her out. Hold her so she does the [inaudible] spin with you. Another [inaudible] spin. O.K. I got it. Bringing the legs — Yeah. I know. I already — Yeah, then you — The other way, honey. I’m going to lift you right now, O.K.? Run. Oh, wow. Oh. No, no. Hold on a sec. I’m going to do it again. Suddenly — O.K. Go. Oh, no, no, no. It’s not down there. It’s under her ribs. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Can you please show me how you would send your wife there? It’s not — Oh. No, no. That’s presenting. Opposite. I want you to like reach. Like you want her to come back, but — O.K. You want me to — Yeah. Reach. Your body. You follow it. You follow that. A little bit early, early, early. And bring it back. Remember, motion creates emotion. O.K. Motion will create emotion. O.K. And it goes backwards too. Emotion makes motion. Motion create emotion. Come on. Come on. He have no emotion. That’s why. Give him some. [inaudible] Good. Down. [music] When we came to this country, we have one goal. We want to establish our lives. Back then, we didn’t have the luxury to enjoy life, not exactly knowing what it means to enjoy life. Now, we have to learn something new. We know we don’t have a lot of time left. We’re making up for the lost time. [Music] (SINGING) We’ve only just begun to live. White lace and promises. A kiss for luck and we’re on our way. Before the rising sun, we fly. So many roads to choose. We’ll start out walking and learn to run. Sharing horizons that are new to us. Watching the signs along the way. Talking it over, just the two of us. Working together day to day. Together. And when the evening comes, we smile. So much of life ahead. We’ll find a place where there’s room to grow. Sharing horizons that are new to us. Watching the signs along the way. Talking it over, just the two of us. Working together day to day. Together. Together. And when the evening comes, we smile. So much of life ahead. We’ll find a place where there’s room to grow. And yes, we’ve just begun.
Ms. Nix is a filmmaker.
Update: This documentary short film is nominated for the 92nd Academy Awards.
If you crossed paths with Paul and Millie Cao, a middle-aged couple who work in California as an engineer and an auditor, you might not guess that every chance they get, they put on sequin-covered costumes and head to a dance floor, where they transform into passionate ballroom dancers. That is where I met them six years ago, when I wandered into Lai Lai Ballroom and Dance Studio. They were part of a group of older Asian-Americans dancing the rumba in a room lit like a nightclub in suburban San Gabriel Valley, near Los Angeles.
I took dance classes at the studio for a year and discovered most of the instructors are professional ballroom dancers from Russia and Eastern Europe. Almost all their students come from the Asian diaspora — mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Paul and Millie’s country of origin, Vietnam. I struggled in waltz classes taught in Mandarin and learned the Taiwanese Tango from generous students who offered to show me the steps.
Over time, I learned Paul and Millie’s story of fleeing Vietnam as young lovers to come to the United States. Their back story is both ordinary and extraordinary, representative of many refugees who are forced to rebuild their lives. Creating a new life in America required Paul and Millie to reinvent themselves. While learning how to speak English, they worked multiple jobs, finished their college degrees, took care of their parents while raising a child and embarked on professional careers. Finding a way to survive defined their adult lives; they didn’t have time for the extras.
Faced with middle age, Paul and Millie chose to reinvent themselves again. After decades of delayed gratification, this time they focused on what gives them joy. As you’ll see in this Op-Doc, dance opened up a world of self-expression and pleasure for the couple, sparking a transition from responsible professionals to flamboyant performers pursuing their creative dreams.
On the face of it, a film about middle-aged people dancing might not seem political. But my decision to tell a story about Paul and Millie’s life in the present, and not solely focus on their past, was intentional. Films about refugees and immigrants are often focused on the point of entry, when the newly arrived are at their most vulnerable. But it’s essential for us to hear stories about what happens next.
Paul and Millie are refugees from Vietnam. Paul and Millie are also working professionals, parents, dancers and American citizens who have lived in California for over 40 years. As with many Americans who started their lives in another country, their story embodies resilience and courage. Love and longing. Separation and reunion. These themes are visually reflected in the dance itself, in their tender glances, when he lifts her to the sky, the yearning in their gestures — their ability to transform adversity into beauty.
Laura Nix is an award-winning fiction and nonfiction filmmaker based in Los Angeles. This film is adapted from a feature-length documentary in progress. It was produced by Concordia Studio for The New York Times Op-Docs and premiered at the 2019 Tribeca Film Festival.
