At the National Museum of Mathematics, origami helps bridge the gap between art and math and finds the beauty in both.
Mention the word “math” and visions of high school arithmetic, thorny trigonometry and those prickly calculus derivatives often come to mind. But the world of math goes far beyond chalk-etched numbers and quadratic equations on a blackboard. It’s also an art. Yes, an art.
Origami, put simply, is the science of paper folding. It combines geometry, patterns and math theory to transform a single piece of paper into a mind-boggling work of art — often a 3-D sculpture.
The origami exhibit, in a back room on the museum’s first floor, features 66 pieces of art made by 24 artists from around the world. Walking through the exhibit feels like strolling through an art gallery — far different from the hustle and bustle atmosphere of the main museum, where visitors boisterously play with interactive exhibits, like riding a square-wheeled tricycle on a circular surface, using math formulas to make the perfect shot through a basketball hoop, or remotely driving a car through a Möbius strip.
The exhibit features wildlife sculptures including a horse, jellyfish, squirrel, lobster and dragonfly, as well as masks, flowers and stars. The artists used carefully calculated folds, pleats and color to create the art pieces. Some are showcased behind clear plastic cases; others hang from the ceiling and on walls. And each comes with descriptions about the artist, the materials used, its connection to math, and how the art was created, in many cases, from a single piece of paper.
“Most people think that math and art are completely unrelated, very different, and express great surprise that someone could be mathematical and artistic,” Mr. Lang said.
It was Mr. Lang’s work and books that inspired Erik Demaine to pursue origami. Born in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Mr. Demaine was a child prodigy, who was home-schooled until 12, earned a bachelor’s degree in computer science and math from Dalhousie University at 15, got a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Waterloo at 20 and is now a professor of computer science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
“I liked to do geometry, but needed some unsolved problems to work on to challenge me,” said Mr. Demaine. And origami fit the bill. So he and his father, Martin, an artist in his own right, took up origami together and jointly created more than 300 origami sculptures.
Mr. Demaine combined his math wizardry with his father’s expertise in glassblowing art. “I would teach him mathematics and he would teach me how to make art,” he said. Their origami art has been showcased at the Museum of Modern Art and the Smithsonian American Art Museum, among other galleries.
Mr. Demaine said he liked the way the worlds of art and math collided at the origami shows, attracting both art and math fans.
The artist Faye E. Goldman used Japanese gold-edged polypropylene ribbons to create spheres, called “11 Hole Torus,” “Small Orange Egg” and “Small Pink Ovoid Egg,” that look strikingly similar to glazed ceramic pieces — well, until you touch them or lift them up and realize they’re made of ribbons.
“It can fold down to a be a very tiny purse or it can expand up to be a very large bag — all using the techniques of origami and folding,” Ms. Lawrence, the museum director, said.
Then there’s Joel Cooper’s masks, which look like finely chiseled medieval faces that one might expect from a porcelain, metallic or papier-mâché mask. But he used paper and origami folding to create the masks, and then added shellac, acrylic paint and polyurethane varnish to give them a final gothic appearance.
“Finding the right combinations of folds to create a shape is like finding the most elegant mathematical proof,” Mr. Cooper said in the comments next to the art.
Ms. Lawrence said the origami show and the museum’s interactive exhibits are all about inspiring visitors to ask how, why and what’s next in the world of math.
