Marlon Anderson told the student to stop referring to him by a racial epithet, which officials at a Wisconsin high school said violated a zero-tolerance policy on offensive language.
Update: Marlon Anderson will be rehired, his union said.
A high school security assistant in Wisconsin said an unruly student called him a racial slur several times last week, but when he tried to explain to the student why the epithet was offensive, it cost him his job.
The security assistant, Marlon Anderson, said that he told the student to stop calling him a “nigger” during an Oct. 9 exchange at West High School in Madison. Both Mr. Anderson and the student are black.
Less than a week later, school officials terminated Mr. Anderson’s employment, citing a zero-tolerance policy on the use of derogatory language by staff members.
Now, students and residents are rallying around Mr. Anderson, 48, who is fighting to get his job back. He said in an interview on Thursday night that the policy was flawed because it failed to put his use of the slur in its proper context.
Gloria Reyes, the school board president for the Madison Metropolitan School District, said in a statement on Thursday that the policy would be re-examined.
Mr. Anderson, who worked at West High School for three years and East High School in Madison for eight years before that, said the episode started when an assistant principal radioed for help with a disruptive student.
The student, a 17-year-old senior, had finished classes for the day and had taken another student’s cellphone when the assistant principal intervened, according to Mr. Anderson, who said the student then pushed the assistant principal.
As Mr. Anderson was trying to escort the student out of the building, he said, the student taunted him with the racial slur about 15 times. He said he repeatedly told the student to stop using the slur, which he himself repeated several times.
That’s when he said the assistant principal, Jennifer Talarczyk, turned on the microphone of her walkie-talkie, so that Mr. Anderson could be overheard by school administrators and members of the security staff. He said Ms. Talarczyk told him to “tap out” and remove himself from the confrontation with the student.
Ms. Talarczyk did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Two days after the exchange, Mr. Anderson said he was put on notice by the school’s principal, Karen Boran.
A spokeswoman for the school district, responding on behalf of Dr. Boran, referred to the statement by the school board president.
Mr. Anderson said he met with human resources officials early this week to discuss the episode.
“Monday morning I was told that I was going to be terminated or I would be given an option to resign,” said Mr. Anderson, who invited black community leaders to join him at the meeting.
Among the people who accompanied Mr. Anderson was Kaleem Caire, the founder of One City Schools, a group of independent charter schools that serves mostly low-income students in Wisconsin.
Mr. Caire wrote that the district should be educating students about the use of slurs instead of running away from the issue.
Madison Teachers Inc., the union for teachers and noninstructional staff, filed a grievance Thursday on behalf of Mr. Anderson to appeal his dismissal, said Doug Keillor, the union’s executive director.
“For now we are prepared to say that Mr. Anderson should not have been terminated over this incident and we will be advocating for his reinstatement,” Mr. Keillor said in an email on Thursday.
Dozens of students at West High School took part in a walkout and a march to the district administration building in Madison on Friday. Among them was Mr. Anderson’s son, Noah Anderson, 17, a senior and president of the Black Student Union.
“I hope this can fix some of the race inequities in our school district,” Noah said Thursday.