In a work opening with a goat tethered to a cinder block, the closest we get to Tchaikovsky’s ballet is four dancers representing swans.
A goat is tethered to a cinder block by a rope tied to its neck. As audience members take their seats, the poor animal paces in a circle, bleating miserably. It is a heartbreaking sight. Eventually three men dressed in black appear and begin to dance; the goat panics as they get closer and closer, its cries becoming increasingly shrill.
That the goat is played by the actor Mikel Murfi, wearing only underwear, doesn’t alleviate the creeping feeling of dread.
This opening of the Irish choreographer Michael Keegan-Dolan’s dance-theater piece “Swan Lake/Loch na hEala,” at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, makes quite a statement, but of what? Even though I found myself constantly thinking back to that first scene throughout the show, no satisfying interpretation came to mind. Some viewers will find this open-endedness bracing; others may see it as fancy obfuscation.
The closest we get to that beloved, if startlingly creepy, ballet is the presence of four dancers representing swans, wearing simple dresses and carrying large wings on their shoulders (Hyemi Shin designed the costumes). They are the most familiar sight in a tale that Keegan-Dolan, who wrote, choreographed and directed the show for his company, Teac Damsa, has reset to a bleak version of contemporary Ireland.
The narrator introduces us to Jimmy O’Reilly (Alexander Leonhartsberger), a hollow-cheeked man in baggy pants, tracksuit top and beanie who has sunk into a deep depression since the death of his father a year earlier. To celebrate Jimmy’s 36th birthday, his mother, Nancy (Elizabeth Cameron Dalman), who uses a wheelchair, gives him his father’s shotgun — a loaded gift, as it were.
The protean Murfi (hailed for his solo plays “I Hear You and Rejoice” and “The Man in the Woman’s Shoes”) also portrays the show’s take on the sorcerer Rothbart of the original “Swan Lake.” Here, he is a priest, who assaults the 17-year-old Finola (Rachel Poirier) and then tries to silence her and her sisters by cursing them; if they mention what happened, they turn into “a filthy animal.” 
The lake happens to be where Jimmy comes to contemplate death, only to be startled by Finola’s sudden appearance. A pas de deux ensues, tentative at first, then as confident as liberation can be.
For all that, the show, which feels rushed at 75 minutes, ends on a startling crowd-pleasing scene that attempts to insert an element of levity, suggesting perhaps that even age-old tragedy can be freed from fatalism.
It’s probably not a coincidence that “Swan Lake/Loch na hEala” has been chosen to open BAM’s Next Wave, the first season programmed by the new artistic director, David Binder. The show is an unclassifiable hybrid that remixes a classical ballet beyond recognition and makes the audience an active participant in constantly pondering not just the meaning of the story, but its very form. What are we watching: Woman or swan? Dance or theater? No matter the answer, it looks as if there are heady times ahead in Brooklyn.
Through Oct. 20 at the Harvey Theater, Brooklyn; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , bam.org. Running time: 1 hour 15 minutes.