Style|What Does Having a Boyfriend Have to Do With Sleep?
Owen Dennis Riley, 17, has never had a girlfriend. But he plays a boyfriend to at least half a million subscribers on YouTube.
He brings you gifts on Valentine’s Day and soup when you’re sick. He serenades you, if you’re into that sort of thing. Most important, he wants to help you get a good night’s sleep. Instead of counting sheep or limiting your screen time before bed, he’ll talk you down for the night and tuck you in.
He proceeds to tickle the camera lens and microphone with makeup brushes, promising that you really look better without makeup, anyway.
His YouTube channel, DennisASMR, is one in a growing genre known as “A.S.M.R. boyfriend role-play.” This combines the popular techniques that may cause people to experience “brain tingles” — the hallmark of autonomous sensory meridian response — with the doting behaviors often attributed to good romantic partners.
Owen isn’t the inventor of this format. According to Craig Richard, an A.S.M.R. expert and a professor of physiology at Shenandoah University in Virginia, boyfriend and girlfriend role-play videos have appeared on YouTube for at least five years. But Owen has certainly helped popularize them. In May, Emma Chamberlain, the teenage mega-influencer, parodied him, the ultimate marker of YouTube fame.
Like many other entrepreneurial teenagers, the Supreme resellers and meme makers, Owen was just looking for a way to expand an audience. After various fruitless endeavors — singing, doing pranks with his siblings — he turned to A.S.M.R.
“I thought it would be easy, and fun — it was summer break and I was bored,” said Owen, who is home-schooled. “Helping people” appealed to him, too. His early A.S.M.R. videos, featuring finger flutters, mic-nibbling and breathy storytelling, began racking up millions of views. One commenter suggested that he try boyfriend role-play.
Owen lives outside of Savannah, Ga., with his parents. Often, when he is recording, they’re in the other room, aware of the content he is making and sometimes involved in the creative process.
“My family is so supportive,” he said. “They thought it was cool I could get that many subscribers from whispering into a microphone.” And those subscribers mean views, which means money. But just how much?
The comments on a DennisASMR video often encompass a range of emotions, from enamored to creeped out. (Viewers also pose questions about his personal life.) These extremes revolve around the intensity of Owen’s eye contact and the weight of his validating statements. How did this teenager develop such deep emotional intelligence?
Watching his parents’ happy marriage of 20 years has also inspired him. The videos, in turn, present examples of the validation and affection he wants for himself.
“I have dealt with the same things my viewers have: anxiety, insomnia and depression. And I’ve never been in a serious relationship, so I know how loneliness feels,” he said. “I know how it all feels, so I can help give them what they’re lacking.” Judging by his latest videos, that includes a real-life superhero, “smexy” mouth sounds and, of course, someone to talk to before bed.
Is It Scientific? Troubling? Both?
According to a paper about a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study by Dr. Richard and others, the brain regions that are activated by the personal attention implied in an A.S.M.R. video compare to those that are activated with real-life caregiving, particularly in emotional arousal and reward. “Someone pretending to care registers as someone actually caring for us,” he said.
Dr. Richard’s study observed only a small sample — 10 people — and research on A.S.M.R. is nascent. Some psychologists aren’t convinced that the videos benefit anyone.
She referred specifically to Owen’s “Jealous Boyfriend Roleplay (Sleep Inducing)” video, which has accrued nearly two million views.
To Dr. Fleck, however, “Jealous Boyfriend” not only defies the social norms of A.S.M.R., it’s also problematic. The comments on the video echo her sentiment.
‘Wow... he actually made me upset and feeling guilty at the same time. And I should not even be feeling these things. I haven’t done anything,” one user wrote.
Anyone who has seen a sleep psychologist has heard it: Screens and sleep don’t mix.
“Studies show that the blue light emitted from screens decreases melatonin production in the brain,” said Whitney Roban, a sleep specialist in New York.  The interactive nature of these videos, she said, also defies the basic tenets of sleep hygiene.
At the end of “Boyfriend Tucks You in at Night,” Owen looks directly into the lens, with eye contact so intense it may feel natural to look away. He drums his fingers on the spine of a book and asks, “Did this help? Are you feeling more relaxed? I’ll text with you if you still can’t sleep, but I think you’ll be fine.” He smiles reassuringly, before squeezing in an ad for a weighted blanket.