Mr. Knowles discovered he had breast cancer in July, and had a mastectomy that month.
Mathew Knowles, the father and former manager of Beyoncé and Solange, revealed this week that he received treatment for breast cancer this year, becoming one of the rare men to face the disease.
Mr. Knowles, 67, a music executive who teaches sports events and entertainment marketing at Prairie View A&M University in Texas, spoke on Wednesday in interviews with ABC’s “Good Morning America” and The New York Times about his experience.
About 245,000 women in the United States learn they have breast cancer each year, compared with about 2,200 men, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The disease kills about 41,000 women and 460 men in the country each year.
Mr. Knowles watched the pattern for three days and began to question if it was his medication or his workout regimen that was causing the blood to appear.
Then Gena Avery Knowles, his wife of six years, also noticed blood on their bedsheets, he said.
Doctors conducted a test that revealed he had a BRCA2 gene mutation, which increases certain cancer risks, Mr. Knowles said, noting that he had urged both of his daughters to have the same test done. Mr. Knowles was previously married to their mother, Tina Knowles Lawson, for 33 years before they separated in 2009. The divorce was finalized in 2011.
Everyone has the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, which work as tumor suppressors, but mutations of them can increase the risk of breast cancer, Dr. Alice Police, a regional director of breast surgery for the Northwell Health Cancer Institute, said on Wednesday. When the BRCA2 gene has a mutation in men, she said, they are at a higher risk of prostate cancer, breast cancer, pancreatic cancer and melanoma.
Mr. Knowles said that he and his wife, Gena, each had several family members who had died from breast cancer.
“Family history in male breast cancer is really, extremely important,” Dr. Police said.  She treats two to four cases of male breast cancer each year and said that warning signs could include a lump in the breast, a bloody nipple discharge or any changes in the nipple.
Mr. Knowles plans to undergo a second mastectomy in January to reduce his risk and will have mammograms every six months, he said.
Racial disparities in breast cancer also exist, but most of the data is on cases involving women, Dr. Police said.
Rates of breast cancer among black and white women are about the same, but the mortality rate is higher for black women because the disease is more likely to be caught at a later stage, she said. Black men with breast cancer also tend to have a worse prognosis, according to the American Cancer Society.
Black women are more likely to have an aggressive, less treatable type of breast cancer called triple negative breast cancer. And they lag white women in diagnosis of estrogen-receptor positive disease, the most treatable form of breast cancer.
One in 833 men are at risk of getting breast cancer in their lifetime, according to the group. The disease is nearly 100 times as common among white women as it is for white men, and 70 times as common among black women as it is for black men.
Mr. Knowles, who also urged men to get checked, echoed that sentiment and suggested that “chest cancer” might be a more apt term than “breast cancer” for men who are uncomfortable.
