A Texas prosecutor told a jury that the victim’s parents wanted their son’s killer to be put to death. The parents say that was false.
WASHINGTON — Not long after the 10th anniversary of the 2006 murder of Jonas Cherry, his parents made a video. They wanted to stop the execution of the man who killed their son.
A Texas prosecutor had told the jury precisely the opposite, saying the Cherrys wanted their son’s killer to die. The defendant, Paul Storey, was sentenced to death.
This month, a Texas appeals court ruled 6 to 3 that new evidence about the prosecutor’s apparent falsehood did not require a new sentencing. Defense lawyers, the majority said, had waited too long to raise the issue and should have tried harder to determine the Cherrys’ views on capital punishment.
There is no question that prosecutors knew the Cherrys opposed capital punishment before the trial of Mr. Storey, who was convicted in 2008 of killing Jonas Cherry during the robbery of a miniature golf course near Fort Worth.
But during Mr. Storey’s sentencing hearing, one prosecutor, Christy Jack, said the Cherrys wanted him to die.
At least one juror has said he was swayed by Ms. Jack’s statement.
“Had I known that Jonas Cherry’s parents were opposed to Paul Storey receiving the death penalty, I would have never have voted for death,” the juror, Sven Berger, said in a 2017 sworn statement.
Not long after, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, the state’s highest court for criminal matters, ordered a judge to look into the matter.
But Judge Young also found that the statement was false, and he recommended that Mr. Storey’s sentence be reduced to life without parole.
Judge Young rejected testimony from Ms. Jack defending her assertion. She said Glenn Cherry, Jonas Cherry’s father, had approached her during the trial to say he had changed his mind about the death penalty.
Judith Cherry said she and her husband had never wavered in their opposition to the death penalty and don’t recall hearing Ms. Jack’s 2008 statement to the contrary.
Earlier this month, the Court of Criminal Appeals rejected Judge Young’s recommendation. The appeals court did not dispute most of what Judge Young had found. But it ruled that Mr. Storey’s lawyers had waited too long to complain about Ms. Jack’s statement.
The lawyers said they found out about the Cherrys’ opposition to the death penalty in 2016. The appeals court said they should have known by 2010, when they filed their first challenge to Mr. Storey’s death sentence.
It was not clear how they could have known. Judge Young found that the prosecutors had never disclosed the Cherrys’ position to the defense.
In the 2010 challenge, Mr. Storey was represented by Robert Ford, who was said to be an uncommonly diligent and tenacious lawyer. Ms. Jack testified that he was ferocious. There is no evidence that he knew about the questions surrounding Ms. Jack’s statement, and there are many reasons to think he would have pressed the point had he known about it.
In other words, Mr. Storey’s lawyers wrote in a recent motion for reconsideration, the appeals court required capital defense lawyers to contact the grieving parents of murder victims to ask about their views on capital punishment on the off chance that they oppose it.