Alexander Najman’s family is Jewish. Jennifer Hindieh has Syrian roots. Despite family backgrounds, the two soon found they were of like minds.
The first time Jennifer Hindieh saw Alexander Najman, she wished he would go away. Instead, after bumming a Marlboro off her in September 2011 at Long Island University, he stuck around and tried to strike up a conversation.
Ms. Hindieh, then a freshman at the university’s Post campus, in Brookville, N.Y., was annoyed that Mr. Najman, a graduate student at Stony Brook University working part time in Post’s philosophy department, had trouble taking a hint. She didn’t particularly care for his demeanor, either.
“He was doing the kind of stuff guys do to impress you, acting all full of himself,” she said. After a few drags on his cigarette, though, he made her laugh. By the time he stubbed it out and walked away from the outdoor bench where Ms. Hindieh's smoke plumes had led him, she had forgotten her first impression and given him her phone number.
She wouldn’t regret it.
Mr. Najman, 32, is the founder of Get Accepted, an academic and career counseling service. Until 2017, he was also a philosophy professor at LIU Post. Ms. Hindieh, 29, is a teaching assistant and graduate student in molecular biology at Adelphi University. She expects to earn a master’s degree next spring before pursuing a Ph.D. in neuroscience. Both are from Long Island. Ms. Hindieh’s parents, Rim and Barbara Hindieh, divorced when she was young; they raised her and her older brother, Raymond, and older sister, Danielle, in Roslyn Heights. Mr. Najman grew up in Port Washington with his parents, Lynn and Lee Najman, and an older sister, Liz.
At the time of the campus bench encounter, both were in serious relationships that were seriously in trouble. “I was incredibly unhappy,” Ms. Hindieh said. “My relationship was kind of similar,” Mr. Najman said, adding that he had been with his partner for years but was unsure how to call it quits.
She didn’t feel that spark at first with Mr. Najman. When they started texting and meeting for coffee and snacks between classes, both on campus and off, it didn’t surface either. What did seem obvious was that they had a lot in common besides their unhappy relationships. Both were trying to kick the cigarette habit. Both were major dog lovers. And both were obsessed with their fields of study, especially where they overlapped and intersected.
As their friendship grew, so did their determination to start over romantically, if not necessarily with each other. By the summer of 2012, Mr. Najman was prepared to end his relationship with his girlfriend. Hearing about Ms. Hindieh’s struggles with her boyfriend was a catalyst. “One time, we were hanging out and he said, ‘You’re not happy. Don’t do this to yourself. You’re a great person, don’t let someone treat you this way,’” Ms. Hindieh said.
A little less than a year after they first met, when both were finally single, Mr. Najman and Ms. Hindieh put together a plan to hang out over whisky and cigarettes at Ms. Hindieh’s father’s house, where she was living.
By the time Ms. Hindieh was ready to move into an apartment with Mr. Najman in Levittown in 2015, Rim Hindieh was thrilled with how his daughter’s love life was progressing.
Ms. Hindieh’s lack of patience for pretenses, evident from that first day on the bench at Long Island University, has been freeing for Mr. Najman. For example, just after they moved in together, he didn’t hide his panic when Bailey, a pit bull puppy they adopted, gobbled a bottle of prescription medication he had left in a bag on the floor.
The couple is also cognizant about other stereotypes — particularly that people from Israel and Syria dislike each other. Rumblings of disapproval surfaced from distant relatives after they moved into their new apartment in Huntington Station and announced their engagement. He proposed with an emerald solitaire bought online at Ritani, a site for ethically sourced diamonds, on Oct. 31, 2018.
But even before then, the two have had conversations about whether they should get married.
Her parents and siblings, as well as Mr. Najman’s, were delighted. But as the couple started putting together a guest list for what they called “the peace in the Middle East wedding,” Ms. Hindieh heard from those distant family members who had misgivings.
Ultimately, she said, “I threw my middle finger up in the air and said, It’s my life. I’m going to love who I’m going to love.” She disinvited anyone reluctant to celebrate their union.
Their wedding was Sept. 14 in the parklike grounds of the Village Club, in Sands Point, N.Y.
Ms. Hindieh, in a Badgley Mischka dress that her father helped to pick out, walked with him down a grassy aisle, littered with rose petals, to Mr. Najman. Her six attendants, wearing mint and sea-foam green dresses, awaited her as 75 guests stood for the bride’s entrance. Bailey, in a custom wedding dress of her own, ordered by Ms. Hindieh from Etsy, preceded her as Lee Najman held the leash.
Under a huppah woven with white and pink hydrangea and roses, Daniel Reitman, a childhood friend of Mr. Najman who was ordained by the Universal Life Church, officiated. Liz Najman, also a Universal Life minister, participated in the ceremony.
“I met Alex when he was 4, and I’ve never seen him as comfortable with another person as he is with Jen,” Mr. Reitman said.
After an exchange of rings, Mr. Reitman and Ms. Najman pronounced them married. Mr. Najman stomped on a glass to cheers of “Mazel tov!” The couple plan to privately read handwritten vows on their first wedding anniversary.
Where Village Club, Sands Point, N.Y.
Traditions Mr. Najman celebrated his bar mitzvah at the Village Club. “He practically grew up here,” said his mother, Lynn Najman. Ms. Hindieh imported a few of her own traditions. During the reception, a D.J. wove Arab music into a soundtrack of American pop. She and a few family members demonstrated their belly-dancing skills.
