Regulators appear poised to cave to the tech industry. What’s the rush?
A mother can’t clean her kitchen because her toddler’s next YouTube video won’t automatically play. A Native American language instructor won’t be able to monetize her Navajo language teaching channel. Online videos will be riddled with ads that have nothing to do with your interests.
That’s the supposedly ominous future that critics in the technology industry paint for American life online if the Federal Trade Commission doesn’t weaken — ahem, “update” — the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998, as it applies to education technology, platforms that host child-focused content and the voice-assisted devices that are flooding into homes today.
The commissioners have an unusual opportunity, though. Rather than ratcheting back one of the nation’s only federal privacy laws, they could instead choose to study the issue in greater depth and ultimately make privacy protections stronger.
Signed into law more than two decades ago, the law, known as COPPA, seeks to ensure that children under the age of 13 cannot share private information, be targeted by advertising or have their data collected online without their parents’ consent. It was updated in 2013 to include protections against tracking children with cookies, the persistent identifiers that track users’ activity online, often for advertising purposes.
This week, the F.T.C. hosted a public workshop, “The Future of the COPPA Rule,” to discuss changes to — and most likely, the weakening of — the act. The focus of the event, attended by many industry advocates, was about how evolving business practices in the tech industry affect children’s privacy on social media, wireless devices and general audience sites.
That focus is important, as more and more products that are not intended for children have become destinations for young people online, while some websites with child-oriented content attempt to dodge compliance with the privacy regulations. One of the major issues under consideration is whether the commission should make special exceptions for education technology and voice assistants like Alexa or Google Home. In her opening statement on Monday, Christine Wilson, an F.T.C. commissioner, offered a pre-emptive defense of the commission’s willingness to entertain changes, claiming that the purpose of the rule review was not to roll back protections, but rather to ensure that the law continued to serve the goals set by Congress when it passed the legislation.
The F.T.C. has no legal obligation to update the act this year, as its next compulsory review is not scheduled until 2023. The agency says the reason for the early review is that technology has changed greatly in the past few years.
Yet Americans’ attitudes toward privacy have changed sharply, too. Rather than bow to industry pressure, the commission is in a strong position to use its authority to compel the tech industry to share more about its business practices toward children, to better inform both public discussion and its own regulatory efforts.
One such official is Andrew Smith, director of the F.T.C.’s Bureau of Consumer Protection, who has echoed industry talking points about how increased privacy protections could hurt the internet experience. He went off script at a Better Business Bureau conference last month to say that if creators are unable to monetize their content with behaviorally targeted ads (to which children are particularly vulnerable), YouTube would become “a desert of crap.” That prompted privacy advocates to call for his recusal from rule-making on the issue.
Mr. Hawley and Mr. Markey have co-sponsored a legislative update to COPPA that includes an “Eraser Button” that would give parents the power to delete their children’s data. It also would raise the age covered by the law to 15 from 12, as well as tighten the requirement that a website seek parental consent to collect information if it has reason to believe a viewer is a child. The current standard is looser, and companies like Google and its subsidiary YouTube have abused it, knowingly targeting children for advertising.
The Markey-Hawley bill would give the commission clear direction on how to enforce the law, limiting the power of industry lobbyists and lawyers to influence agency decisions.
Silicon Valley prides itself on moving fast and breaking things. It’s time for those who oversee privacy protections to slow down and think hard about what rolling back this foundational law would mean for children.
