Book Review|The Trolls Are Everywhere. Now What Are We Supposed to Do?
As in the famous novella by Voltaire, that nerdy passel of Candides had not thought through the impact and consequences of their choices. As a result, they ended up creating what might be called The Purge — and it’s happening around the world, 365 days a year, seven days a week, 24 hours a day. Consider the Reddit founders Steve Huffman and Alexis Ohanian, who started their online community forum with the slogan “Freedom from the press” and a firm ethos of unfiltered speech. “We built Reddit around the principle of ‘No editors. The people are the editors,’” Huffman told Marantz.
Unfortunately, Huffman and Ohanian never specified which kind of people they hoped to attract — and they certainly did not expect the quick arrival of armies of what Marantz calls “gate crashers.” The goal of these “edge lords” — another name for a collection of nihilists, right-wing nationalists, conspiracy purveyors, white supremacists and more — was to downgrade the discourse in a way that would soon corrode the entire system.
So the geeks built a chaos machine that ginned up a world of socially acceptable sadism, and Marantz dived into the toxic stew to chronicle the scene. And what a Thunderdome it is, with players ranging from the digital equivalent of carnival barkers to — perhaps even scarier — true believers.
Better him than me, I thought as I read about his encounters with the celebrities of this awful antisocial universe, from the Proud Boys’ Gavin McInnes to the American neo-Nazi and white supremacist Richard Spencer to the deeply cynical Mike Cernovich.
Cernovich is what my grandmother would have called a “piece of work,” constantly pretzeling himself into all kinds of shapes to deal with whatever contradiction is in conflict with his peculiar ideology. Which is why Marantz dubs Cernovich “alt-light,” one of many demagogues without a goal except perhaps to wreak havoc.
As a longtime reporter covering the tech industry — which I have found so nonreflective, it’s a miracle that its ranks can see themselves in the mirror — I am, shall we say, pessimistic. Silicon Valley simply does not do consequences, and we are the worse for it.
Still, after his long time hanging with the worst of digital humanity, Marantz appears to believe that the arc of history does bend. To get it to point back to justice, he notes, we will have to do the heavy lifting ourselves.
