Meet the “new man”: whatever others say he is.
John Wayne, that repository of testosterone — now considered an illicit substance in many states — once played a character who said, “You have to be a man first, before you’re a gentleman.” Who knows what, exactly, he meant by it? It sounded like a fine thing to say, back when men were unabashed “men.” 
But after years of #MeToo scandals, which have revealed weirdos and perverts and sex criminals (and that’s just R. Kelly), “toxic masculinity” is now regarded as tautology in some quarters. In more than a few tellings today, just to be a man is to be toxic.
So GQ’s newish editor in chief, Will Welch, is taking a crack at overhauling our benighted gender, presenting an issue in which, as he puts it, “traditional notions of masculinity are being challenged” and “overturned.” In doing so, he holds, we can be more generous, empathetic humans, even to ourselves, since “toxicity simply cannot thrive in the golden presence of genuine self-love.” Tell that to Harvey Weinstein, who allegedly “self-loved” into a potted plant in front of one of his trapped victims.
It’s difficult to envision the guys down at the tackle shop or Tractor Supply going in for sleeping-bag couture and hot makeup tips. But then, they’re the Old Man, the kind of man the new masculinity seeks to leave behind. Maybe they haven’t paraded around female job applicants with open kimono, à la Charlie Rose, or haven’t traumatized female colleagues by subjecting them to pelvic pinball, à la Mark Halperin. But in GQ’s eyes they’re guilty of a more universal sin: They’re still living as men undefined by non-men.
The bulk of GQ’s conversation starter is a package in which “18 powerful voices” have their say on the new masculinity. You’d think this would make for an interesting cross-section of representative men, but there, you’d largely be wrong, since traditional men seem afterthoughts in their own discussion. As the writer Rod Dreher has noted in his own analysis of the GQ spread, scratching out some back-of-the-envelope calculations, of these 18 purportedly definitive figures, there are perhaps four who are heterosexual cis men, about 20 percent (even though 95 percent of all males identify as hetero).
Aside from the views of men like the filmmaker John Waters (“men are the ones who have penis envy”), or Magic Johnson’s son, who has chosen a life “embracing traditionally feminine clothing and cosmetics,” GQ seems primarily interested in soliciting women’s opinions of what being a man means. Imagine Ms. or Jezebel doing the mirror version of this, with men mansplaining what women should be. Then run for your life.
You do get transgender men, like the boxer Thomas Page McBee, celebrating his “newly weaponized body,” which might sound like a threat to women if he hadn’t been originally gender-assigned to womanhood. There’s the rapper Killer Mike, who, along with his wife, Shana Render, is interviewed in one of Atlanta’s iconic strip clubs. But don’t strip clubs demean women? No bother. Killer Mike is otherwise woke enough to pass muster (he is, after all, a Bernie Sanders supporter), and Ms. Render informs that they do dispense investment tips to strippers. “Catering, massage companies, real estate,” Killer Mike adds.
Otherwise, there are a lot of women, all kinds of women. There’s the comedian Hannah Gadsby, who suggests men scale back their confidence, refrain from sharing their opinions, while looking “to traditional feminine traits” and then “incorporating them into your masculinity.” And there’s Al Freeman, whose soft-sculpture work is an effort to examine hypermasculine spaces, “a mirror of the things that I wish would be softer, or more benign, or less threatening somehow.” Think pillow versions of male genitalia or frat-house Jagermeister bottles. “I guess it’s castrating humor, to some degree,” Ms. Freeman says.
Wonder how that could’ve happened.
“Having to listen to people who aren’t men, or who are ashamed of manhood, constantly telling me how to be one,” would be my short answer, after I stopped, dropped and rolled for cover.
Why keep fuzzing distinctions that for millenniums have resisted fuzzing? Punish the sex criminals and pelvic pinball wizards. Good riddance to them all. But otherwise, let men and women be men and women, however that appropriately breaks, without laboring so hard to fuse them. Maybe our opposites attracting, which the furtherance of our species has depended on, isn’t a design flaw, but its very essence. And maybe the wokerati ought to take their own most oft-repeated cliché to heart: Our diversity is our strength.
Matt Labash was a national correspondent at The Weekly Standard.