PARIS — All over Paris, streets have been dug up and cut in two, and old paving stones overturned to build dozens of miles of bike lanes. A major urban highway has been closed to cars and turned over to pedestrians. Paris is readying feverishly for an emergency that, in the minds of the city and its mayor, is already here.
Even before July’s record temperatures — 42 degrees Celsius, or 107.6 Fahrenheit — Ms. Hidalgo spent the last five years as mayor trying to transform the millennial city into a greener version of itself.
Along the way, Ms. Hidalgo, who is up for re-election next year, has won supporters for her forward thinking, and earned thousands of enemies for the inevitable disruption her plans have created.
But she has positioned herself prominently among the mayors of the world’s premier capitals as an advocate for what she bills as a new, and necessary, kind of urban landscape.
Visitors and residents alike can now glide for miles along the river banks on a bike, protected from the cars by granite separators, or all the way across the city, from Concorde to Bastille, beating the gridlocked traffic. Ms. Hidalgo is aiming for more than 600 miles of bike lanes by next year, up from around 400 when she started.
As monotonous green-gray metal separators, shielding the projects, have sprouted across Paris, the inconveniences have been accompanied by an angry chorus of groans from hapless motorists.
But the fights the Spanish-born mayor has already taken on and won demonstrate that she has no intention of backing down.
“There’s been a very violent reaction at times,” Ms. Hidalgo said, smiling slightly in an interview in her cavernous office at the grandiose Hôtel de Ville, the City Hall.
The idea of Ms. Hidalgo, a former workplace inspector at the French labor ministry who worked her way up the political hierarchy, is simple. To help secure an uncertain climate future, Paris must project itself back into the past — a past with fewer automobiles.
She has declared war on cars. Every cursing motorist who seeks to navigate the obstacle course of Parisian streets wishes she had never been elected. Don’t mention her name to taxi drivers.
Other critics, particularly on the right, accuse the Socialist mayor of crazed environmental experimentation at the expense of the city’s inhabitants.
“She’s put us in debt, just to make the BoBos happy,” said Mr. Hansal, using French slang for the bourgeois bohemians, the environmentally conscious middle class that is the mayor’s base.
Such responses reflect a widespread impression that fighting climate change has become an elitist concern. But people in wealthier suburbs — who own cars — have also been up in arms. The French car owners’ association, furious, published Ms. Hidalgo’s office number and invited motorists to flood it with calls.
But the city itself has seen a steep drop in car ownership, from 60 percent of households in 2001, to 35 percent today. Paris, meanwhile, has risen in the list of bike-friendly cities to eighth place from 17th since 2015.
“There’s been a very violent reaction at times,” to her changes, Ms. Hidalgo said. “Part of it has to do with being a woman,’’ who make up two-thirds of public transport users, she said.
As elections approach next year, Ms. Hidalgo, a relatively solid Socialist in a party otherwise headed for extinction, holds a substantial lead in polling over her nearest rival, Benjamin Griveaux, the candidate of President Emmanuel Macron’s political movement.
Around the Place des Fêtes in the 19th Arrondissement, there were few neutral parties among Parisians shopping at the outdoor market. But the mayor’s supporters outnumbered the critics in a random sampling.
One of the mayor’s most contested and controversial steps was to shut down parts of the 42-year-old highway along the Right Bank of the Seine and turn it into a park.
The long riverside expanse is now jammed with partying youth on warm nights, and is becoming, in terms of race and class, one of the most integrated spots in the city.
Now Ms. Hidalgo is planning “urban forests,” clumps of trees on the river bank and in front of the some of the city’s most iconic spots, like the Opera Garnier, the Hôtel de Ville and the Gare de Lyon train station.
A top official has written a policy note detailing a possible green corridor up and down the city if she is elected to a second term.
Leo Fauconnet, an urban expert with the Paris region’s planning agency, gave Ms. Hidalgo credit. “We’ve got a proactive policy, compared to other cities in the world,” he said.
But hard-core environmentalists, growing in political clout in France with the surge of the Green party, are not persuaded.
Indeed, the character of much of the city is changing in ways that Ms. Hidalgo has been less forceful in addressing. An unceasing invasion of mass tourism threatens to turn Paris into a vast open-air theme park for the global affluent.
Working families are leaving central areas like the Second Arrondissement, which has lost 10 percent of its population since 2015. Airbnb has created neighborhoods of absentee landlords. The average apartment price per square meter has topped $11,000, making Paris now the world’s third-most expensive city.
Ms. Hidalgo said she was aware of those dangers, too, and was working to mitigate them.
