Opinion|Will Trump Ever Leave the White House?
Will Trump Ever Leave the White House?
It’s a loaded question — with no obvious answer.
We should not assume that either a 2020 election defeat or impeachment/conviction will remove Trump from the White House.
Both before Trump was elected in 2016 and during his term, he has made frequent references to “my 2nd Amendment friends” and increasingly the “patriots” who constitute the military.
Before you decide that this is paranoia, let me point out that Leege is an eminently reasonable scholar, a former chair of the board of overseers of the American National Election Studies and one of the founders of the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems. He has been a valued source of mine for years.
As president, Trump has resisted any effort to curb citizen access to guns and ammo. He puts on a modest show of concern when a particularly bad gun massacre occurs but, in the end, he sees armed citizens as a significant personal asset.
I think the legal profession, finance, and corporate business would resist Trump’s efforts toward a coup. They need stability to make profits. Perhaps the biggest question concerns the military. Coups are usually backstopped by colonels, not generals. Thus, major barracks could provide him with support. Probably his best strategy to keep all levels of the military loyal to him rather than to the Constitution would be to embroil us in a major war.
is and always has been Republican United States Senators. If enough of them, spread across the country and in the South, see advantage in supporting the Constitution instead of their personal and party’s advantage, they would desert Trump either through conviction on impeachment articles or through the 2020 election.
Take a look at what Trump has openly, consistently and repeatedly said. Here are just a few examples.
I’m a leader. I’m a leader. I’ve always been a leader. I’ve never had any problem leading people. If I say do it, they’re going to do it. That’s what leadership is all about.
I will look at it at the time. I’m not looking at anything now. I’ll look at it at the time. What I’ve seen — what I’ve seen is so bad. First of all, the media is so dishonest and so corrupt, and the pile-on is so amazing.
You know, the left plays a tougher game, it’s very funny. I actually think that the people on the right are tougher, but they don’t play it tougher. O.K.? I can tell you, I have the support of the police, the support of the military, the support of the Bikers for Trump — I have the tough people, but they don’t play it tough until they go to a certain point, and then it would be very bad, very bad.
And on Monday, Trump strengthened the case that he is willing to burn the house down, posting a series of tweets quoting Robert Jeffress, pastor of the First Baptist Church in Dallas, from an appearance on Fox News earlier that day.
I’ve literally spoken to thousands and thousands of evangelical Christians, I have never seen them more angry over any issue than this attempt to illegitimately remove this president from office, overturn the 2016 election and negate the votes of millions of evangelicals in the process. And if the Democrats are successful in removing the president from office, I’m afraid it will cause a Civil War-like fracture in this nation from which this country will never heal.
All of this raises a couple of questions: What drives the depth and intensity of support for Trump? And how far are those supporters willing to go to keep him in the White House?
Extensive evidence suggests that the passion of Trump’s loyalists is, to a considerable extent, rooted in what they perceive as racial and cultural threat. Polls and surveys from Pew, N.P.R. and the Public Religion Research Institute show that 55 percent of whites believe they are discriminated against, that a plurality of whites (46 percent) believes that a majority-minority nation will “weaken American culture” and that once dominant white Christians are no longer a majority.
Let’s first examine the question of how seriously we should take the specter of civil disorder. I asked a number of experts in American politics and their replies varied.
I doubt he would go quietly and would not be surprised if he claims he was robbed, but any attempt to hold onto office — to refuse to leave the mansion, or keep issuing executive orders drafted by Stephen Miller, or sending nominations to the Senate — would be laughably brief. There is no Praetorian Guard in the United States, certainly not the highly professional Secret Service.
I believe that the career officials of the federal government, including members of the military, would adhere to the person who won, regardless of which candidate they supported.
the role of Fox News should not be underestimated. If Fox declared that Trump was the “real winner” all bets would be off. I believe, however, they would report honestly on such an important question.
it is possible that Republicans would close ranks behind Trump, resulting in a constitutional crisis. If right-wing media and the G.O.P. politicians were to remain solidly behind Trump, as they largely have thus far in previous scandals, there would be no easy constitutional exit.
In my view, the key variable is the response of the Republican coalition, including Fox News and other major right wing media. If the Republican coalition fractures, Trump is toast.
In the Republican mind-set, the rules about transparency, legislative process and conflict of interest were driven by liberal reform groups not by people who actually wield power in America’s interest. America is teetering toward socialism and cultural chaos. Hence, the President has the right to push the boundaries of his power to achieve the right outcomes.
Nixon redux but worse. I naïvely thought we passed this test as a country already with Watergate and Iran-contra but it seems that our periodic assaults on democratic values are like a bad weather cycle made worse by a more extreme political climate.
It signals to Trump’s (overwhelmingly white) supporters that he’s willing to represent them at any cost, even that of liberal democracy itself.
the substance of Trumpism is ethnonationalist, its form is authoritarian. Like other aspiring autocrats, such as Hungary’s Viktor Orbán or Poland’s Jarosław Kaczyński, Trump seeks to delegitimize his opposition as “enemies of the people” in order to mobilize his base and maintain a stranglehold on power.
David Brady, a political scientist who is also a professor at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, provided poll data indicating that the hard core of Trump supporters is quite likely to disbelieve outcomes in which Trump is cast as the loser.
less than 15 percent of those same strong Trump supporters have any faith in TV news, newspapers and less than a third support the C.I.A., F.B.I. and so on.
tend to agree that American society owes whites a better chance in life than they have received, that it hasn’t given them an opportunity to get ahead, and that it hasn’t dealt fairly with white people.
From the perspective of Trump’s most fervent supporters, the issue of race is crucial.
Percentage of respondents in a December survey about the makeup of America in 2050.
By The New York Times | Source: Pew Research Center; respondents who didn’t answer the questions are not included.
As the accompanying chart shows, the Pew survey asked two relevant questions.
Republicans said more conflicts by better than 4 to 1, 59-14; a much smaller percentage of Democrats said that there would more conflict, 42-36.
In this case, Republicans foresee a weakening of American customs and values by a decisive 59-13. Democrats, in contrast, anticipate stronger customs and values, 42-22.
Lilliana Mason, a political scientist at the University of Maryland, posed a thought-provoking question in her response to my emailed inquiry.
I don’t think it’s entirely about Trump — the Republican Party has been the party of white Christians for a while now. What Trump did was to remind white voters that they should feel victimized and aggrieved.
the social sorting that we have observed over the last few decades has been a gradual movement toward a real reckoning with race in American politics and society that we haven’t ever really had to face.
Americans were to have a true reckoning with our legacy of racial violence and bias, we should expect to see a strong backlash from the forces of white supremacy that have been in America’s DNA since the founding. An optimistic view is that we are in the beginning of this process now. A pessimistic view allows that the backlash might succeed. Either way, it is not inconsistent with Trump’s evocation of Civil War.
Jack Goldstone, a professor of public policy at George Mason, voiced the more pessimistic view.
fear being overwhelmed by a sudden increase in the volume of minorities in society that will leave them unrepresented and disadvantaged — indeed many feel already disadvantaged compared to the efforts to give preferences to “underrepresented” minorities.
an attack on Trump is an attack on themselves; hence the strength of their response to efforts to impugn Trump or remove him from power. For these voters, Trump is all that is holding back the deluge that will sweep them away once the “liberal elites” and minorities take power.
cannot be a technical criminal action. It would have to be a clear case of Trump acting so much in his own behalf and betraying the country that it would undercut these voters’ belief that Trump is acting for them.
There is no doubt that Trump continues to fan the flames of racial anxiety for his perceived benefit. He tries to paint an America that has shifted from the white dominated 1950s when immigration was low and blacks were highly segregated.
This is not the America of today and really only applies to a swath of the population ages 55 and above and in whiter parts of the country whose populations are increasingly diminishing, Only 30 percent of the population lives in counties where no minorities are highly represented and 96 percent of counties are becoming less white. Most people, even many in those demographic categories, have had contact with racial minorities through their families and workplaces and are not cowed by Trump’s rhetoric.
own view is that Trump won in 2016 for a variety of reasons, including economic difficulties affecting some groups, a distaste for Hillary Clinton and, for some, the idea, floated by Trump, that immigrants and nonwhites were changing the country in distasteful ways.
Now Trump is less popular in general and Republicans have done less well in the 2018 midterms including among whites, especially white women, and in nonurban areas.
Yes, some people are afraid of a nonwhite takeover for America but they are a small and dwindling piece of the American electorate. Highlighting race as a primary campaign message will not work for Trump again.
I would like to be able to share Frey’s optimism, but I am more worried than he is about strains within the American electorate.
