A Wisconsin-based purveyor of pepper, paprika and poppy seeds spent more on impeachment-related Facebook ads than any entity besides President Trump.
Candidates, campaigns and companies have unleashed a flood of Facebook advertisements related to impeachment, and it might come as no surprise that President Trump and his re-election campaign are far outspending everyone else.
But last week, the second biggest spender was an entity you might not be familiar with: a purveyor of pepper, paprika and poppy seeds based in Wisconsin.
Penzeys Spices, a family-owned company in Wauwatosa, spent nearly $92,000 on Facebook advertisements related to impeachment from Sept. 29 to Oct. 5, according to data from a communications agency that tracks political spending.
Bill Penzey, who founded the company in 1986, said he found out about the second-place ranking on Wednesday when customers emailed him.
Penzeys sells spices online and has dozens of brick-and-mortar stores across the United States. Mr. Penzey declined to share financial information but said the money he spends on Facebook ads is less than what he used to spend on print catalogs, which he stopped sending out about four years ago.
The data on Facebook impeachment ads, which was reported by Axios on Wednesday, came from Bully Pulpit Interactive, a communications agency based in Washington whose 2020 Campaign Tracker shares information about political spending. The agency used an in-house program to identify Facebook ad copy with the words “impeach,” “impeachment” and “impeaching,” a spokeswoman said.
By those parameters, Penzeys beat out every other ad buyer in the country, save its commander in chief. The spice company topped Tom Steyer, the billionaire Democratic presidential candidate; Senator Mitch McConnell, the Republican majority leader; the Democratic Governors Association; and the National Republican Senatorial Committee.
Facebook’s publicly available data shows that from Oct. 2 to 8, Penzeys was the seventh-biggest spender on ads about “social issues, elections or politics” — a broader category than just impeachment — and the only entity in the top 10 that was not a politician or a policy-oriented organization.
The company’s ads aren’t subtle. “This week the curtain was finally pulled back on how deeply un-American the Republican Party has become,” said one Facebook post on Oct. 3, referring to the impeachment inquiry against Mr. Trump. The same post encouraged readers to sign up for a cooking newsletter.
But Mr. Penzey has been politically outspoken for a while, and that’s no secret to his customers. Followers of the chain’s Facebook page regularly see long messages criticizing the latest Trump administration news, with spice-related content sprinkled in.
Facebook has been criticized for taking a hands-off approach to moderating political content — including paid ads — even when they include false information. But it has also been accused of censorship by conservative politicians, including Mr. Trump, who argue that the social network is more accommodating to liberal points of view.
Penzeys may use “season liberally” as a trademarked slogan, but its outspokenness is not just a reaction to the president.
The New York Times reported in 2006 that Mr. Penzey had started a food magazine that touched on prison reform, immigration policy and international adoption. He lost customers after his first issue featured a gay couple — two men who had triplets via a surrogate mother — long before gay marriage was legal in Wisconsin.
The politics haven’t hurt Mr. Penzey’s business, he said, adding that he has lost some customers but gained some, too.
