Unlike the electorate in 1974, voters today have always known that the president is ethically dubious, and many don’t care.
Dr. Olmsted is a professor of history at University of California, Davis.
Over the weekend, some House leaders said that their impeachment inquiry does not need to prove that President Trump set in motion a cover-up to hide his dealings with Ukraine. As Representative Hakeem Jeffries said on Sunday, “We’re going to remain focused on the abuse of power that clearly exists. There’s evidence that is hiding in plain sight of that fact, including the rough transcript.” That transcript, which shows that Mr. Trump asked Ukraine’s president to investigate Joe Biden in exchange for “very good” treatment, is enough for his impeachment, they say. What more do they need?
A lot, probably. The Democrats in Congress need to persuade Republicans and the public in general that the Ukraine scandal is more than just another example of Mr. Trump being himself. In that sense, they face a more difficult task than did Richard Nixon’s critics during the impeachment investigation of 1974.
During the Watergate scandal, Nixon tried mightily to keep his conversations with his co-conspirators secret. An exceptionally shrewd politician, he lied with a clear goal: to keep his public image as a statesman intact.
Mr. Trump, by contrast, does not display Nixon’s concern for clever image manipulation. His lies are indiscriminate rather than strategic. As a result, there could be a higher bar for his political opponents to clear. Nixon’s critics used the Watergate tapes to show the real man behind the mask. Mr. Trump doesn’t wear a mask. He’s proud to flout the norms of presidential behavior, possibly even to the point of extorting foreign leaders.
In truth, the burglary was part of an espionage and sabotage operation run by Nixon’s campaign to discredit Democratic presidential candidates. Nixon aides paid for the program with a substantial slush fund fed by unreported contributions. The president knew he needed to stop any further investigation into the burglary lest these other crimes be exposed, and — as the nation would later learn — he immediately started a cover-up.
Pressured by Senate Democrats, the administration appointed a special prosecutor, Archibald Cox, to investigate the various crimes soon summarized as “Watergate.” The Senate set up a select committee to hold hearings into any “illegal, improper or unethical activities” in the 1972 presidential election.
The most sensational testimony came from Alexander Butterfield, assistant to Nixon’s chief of staff, who revealed the president had been recording his conversations in the White House. Cox subpoenaed some of the recordings. The Senate committee also demanded that the president produce these tapes.
Nixon refused, claiming executive privilege. When Cox persisted, Nixon had him fired, but was forced to accept a new special prosecutor, Leon Jaworski, and to turn some tapes over to him and to Congress. That’s when prosecutors found that one of the tapes featured an 18½-minute gap, the apparent result of a manual erasure. Jaworski and Congress redoubled their efforts to get more tapes.
Terrified by the prospect of others hearing the actual tapes, Nixon refused again, and instead made public “edited transcripts” of them.
The release of the transcripts became a fiasco for the president. Rather than helping the White House control the conversation, the documents became objects of cultural fascination. Newspapers printed them in full as special sections; radio stations broadcast live readings of them; the paperback edition of the transcripts was wildly popular. A prudish White House transcriber had replaced many four-letter words with “expletive deleted,” which became a popular catchphrase.
Moreover, Congress checked the actual tapes against the transcripts and discovered that someone had edited them in ways that benefited Nixon. For example, one conversation from March 22, 1973, recorded the president telling his aides, “I want you all to stonewall it, let them plead the Fifth Amendment, cover up, or anything else” — a vivid passage mysteriously absent from the White House transcript.
The discrepancies between the White House transcripts and the tapes became evidence of further malfeasance. When the Supreme Court ruled that he had to turn over more tapes, including one in which he explicitly directed the Watergate cover-up, Nixon resigned.
Nixon did everything he could to prevent Americans from hearing how he sounded in private. Later, he said that his chief mistake in Watergate was not abuse of power, but rather his failure to conceal evidence. “If the tapes had been destroyed,” he told the journalist David Frost, “I believe that it is likely that I would not have had to go through the agony of resignation.” Nixon realized that the tapes had bared his true self to the public — and thus cost him the presidency.
To be sure, Mr. Trump is no stranger to cover-ups. He hides his tax returns and refuses to discuss his businesses. But in the case of the Ukraine phone call, where there is documentation that he asked a foreign leader to interfere in an American election, he insists he has no regrets. His unorthodox conversations, the president insists, are “perfect.” He dares his opponents to find fault with what he presents as his routine conduct of foreign affairs.
Nixon’s opponents needed to produce evidence that revealed the real Nixon. The president’s critics today have a greater challenge: to persuade enough voters that the real Mr. Trump — whom we already know — is a criminal worth removing from office.
