A jury found Sigfredo Garcia guilty of first-degree murder in the 2014 killing of Dan Markel.
MIAMI — The killing shook Florida’s capital and stunned the international legal community: A prominent law professor locked in a rancorous battle with his ex-wife and in-laws was gunned down in his garage, in what prosecutors depicted as a murder-for-hire plot.
State prosecutors charged three people with the murder of the professor, Dan Markel, hoping to pressure them into revealing whoever may have financed the murder.
Two of the accused, Sigfredo Garcia and Katherine Magbanua, maintained their innocence and went to trial late last month, five years after the professor’s death. Over 11 days, the case played out inside a courtroom in Tallahassee, the state capital, revealing a web of tumultuous relationships around Mr. Markel’s murder.
On Friday, a jury found Mr. Garcia, 37, guilty of first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder, and not guilty of solicitation of murder. He faces the death penalty, and sentencing will begin on Monday.
After more than 11 hours of deliberation, jurors told Judge James C. Hankinson that they were unable to reach a verdict on the same charges against Ms. Magbanua, 35. Judge Hankinson declared a mistrial.
The other man charged with the murder, Luis Rivera, a close friend of Mr. Garcia and a former leader of the North Miami Latin Kings gang, cooperated with law enforcement. In exchange for testifying against Mr. Garcia and Ms. Magbanua, Mr. Rivera, 36, was allowed to plead guilty to second-degree murder and avoid the death penalty. He received a 19-year sentence instead, and is concurrently serving a 12-year sentence in an unrelated federal racketeering case.
After a contentious divorce in 2013, Mr. Markel, 41, a professor at the Florida State University College of Law who had helped build a network of online legal scholarship, and his ex-wife, Wendi Adelson, were given joint custody of their two young sons.
Prosecutors argued that Mr. Markel was murdered because a court order prevented Ms. Adelson from relocating to South Florida with the children. They said her brother and mother then got involved, and arranged for Ms. Magbanua, Mr. Garcia and Mr. Rivera to carry out the murder for $100,000.
Mr. Markel was shot twice in the head on the morning of July 18, 2014, shortly after he pulled his car into the garage — his keys were still in the ignition. A neighbor thought he heard a gunshot and saw a light-colored Toyota Prius drive away.
From cellphone records and surveillance footage, investigators determined that a light green Prius had followed Mr. Markel the morning he was killed. They found that Mr. Rivera had rented the Prius in Miami. On the rental contract, Mr. Rivera listed cellphone numbers for himself and Mr. Garcia, his best friend since childhood.
Toll transponder data showed the Prius making the 450-mile-plus trip from Miami to Tallahassee and returning after the murder. That night, the men stopped at a drive-through A.T.M. in South Florida, where they were photographed with Mr. Rivera behind the wheel and Mr. Garcia in the passenger seat.
Finding Mr. Rivera and then Mr. Garcia led investigators to Ms. Magbanua, with whom Mr. Garcia has two children and an on-again-off-again relationship. At the time of the murder, the couple was broken up, and Ms. Magbanua was dating Charles Adelson, Ms. Adelson’s brother and Mr. Markel’s former brother-in-law.
Ms. Magbanua did part-time clerical work at a Miami Beach dental office where she met Mr. Adelson, 42, a periodontist.
Her finances improved considerably after Mr. Markel’s murder. Bank records showed she began receiving regular checks from a different dental practice, owned by Mr. Adelson’s parents in Broward County. The checks were handwritten and signed by Mr. Adelson’s mother, Donna Adelson.
Two assistants who worked at the practice testified that they did not know Ms. Magbanua to be an employee. A few months after the murder, Ms. Magbanua paid a plastic surgeon $4,000 in cash for breast implant surgery.
In April 2016, police tapped the cellphones of Mr. Garcia, Ms. Magbanua, Charles Adelson and Donna Adelson. To get them to talk to one another, an undercover F.B.I. agent posed as a member of the Latin Kings gang and asked Donna Adelson for more compensation for the family of Mr. Rivera, who was in prison. Mr. Garcia was arrested the following month, and Ms. Magbanua some months later.
None of the Adelsons have been charged. For years, as Mr. Markel’s sensational murder has been dissected in news articles, blog posts, a popular true-crime podcast and episodes of “Dateline” and “20/20,” lawyers for the Adelsons have maintained their innocence.
Donna Adelson, 69, had figured prominently in her daughter’s divorce. About a year before the murder, she suggested that her daughter pretend the couple’s sons had converted to Catholicism — Mr. Markel was an observant Jew — to pressure Mr. Markel to agree to the children’s relocation. Donna Adelson also floated offering Mr. Markel $1 million to allow the move.
Wendi Adelson testified at the trial that she had no knowledge of the murder. She moved her sons to South Florida a few days after Mr. Markel was killed.
Ms. Magbanua took the rare step of testifying in her own defense. She said she began receiving the checks from the Adelsons after she asked Charles Adelson to hire her as his assistant — a favor so she could qualify for state health insurance for her children. The money for her surgery, she added, had been saved up from cash tips she made working in nightclubs.
Ms. Magbanua denied any part in the murder but said she believed that Mr. Adelson was involved. Her defense lawyers suggested that Mr. Garcia, the father of her children, agreed to kill Mr. Markel in exchange for Mr. Adelson to stop dating her. Mr. Garcia briefly confronted Mr. Adelson 17 days before the murder.
“The only thing she’s guilty of is terrible taste in men,” Tara Kawass, one of Ms. Magbanua’s lawyers, said during opening arguments.
Mr. Rivera testified that Ms. Magbanua had served as the conduit for the murder plot, and that Mr. Garcia had pulled the trigger.
Mr.  Saam Zangeneh, Mr. Garcia’s lawyer, argued that Mr. Adelson had bought drugs from Mr. Rivera and hired him directly to commit the murder.
Investigators found no direct link between Mr. Adelson and either Mr. Rivera or Mr. Garcia. David Oscar Markus, a lawyer for Charles Adelson, said the mistrial against Ms. Magbanua showed why prosecutors have never charged the Adelson family.
Lawyers for Mr. Markel’s parents said they expect a new trial against Ms. Magbanua.
