U.S.|Airline Food Waste Is a Problem. Can Banana Leaves Be Part of the Solution?
The average airline passenger leaves behind about three pounds of waste each flight. One British design firm has ideas to bring down that number.
From disposable headphones and plastic cutlery to food scraps and toilet waste, the average airline passenger leaves behind over three pounds of garbage, according to one estimate. To get travelers and airlines thinking — and talking — about that rather large pile of trash, a British design firm has refashioned the economy meal tray, replacing plastic with renewable materials such as coffee grounds, banana leaves and coconut wood.
Jo Rowan is the associate strategy director of the firm, PriestmanGoode, which has spent more than two decades applying design thinking to the air travel experience, including airport lounges and cabin seating.
Now, she said, the firm is turning its attention to the less “glamorous” side of things.
The redesigned items are featured in an exhibit, “Get Onboard: Reduce.Reuse.Rethink,” that opened last month at the Design Museum in London.
By far the biggest environmental issue with air travel — and the reason the 16-year-old Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg opted to sail to New York from Europe in August, rather than fly — is the associated carbon emissions, which are growing at a faster rate than predicted in previous, already dire projections.
But as air travel becomes increasingly accessible, and as more people take to the skies, airlines have been making public pledges to curb their environmental footprints, including the plastic forks and leftovers their passengers leave behind.
How much trash are we talking about?
Because there is no central authority tracking statistics about the amount of waste produced on flights, accurate and recent figures are hard to come by. But the International Air Transport Association, a trade group representing about 300 airlines, conducted a small study at Heathrow Airport in London and estimated that airlines generated about 6.7 million tons of cabin waste last year.
As low-cost airlines proliferate, and as the tourism industry continues to court middle-class customers, that number could double in the next decade.
“It’s a relatively limited sample at this stage,” Chris Goater, a spokesman for the trade association, said.
Pere Fullana i Palmer, director of the UNESCO Chair in Life Cycle and Climate Change, a research group based in Barcelona, has taken an even deeper dive into the issue of airline trash.
“You cannot improve a system if you don’t know it,” he said.
Dr. Fullana i Palmer’s research group teamed up with Iberia Airlines, Gate Gourmet, Ferrovial and Ecoembes to analyze approximately 8,400 pounds of garbage on 145 flights into Madrid. The group found that 33 percent was food waste, 28 percent was cardboard and paper waste, and about 12 percent was plastic.
As consumers become increasingly conscious of the outsize environmental impact of air travel, airlines are under growing pressure to take action.
Alaska Airlines, Ryanair and British Airways have made public declarations to reduce waste, and Air France said it would eliminate 210 million single-use plastic items like cups and stirring sticks by the end of this year.
On one Qantas flight in May, which the company called “the first-ever commercial flight to produce no landfill waste,” the airline removed individually packaged servings of milk and Vegemite, and served meals in containers made from sugar cane, with utensils made of crop starch.
The solution, she said, would require collaboration among airlines, local authorities and airports, which are ultimately responsible for handling and hauling trash.
I.A.T.A., the airline trade association, said the rules governing international catering waste — which involve a complex set of international and country-specific regulations meant to prevent the spread of disease — should be reconsidered to increase recycling rates.
While all cabin waste is subject to the regulations of the country in which it lands, some European countries, as well as Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States, have imposed additional measures to protect agriculture. This means that even untouched food and drink, which, according to I.A.T.A. estimates, makes up about 20 percent of total airline waste, ends up in landfills or is incinerated.
The regulations governing single-use plastic, which will be banned in the European Union by 2021, also present challenges, according to the trade association.
Dr. Fullana i Palmer agreed that legislation permitting more materials to be recycled or turned into biogas was needed, but said that change was possible.
In designing the onboard items, PriestmanGoode was conscious of heft because the more weight on an aircraft, the higher the fuel emissions. The tray is made of coffee grounds and husks (also a coffee byproduct). The dishes are made of pressed wheat bran, and a single spork made of coconut palm wood, a waste product that farmers would otherwise burn, replaces plastic cutlery.
The team also played with lids of dishes, which are typically made of transparent plastic, to signify what’s inside: a pressed banana leaf for salads and side dishes, an edible waffle cone for dessert.
Ms. Rowan said airlines and suppliers had shown interest in the products, which, for now, are available only at the museum through February.
