A reader says the wealthy and corporations should be taxed more heavily to help pay for updating the country’s highways, airports and so on. Also: On hiring more women and minorities.
In “Taxing Our Way to Justice” (Sunday Review, Oct. 13), Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman have set out a solution to a problem that keeps me awake at night.
Despite the noise about Make America Great Again, anyone who has traveled outside of the United States knows how outdated our infrastructure is compared with other industrialized nations. We should be ashamed of our airports and other public transportation systems, highways, schools, etc. If other countries have made the commitment to adequately fund their infrastructure, why can’t we do the same?
The shifts in the tax system in recent decades, as the authors explain, have indeed shortchanged those at the bottom of the income ladder and unjustifiably enriched those at the top of the ladder. But the authors could have also stressed that the shifts in the personal and corporate tax codes have deprived local, state and federal government of needed tax income, resulting in our failure to adequately invest in infrastructure.
Wealthy citizens and America’s corporations should be required to pay a fair share of the costs of retaining or rebuilding the kind of infrastructure that contributed to their success.
While City Comptroller Scott Stringer’s push for companies in New York City to consider more women and minorities for top jobs is a step in the right direction, it will not address or solve the larger problem.
The reality for many companies, particularly those in tech and finance, which historically have struggled to hire women and people of color across all levels, is that finding viable candidates to add to their boards is extremely difficult.
We should be incentivizing companies to hire diverse talent starting at the entry level. Something as simple as calling for public companies to recruit from the many top women’s colleges and historically black colleges and universities could ensure that businesses are at least starting out with qualified talent from diverse backgrounds.
From there, we can then begin the march to ensure that companies have the systems and benefits in place to retain this talent, and encourage its growth all the way to the C-suite and the boardroom.
The writer is president of Barnard College.