Under fire by Turkish forces, the militia that battled ISIS threw in its lot with Syria’s Russian-backed government.
The Kurds’ deal with Damascus paved the way for government forces to return to the country’s northeast for the first time in years to try to repel a Turkish invasion launched after the Trump administration pulled American troops out of the way. The pullout has already unleashed chaos and bloodletting.
The announcement of the deal Sunday evening capped a day of whipsaw developments marked by rapid advances by Turkish-backed forces and the escape of hundreds of women and children linked to the Islamic State from a detention camp. As American troops were redeployed, two American officials said the United States had failed to transfer five dozen “high value” Islamic State detainees out of the country.
Turkish-backed forces advanced so quickly that they seized a key road, complicating the American withdrawal, officials said.
The invasion ordered by President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, which came after a green light from President Trump, is aimed at uprooting the Syrian Democratic Forces, a Kurdish-led militia that has been a key partner in the fight against the Islamic State. Turkey sees the group as a security threat because of its links to a Kurdish separatist movement that the country has battled for decades.
ISIS members’ families escape from detention.
As the Turkish incursion progresses and Kurdish casualties mount, members of the Syrian Democratic Forces have grown increasingly angry at the United States. Some have cast Mr. Trump’s move as a betrayal.
The Kurds refused, the American officials said, to let the American military take any more detainees from their ad hoc detention sites for captive ISIS fighters, which range from former schoolhouses to a former Syrian government prison. Together, these facilities hold about 11,000 men, about 9,000 of them Syrians or Iraqis. About 2,000 come from 50 other nations whose governments have refused to repatriate them.
The fighting has raised concerns that jihadists detained in the battle to defeat ISIS could escape, facilitating the reconstitution of the Islamic State. Five captives escaped during a Turkish bombardment on a Kurdish-run prison in Qamishli on Friday, Kurdish officials said.
The Kurdish authorities also operate camps for families displaced by the conflict that hold tens of thousands of people, many of them wives and children of Islamic State fighters.
The Americans promised they would protect his people. Now, one Kurdish leader is forced to turn to former foes for help.
Today: The Trump administration has ordered a full evacuation of the 1,000 American troops that still remain in northern Syria as Turkey intensifies its bombardment of the Kurdish forces there. How is it that those Kurdish forces came to be seen as allies to the U.S. and terrorists to Turkey?
It’s Monday, October 14.
Ben, give us a sense of what’s going on today where you are. What are you doing?
I’m in Erbil, in northern Iraq.
I spoke with my colleague, Middle East correspondent Ben Hubbard, on Friday afternoon.
I’m waiting for permission from the Kurdish authorities here to cross the border into Syria so that we can go and cover the Turkish military incursion there.
— in the main city, in this area where we usually stay and where we’ve stayed on our previous trips. It actually happened right down the street from this little fast food restaurant where we used to go and buy sandwiches.
We, all the time, see these images from the Middle East of things getting blown up. But when you sort of recognize this place, it brings it home a bit more than just kind of seeing some kind of destruction on the news.
How many times have you done this now, gone into Syria?
I’ve done seven trips into Syria since the start of the civil war. My last trip was earlier this year, and that was after Trump had said that he wanted to pull the United States forces. At that time, there were about 2,000 American troops based in northeastern Syria.
And we have won against ISIS. We’ve beaten them, and we’ve beaten them badly. We’ve taken back the land. And now it’s time for our troops to come back home.
The pullout of U.S. troops from Syria has America’s allies bracing for more conflict. President Trump spoke to Turkey’s president on the phone yesterday and warned him not to mistreat members of the Kurdish community who are fighting ISIS alongside the United States.
So we wanted to go back and visit and see what this place — you know, what it looked like, how people felt, how they were planning for it. There was a lot of nervousness. People didn’t really know how it was going to affect them. And there was a lot of worry that it would destabilize this part of the country.
And there this one particular person that I really wanted to meet. His name was Mazlum Kobani.
And why did you want to meet him?
So Mazlum Kobani is the most powerful person in this northeastern corner of Syria.
General Kobani built his army in Syria with farmers, factory workers and students. Members of an ethnic minority known as the Kurds dominate the militia.
He is the head of the Syrian Democratic Forces, which is an umbrella group of a number of militias.
But the Syrian Democratic Forces, or S.D.F., led by the Kurds had been the Americans’ main allies in the fight against the Islamic State group.
 I mean, he is the guy that decides what these various militias under his umbrella are going to do and where they’re going to fight and how they’re going to deploy.
Block by block, house by house, they became the foot soldiers who took the state out of the Islamic State.
He’s involved in strategy, and he’s also the go-to guy for the United States.
A senior U.S. military officer told us much of the credit belongs to this man, S.D.F. leader General Mazlum Kobani.
Mazlum Kobani stands right at the juncture of the United States, of Turkey, of the Kurds, of Syria. This is the guy that’s kind of at the center of this whole storm that’s just broken out this week.
So tell me about the last time that you spent time with him?
So I wanted to meet him on our last trip, because I wanted to talk to him and ask him, O.K., well, you know, you’ve spent this last number of years building up this partnership with the United States. Now the president wants to leave. How does it affect you? So we put in a message saying that we’d like to see him and that we were in town. And we waited. And then we sort of gave up on waiting, weren’t sure when it was going to come through. We actually went off to do something else. And when we were on the road, driving in the opposite direction, we got a phone call and said, well, if you want to see him, come now.
So we promptly turned the car around and drove out to a base that they have. And they sort of showed us where to park and brought us in and then took us into a little trailer with sort of some seats and carpeting. And I think it had A.C. — you know, it had air conditioning and a TV but nothing super luxurious.
And there he was — sitting there, wearing camouflage uniform. He was a fairly modest figure, quite soft-spoken. Didn’t have sort of a bluster that you get from a lot of powerful military folk. I noticed when I shook his hand that his palm was quite soft, which sort of taught me that he was not somebody who spends a lot of time holding a Kalashnikov and firing at the enemy, but somebody who was involved in much higher strategic matters. And I sat across from him, asked him if I could record, set down my recording, and then we began the conversation.
I mean, at that time, it was quite theoretical. Because Trump had said that he wanted to leave. And then a number of people in the administration had sort of talked him down and said no, this is a bad idea. And so, you know, his messaging was very much that we’ve had a very good relationship with the United States. It was working together with the United States that we were able to get rid of ISIS in Syria.
You know, he sort of talked about it as in this partnership — was kind of keeping the lid on things. But there was a lot of concern about sleeper cells and about remnants of the Islamic State that were hiding out and just sort of looking for their opportunity to come back. I think he was quite concerned that if the U.S. left, that would be a lot easier for them to do.
And Ben, what is it about this man that would cause him to be seen so differently by the Turks than by the Americans?
Well, part of it is that the United States history with Mazlum Kobani is very short. The Turkish history with him is very long. And so we have to sort of go back and look at the much longer history, you know, of who this guy was and what he was involved in before he showed up as a partner with the Americans a few years ago. So he’s Kurdish, for one. The Kurds are one of the largest ethnic groups in the world that does not have its own nation. There are 30 to 45 million of them, mostly in Turkey, Iran, Iraq and Syria. They were promised their own state by Western powers after World War I, which they never got. And so the current borders of the region were drawn, and the Kurds were left in all these different countries. And so most of them have been interested in having some kind of Kurdish independence or an independent Kurdish state since that happened. In Turkey, there was a very strong effort by the state to try to quash Kurdish identity.
The Kurds have suffered repression, mainly in education and political representation in the country.
They would ban teaching of Kurdish language in schools and other forms of cultural expression. And in the late 1970s, there was a reaction to this. There were a number of Kurdish activists who got together and founded something called the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, also known as the P.K.K.
Although banned, the Kurdish Workers’ Party is supported by many thousands of Kurdish villagers, especially the youth. Most are convinced it’s the only way forward.
They became a military organization. They were basically an underground guerrilla organization that went to war with the Turkish state. And they would attack Turkish army vehicles, army posts, sometimes Turkish civilians. The Turkish Army would respond with raids and attacks on Kurdish villages. And it was just kind of classic insurgency and counterinsurgency.
According to Turkish sources, up to 2008, the conflict between Turkey and the P.K.K. resulted in over 40,000 deaths, including P.K.K. members, the Turkish military and civilians.
And so when Turkey thinks about the Kurdish issue and when they think specifically about the P.K.K., this is what they think about.
So when Turkey calls the Kurdish terrorists, they’re referring to Kurds who attempted to stage a kind of uprising within Turkey to finally get the state that they believed they were owed?
And the P.K.K. is certainly growing. It now claims 50,000 members fighting for an independent Kurdistan.
So in the midst of this insurgency and counterinsurgency that’s tearing apart southeastern Turkey, the P.K.K. spreads. You have operatives who leave and set up bases elsewhere in the region. You have Kurds from other countries who sympathize with the movement and join. And this is where Mazlum Kobani comes into the picture.
And what does he tell you about his own role in this story?
We don’t exactly know what his real name is. I mean, he goes by the name Mazlum Kobani, which is a nom de guerre. Mazlum is a nickname, and Kobani is the name of his hometown. When I asked him what his real name was, he told me it was Mazlum Abdi. Then if you go and ask the Turks, they tell you that his real name is Ferhat Abdi Shahin. So nobody knows exactly what the guy’s real name is.
Hmm. But from what you can piece together, how does he fit into this movement that ends up operating in this part of Syria?
So I was very curious about his history. I mean, when you work in the Middle East, you learn that people’s histories matter. You know, people don’t change affiliations very easy. And when I met Mazlum, he was 52 years old. And I knew that he had studied at Aleppo University and that he had popped up in Syria in his late 40s. And so my question was, well, what did this guy do in the meantime? Where was he?
American officials didn’t seem very curious about that question. So I talked to other people in the region. I talked to the Turks, and I talked to officials in Iraq, who told me that, yeah, he had been very active in the P.K.K. He had joined when he was in university. He’d been an operative primarily based in northern Iraq. I was told as well that he more recently became the head of a special operations unit that oversaw some attacks on Turkish soldiers.
So this is how we get to this really fraught moment where the U.S. and Turkey see him so differently, because, in fact, he quite possibly is both things — somebody who was inflicting damage on Turkey and a very reliable ally to the U.S.?
The Turks, when they look at this guy, they pay attention to what he did in the previous three decades, and how he was active in this organization that carried out a lot of violence in Turkey and received a lot of violence from the Turkish state, to be fair. The Americans are not really interested in that. What they see is what he’s done since 2014 — that he’s been this very disciplined military leader who has very organized forces who do what they’re told and ended up being very successful partners in the battle against the Islamic State.
So this ends up being this kind of fascinating geopolitical collision, where, in acting as a militia organization fighting Turkey, this group of Kurds ends up in a spot in Syria where they’re perfectly positioned to help the U.S. join this fight against the rising threat of ISIS.
Yeah. There’s no way that these guys would have had the organizational skills and the military skills to become valuable allies to the United States if they didn’t have all this history fighting the Turks.
Mm. But what’s in it for these Kurds to work with the U.S. against ISIS?
Well, it starts because they’re in a state of emergency.
[GUNS FIRING] ISIS is on the move again, taking on Kurdish fighters and extending the borders of what they call their Islamic State.
I mean, in 2014, their backs were really to the wall. ISIS was expanding and taking over a tremendous amount of territory. It was terrifying people by beheading people on television.  And they wanted to go in and slaughter all the Kurds because they considered them infidels.
Well, the Kurds themselves say they need help because they fear a massacre.
In that situation, they find out that the United States also wants to fight against the Islamic State. But they didn’t want to put people on the ground. So they needed local partners, and they found this Kurdish militia. And the United States started launching airstrikes. This is really when this partnership was born. You had the guys on the ground, telling them where the positions were that needed to be bombed. And they pushed ISIS back from Kobani.
Then they start putting in place plans to push ISIS out of other towns. And as their territory expands, as they push the jihadists back, they sort of look around and say, wow, we have all this territory now, and we need to govern it. And so this is when a new project comes along, which is trying to figure out how to put their ideology into place and institute a kind of autonomous rule for local communities in these areas.
So Ben, what kind of understanding develops between the U.S. and these Kurds in Syria about how deep this partnership will be, how long it will last, and what kind of protections both are going to provide for each other?
Well, it’s unclear, which is one of the ways that we got ourselves in the situation that we’re in now. I don’t think it’s ever really spelled out. So basically, these guys start taking over more territory. They come into Arab areas. They come into Christian areas. These places have their own militias. This is what all comes together to become the Syrian Democratic Forces, which is the umbrella group that we’re talking about now. And there’s always been, in my view, a contradiction in U.S. policy, where we were very happy to work with these guys militarily. I mean, we trained them so that we didn’t have to have Americans on the ground. But there was never any real American recognition that they also had a political project that they were trying to implement.  So it was a bit of an inconvenient truth for the United States, so we just focused on the most recent part of their history, and we kind of ignored the part that involved Turkey?
I think for the United States, it was very much a marriage of convenience. I mean, when I — after I met Mazlum, I went and I interviewed American military people who knew him and had worked with them. And most of them who were around said, oh, yeah, we know exactly who these guys were. And so I think the U.S. government was aware at the time of the P.K.K. background of these guys, but this is not a group that has huge resonance in the United States. They’ve never attacked American interests. They’ve never been active or significantly active in the United States. So I think for American policymakers who were also in a state of emergency, trying to figure out what do we do about the Islamic State, it seemed like the best way to do it. And it was. I mean, it worked. But there was never any agreement about what happens after the Islamic State is gone, what happens in this territory, who’s in charge. That’s been a question that’s been hanging over U.S. policy — is O.K., what next?
Right. And now we know what’s next is the U.S. is starting to withdraw and giving Turkey the green light to cross over into Syria and attack these Kurdish troops.
And Ben, would the U.S. have been able to contain ISIS in this part of the region without Mazlum and his troops?
It’s very hard to imagine a scenario in which we could have done that. It was very clear that even under Obama, there was no way that we were going to send significant numbers of American troops onto the ground here. The legacy of the Iraq War kept everyone out of it. We didn’t want to do that. And so it really allowed us to outsource the ground fighting. We had very small numbers of American troops on the ground. We were allowed to keep American jets in the air and American commanders on protected military bases. And these guys did a lot of the ground fighting. They were the ones who were on the front lines, going into these cities and being spotters for airstrikes. There’s just really no way without a massive American deployment that we could have done this.
Ben, I’m curious, was the relationship with the U.S. ultimately part of what made the Kurdish fighters such a threat to Turkey, the fact of that partnership?
Absolutely. There’s really no way that this group would have ended up in control of as much territory as they now have if they had not had the military backing of the United States. I mean, that really turbo-charged what they were able to do and left them in charge of this huge swath of northeastern Syria. And the Turks sitting across the border were horrified by this. They basically said, you know, here’s one of our allies in NATO who’s working with this group that has a history of fighting us inside of our own borders. And thanks to their partnership with our NATO friends, they’re taking more and more territory and setting up governance and, you know, this is going to be a national security threat. At the same time, I think that the Kurds in Syria were very aware that this was maybe not going to go very well. I mean, Trump was very clear, as soon as he came in, that he did not want to keep people here long-term. During my last trip, when I actually sat down with Mazlum, he spoke about this.
He said our idea would be for the Americans to stay, because we think that what we’ve done is positive. We think we had a positive partnership. We were able to do good things, and that we can continue to stabilize this part of Syria.
But after I left that interview, we drove around elsewhere in the area. And we noticed along the sides of the roads every 200, 300 meters, there was a little pile of dirt. And we realized people were digging. And they were digging tunnels because they were scared that if the Americans left, they were going to be stuck fighting the Turks. And being a good old-fashioned guerrilla organization, when you do that, you build tunnels, so that you can pop out and shoot at people from behind. And so that made it very clear to me that they no longer have faith that the U.S. is going to stay and have their back. And they’re coming up with their plan B, which is they think that they’re eventually going to fight the Turks, and they’re starting to put in place the infrastructure to do that.
Have you had a chance to speak to Mazlum in the time since President Trump actually drew down U.S. forces from the Turkey-Syria border and these Turkish forces began this military operation, actually starting to invade this part of Syria?
So I was able to reach him on a very poor telephone connection. This was after Trump had acknowledged that the Turks were going in and said that he was going to pull American troops out of the way, but before it had actually started.
What did he say about this decision by the U.S.? Does he feel betrayed?
He never used that word. The word that he used was disappointment. He said that this decision was a disappointment for them. Then when I asked him about what was next, he basically said, we’re going to resist. If the Turks come in, we’re ready for them. We’ve been at war for seven years, and we can continue the war for another seven years.
But without the U.S. as a buffer and a protective force, what kind of chances do these Kurdish forces have against the Turkish military?
I think we have every reason to expect a very bloody battle that could draw on for a very long time. What we’re going to see is a NATO country that has a very modern military with jets and tanks and all sorts of heavy machinery going up against what’s basically a militia that has guns and R.P.G.s and more kinds of light weapons. What they do have is a lot of experience doing insurgency. So I think what we could see is going back to the way that they fought the Turks inside of Turkey. And so we’re going to see roadside bombs.  But I think that if the Turks really do keep pushing in, I think it could get very bloody and very violent.
So when you do cross the border, will you try to find Mazlum? Will you try to check in with him?
I’ll definitely try to see him. I’ll definitely send a message to his people and say that we’re there and that we would like to talk to him and hear what he’s thinking and what he’s planning for the future. I have no idea if that’ll work.
He might consider it too risky to meet with us. And I think when he’s talked to me in the past, it’s because he saw me and he saw The New York Times as a way not just to speak to American policymakers, but also to speak to the American people. The mood has obviously changed. He’s seen a decision from Washington that’s left his people and the region that he is trying to protect incredibly vulnerable to a longtime enemy. Now we’ve got bombs going off in cities and shells landing and airstrikes happening. And I think there’s probably a sense that the reason this is all happening is because of a decision made in the United States. And he might not feel it necessarily worth his while now to try to send a message to the United States anymore.
Well, Ben, stay safe. Good luck on this reporting, and we’ll talk to you soon.
On Sunday, during an interview with CBS, the U.S. secretary of defense, Mark Esper, said that he was evacuating the 1,000 American troops that remain in northern Syria — for their own protection.
So I spoke with the president last night after discussions with the rest of the national security team. And he directed that we begin a deliberate withdrawal of forces from northern Syria.
A deliberate withdrawal from the entire country?
From northern Syria.
Which is where most of our forces are.
The evacuation will represent a nearly total withdrawal of U.S. forces from Syria and the complete abandonment of Kurdish fighters there. In response, the Kurdish fighters announced they had formed a new alliance with the Syrian government of Bashar al-Assad, a sworn enemy of the U.S. Amid the U.S. withdrawal, The Times reports that Turkish-backed fighters have brutally executed Kurdish leaders and that Kurdish forces have lost control of a prison holding 700 relatives and supporters of Islamic State fighters, allowing everyone inside to escape.
Just in the past few hours online, there have been videos circulating — horrific videos — showing execution of some of these Kurdish allies of ours. There are reports of hundreds of ISIS fighters and family members just running free.
It’s terrible. It’s a terrible situation. We condemn it. We have condemned it.
Here’s what else you need to know today. The Times reports that federal prosecutors have opened a criminal investigation into whether the president’s personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani broke lobbying laws in his dealings with Ukraine. The prosecutors are examining Giuliani’s efforts to undermine the American ambassador to Ukraine, Marie Yovanovitch, who was fired by President Trump after two associates of Giuliani waged a campaign to discredit her. Over the weekend, in a show of support for Giuliani, Trump had lunch with him at his golf club in Virginia.
After a Turkish airstrike, female detainees connected to the Islamic State rioted in a camp in Ain Issa, lighting their tents on fire and tearing down fences, according to a camp administrator, Jalal al-Iyaf.
In the mayhem, more than 500 of them escaped, Mr. al-Iyaf said.
Most of the camp’s other 13,000 residents are Syrian, but there are also refugees from Iraq who sought safety in Syria because of violence at home. By nightfall, some of those people had left the unguarded camp, too, fearing that it was no longer safe, Mr. al-Iyaf said.
Determining the exact state of play on the ground proved difficult on Sunday, as the advances by Turkish-backed Arab fighters scattered Kurdish officials who had previously been able to provide information.
The likelihood of an ISIS resurgence remains hard to gauge, since the Syrian Kurdish leadership may have exaggerated some incidents to catch the West’s attention.
The camp escape came hours before the United States military said it would relocate its remaining troops in northern Syria to other areas of the country in the coming weeks.
Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper said in an interview with CBS’s “Face the Nation” that the United States found itself “likely caught between two opposing advancing armies” in northern Syria.
Syrian government troops were expected to enter the city of Kobani overnight.
The Kurdish-led militia said the Syrian government had a “duty to protect the country’s borders and preserve Syrian sovereignty,” and would deploy along the Syrian-Turkish border.
Previously, Trump administration officials argued that keeping Mr. Assad’s forces out of the territory was key to stemming Iranian and Russian influence and keeping pressure on Mr. Assad.
Mr. Trump says his decision to pull American troops out of the way of the Turkish advance was part of his effort to extricate the United States from “endless wars” in the Middle East and elsewhere.
“The Kurds and Turkey have been fighting for many years,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter on Sunday.
Mr. Trump also tried to assuage his critics, including Senator Lindsey Graham, the South Carolina Republican who broke with him over the Syria decision and is promising bipartisan legislation to slap economic sanctions on Turkey.
But his decision has had devastating consequences for Syria’s Kurds.
They lost thousands of fighters in battles against the Islamic State and sought to establish a form of autonomous rule in the lands captured from the jihadists. Now that project has collapsed, and it remains unclear what rights they will retain, if any, should they fall back under Mr. Assad’s government.
On Sunday, Turkish troops and their Arab proxies made major progress on the ground, seizing the strategic border town of Tel Abyad and prompting celebrations across the border in Turkey.
In Akcakale, a Turkish border town, residents raced around in cars, flying Turkish flags and honking their horns. Exiled Syrians, many of them from Tel Abyad, climbed onto rooftops to watch the end of the battle as gunfire sounded.
Three wounded Syrian Arab fighters were recuperating in a private apartment near the border in Akcakale after returning from the front line, where they had been shot in an ambush by Kurdish troops.
The men were from an area controlled by Kurdish forces who they said had prevented them from returning home.
On Sunday afternoon, Mr. Erdogan announced that his forces controlled nearly 70 square miles of territory in northern Syria.
They have also taken control of an important highway connecting the two flanks of Kurdish-held territory, the Turkish defense ministry said. This allows Turkish troops and their proxies to block supply lines between Kurdish forces — and cut an exit route to Iraq.
It also makes it harder for American troops to leave Syria by road.
Since the Syrian civil war began eight years ago, northern Syria has changed hands several times as rebels, Islamists, extremists and Kurdish factions have vied with the government for control.
After joining American troops to drive out the Islamic State, the Kurdish-led militia emerged as the dominant force across the area, taking control of former ISIS territory and guarding former ISIS fighters on behalf of the United States and other international allies.
With Turkey making increasing noise in recent months about forcing the Kurdish militia away from its border, the American military made contingency plans to get about five dozen of the highest-priority detainees out of Syria.
The planning began last December, when Mr. Trump first announced that he would withdraw troops from the country before his administration slowed down that plan, one official said.
American special forces moved first to get the two British detainees, El Shafee Elsheikh and Alexanda Kotey, on Oct. 9, in part because there was a clear plan for them already in place: The Justice Department wants to bring them to Virginia for prosecution. They are now being held in Iraq.
But as the military then sought to take custody of additional detainees, the Kurds balked, the two American officials said. The Kurds’ animosity might harden now that they have aligned themselves with Mr. Assad, an American foe.
That, combined with the Pentagon’s withdrawal American forces, makes it even less likely the United States will be able to take any more detainees out.
Ben Hubbard reported from Dohuk Iraq, Charlie Savage and Eric Schmitt from Washington and Patrick Kingsley from Istanbul. Carlotta Gall contributed reporting from Akcakale, Turkey, Peter Baker from Washington, Hwaida Saad from Beirut, Lebanon, and Iliana Magra from London.