The clip underscores how the president’s escalating war on what he calls the “fake news” media has encouraged media-savvy members of the far-right fringe to defend Mr. Trump with extreme language and images.
WASHINGTON — The creator of a gruesome video that showed a fake President Trump killing journalists and political opponents and that was played at a meeting of a pro-Trump group over the weekend is part of a loose network of right-wing provocateurs with a direct line to the White House.
The connections underscore how the president’s escalating war on what he calls the “fake news” media has elevated people from the far-right fringe into allies who defend Mr. Trump with extreme language and images.
The president did not mention the video on Monday in the blizzard of Tweets he sent out wishing his former press secretary good luck on “Dancing with the Stars,” defending his recent decisions on Syria and attacking Democrats for their impeachment inquiry. But Stephanie Grisham, the White House press secretary, said Mr. Trump condemned the video. It was shown at a meeting of American Priority, a pro-Trump group, celebrating free speech at Trump National Doral Miami, which he owns.
Many of the Trump supporters who attended — including Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida, the former White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders and Donald Trump Jr., the president’s son — said they did not condone the violence portrayed in the video and were not aware that it had played on a loop in a conference room next to the Donald J. Trump Ballroom at the resort.
The goal of the online community that makes and shares grisly videos like this is to use what are known as “spicy memes” to fire up the president’s base online, stir outrage among his opponents and provoke coverage by the mainstream media, which often helps amplify the messages.
Some of these meme-makers make money from their creations by soliciting donations or running ads on YouTube. (Data from SocialBlade, a website that tracks social media statistics, estimates that TheGeekzTeam has earned less than $2,000 from his or her channel over the past year.) Others do it purely for the notoriety — or, best of all, an approving retweet from the president.
TheGeekzTeam has been a prolific meme-maker for several years, posting videos with titles like “Captain MAGA” and “Trump: The Punisher” to YouTube and to r/the_donald, a large pro-Trump forum on Reddit. The video shown at the American Priority meeting was first posted on YouTube in July 2018.
Earlier this year, the account began contributing to MemeWorld, a centralized meme repository organized by Mr. Cook, who goes by the name “Carpe Donktum” online.
Mr. Cook’s website acts as a clearinghouse for offensive memes and videos, allowing users to post homemade videos that often depict Mr. Trump as a crusader or superhero who uses violence to suppress news outlets, individual journalists and political opponents.
Mr. Cook’s own videos, as well as his one-stop shop of a website, has become a go-to resource for Mr. Scavino, who often shares the video with Mr. Trump. In April, Mr. Cook landed in the center of a controversy over a doctored version of a video in which former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. addressed his interactions with women.
In the doctored video, a cartoon version of Mr. Biden appears to be nuzzling the back of his head. Mr. Trump shared the video with his 60 million followers on Twitter at the time.
“Trolls in the White House,” Mr. Cook wrote in a photo he shared to his personal Instagram account on July 11, the day of the summit. Days earlier, he shared photos to his personal Instagram page of his family greeting Mr. Trump in the Oval Office as Mr. Scavino watched.
At the White House social media meeting, which honored pro-Trump meme-makers and other members of the far-right ecosystem, Mr. Trump praised a room full of content creators as people who had worked with Mr. Scavino on ideas that ultimately saved him money on advertising.
A White House spokesman did not respond to a request for comment about why Mr. Cook was invited to participate in the White House social media meeting in the first place.
Tracing the origins of the video shown over the weekend illustrates the often-complicated origins of “spicy memes.” The video was taken from the 2014 movie “Kingsman: The Secret Service,” and showed the actor Colin Firth in a gory church massacre scene. In the movie, the people killed are members of a fundamentalist church.
In an earlier online iteration the target was just one news organization: CNN. Mr. Trump’s head was superimposed on Mr. Firth’s body but all the people punched, shot, and stabbed had CNN logos covering their faces.
“You are fake news,” Mr. Trump said as he pointed a gun at a woman with the logo The creator of that original video, Andres Hughes, said online that he made the video and submitted it to a meme contest run by the right-wing website Infowars three years ago, hoping to win a $20,000 prize.
But in July 2018, the doctored film clip was further altered to include new targets. Other news organizations, like PBS, NPR, Politico and The Washington Post, were added to the mix.
Mr. Trump was also depicted killing and maiming political enemies like Representative Maxine Waters of California, Senator John McCain of Arizona, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, former Presidents Barack Obama and Bill Clinton, as well as Hillary Clinton and others.
An email to an address listed on the creator’s YouTube channel was not immediately returned. American Priority denounced the video shown at its event as not “approved, seen or sanctioned” by the organizers and denounced violence of any kind. But the group’s founder, Alex Phillips, has his own longstanding relationship with Mr. Cook, and in the past has supported his work online.
Annie Karni and Katie Rogers reported from Washington, and Kevin Roose from New York. Jeremy Peters and Kitty Bennett contributed reporting from Washington.