WARSAW, Poland — Winning a Nobel Prize in Literature is usually a cause for celebration in the writer’s home country, a point of pride and a justification for a bit of patriotic pomp. But in Poland, where the nation is engaged in a bitter and consequential battle over the question of what it means to be Polish, the prize has led to controversy, instead.
When Olga Tokarczuk of Poland won it on Thursday, the reaction was as divided as is the country itself. To some, she is an eloquent writer who captures Poland’s tragic and inspiring 20th-century history. To others, she is a traitor.
Ms. Tokarczuk has documented Poland’s long history of pluralism and ethnic mixing at the same time as her government has cast migrants as a mortal danger to the nation. She has denounced attacks on gays and globalists, even as leaders in Poland’s governing Law and Justice Party have sought to convince voters that a “rainbow plague” backed by decadent Western leaders presented an existential threat to both families and the nation itself.
So with national elections scheduled to take place in Poland on Sunday, perhaps it was not surprising that Poland’s competing factions sought to use the prize announcement to bolster their own sides.
Rafal Ziemkiewicz, a right-wing journalist, took to Twitter to excoriate Ms. Tokarczuk and other artists, including the Oscar-winning director Pawel Pawlikowski.
Those who oppose Poland’s government and its attempts to shape the cultural landscape with nationalist dogma hoped to use the moment to show the world that Poland would not be defined by the government.
He signed it with a grinning emoji.
Ms. Tokarczuk became Poland’s sixth winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature and only the 15th woman to receive the distinction since 1901.
She is best known for works such as “Primeval and Other Times,” “The Book of Jacob,” “Drive Your Plow Over the Bones of the Dead” and “Flights,” an experimental novel for which she received in 2018 the Man Booker International Prize for translated fiction.
She was branded a “targowiczanin” — an old-fashioned term for traitor — and vilified by right-wing nationalists.
Just this week, Poland’s minister of culture, Piotr Glinski, was dismissive when asked about her writings.
“I’ve tried reading some, but I’ve never finished any,” Mr. Glinski said when asked about Ms. Tokarczuk on TVN24 on Monday.
But on Thursday, Mr. Glinski did congratulate Ms. Tokarczuk. “It is proof that Polish culture is appreciated all over the world,” he wrote on Twitter.
Poland’s response to the prize is just a further example of how deeply split the country is.
The governing party promotes a brand of nationalism that requires a carefully curated version of Polish history and equates criticism of Poland with a lack of patriotism. It led the government to pass legislation that would have made it a crime to accuse the Polish nation of complicity in the Holocaust. After fierce international backlash, the law was watered down.
But the government is still waging war against the leaders of some of the country’s most important cultural institutions, including the Polin museum where it has been working to oust the current director, Dariusz Stola, who is viewed as a political enemy. The government says he has used the museum as a platform to organize opposition events. Mr. Stola disagrees, saying he is being targeted because he is not “loyal” to the party.
Even before Law and Justice began trying to remake the cultural landscape, Ms. Tokarczuk was warning about the desire of certain politicians to erase the darker moments of Polish history.
When Ms. Tokarczuk was receiving an award for her work in the city of Walbrzych in 2016, Law and Justice officials ostentatiously left the room.
Last week, when Ms. Tokarczuk, was honored in southwestern Poland, where she lives, local Law and Justice politicians objected. Krystyna Sliwinska, a Law and Justice councilwoman in Klodzko, said that the writer “slanders Poles” and is lying about their history and should not receive such a distinction.
At the ceremony, Ms. Tokarczuk responded.
