Writers, directors and other creators share recommendations for how to spend the scariest night of the year.
You’d think that Elvira, Mistress of the Dark, would have plenty of advice on how to spend Halloween. After all, she’s made a career out of highlighting the spooky and macabre.
Fortunately, I found some others with horror in their bones to share recommendations on how to spend the scariest night of the year. The responses have been condensed and edited.
Halloween is a time when I dip into short stories. I’d pair two of my favorite modern collections with classic collections.
“Things We Lost in the Fire” by Mariana Enriquez, an Argentine writer, reminds me of Shirley Jackson’s “The Lottery and Other Stories.” Enriquez’s stories are haunting and disturbing and play with ambiguity. But they also mine sociopolitical and gender anxieties like Jackson did. Enriquez’s “The Dirty Kid” is one of the most disturbing stories I’ve read in a while.
Nathan Ballingrud’s “Wounds: Six Stories From the Border of Hell” is a perfect match with Clive Barker’s “Books of Blood.” Both collections really stretch the boundaries of the genre by employing these grand, horrific worlds. Nathan’s story “The Butcher’s Table” reminds me of the first time I read Barker’s “In the Hills, the Cities.” It’s horrifying, but there’s beauty.
I’d check out the Dakota building where parts of “Rosemary’s Baby” were filmed. It was a rare horror film that represented New York at its most sophisticated and aesthetically pleasing rather than grimy. Seeing some of those creepy details up close would be a lot of fun.
Even though I’m a die-hard horror film fan, dressing up for Halloween has never been my thing. I’ve always preferred to spend this sacred holiday in a dark room watching scary movies — until I had a kid. Now, the best thing to do for Halloween is take my 5-year-old trick-or-treating on the best street in Greenpoint: Milton Street. The houses go all out with their decorations, and it has that old-school feel of actually walking up to get the candy. It’s packed, fun and amazing each year.
I recommend a trip to the village of Sleepy Hollow in Tarrytown, N.Y. Not only is the village itself beautiful this time of year, but it embraces the spirit of Halloween and Washington Irving’s legend.
I like to start my day at the Sleepy Hollow Cemetery and the Old Dutch Church. It’s a beautiful and historic cemetery with gorgeous tombs, headstones and mausoleums. With twisted trees and spooky statues everywhere, it looks like something out of a classic horror movie. During the day you can grab a cup of hot apple cider or a cold seasonal beer right inside the cemetery and wander the winding paths and hills. In the evening there’s a haunted lantern tour through the cemetery, which I highly recommend.
As the sun sets, it’s imperative that you visit the Horseman’s Hollow at Philipsburg Manor. It’s a walking tour through a 300-year-old Dutch village that’s now haunted by the headless horseman. It’s the most frightening and artfully done haunted house experience around.
We’re huge fans of hosting classic homemade Halloween house parties. You can make anything look scary with the right string of lights and lit-up jack-o’-lanterns scattered about.  Just hand draw skulls or witch hats out with crayons on brown packing paper, cut them out and glue them to coarse string and hang them around. Orange string lights make great additions to any décor too, not to mention as many candles as you can scare up.
As far as food, a favorite in our house is a beef stew that is slow baked inside a basketball-size pumpkin. Getting some apple cider and heating it up on the stove will make the place smell great, and you can serve it with rum, butter and apple slices.
If you’ve ever wanted to try your hand at conjuring, Halloween is the night to jump in. When I lived in New York, my friend Pat and I painted a magic circle on our roof on 131st Street, put on black robes and built an altar. Here’s what you do: walk around the circle, pausing every few steps to chant the name of an entity (Satan or Cthulhu would work). After about 10-20 minutes of this, make a loud, clear and simple request from the spirit world.
Halloween is one of the few times I get my wife to watch scary movies. We’ll sit and watch three of them while waiting for the doorbell to ring. This year we’re going to watch “The Hitcher,” the 1986 movie with Rutger Hauer. It was one of his greatest movies. It’s this twisted story of a father-son relationship, and about the importance of being able to destroy the older version of yourself in order to become the man you were meant to be. It’s also something rare: a scary movie that’s shot mostly in sunshine.
Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn is doing this thing called Nightfall on Oct. 25 and 26, in which all these performers and groups — Morbid Anatomy, Death of Classical — are doing performances throughout the cemetery. You walk around and see all these amazing visuals too. I love that Green-Wood is working hard to make cemeteries fun again, a place to hang out. This city forgets its history quickly, so it will be nice to host a performance art séance for the dead and the living.
In our family we have three boys that are 12, 17 and 19. When I was a kid, we loved watching those half-hour Halloween specials with Garfield and Fat Albert. You can watch a few of them now on YouTube and Amazon Prime. We even love the Halloween episode of “Happy Days,” where Richie Cunningham goes to a haunted house.
There’s a Halloween street every year on 69th Street between Broadway and Central Park West. The 69th Street Block Association does it, and it’s pretty amazing. I have a 4-year-old named Georgie, who wants to be a bush for Halloween. That’s my new Halloween experience that will take my time in the next few weeks: Turn my daughter into a bush.