Vice Media, the insurgent media brand known for its arch take on youth culture and entertainment, has acquired the women’s lifestyle publisher Refinery29.
The deal is valued at about $400 million and includes mostly stock with some cash, according to two people familiar with the transaction who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.
Refinery29 publishes entertainment content aimed at women, an audience Vice lacks, and also runs a lucrative events business. The company had been looking for possible buyers for the last few years as it faced a tough business environment. The digital media industry is dominated by Google and Facebook, which together take more than 60 percent of online advertising revenue.
Nancy Dubuc, the chief executive of Vice, called the merger “a transformative day” in a note sent to the staff Wednesday.
"With this acquisition, we’ll be growing our investment in premium content production across all our divisions,” she added.
The deal is the second significant merger among digital publishers in recent days. Last week, Vox Media acquired New York Media, the company behind New York magazine and its online offshoots, in an all-stock transaction that surprised the industry. Last year, several media executives discussed the likelihood that they would have to join forces, in part to counter the influence of Facebook and Google.
The company laid off 10 percent of staff earlier this year and consolidated several websites under the Vice.com umbrella. Ms. Dubuc has presided over several shake-ups since taking over as Vice Media’s chief executive last year.
As a result of its taking on Refinery29, Vice Media will consider cutting some jobs in its business and administrative wings, but plans to add more people in the editorial and creative departments, according to the people familiar with the deal.
Vice started as a free punk magazine in Montreal in 1994. Over the years, it has largely sloughed off its brash tone to become a global media company with about 3,000 employees. Backed by media giants like the Walt Disney Company and 21st Century Fox, as well as the private equity firm TPG, Vice Media now includes an advertising agency, a TV network and a film production arm.
Refinery29’s financial backers include WarnerMedia’s Turner group and the cable giant Discovery. Both are effectively trading their Refinery29 investments for stock in Vice Media, since the deal includes little cash.
Vice Media’s valuation has become a point of contention even among its own investors. Earlier this year, Disney decided the value of its investment in the company was effectively nothing, meaning it did not expect a return on its investment. In a filing this year, Disney said it had taken a $353 million write-down on its stake in the company.
This year, Vice announced that it had raised $250 million in debt financing from investors who included the billionaire George Soros.
In June, HBO canceled the nightly program “Vice News Tonight,” and Josh Tyrangiel, Vice Media’s executive vice president of news, who had overseen the show, announced that he was leaving the company. Jesse Angelo, a onetime publisher of The New York Post, joined Vice Media as president of global news and entertainment soon after Mr. Tyrangiel’s departure.
Ms. Dubuc has also been working to bring about changes in the company’s culture and workplace behavior. A 2017 New York Times investigation uncovered four settlements involving Vice Media employees and allegations of sexual harassment or defamation.
In her memo to the staff, Ms. Dubuc anticipated the remarks of critics concerning the merger of Vice Media and Refinery29.
