Set in a funeral parlor on Christmas Eve, this revival at the Irish Repertory Theater plays alcoholism for drama without resorting to boozy histrionics.
You don’t need a single line of dialogue to feel the bone-deep malaise that pervades Conor McPherson’s “Dublin Carol”: The play’s set practically screams exhausted shabbiness, drenched in an orange-brown palette Pantone might call Tragic Rust — a monochromatic approach that is representative of the limited emotional landscape to follow.
As if this weren’t enough, the action takes place on Christmas Eve, which can be the most jolly or the most depressing time of year; it’s almost immediately clear that “Dublin Carol” has picked the second option.
And there is more: We are in the back office of a funeral parlor, and the main character, John (Jeffrey Bean), is an alcoholic who works for the undertaker. The play, which has little conventional plot, is essentially a snapshot of this lost soul.
Mr. McPherson has deployed a string section made up of theater’s smallest violins. Yet John’s despair is not so much melodramatic as it is achingly banal. This has the merit of realism.
Irish artists have long made great use of drink and its natural habitat, pubs, as lubricants for storytelling. One of Mr. McPherson’s best-known plays, “The Weir” — the immediate predecessor to “Dublin Carol” — is even set in a barroom.
“I wish I’d never been born,” John, at one point, tells his daughter, Mary (Sarah Street), who has come by to inform him that her mother is dying of cancer. The pair engage in wistful chitchat and reminiscences, but this isn’t an easy reunion — she recalls how her dad once took her to a pub when she was a young child, and he drank so much that he got into a brawl and fell on top of her.
The conversation with Mary is book-ended by two scenes with John’s young colleague, Mark (Cillian Hegarty). In the first, which takes place in the morning, the men are tentative, unsure of how to conduct small talk. John assures Mark that he still drinks, just not as much as he used to. Yet he is recovering from a hangover, and we see him hit the whiskey with Mary. By the third and final scene, when Mark returns in the late afternoon, John is so inebriated that he is staggering, and his mood has plummeted in parallel with the shrinking level inside the bottle of Jameson.
This is just one more day in a wrecked life, and ultimately the show wrings little out of John as a theatrical creation, proving that drinking can smother drama as well as people. Happily, it’s a fault Mr. McPherson corrected in his lovely Broadway-bound musical, “Girl from the North Country,” which, unlike “Dublin Carol,” draws a dark form of illumination and beauty out of loneliness and despair.
Through Nov. 10 at Irish Repertory Theater, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , irishrep.org. Running time: 1 hour 20 minutes.