The Department of Homeland Security said it would begin testing on hundreds of thousands of immigrants in federal detention facilities.
Immigrant and privacy advocates said the move raised privacy concerns for an already vulnerable population. The new rules would allow the government to collect DNA from children as well as those who seek asylum at legal ports of entry.
The advocates warned that United States citizens, who are sometimes accidentally booked into immigration custody, could also be forced to provide DNA samples.
“That kind of mass collection alters the purpose of DNA collection from one of criminal investigation basically to population surveillance, which is basically contrary to our basic notions of a free, trusting, autonomous society,” said Vera Eidelman, a staff lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union’s Speech, Privacy, and Technology Project.
She said that because genetic material carries family connections, the data collection would have implications not only for those in immigration custody but also their family members who might be United States citizens or legal residents.
Homeland security officials said the new initiative was permitted under the DNA Fingerprint Act of 2005. Until now, immigrant detainees have been exempt from the law, they said, because of an agreement between two Obama administration officials, Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. and the homeland security secretary, Janet Napolitano.
A letter in August to the White House from the Office of Special Counsel cited an official whistle-blower complaint alleging that immigration agencies had failed to carry out their full obligations under the law to collect DNA. It suggested that immigration authorities such as Customs and Border Protection already were carrying out limited DNA collections.
The officials said the proposed rule was inspired partly by a pilot program conducted this summer along the southwestern border, in which ICE agents used rapid DNA sampling technology to identify “fraudulent family units” — adults who were using children disguised as their own to exploit special protections for families with immigrant children.
The new program would differ from the pilot in that it would provide a comprehensive DNA profile of individuals who are tested, as opposed to the more narrow test that was used only to determine parentage. And unlike the testing under the pilot program, the results would be shared with other law enforcement agencies.
In supplying the F.B.I. and other law enforcement with the DNA of immigration detainees, federal authorities are jumping into an ethical debate about the use of DNA in criminal investigations. While such sampling has been crucial in securing thousands of prosecutions over the past several decades, it has also generated controversy because of the potential for abuse.
The move comes amid a wider Trump administration push to criminalize unauthorized border crossings, even in some cases when people enter the country lawfully, such as those who present themselves at legal ports of entry to seek asylum.
Crossing the border without documents and attempting to elude border authorities is a misdemeanor for first offenders.
President Trump has often sought to link all immigrants, regardless of their legal status, to crime despite a significant body of research that has shown that immigrants are less likely to commit crimes than native-born citizens.
The homeland security officials who discussed the new initiative said immigration agents would be trained to properly collect the data while respecting immigrants’ privacy rights. They said the Department of Homeland Security had the authority to collect DNA.
Though the Supreme Court has found that the constitutional right to privacy applies to everyone within the United States, regardless of their immigration status, a more restrictive interpretation of the Fourth Amendment has been applied within a 100-mile zone of the border, where suspicionless searches are allowed, even of American citizens.
Trump administration officials did not provide a timeline for the rollout of the regulation but said a working group was meeting weekly to introduce it as soon as possible.