Europe|He Opposed Using Transgender Clients’ Pronouns. It Became a Legal Battle.
He Opposed Using Transgender Clients’ Pronouns. It Became a Legal Battle.
LONDON — A British government agency did not discriminate against an employee who refused to use transgender clients’ pronouns because he felt it violated his Christian beliefs, an employment tribunal has ruled.
The employee, David Mackereth, 56, had argued that the Department for Work and Pensions acted in breach of the country’s Equality Act when it instructed him to use clients’ preferred pronouns, or face the loss of his job.
Dr. Mackereth’s backers were critical of the decision, saying that it represented limits on free speech, while supporters of transgender rights hailed the ruling as important recognition for a group that has long been marginalized.
The British government estimated in 2018 that there were 200,000 to half a million transgender people in the country, and a YouGov survey commissioned by Stonewall, a British L.G.B.T. charity, found that two in five trans respondents had experienced a hate crime or incident in the previous year.
In June 2018, Dr. Mackereth was undergoing training as a health and disabilities assessor for APM, a service provider, at a Department for Work and Pensions assessment center in London when another trainee asked how a transgender person should be referred to.
The tribunal heard that Dr. Mackereth believed in “the truth of the Bible and, in particular, the truth of Genesis 1:27.” By his interpretation, that biblical verse — “So God created man in His own image; in the image of God He created him; male and female He created them” — supported the view that people are immutably male or female.
He also believed that “it would be irresponsible and dishonest for e.g. a health professional to accommodate and/or encourage a patient’s impersonation of the opposite sex,” he told the tribunal.
Dr. Ahmed expressed concerns about Mr. Mackereth’s comments during a weekly staff meeting, and it was later decided that James Owen, a contract manager for APM, should talk to Dr. Mackereth about the matter, the tribunal heard.
In that conversation, Mr. Owen told Dr. Mackereth that he was at risk of losing his job, and Mr. Mackereth said in his witness statement that he felt pressured to renounce his beliefs in order to keep it.
In an email exchange a few days later, Mr. Owen asked Dr. Mackereth whether he agreed to “refer to the customer by their chosen sexuality and name.” If he did not wish to do so, Mr. Owen told him, the Department for Work and Pensions would respect his decision and his right to end the employment contract.
“I am a Christian, and in good conscience I cannot do what the D.W.P. are requiring of me,” Dr. Mackereth replied, according to the tribunal report.
Mr. Owen then accepted his resignation, but Dr. Mackereth replied in an email that he had been fired.
In its ruling, the tribunal panel found that Dr. Mackereth had not been discriminated against or harassed under the Equality Act. Christianity is protected under the act, but the panel found that Dr. Mackereth’s specific beliefs were not.
Dr. Mackereth plans to appeal the decision, according to the advocacy group Christian Concern.
But Emma Meehan, the assistant director for public affairs at L.G.B.T. Foundation, a British charity, welcomed the outcome.
A similar case came to light in the United States this week after a high school teacher in West Point, Va., was fired over his refusal to refer to a transitioned transgender student using masculine pronouns. The teacher, Peter Vlaming, also cited religious beliefs for his position.
On Monday, Mr. Vlaming sued school district officials, arguing that in firing him they had violated his rights to freedom of speech and religion, among other claims.
Jonathan Hochman, the school’s principal, said after Mr. Vlaming was fired in December, “I can’t think of a worse way to treat a child than what was happening,” according to The Associated Press.