And so will lots of other states, despite the F.C.C.’s decision.
Mr. Wheeler is a former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission.
But the ruling did keep net neutrality alive — by overruling the agency’s claim that it could pre-empt state governments from setting out their own net neutrality requirements. The decision opens the doors for states to fill the regulatory void. Internet service providers should be quaking in their boots: As of today, they run the serious risk that they’ll have to follow a patchwork of different state requirements. The companies may not have liked the previous administration’s decision to classify them as common carriers, but that at least provided them with a uniform national policy. That is now gone.
At present, 34 states (and the District of Columbia) have introduced some kind of open internet legislation. The leading net neutrality law was passed in the nation’s most populous state, California, and follows the rules that the F.C.C. overturned. California agreed to hold off on enforcing their new net neutrality law until the pre-emption question was answered by the court. That hold is now off: If you live in California, you will have an open internet. It remains to be seen whether California’s law becomes the de facto open internet law across the nation or whether it becomes one of many different net neutrality laws.
The very same issue has animated the debate over federal privacy legislation. Because of a privacy law (also passed in California) and the actions of other states, network companies (along with others such as Google and Facebook) have been forced to ask Congress for a national privacy law to clear up potential interstate discrepancies. Interestingly, the lack of a uniform privacy policy began early in the Trump administration when the Republican-controlled Congress repealed another Obama-era rule that limited the networks’ access to the personal information of their subscribers. Into that void stepped, once again, California.
The court decision comes on the heels of a new study from George Washington University demonstrating that the argument used by the F.C.C. to repeal net neutrality — that the regulation hurt investment in broadband infrastructure — was false. The agency acted in true Trumpian style: Truth be damned, just keep telling a colorful story often enough.
The House of Representatives passed legislation that repeals the agency’s actions, but it has languished in the Senate, where the companies and their allies opposed it. Now the network companies face an interesting dilemma. Having received the deregulation they sought, the threat of conflicting state laws will send them to Congress to ask for a federal law that does what the F.C.C. could not. But in the interim, the strong California law will become a de facto standard. If there is a debate in Congress, that will be the starting point.
There are only around 30 days remaining on the legislative calendar — the impeachment activities will dominate Congress’ considerations. When Congress comes back in January, the companies that have waged a multiyear crusade against the open internet are likely to be fighting for federal legislation to overturn California’s law and pre-empt those of other states.
The future of an open and fair internet is now in the hands of state governments and Congress. The more states act, the greater imperative companies will feel to accept meaningful action from Congress.
