New York|Bronx Teenager’s Death Is the Youngest Vaping Fatality in U.S.
The 17-year-old who died last week is the youngest of 23 people to die nationwide of a vaping-related lung illness.
The death brought the total number of vaping-related deaths in the United States to 23, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and state agencies. New Jersey health officials said last week that an adult woman was the first resident of that state to die of a vaping-related illness.
The New York City medical examiner’s office was conducting its own inquiry into the death announced by the state, according to a spokeswoman for Mayor Bill de Blasio.
“The city is investigating the case in question but no official determination has been made at this time,” the spokeswoman, Avery Cohen, said.
Of the 18 deaths tallied by the C.D.C. as of Oct. 1 — the agency’s latest official figures — the youngest victim was 27, officials said. The four cases besides the one in the Bronx reported to state agencies since then involved adults, officials said.
As of Tuesday, the New York State Department of Health had received 110 reports from doctors about severe pulmonary illness among patients ages 14 to 69 who had used at least one vape product before becoming sick, officials said. Around 1,100 cases of vaping-related illness had been reported nationwide.
Patients with vaping-related lung injuries typically show symptoms that resemble flu or pneumonia. No single substance has been shown to cause the illness, but several marijuana products have been identified as possible culprits. It had not been determined by Tuesday what substance was responsible in the Bronx death, a state health official said.
About 70 percent of the patients were male, 80 percent were under 35 and 16 percent were younger than 18, she said. The median age for those who died was about 50.
Several states, including New York, have responded to the outbreak, and to the increasing rate of teenage vaping, with efforts to ban flavored e-cigarette pods that are especially popular with children. The Trump administration said last month that it was considering a federal ban on flavored e-cigarettes.
Last week, a state appeals court blocked the New York ban on the flavored pods just before it was to take effect. Vaping groups had sued to stop the ban, arguing that it would hurt retailers and adults who use the products to quit smoking tobacco. The vaping industry is also battling a more extensive ban of all vaping products in Massachusetts, which recently reported its first vaping-related death.
The disclosure of the Bronx teenager’s vaping-related death came as New York City filed a federal lawsuit against 22 websites it claims targeted and sold e-cigarette products to people under 21, the minimum legal age to buy tobacco and e-cigarette products in New York.
