Voting rights advocates described the removals as troubling, saying it was just the beginning of efforts to suppress the vote in battleground states.
A coming purge of Georgia’s voter rolls has raised alarms among advocacy groups in the state and nationwide, many of whom see the issue of who gets to cast a ballot re-emerging with next year’s election, particularly in battleground states.
This week, Georgia state officials said they would be removing about 300,000 names from their lists of eligible voters, a number that amounts to almost 4 percent of those registered to vote. The state said the move is a normal part of updating records after voters have moved away or stopped casting ballots.
Walter Jones, the spokesman for the Georgia secretary of state’s voter education program, called the purge “a routine process that every state does,” and one that has gone on for years in Georgia under both parties.
The purges, however, have become deeply controversial in Georgia. In 2018, in one of the most competitive governor’s races in years, Brian Kemp, a Republican, declared a narrow victory against his democratic rival, Stacey Abrams. Since Mr. Kemp was then serving as Georgia secretary of state, he oversaw his own election, which critics accused him of manipulating by conducting purges in communities that were more likely to vote for Democrats. He beat Ms. Abrams by 1.4 percentage points.
Voting rights advocates described the latest purge as troubling, saying it was just the beginning of efforts by some state officials across the country to suppress the vote in competitive races. They see the efforts as targeting the young and people of color since they are often disproportionately hit by the removals.
“We see very similar problems reflected in states all around the country now; there have been an uptick in purges,” said Hannah Fried, the executive director of All Voting Is Local, a group that fights wrongful removals. It is monitoring two other likely battleground states, Florida and Ohio.
The stakes in Georgia are especially high next year because in addition to voting for president, Georgians will be picking two new senators: Johnny Isakson, a Republican, announced in August that he was retiring for health reasons, and David Perdue, also a Republican, is up for re-election. Traditionally, when two Senate seats are simultaneously up for grabs, they often go the same way, which is critical when the Republicans command only a 53-47 majority in the upper chamber.
Mr. Jones said Georgia had limited its purge to voters who had registered a change of address, whose official mail had been returned undelivered, and who had not been active in the last two election cycles.
Those voters had received a notice asking them to confirm that they still lived at their addresses, and they were given two additional election cycles to respond. Those who have failed to do so will receive a final notice next week along with a card they must return to avoid being purged. If they do not respond, their names will be removed.
Fair Fight Action, an advocacy organization founded by Ms. Abrams, said Georgia’s removal of registered voters who had not cast recent ballots was wrong.
Ohio has since struggled to keep its rolls accurate. This year, Ohio’s secretary of state released the names of 235,000 voters it had planned to purge from the rolls in September, but a review of the names by the government and nongovernmental groups revealed that up to 20 percent of the names were there in error.
Florida is another state that voting rights advocates are closely watching.
“Florida has a history of problematic voter purges,” said Ms. Fried of All Voting Is Local.
Until last year, it was among a handful of states that maintained a lifetime voting ban against people convicted of felonies. In 2018, voters approved a constitutional amendment allowing most who had served their sentences to vote, adding to the swing state an estimated 1.4 million potential voters, predominantly people of color.
Republican lawmakers have since weakened the law by requiring former prisoners convicted of felonies to pay years-old court fines before registering to vote, but a court injunction temporarily blocked the restrictions this month.
Ms. Fried said the struggle is but one among many voting rights issues she is seeing in Southern states, which in 2013 were relieved of having to follow a Civil Rights-era requirement forcing them to get federal approval for voting changes that might affect minority voters.