BEIJING — The Chinese authorities have detained a journalist who was a leading figure in the country’s #MeToo movement and had recently written about the antigovernment protests in Hong Kong, her friends said on Thursday.
The activist, Huang Xueqin, was detained last week in the southern city of Guangzhou, according to friends who asked not to be identified by name. The authorities accused Ms. Huang, 31, of “picking quarrels and provoking trouble,” a vague accusation that the government often uses to silence activists who challenge the status quo.
Ms. Huang is best known in China for her role in the country’s fledgling #MeToo movement, which achieved some success despite China’s authoritarian system.  The movement took on professors, television anchors, religious leaders and others.
Ms. Huang is now also the latest mainland citizen known to have been detained for showing support for the Hong Kong protests. The ruling Communist Party has depicted the demonstrators as rioters seeking political revolution, and the police on the mainland have in recent months detained and questioned several citizens who have shared protest slogans online.
In June Ms. Huang published an essay about her experience attending the first massive march in Hong Kong against a bill, now withdrawn, that would have allowed the extradition of the territory’s residents to mainland China.
She wrote that she was attending the rally “with the intention of giving voice to, participating, bearing witness and recording history” and criticized the mainland’s restrictions on free speech when she learned that her social media posts about the protest had been censored.
Her detention has raised concerns among human rights groups who have denounced a broad crackdown on dissent that China’s leader, Xi Jinping, has waged since rising to power in 2012. Dozens of lawyers, journalists and activists have been detained and many have been sent to prison.
It was unclear precisely why Ms. Huang had been detained, and the police in Guangzhou did not answer a call seeking comment.
Since February, Ms. Huang, who also goes by Sophia, had been traveling to Taiwan, a self-governing island, and Hong Kong, where she had planned to attend law school in September, her friends said. Chinese leaders consider Taiwan part of China.
After she began chronicling her experiences in Hong Kong, the police on the mainland confiscated her passport in August and harassed her relatives, her friends said.
In that same June essay about Hong Kong, Ms. Huang spoke critically about the way that a Chinese state news outlet had depicted the protesters as being backed by Western forces. The protesters have dismissed such claims and asserted that they alone are demanding greater police and official accountability and universal suffrage.
