In a derelict hotel, six holdouts resist the gentrification of Skid Row. Soon they will be gone, but the art of one resident may endure.
There’s a ghostly old flophouse on the Bowery. Rowdy brunch crowds stumble past its stained-glass windows and locked double doors. It’s lonesome but not empty.
Radiators hiss in its cracked tile floor lobby. Dusty, unused keys hang behind a reception desk. Dark halls are lined with hundreds of boarding rooms empty except for worn mattresses. A few of these cubicles are occupied, stuffed with clothes and belongings. Steam rises from a shower stall. Light flickers behind doors. And a lullaby can be heard through the building when a 70-year-old poet and artist who calls himself Sir Shadow draws at night.
Sir Shadow is one of six men who are the final residents of the Whitehouse Hotel. The crumbling four-story building is one of the last of the cheap single-room-occupancy hotels that lined the Bowery a century ago alongside brothels and saloons and defined the area as a symbol of urban despair. While rooms across the street at the Bowery Hotel cost around $400 a night, the men pay no more than $8.50 for their cramped cubicles, though they pretty much have the run of the place.
As Sir Shadow hums for inspiration, his slender hand strikes a sketchpad with a silver marker and swirls deliriously, never leaving the page, as though he were signing a signature. The elegant silhouette, formed with one continuous line, depicts a saxophone player. He blurs through more: a jazz ensemble featuring trumpet and upright bass; a drummer in the flurry of a solo. His musicians are faceless abstractions.
Sir Shadow arrived at the Whitehouse Hotel around 1995, and he has become a kind of Bowery folk hero since then. At 6-foot-4, he sleeps diagonally to fit into his windowless cubicle. Rarely without his fedora, he gets around on a red electric scooter and draws his blues and jazz musicians across the neighborhood. He calls his one-line style Flowetry, which can be found in the calendars he sells. Quincy Jones, Lauryn Hill, and Diana Ross are said to be fans.
But his masterpiece might be the Whitehouse Hotel itself. Nearly every hallway and boarding room contains a Sir Shadow mural. Even the keys behind the reception desk are marked with his musical silhouettes.
But serenity is a privilege in New York. Sir Shadow’s sanctuary seems destined to meet the fate of every other flophouse.
Lodging houses like the Whitehouse Hotel, which sits at 340 Bowery and opened in 1916, were all over New York’s Skid Row. Dozens of these establishments date back nearly to the Civil War. The Alabama Hotel, the Grand Windsor Hotel, the Providence Hotel — their cell-like stalls had chicken wire rather than ceilings, and they cost pennies per night. They became the primitive dwellings of desperate men who gradually saw no benefits to ever checking out.
In the 1990s, change came to the Bowery, and most of the old flops were developed into restaurants and hotels. But the men clinging on in the remaining hotels were protected by housing laws that gave them the rights of permanent residents. Eviction became a complicated procedure, and real-estate developers have had to contend with these holdouts ever since.
Sir Shadow and his fellow holdouts are in their 60s and 70s: Wayne, Roland, Rob, Bobby, and Charles (there’s also Louis, but he’s in the hospital and I’m told he’s not coming back). They pass by one another with grumbled greetings and take showers in a fluorescent-lit basement bathroom. Chess is played in the lobby. Two men have a bitter grudge and have hardly spoken in years.
But Sir Shadow’s artistic life is now entwined with the building. “I might have this little room in the Whitehouse Hotel,” he said, “but this room keeps me free. I can’t be at some job. That would ruin my flow. A man with a million dollars doesn’t have what I have.
One afternoon last summer, Sir Shadow composed his one-line drawings for tourists at his regular spot in Washington Square Park. He hummed his lullaby as he drew in his sketchpad.
A tourist complimented his work.
A young woman said she liked his abstract style.
In fact, the artist deflected nearly every comment about his work into philosophical musings. Especially questions about his life.
Then there’s Sir Shadow’s least favorite question: What is your real name?
Sir Shadow can lose his temper when pressed about his past. His mood darkened when I told him I found clues about his life in old newspaper articles, a student documentary he’d forgotten about, and within a self-published book of his early poetry at a library in Harlem. I knew who he was before he became Sir Shadow.
The artist was born Thomas Allen Paxton in 1949, and he grew up in Jamaica, Queens. He was raised in a sprawling housing project, and he was an artistic child who wrote poetry about life in his neighborhood. He dropped out of Jamaica High School. He declined to discuss his family.
In the 1970s, he told me, he heard about the countercultural movement in San Francisco, and he boarded a cross-country bus.
He soon returned to New York and he was homeless through the 1980s. He said he lived in subway tunnels and wrote his poetry on underground walls. At the height of the crack epidemic, he served a short sentence in prison for larceny. He insists he was wrongly accused and calls this period his “kidnapping.” Idling in his cell, he kept writing.
Sir Shadow hasn’t had a job in decades, although he can leave from a session in Washington Square Park with a tidy sum of $20 bills. But he also relies on patronage. One afternoon this fall he took a bus uptown and parked his scooter outside an office building on 42nd street. He approached the security desk with a portfolio of his work. “Tell them it’s Shadow,” he said. The artist was there to visit his friend and patron, Anita Durst.
In a room on the 32nd Floor, a sea gull flew past the window. He fetched a plate of food in the office kitchen, where a poem of his (“The Inner You”) was taped to a wall, and he spread his drawings across the table. Ms. Durst arrived and they greeted each other with smiles.
“His work connects to me on an emotional level,” she said, considering his latest drawings. “It sings to me. His love for life is what comes through in his poems.” She expressed concern that his hundreds of thousands of drawings and poems, heaps of which are stored haphazardly around the Whitehouse Hotel, need to be archived. “We’ve tried some things but they haven’t worked for him,” she said.
“I’m leaving it all to her,” said Sir Shadow. “My job was to bring it into the world, and now I’ve done that. Like the birds and the bees, she’s part of my life.” Sir Shadow gave her a copy of the 2019 Flowetry calendar before she returned to work. An assistant slid his kale salad into a takeout box, and he lumbered through the quiet corporate office.
By the time Sir Shadow arrived at the Whitehouse Hotel in the mid-90s, the flophouses were grim decaying dwellings filled with stories of men with hollow stares who never left their beds. Housing reformers won a landmark decision that led to many of them being closed, and developers set their sights on the neighborhood. But as the Bowery changed, the Whitehouse Hotel endured, and in 2000, it became a hostel. Thirty holdout tenants remained, and while some despised the young backpackers, Sir Shadow welcomed a new audience for his art. The lobby became his gallery, and he composed hundreds of drawings in rooms across the building.
The hostel closed in 2014, and the Whitehouse finally became a phantom building stuck in time. A slow-moving drama regarding its future has been occurring for a decade. In 2007, a hotelier named Sam Chang bought the property for $7.8 million, but shortly after that, 340 Bowery was unexpectedly included in the NoHo Historic District, hampering development. In 2014, the property was sold to the Renatus Group, but development has been hindered by Sir Shadow and his compatriots. A few residents have died, and buyouts have lured away others. The men who remain in the flophouse have refused these deals. The Whitehouse Hotel’s future appears to now hinge on a grim but simple waiting game.
Worrying about the future is a primitive concept Sir Shadow doesn’t indulge in. But he will readily admit he’s concerned about the legacy of his art. He mentioned his hope that the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture might one day recognize his work. But his diabetes is getting worse, and he receives dialysis several mornings a week. He laments how brunch crowds in the Bowery are more interested in mimosas than supporting a local artist.
We were playing chess in the lobby of the Whitehouse Hotel one night when a family entered the building. Somebody must have let them in: a well-dressed man with slicked white hair and his wife and two college-age children. They had eaten dinner nearby and the man wanted to explore the property. His wife cheerily explained that they owned some buildings upstate and claimed that her husband had become obsessed with the Whitehouse Hotel. Apparently it wasn’t his first visit.
The man eagerly studied the crumbling lobby in his leather loafers as he thumbed out some $20 bills for Sir Shadow. Soon, he would tour the dark halls upstairs. But Sir Shadow wasn’t interested in the reasons for his visit. He reached for his sketchpad.
