Representative Chris Collins was narrowly re-elected to a fourth term, overcoming his indictment on insider trading charges and a prolonged vote count that left him with more than a 2,500-vote cushion.
The race represented a startling turnaround for Mr. Collins, who had withdrawn from the contest in the 27th District after his indictment in August.
Federal prosecutors charged Mr. Collins with insider trading and lying to federal agents. They said Mr. Collins told people, including his son, that a company they had invested in, Innate Immunotherapeutics, had failed a crucial drug trial. Mr. Collins, who sat on the board of the company at the time, has vigorously denied the charges.
As local Republican leaders were looking for a replacement candidate, Mr. Collins re-entered the race, though it was sometimes hard to tell: In the weeks leading up to Election Day, Mr. Collins’s campaign did not release a public schedule, and he refused to debate Mr. McMurray.
The indictment also had an impact on fund-raising: Mr. McMurray raised roughly $520,000 compared to Mr. Collins’s $33,000 in the third quarter, with only $80 coming from individuals in the congressman’s district.
As polls showed the race tightening, national Democrats — who initially shunned Mr. McMurray because of his extreme long-shot status — began to rally behind him. Former Vice President Joe Biden campaigned with Mr. McMurray in Lancaster, N.Y., and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee started spending money on his campaign in mid-October.
But in a district that President Trump won by 25 points, Mr. McMurray ultimately fell short.
The victory is particularly important for Republicans, who lost at least 39 House seats in the midterm elections. In New York, three Democrats ousted incumbent Republicans, and Mr. Collins was seen as vulnerable after the indictment.
Mr. Collins, who is not scheduled to appear in court until 2020, told local outlets his legal issues will not impact his work as a member of Congress.
