After Chicago’s collapse against Green Bay in Week 1, Eddie Jackson called his teammates lazy and complacent. He said they did not finish.
In the fourth quarter of Sunday’s grudge match between the longtime rivals, Jackson, a standout safety, picked off an Aaron Rodgers pass in the red zone, effectively shutting down the Packers’ comeback attempt and giving the Bears a 24-17 victory at home that clinched the N.F.C. North title.
That Jackson limped off the field following the play, heading to the locker room shortly afterward with a sprained ankle, could portend bad things for Chicago going forward, but on this day he lived up to his promise to make sure his team did not fall apart again. In doing so he ended Rodgers’s streak without an interception at 402 passes, an N.F.L. record.
Revenge against a rival was nice, but more important for the Bears, who finished at the bottom of the N.F.C. North last season, the win secured the team’s first division title, and its first playoff appearance, since 2010.
Things started quickly for Chicago, with the team scoring on its second offensive possession when Jordan Howard ran the ball in from nine yards out. A 12-yard touchdown pass from Mitchell Trubisky to Tarik Cohen in the final minute of the first half made it 14-3.
While the Packers eventually evened things at 14-14, Trubisky put the team ahead for good early in the fourth quarter with a 13-yard touchdown pass to Trey Burton, showing an aggressiveness with the throw that has often been absent from his play.
That was plenty of scoring with the way the Bears have played defense this season. As has become customary, they gave up some yardage but made the opposition pay for trying to move the ball. They hit Rodgers nine times and sacked him five times — Packers-killer Khalil Mack accounted for two and a half sacks — and held the Green Bay attack to a relatively modest 323 yards.
The turnaround of the Bears’ fortunes from last season has largely been credited to Mack, who came to the team in an off-season trade with Oakland. Nagy, who also joined the team in the off-season, did not shy away from that belief when asked to sum up what Mack, a former defensive player of the year, has meant to the team.
Rodgers, who spent much of the day running away from Mack and Chicago’s intense pass rush, completed 25 of 42 passes for 274 yards but did not throw a touchdown. Trubisky, given loads of time to pass — he was sacked just once and hit one other time — easily outplayed his veteran counterpart, completing 20 of 28 passes for 235 yards and two touchdowns.
It did not help Green Bay’s chances that Aaron Jones, who emerged this season as the team’s answer at running back, injured his knee early in the game after carrying the ball just four times for 8 yards. And with Green Bay now eliminated from playoff contention, Jones, depending on the severity of the knee injury, could be shut down for the remainder of the season.
As the Bears wait to find out when they can expect Jackson back, they will have to ponder how to handle the final two weeks of the regular season. They still trail the Rams and Saints for a first-round bye, so there may not be much to motivate the team. But with a winnable road game next week against the San Francisco 49ers, they could try to keep winning in case Los Angeles or New Orleans falters.
Nagy seemed to indicate Chicago had no plans to coast.
