Deborah Zall, a dancer and choreographer who studied with Martha Graham and went on to make her own mark with solo works depicting extraordinary women, died on Dec. 11 in Manhattan. She was 84.
The cause was pneumonia, her sister Rona Nadine Affoumado said.
Ms. Zall also appeared in dances taught to her by choreographers from the Martha Graham circle, including Graham’s teacher, Ruth St. Denis, and Anna Sokolow, a founding member of the Actors Studio. Ms. Zall was even given permission to perform the famous 1930 Graham solo “Lamentation,” in which the dancer expresses her grief through anguished movements magnified by a cloaklike costume — a rare occurrence for a dancer not in the company.
Over the last two decades, she had begun staging works for younger dancers. These included her own and those of her mentors, as well as pieces by the longtime Graham dancer Bertram Ross, a close friend. (When he died in 2003, Mr. Ross left the rights to all his dances to Ms. Zall.) In 2014 she formed her own ensemble, the Deborah Zall Project: In the Company of Women, consisting mostly of former members of the Graham company.
Ms. Zall in about 1990.
She was a committed teacher of Graham’s dance technique. “I teach the orthodox technique,” she told the magazine Dance Teacher in 2015, “exactly what Martha Graham taught me.” At various points, she was an instructor at the Martha Graham School in New York, the Laban Dance Center and the Place in London and, most lastingly, LaGuardia High School, where she was on the faculty from 1994 to 2011.
Deborah Miriam Zall was born in Philadelphia on Oct. 2, 1934, the eldest daughter of Edward Isaac Zall, a salesman, and Esther (Perelstein) Zall, a bookkeeper. She is survived by her two younger sisters, Rona Nadine Affoumado and Greta Louise Kenney. Her marriage to Robert Sacks ended in divorce.
After high school, Ms. Zall left for New York City, where she trained at the Juilliard School, the Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theater and the Martha Graham School. Then, instead of joining a company, she struck out on her own, creating evenings of dance and sometimes appearing as a guest with other troupes.
