COPENHAGEN — The authorities in Morocco said on Thursday that three more suspects had been arrested in the killings of two Scandinavian tourists in the Atlas Mountains, in what Danish officials suggested was an act of terror linked to the Islamic State.
The Central Office of Judicial Research in Morocco said in a statement that the three suspects had been detained in Marrakesh. Another suspect arrested on Tuesday was thought to have extremist ties, Moroccan prosecutors told local news outlets without providing further details. The names of those arrested were not immediately released.
The authorities said that the bodies of the victims, Louisa Vesterager Jespersen, 24, of Denmark and Maren Ueland, 28, of Norway, were found on Monday by other tourists in an isolated area of the High Atlas Mountains, an area popular with hikers and six miles from the village of Imlil. Both women had been studying at the same school in Norway to become tour guides.
“What should have been a holiday trip turned into a nightmare,” Mr. Rasmussen said. He vowed to do everything possible to solve the crime.
A video posted on social media purported to show one of the victims screaming while a man cut her neck with a knife. The Danish Security and Intelligence Service said it was working to authenticate the video.
Norway’s National Criminal Investigation Service, the special unit of the Norwegian police known as Kripos, said it was trying to have the video removed from websites, according to local news reports.
The affiliation of the suspects was unclear, but the four had recorded a video a week before the killings, pledging allegiance to the Islamic State, according to Morocco’s general prosecutor.
The video, which was shared on Twitter, showed the men vowing fealty to the group’s leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and saying that they “cannot remain seated, witnessing the destruction caused by Crusader planes,” terminology typically used by the group to refer to Western airstrikes in Iraq and Syria.
Prime Minister Erna Solberg of Norway called the killings “a senseless attack,” adding that the case “emphasizes the importance of combating violent extremism.” She said that Norway would assist the Moroccan authorities in their investigation.
The deaths have shocked Morocco, a popular tourist destination where attacks on foreigners are extremely rare. But the country has battled Islamic extremism for years, and thousands of Moroccans have joined the Islamic State group, also known as ISIS. The last terrorist attack happened in Marrakesh in 2011, when a bomb attack in a cafe killed 17 people, including 11 Europeans.
The foreign ministries in Norway and Demark issued travel advisories on Thursday warning their citizens to exercise extreme caution when visiting Morocco.
Abdellah Rami, a Moroccan expert on Islamist movements, said that if the terrorism link were to be verified, it would be the first terrorist attack outside Morocco’s urban areas.
The site where the bodies were found is often the starting point for treks to Mount Toubkal, North Africa’s highest peak.
Ms. Jespersen’s family told Danish news media that she had traveled to Morocco on Dec. 8 to celebrate Christmas and to practice climbing with her Norwegian friend. Since the age of 18, her relatives said, she had a habit of traveling for the holiday.
On their last phone call before the trip, Ms. Jespersen told her mother, Helle Jespersen, who lives in Grindsted, west of Copenhagen, that she was excited and busy with exams at the Norwegian school where she was studying to become a tour guide.
According to Moroccan news reports, investigators recovered surveillance footage showing three suspects putting up a tent near the victims’ tent and leaving the area after their deaths.