BEIJING — Two Canadians detained in an apparent act of prosecutorial retaliation. A prominent pastor, an internationally renowned Chinese photographer and China’s top international police officer all held by the authorities. Hundreds of thousands of Muslims in the western region of Xinjiang locked up in camps for mass indoctrination.
These and the detentions of many others — including billionaires, lawyers, even the American children of a Chinese fugitive — suggest that the ruling Communist Party no longer cares much about the risk to its international stature posed by harsh actions against its opponents.
Already there are signs that this hard-line approach might be costing China support overseas, alienating even the moderate voices in the United States and elsewhere who have for decades argued that engaging the Chinese leadership is vastly preferable to confronting it.
China’s ruling Communist Party has never shown much forbearance for those it views as critics and it has long bristled at international criticism of its actions — its treatment of Tibet, say, or the bloody crackdown on protesters on Tiananmen Square in 1989. Even so, there was a time when internal qualms about international blowback restrained its behavior, or at least factored into the public defense of its actions.
That political calculus has now clearly shifted.
In all of the cases cited above, China has dismissed widespread international opprobrium. And it has fought back. In the state media, in diplomatic channels and in international organizations like the United Nations Human Rights Council, the Chinese have accused critics of interfering in its internal affairs or wielding double standards to check a rising economic, diplomatic and military power.
Observers say the timing of the investigation into the two Canadians this week suggested it was retaliation for the arrest in Canada of Meng Wanzhou, a senior executive of Huawei, the Chinese tech company that American prosecutors have accused of committing bank fraud.
A spokesman for China’s foreign ministry said on Thursday the detention of the two Canadians by state security officials was in line with Chinese laws. Other Chinese officials have similarly defended the move.
The reasons for the shifting calculus are a matter of debate. Many political observers believe that under Xi Jinping, China has become both too powerful and yet too insecure to be willing to brook compromise — or the kind of measured efforts that could assuage its foreign critics.
“You can look at contemporary Chinese history as a struggle between evincing displays of strength and trying to win the acceptance of the established powers,” Orville Schell, director of the Center on U.S.-China Relations at Asia Society, wrote in an email.
Mr. Xi’s efforts to reassert the mission of the “one party” in that equation have clearly had an effect. The policies of the Trump administration — on trade and other issues — appear to have also affirmed his instincts that the world’s only superpower will not make room for another.
As a result, there is no indication that Mr. Xi will soon display greater willingness to bend to international pressure on human rights. On the contrary, he has moved to strengthen the party’s ability to police virtually all aspects of society with the help of a beefed-up security apparatus.
Since he came to power in 2012, China has approved a new National Security Law that gave sweeping reach to the party’s control of education, information, culture and cyberspace. He also launched a National Security Commission that, unlike the White House’s National Security Council, devotes a lot of attention to domestic security threats.
The National Security Commission has remained a secretive institution, rarely surfacing in official news reports, but reports on local government websites indicate that it has galvanized official energies on fighting spies, rooting out dissent and eradicating subversion. It has almost certainly shaped the policies that have led to the flurry of high-profile detentions.
A country as big and influential as China seems sure to attract attention from foreign intelligence agencies, but more than other countries, China erases any distinctions between national security and the security of the ruling party.
The two Canadians now being held in China are the types of people that China could once point to as advocates, or at least those eager to work in and with the country. Neither was overtly hostile.
Michael Spavor operated a nongovernment organization that promoted tourist, cultural and business exchanges with North Korea. Michael Kovrig was a former Canadian diplomat who since last year has worked for the International Crisis Group, a nongovernmental research organization that seeks to defuse international conflicts.
Hugh Pope, the organization’s director of communication and outreach, said on Friday that Mr. Kovrig met regularly with senior officials in their ministries and in public forums, most recently during the eighth conference on regional military affairs known as the Xiangshan Forum, which was held in Beijing in October.
