It’s nearly two years until Election Day 2020, but Elizabeth Warren is forming her exploratory committee right on schedule, if recent history is any guide.
The Massachusetts senator has said she will run against President Trump in 2020. The two already have a history of trading barbs on a range of topics, including Senator Elizabeth Warren’s Native American ancestry.
“I’m launching an exploratory committee for president.” Senator Elizabeth Warren could be fighting President Trump for the keys to the White House in 2020. But the two already have a long history of trading barbs. “She is a ‘goofus.’” “Wannabe tyrant.” Here’s how Elizabeth Warren has faced off against Donald Trump. In the 2016 election, Warren gleefully played the role of attack dog for the Democrats, taunting Trump on Twitter and in speeches. “A small, insecure money-grubber who doesn’t care who gets hurt, so long as he makes a profit off it. Donald Trump is worried about helping poor little Wall Street. Let me find the world’s smallest violin to play a sad, sad song.” After Trump went after a federal judge because of his Hispanic heritage — “He’s a Mexican. We’re building a wall between here and Mexico —” it was Warren who went on the attack. “Trump is picking on someone who is ethically bound not to defend himself. Exactly what you would expect from a thin-skinned racist bully.” And at the Democratic National Convention, Warren told liberals that Trump had ripped off ordinary Americans. “But he filed business bankruptcy six times, always to protect his own money, and stick the investors and contractors with the bill. And for one low, low price, he’ll even throw in a goofy hat.” But it was her fight with Trump over her claim of Native American heritage that got the most attention. “And Massachusetts is represented by Pocahontas, right? Pocahontas. They call her ‘Pocahontas.’ I’ve got more Indian blood in me than Pocahontas, and I have none. I mean — sadly, I have none. But I have more than she does.” “Hi. This is Elizabeth Warren.” Trump’s unrelenting mockery prompted Warren to release the results of a DNA test that she says is proof of her ancestry. The announcement largely backfired. She apologized to the Cherokee Nation for taking the DNA test. “My mother was born in eastern Oklahoma.” But the feud between Warren and Trump continues. “President Trump’s actions and instincts align with those of authoritarian regimes around the globe. He embraces dictators of all stripes. He cozies up to white nationalists. He undermines the free press and incites violence against journalists.” As the 2020 presidential race heats up, one thing is clear — the skirmishes could get nastier.
The 2020 presidential race is happening — now, today, before 2018 is even over. On Monday, Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, became the first major candidate to enter the contest, announcing that she was forming an exploratory committee.
And President Trump, never one to shy away from political combat, has also gotten an early jump on the 2020 race, naming a campaign manager last February and flouting precedent by raising money for his re-election during the midterm campaign.
 But that does not make it unusual. A glance at recent history suggests that the candidates are roughly on schedule.
It was not always this way. In 1960, John F. Kennedy did not announce his candidacy until 11 months before Election Day. As recently as the 1992 election, Bill Clinton did not formally enter the presidential contest until just over a year before the general election. But since then, campaigns have grown longer, bloating into nearly two-year affairs.
But it was Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, the eventual runner-up to Mr. Trump in the Republican primary, who was the first major candidate to formally announce a presidential bid, in March 2015. The future Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, declared “I’m running for president” soon after, in April 2015.
In the end, all of them lost to Mr. Trump, who did not announce his candidacy from the atrium of Trump Tower in Manhattan until June 2015.
The 2012 election got off to a slow start, although it was widely expected that Mitt Romney, who had run in 2008, would again seek the Republican nomination. But few of the Republicans lining up to run against President Barack Obama were willing to formally claim an early stake in the race.
Former Gov. Tim Pawlenty of Minnesota became the first major Republican to enter the race, announcing an exploratory committee in March 2011. But he would not win the party nomination.
Mr. Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, announced his own exploratory committee in April 2011 and would eventually emerge as the Republican standard-bearer against Mr. Obama, who won re-election.
2008: And you thought this year was fast?
If you think there wasn’t enough room between the midterm election and the start of presidential campaigns this year, look no further than the 2008 election cycle.
For the first time in more than half a century, the presidential race did not include an incumbent — either the president or the vice president — on the ballot. And the campaigning started so early that it bumped up against the midterms.
Tom Vilsack, a Democrat who was the governor of Iowa, announced his intention to run for president the week of the 2006 midterms and made it official by the end of November. John McCain, the senator from Arizona who would go on to capture the Republican nomination, formed his presidential exploratory committee that same month.
By January 2007, when Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton launched their exploratory committees, the field was already crowded with candidates. It was a breathtakingly fast start to a presidential race that would propel Mr. Obama to the White House.
Going into the 2004 election, George W. Bush was the incumbent president, but that did not dissuade prospective Democrats from campaigning.
John Kerry, the senator from Massachusetts, established himself as an early contender: In early December 2002, he went on NBC’s “Meet the Press” to declare that he was creating an exploratory committee. By January, a flood of other candidates had entered the race.
Initially, Mr. Kerry’s early move paid off: He bested the other Democratic candidates to become the party’s nominee for president. But he, too, lost to the incumbent president as Mr. Bush secured a second term.
The unforgettable 2000 presidential race that ended with a recount in Florida began with the long-shot candidacy of a liberal senator from Minnesota.
Al Gore, then the vice president of the United States, was the favorite for the Democratic nomination and announced his first formal step toward running for president on Jan. 1, 1999. The future President Bush announced his exploratory committee two months later, in March 1999.
But there was another notable candidate that election cycle: Donald J. Trump. Encouraged by “amazing” polls, “unbelievable” news media interest and a “huge” ground swell of public support, he announced an exploratory committee to run for president in October 1999. He suggested that Oprah Winfrey would be his vice president.
That campaign didn’t take off. But we know how this story goes. Mr. Trump made it to the White House, where he has uprooted American politics — and opened the door to the wide field of candidates who will fight to challenge him in 2020. It starts now.
Jonathan Martin contributed reporting.