The host of American Public Media’s “Live From Here” is broadcasting weekly from Town Hall in Manhattan.
Dec. 15 and 22; ticketmaster.com.
Yes, Chris Thile is based in New York City, and yes, he is the voice of the nation’s folksiest variety show. Since 2016, he’s been host of American Public Media’s “Live From Here,” a revamped version of “A Prairie Home Companion,” Garrison Keillor’s decades-long paean to storytelling and Midwestern values. But the dissonance dissolves when considering that Thile is a virtuoso mandolinist for the groups Nickel Creek and the Punch Brothers.
For the month of December, Thile and his band, led by super-producer Mike Elizondo, have been broadcasting live weekly from Town Hall in Manhattan. The two remaining shows will star indie rock favorite St. Vincent and “The Late Show” bandleader Jon Batiste; and classical ensemble The Knights.
Dec. 9; starz.com.
Can there ever be too much of J.K. Simmons? For fans of “Counterpart” — with the masterful character actor Simmons doing leading-man double duty — the answer is a walloping no.
In its first season, “Counterpart” chased Simmons around Berlin, playing two versions of Howard Silk that are subtly, yet strikingly distinct. One is a meek office drone at an international agency called the Office of Interchange, while his badass doppelgänger operates in a secret parallel realm called the Other Side. Their mission: to swap identities and keep the gentler Howard’s comatose wife, Emily (Olivia Williams), alive. Then a terrorist attack sends the portal doors slamming shut, leaving the Howards stranded in each other’s world.
Dec. 11-17; nyphil.org; trinitywallstreet.org.
The holidays are upon us, which means that most of the world’s classical music organizations are dedicated, at some point this month, to performing Handel’s “Messiah.” Two organizations in New York this week offer noteworthy approaches.
Billed, flatteringly, as the “Messiah” of all “Messiahs,” the New York Philharmonic’s run features the conductor Jonathan Cohen overseeing a strong cast that includes the countertenor Anthony Roth Costanzo, fresh off his much more outré approach to Baroque arias with the glittery “Glass Handel” project.
Through Dec. 22; perrotin.com.
Through rigorous executions of distorted or surreal forms, Emily Mae Smith’s oil paintings and Genesis Belanger’s ceramics dramatize the painful contradictions of inhabiting a female body. The high point of “A Strange Relative,” their astute two-woman show at Perrotin Gallery in Manhattan, is an installation in which a sculpture and a painting, both on the subject of a woman at her dressing mirror, also mirror each other.
Dec. 12-15; newyorklivearts.org.
In 1983, the dancers Anne Iobst and Lucy Sexton joined forces as the irreverent duo Dancenoise. Regulars on the East Village performance scene, they quickly became known for their hard-core feminism and gory, kitschy comedy. Knives and fake blood were recurring accessories, as indispensable as combat boots and lingerie.
Their appearances grew more sporadic after Ms. Iobst moved to San Francisco in the late ’90s, but in recent years they have regained momentum, with a program at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 2015 and now a 35th-anniversary show at New York Live Arts in Chelsea.
Dec. 12-15; bam.org.
There is some chance that the young governess was overeager for the job. At 20, a parson’s daughter, she didn’t ask many questions of the disarmingly handsome Londoner who hired her to look after his young niece and nephew in the country — not even when he stipulated that her chief duty would be to leave him undisturbed.
So when she starts spotting ghosts around the grand old house, in Henry James’s spine-tingling novella “The Turn of the Screw,” she doesn’t trouble her employer about it. She says not a peep, either, about her conviction that these menacing spirits are eyeing her suspiciously angelic charges.
