Lee Leonard, an urbane host of sports and entertainment programs who introduced ESPN to a small audience on the day of its debut in 1979, died on Sunday at his home in South Orange, N.J. He was 89.
His wife, Kelly Bishop, confirmed his death.
Mr. Leonard was a well-regarded veteran of local and national sports studio shows when executives at ESPN, which was just getting off the ground, asked him to be a co-anchor of “SportsCenter,” envisioned as the network’s flagship news and highlights program. And it was “SportsCenter’s” inaugural broadcast that launched the network, with Mr. Leonard delivering its first words, on Sept. 7, 1979, setting ESPN on its path to becoming a television empire.
“If you’re a fan — if you’re a fan — what you’ll see in the next minutes, hours and days to follow may convince you you’ve gone to sports heaven,” Mr Leonard said.
Mr. Leonard brought maturity to the fledgling network. By then he had been a disc jockey, radio talk show host and the co-host with Bill Mazer of a pioneering Sunday night program — “Sports Extra” on WNEW-TV in New York — that provided extensive highlights, scores and commentary.
George Grande, seated at left, and Mr. Leonard on the set of “SportsCenter” in 1979. Mr. Leonard stayed with ESPN for only six months, leaving for CNN when it offered him a program covering show business.
Mr. Leonard stayed at ESPN — which stood for the Entertainment and Sports Programming Network — for about six months, disappointed that it did not live up to the entertainment part of its title and give him a platform to cover show business.
The network was CNN, which started up in 1980, and it gave Mr. Leonard the entertainment outlet he wanted, a show called “People Tonight.” But his time as its host did not last long. He was replaced in 1982 by Mike Douglas, the longtime syndicated talk-show host.
In 1986, Mr. Leonard published a novel, “I Miss You When You’re Here,” about a disc jockey who becomes the star of a network television show. Mr. Leonard gave the lead character, Maxwell Lefkowitz, his real name.
Maxwell Lefkowitz was born on April 3, 1929, in New York City to Daniel Lefkowitz and Estelle (Cohn) Lefkowitz a beautician. After graduating from DeWitt Clinton High School in the Bronx, he attended Columbia University but did not graduate. He served in the Army in Germany during the Korean War.
He became interested in broadcasting in the Army, and after his discharge worked as a disc jockey in various cities, including Norfolk, Va., and Cincinnati. In 1964, he was hired by WNBC-AM in New York as the host of a daytime talk show. Early on in his career he changed his name to Lee Leonard.
In 1976, the Chicago Tribune media critic Gary Deeb wrote that Mr. Leonard’s erudition had elevated “Grandstand,” which had previously been hosted by Jack Buck, the longtime announcer for the St. Louis Cardinals.
But he was fired in 1978 by Don Ohlmeyer, the executive producer of NBC Sports, freeing him to join the fledgling ESPN when it called.
In addition to Ms. Bishop, an actress who met Mr. Leonard when he interviewed her on “Midday Live,” he is survived by his daughter, Norma Sheryl Leonard, and a grandson. His marriages to Rona Rosenberg and Salome Jens ended in divorce.
After his second stint at CNN, Mr. Leonard coached business executives on handling media interviews and for a time, starting in the mid-1990s, was a news anchor and talk show host for News 12, a New Jersey cable station.
