A 2008 condominium in Atlanta, a walk-up loft apartment in Manhattan and a French Provincial-style house in Houston.
Bought as a shell in 2013 and finished through a two-year collaboration of the local firms Reu Architects and Oetgen Design, this home is on the top floor of a gated complex of 23 townhouses and flats called Regents Park. It is in the center of the Buckhead district, about seven miles north of downtown Atlanta.
Indoors: Both a conventional staircase and a private elevator lead to an oval foyer with diamond-patterned marble floors and walls hung with murals adapted from 18th-century etchings. At one end is a dining room with an open, beamed ceiling and multiple sets of French doors leading to a stone terrace. Beyond the dining room to the left is a living room with a gas fireplace that has a black marble surround. The fireplace’s herringbone pattern echoes that of the pickled hardwood floors.
The dining room opens on the right to a kitchen with black marble countertops and professional culinary appliances, including a Wolf range. The area has a breakfast room and a butler’s pantry that leads to what the owners describe as a cabinet of curiosities: a room with floor-to-ceiling glass display cases. Doors with English brass hardware open to a powder room and a coatroom.
Nearby is a room that could be used as a study or bedroom (it has a private three-quarter bathroom). The master and guest bedrooms are in a wing at the opposite end of the foyer. The master suite connects to a bathroom with a walk-in shower and a separate tiled tub. The guest suite has a bathroom with mosaic tile, a walk-in shower and a vessel sink on a pedestal. There is also a laundry room.
Outdoor space: In addition to the private terrace, with views of downtown Atlanta, residents have use of the building’s one-acre garden. The elevator descends to a private, gated three-car garage, near a large windowless storage room that comes with the unit.
This co-op is in the SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan, a half-block north of Canal Street. The base of the four-residence building has an independently owned commercial space that is currently vacant. This is a walk-up building, and the unit is on the second floor.
Indoors: The floor-through loft is about 25 feet wide in the front but expands to 30 feet in the back, allowing for an almost 11-foot-wide guest room. Nine double-hung windows rise to the 11.5-foot ceilings. The living and dining areas have exposed brick walls and hardwood floors, and there is a central space described as a media room with enough space for a pool table or a grand piano.
The master bedroom has two floor-to-ceiling closets and a bathroom with double sinks, a tub and a shower. The 11-by-12-foot open kitchen has an adjacent laundry-and-storage room of about equal size.
Outdoor space: There is no private parking. The A, C, E, F, N, Q, R, W and 6 trains are all a few minutes’ walk away.
Taxes: The monthly homeowner’s fee of $3,250 includes property taxes; 45 percent of it was tax-deductible in 2017.
This house is in Bunker Hill Village, one of a group of affluent residential communities in west Houston known as the Memorial Villages. It is about 15 minutes from the Galleria shopping center in good traffic.
Indoors: The house, designed by Boxwood Interiors in Houston and constructed by Northstone Builders, has a foyer that leads to a dramatic central hall decorated with Farrow & Ball wallpaper. The curving central staircase has a custom-designed iron balustrade and a seating area tucked beneath it.
The foyer is flanked by a dining room on the left and a living room on the right; both rooms have tall, arched windows and paneling with bolection molding. (The living room also has built-in bookshelves with integrated lighting.) Off the dining room is a butler’s pantry with a gold tiled backsplash and a copper-hammered sink; it leads to wine room, silver closet and pantry, as well as to the white marble kitchen with custom cabinets and a breakfast bay.
The kitchen is connected to an expansive family room with a beamed ceiling, a fireplace and a wall of windows overlooking the backyard and swimming pool. On the other side of the kitchen is a service area with a laundry room, a half bathroom and a mudroom that could be used as an office. Access to the three-car garage and motor court is here, as is a back staircase.
Turning right from the stair hall, past the powder room and coat closet, one finds a large master bedroom with a beamed ceiling and Schumacher wallpaper, as well as a white-marble en suite bathroom with a glass shower and soaking tub, and two walk-in closets.
Four additional bedrooms with en suite bathrooms and walk-in closets are on the second level. So is a 23-by-16-foot game room with built-in speakers and bookshelves, and access to a kitchenette and a computer nook.
Outdoor space: Outside the family room is a patio with an outdoor kitchen; next to it is a swimming pool and sun deck. The half-acre property also includes an AstroTurf play lawn and a bocce court.
