WASHINGTON — House Democrats are putting forward a proposal to reopen the federal government by severing funding for the Department of Homeland Security and border security from other spending bills that enjoy bipartisan support — a gambit aimed at forcing President Trump to negotiate or to shoulder the blame for a protracted shutdown.
The Democrats’ plan, which will come up for a vote on Thursday when they take control of the House, consists of two bills. The first includes six bipartisan spending measures that would fully fund agencies like the Interior Department and the Internal Revenue Service through the end of the fiscal year in September.
The second would extend homeland security funding at current levels through Feb. 8, including $1.3 billion for fencing but no funding for Mr. Trump’s border wall — a provision that renders it dead on arrival in the Republican-controlled Senate.
By splitting off the homeland security bill, Democrats are opening the door to a month of negotiations. But they are also essentially daring Mr. Trump and Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, to keep a big chunk of the government shuttered over the president’s demand for the wall. Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, and Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, who is expected to be sworn in as speaker on Thursday, challenged Republicans in a joint statement on Monday.
Mr. Trump continued to dig in on New Year’s Eve, venting his frustrations in tweets and in a Fox News interview as the shutdown stretched into its 10th day and as furloughed federal workers were about to miss their paychecks on Wednesday.
The president made building a “big beautiful” wall along the southern border a central promise of his 2016 campaign, and he is concerned that if he gives in on wall funding, his political base will revolt.
The shutdown standoff will give Americans their first glimpse at how Washington will work in a new era of divided government. It will also be the first leadership test for Ms. Pelosi, who anticipated a string of celebrations as she reclaims the gavel as the nation’s first female speaker of the House. She has continued to insist that Democrats will not cave on wall funding.
The shutdown is affecting parts of nine cabinet-level departments, and as it drags on, anxieties are rising among the 800,000 federal employees who are either furloughed or working without pay. In one ominous sign, the federal Office of Personnel Management has posted a sample letter for mortgage companies and creditors on its website, giving guidance to federal employees on how to negotiate reduced payments.
Democrats say their proposed measures would create a month of breathing space for the president to negotiate with them. But Mr. Trump would lose much of his leverage in the border fight if he accepts their terms.
The Democrats’ two-pronged plan will also complicate life for Mr. McConnell, who has said he will not bring up any measure that does not have the president’s support. Once the bills pass the House, as expected, Mr. McConnell will have to decide whether to put one, both or neither on the Senate floor for votes.
By passing only a short-term funding extension for the Homeland Security Department, Democrats would effectively prolong the divisive debate over the wall — and potentially open a path for a broader immigration overhaul. That could expose divisions among Democrats.
But Democrats say they hope their plan will draw a sharp contrast between them and Mr. Trump by projecting an image of a responsible party trying to govern in a capital ruled by a president who thrives on unpredictability.
For newly elected Democrats, having the shutdown languish into the new year means that they will be able to vote and have a say in the renewed negotiations — a chance, some said, to open their tenure with a flourish.
The 1,070-page legislative package, which was made public on Monday afternoon, includes six bills that are virtually identical to the legislation that passed the Senate Appropriations Committee in 2018, and in four cases passed the Senate, according to summaries prepared by Democrats on the committee. It also includes the stopgap measure for the Homeland Security Department.
The similarities, Democrats argued, bolster their argument that the package would pass the Senate, if granted a floor vote.
In several instances, the bills rebuff funding cuts proposed by the administration and instead pour more funds into programs Mr. Trump either suggested reducing or eliminating. One bill in the package includes more funding for the 2020 census and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s climate research.
The bill also provides $110 million for NASA’s efforts to teach science, technology, engineering and math — programs the president had proposed eliminating. Another bill would fully fund the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, the food stamp program, into 2019. And while the bill does not reauthorize the Violence Against Women Act, which protects victims of domestic violence and designates money for the prosecution of those who commit violent crimes against women, the package provides nearly $500 million in funds for programs under the act, which recently expired.