What to know (and what not to miss) at the fairs.
It’s that time of the year again, when the international art world descends on Miami’s Collins Avenue for a weeklong, Champagne-fueled cultural extravaganza. Once more, Miami plays host to nearly 20 fairs and countless more parties and other unclassifiable happenings. Here’s your guide to what to see, from an exhibition of whimsical creatures at the Bass Museum to the acrobatic performances at Art Basel Miami Beach’s new Grand Ballroom.
For their first solo museum show, now open at the Bass Museum, Nikolai and Simon Haas — the Los Angeles-based artists-cum-designers also known as the Haas Brothers — have created a menagerie of their signature whimsical beasts, arranged throughout an immersive forestlike environment. Titled “Ferngully,” after the 1992 animated children’s film, the exhibition incorporates furniture, sculpture and objets d’art crafted from Icelandic sheepskin, curly cow fur, chocolate goat fur, carved ebony and cast bronze. “This show is a physical journal of the last seven years,” Simon Haas told T. Visitors are also able to take home an otherworldly creation of their own; the lifestyle brand L’Objet has worked with the artists to create a limited edition of objects for the home, including handcrafted porcelain plates, Mojave palm-scented candles and a hand-etched gold-plated stationary box — all available at a pop-up shop within the museum.
“Ferngully” is on view now through April 21, 2019, at the Bass Museum, 2100 Collins Avenue, Miami Beach, thebass.org.
The 17th edition of Art Basel Miami Beach, the week’s largest fair, brings together over 200 contemporary and modern art galleries from around the world, including big-name institutions like Hauser & Wirth, Lisson Gallery and Galerie Perrotin. But a number of solo showcases by smaller galleries venture off the beaten path. At the Thierry Goldberg Gallery booth, the 28-year-old artist Tschabalala Self has recreated elements of storefronts from her native New York. Designed as an immersive shop interior — and aligned with the artist’s ongoing concerns with the black female body in contemporary culture — “Bodega Run” celebrates black and Latino corner stores and features drawings of overstocked shelves, paintings of customers and oversized sculptures of milk crates. Meanwhile, Galeria Jaqueline Martins from São Paulo presents a solo survey of work by Regina Vater. The Brazilian artist is known for her feminist installations inspired by African-Brazilian mythologies and credited for the design of the first 1960s Tropicália album covers.
Art Basel Miami Beach is open from Dec. 6 to Dec. 9, 1901 Convention Center Drive, Miami Beach, artbasel.com.
Across the Venetian Causeway, the independent art fair NADA returns to Ice Palace Studios for its 16th year, bringing together 125 galleries and a notable variety of queer and feminist works. Mrs. Gallery, from Queens, N.Y., shares a solo presentation of new large-scale wooden sculptures and vibrant watercolors by the artist Chris Bogia, a founder of the Fire Island Artist Residency. Meanwhile, Fierman and Situations show works by Jimmy Wright, known for his figurative paintings depicting the sexual culture of the 1970s, and later the floral still lives he made during the height of the AIDS crisis. The London-based Hannah Barry Gallery, in collaboration with the roaming gallery Ballon Rouge Collective, presents the work of the French artist Marie Jacotey, whose expansive textile installation “Morning Defeats & Gloria Victis” evokes the curtained back rooms of clubs and boudoirs.
NADA is open from Dec. 6 to Dec. 9 at Ice Palace Studios, 1400 North Miami Avenue, Miami, newartdealers.org.
Following their standout contributions to this year’s New Museum Triennial, where they showed large-scale paintings infused with ’90s pop-culture references, the queer Mexican artist Manuel Solano (who prefers the pronouns they and them) presents their first solo exhibition at the newly refurbished Institute of Contemporary Art, Miami. “I Don’t Wanna Wait for Our Lives to Be Over” spans painting, photography, video and installation and explores themes of identity and perception. Solano lost their eyesight in 2014, following H.I.V.-related complications, and memory and figuration are central to their practice. In contrast to their previous work, the pieces here are more introspective — no allusions to Michael Jackson this time. A central work is a diptych made in collaboration with the artist’s mother, Claudia, a former photographer who set aside her own artistic practice to raise her family. She and Solano made portraits of each other, through painting and photography respectively, creating an intimate correspondence.
“I Don’t Wanna Wait for Our Lives to Be Over” is on view now through April 14, 2019, at ICA Miami, 61 NE 41st Street, Miami, icamiami.org.
Watch our video studio visit with Manuel Solano.
Downtown, at the Pérez Art Museum Miami (PAMM) — which turns 35 next month — the Portuguese artist Pedro Neves Marques opens “A Mordida,” a show comprising two newly commissioned films. Blurring the boundary between documentary and narrative film, the short pieces immerse the viewer in a dystopian world centered on a mosquito factory, a laboratory that creates genetically modified mosquitoes in order to combat the spread of viruses. Here, characters face the threat of the Zika virus while navigating Brazil’s shifting political state. “The films relate to Brazil’s current increase of intolerant conservatism in politics, especially with the presidential election of the fascist Jair Bolsonaro,” says Neves Marques. “As a counter offer to this aggression, I am suggesting an environment that veers to intimacy, affection and acceptance.” Meanwhile, PAMM’s double-height project gallery houses “American Echo Chamber,” a series of 15 kinetic lights by the Peruvian artist José Carlos Martinat, inspired by Peru’s popular pyrotechnic parks.
“A Mordida” is on view now through July 28, 2019, and “American Echo Chamber” is on view now through Jan. 26, 2020, at the Pérez Art Museum Miami, 1103 Biscayne Boulevard, Miami, pamm.org.
The gallerists Larry Gagosian and Jeffrey Deitch return to the Moore Building, in the Design District, for the fourth iteration of their now yearly collaboration. Their new show, “Pop Minimalism | Minimalist Pop,” attempts to reconcile the otherwise radically contrasting artistic movements of Pop Art and Minimalism, which both arose in the early 1960s as alternatives to the dominant abstract expressionism of postwar America. While Pop Art used mass-media imagery to take down the traditional distinction between high and low art, Minimalism introduced simplified geometric forms and the use of industrial materials. What do the movements have in common? As this exhibition demonstrates — with works by Peter Halley, Jeff Koons, Adam McEwen, Sarah Morris and Richard Prince — they share a number of key components, such as the ready-made form and a lasting influence over contemporary art.
“Pop Minimalism | Minimalist Pop” is on view now through Dec. 9 at the Moore Building, 191 NE 40th Street, Miami, gagosian.com.
This year, the Design Miami Visionary Award went to the Mexican husband-and-wife duo Carla Fernández and Pedro Reyes. Fernández, a fashion designer, is known for her sustainability-focused work with indigenous communities across the country — ranging from geometrically patterned garments to craft-inspired jewelry — while Reyes, an architect turned artist, made a name for himself with a socially engaged body of work that spans sculpture, video and performance (he once made a mechanized orchestra out of discarded weapons). To mark the occasion, Fernández and Reyes are presenting a collaborative retrospective of sorts at Design Miami that ranges from textiles and furniture to graphic design. Notable works include Reyes’s three-legged wooden metate chairs, built using 3,000-year-old techniques, and a selection of Fernández’s textile works. The artists also collaborated on a graphic map that lists the names of more than 300 original settlements in the Americas that predated European colonization. It is featured on the front of the fair’s tent, on the wall of the couple’s exhibition and on merchandise, including T-shirts (the proceeds will benefit two charities: Taller Flora, which supports Mexican artisans, and Immigrant Families Together).
Design Miami is open from Dec. 5 to Dec. 9 at Meridian Avenue and 19th Street, Miami Beach, miami2018.designmiami.com.
The choreographer Bárbara Foulkes in Abraham Cruzvillegas’s “Autoreconstrucción” earlier this year at the Kitchen in New York.Credit...Photo: © Paula Court, courtesy of the Kitchen.
This week, the Miami Beach Convention Center’s newly built Grand Ballroom will be inaugurated with the work of the Mexican artist Abraham Cruzvillegas. In collaboration with the Swiss curator Philipp Kaiser and the Argentine choreographer Bárbara Foulkes, Cruzvillegas will present an iteration of his piece “Autoreconstrucción,” shown earlier this year at the Kitchen in New York. Somewhere between an acrobatic performance and an installation of found objects, the work will be activated by musicians and dancers twice a day throughout the fair’s duration and is the only free event at Art Basel Miami Beach. The structure is made of locally salvaged materials — previous iterations have included brooms, billiard cues and hockey sticks — and inspired by Mexico’s pre-Columbian cultures, specifically the traditional music and dances of the indigenous Huasteca people.
“Autoreconstrucción” will be staged from Dec. 6 to Dec. 9, with performances at 3 p.m. and 5 p.m. daily, at the new Grand Ballroom in the Miami Beach Convention Center, 1901 Convention Center Drive, Miami Beach, artbasel.com.