Whitney Mayfield Gambrill and Nicholas Alexander Krotec were married Dec. 28 at the Rye Presbyterian Church in Rye, N.Y. The Rev. Dan Love, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 32, is a fifth-grade teacher at California Elementary School in Costa Mesa, Calif. She graduated from Northeastern and received a master’s degree in education with distinction from Vanguard University in Costa Mesa.
She is a daughter of Eunice Jennings Gambrill of Greenwich, Conn., and the late John L. Gambrill. The bride’s father was an editor for the The Journal News and The Herald Statesman, both part of Gannett Suburban Newspapers in Westchester County, N.Y. Her mother retired as the owner of an employment agency, bearing her name, in Port Chester, N.Y.
The bride’s grandfather, the late William M. Jennings, is a former president of the New York Rangers and a Hockey Hall of Fame inductee in 1975.
The groom, 33, is the director of finance at Westox Labs, a toxicology lab in Irvine, Calif. He graduated from Pepperdine, from which he also received an M.B.A.
He is a son of Susan Pitcairn Krotec and Dr. Joseph W. Krotec of Newtown Square, Pa. His father is the medical director of Theorem Clinical Research in King of Prussia, Pa.
The couple met in May 2016 through OkCupid.
Margaret Ferro Bordonaro and Gregory Joseph Solarz are to be married Dec. 30 at the Basilica of St. Patrick’s Old Cathedral in New York. Msgr. Donald Sakano, a Roman Catholic priest, and the pastor of the church, is to perform the ceremony.
Mrs. Solarz, 32, is a manager at the Frederick A. O. Schwarz Education Center at the Museum of the City of New York. She manages various educational programs including New York City History Day. She graduated summa cum laude from Connecticut College, and received a master’s degree in art history from the Institute of Fine Arts, New York University.
She is the daughter of Kathryn O’Brien Bordonaro and Peter A. Bordonaro of New York. The bride’s parents retired as administrators for Prep for Prep, the educational and leadership development nonprofit for high-achieving students of color in the New York City. Her father was the deputy executive director and the director of academic programs, her mother was the director of alumni affairs. The bride’s mother is on the Manhattan Community Board No. 2, and is on the board of Tenants & Neighbors, an advocacy group for rent-regulated tenants in New York State.
The groom, 35, is a vice president at Two Sigma, a quantitative hedge fund based in New York. He graduated with a dual-degree in computer science and business from Lehigh.
He is the son of Joanne Hoelle Solarz of Philadelphia and Robert G. Solarz of Ambler, Pa. The groom’s mother is the vice president for finance at Maternity Care Coalition, a nonprofit in Philadelphia providing services to pregnant women and families with children up to age 3. His father is the executive director at Delaware Valley Trusts in Horsham, Pa., which provides insurance coverage for public entities primarily in southeastern Pennsylvania.
The couple met briefly in 2006 through a mutual friend while at the Bowery Bar and Grill in Lower Manhattan. Nine years later they reconnected at another friend’s wedding, and then went on six dates in two weeks.
Molly Montgomery Clements and Patrick Christian Fisher were married Dec. 29 at All Souls Episcopal Church in Oklahoma City. The Rev. Patrick Edmund Bright, the parish rector, performed the ceremony, with the Rev. John Henry Marlin, who is also an Episcopal priest, taking part.
Mrs. Fisher, 27, works as an account strategist at LGND Digital Storytelling, an agency in Washington that designs and introduces digital products and campaigns for companies and public affairs organizations. She also works in Washington as a tour guide at the National Gallery of Art. She graduated from Bowdoin College.
She is the daughter of Dr. Melissa Wagstaff Kline Clements and Richard LeFlore Clements of Oklahoma City. The bride’s father is president of 405 Plastics & Distribution, a plastics manufacturer there. Her mother is a surgical dermatologist, also in Oklahoma City.
Mr. Fisher, also 27, is the senior manager at Lidl US, an international grocery store chain. He works in Crystal City, Va., the site of the company’s American headquarters. He graduated from Wake Forest University.
He is the son of Kimberley Keith Turner Fisher and Neil Wallace Fisher of North East, Pa. The groom’s father, who worked in Albany, is retired as director at the New York State Assembly, Majority Conference. He is also a Navy veteran.
The couple met in 2012 at a barn party over homecoming weekend at Bowdoin.
Courtney Anne Lenoir and Christopher William Stavrakos Jr. were married Dec. 29 at St. John’s of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, N.Y. The Rev. Stephen C. Tamke, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
Until June, Mrs. Stavrakos, 26, was a fourth-grade teacher at the Green Vale School in Old Brookville, N.Y. She is on a yearlong sabbatical from the school. She graduated from N.Y.U.
She is the daughter of Susan M. Lenoir of Locust Valley, and the late John R. Lenoir. The bride’s father was an investment banker at Sandler O’Neill Partners, and a victim of the 9/11 terror attack on the World Trade Center. Her mother is a wedding designer at Scarsella’s Flowers in Laurel Hollow, N.Y., and she is on the board of Grenville Baker Boys & Girls Club in Locust Valley.
Mr. Stavrakos, known as CJ, also 26, is a strategist at Uber Eats, an online food ordering and delivery platform, and is on assignment at their European headquarters in Amsterdam.
He is a son of Jill M. Stavrakos and Christopher W. Stavrakos of Wayne, Pa. His father recently retired as a senior fellow focusing on policy matters at the Securities and Exchange Commission in Philadelphia.
The couple met in 2011 while on the staff of the National High School Model United Nations during their freshman year of college. They started dating two years later when Ms. Lenoir was chief of staff and Mr. Stavrakos was the secretary general at the conference, and for the last two years had a long distance relationship while he has been on assignment in Amsterdam.
Margaret Ann Cordell and Army First Lt. James Zygmunt Wartski Jr. were married Dec. 29 at the Knowles Memorial Chapel in Winter Park, Fla. The Very Rev. Richard M. Walsh, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs. Wartski, who is 24 and known as Molly, is a speech-language pathologist for Kidz Therapeze in Killeen, Tex. She graduated from the University of Mississippi and received a master’s degree in speech-language pathology from the University of Florida.
She is a daughter of Ingrid Person Cordell and Coleman Wynn Cordell of Winter Park. The bride’s father is a managing director for Bank of America, Merrill Lynch, in Winter Park. He is also a board member of both the Florida Foundation at the University of Florida, and the University of Florida Business School. Her mother is a board member of the Orlando Shakespeare Theater and Support Our Scholars in Central Florida.
Lieutenant Wartski, 26, is an executive officer of a tank company, known as Charlie Company, with the First Battalion, Fifth Cavalry Regiment at Fort Hood, Tex. He graduated from the United States Military Academy.
He is a son of Donna Capitelli Wartski and retired Col. James Z. Wartski of Oviedo, Fla. The groom’s mother is a director, medical outcomes specialist for the United States Medical Affairs at Pfizer in Orlando. His father serves as the executive director of community engagement, veterans experience for the Department of Veterans Affairs in Washington. He is also a board member of the Association of Graduates at the Military Academy.
The couple met in high school in Winter Park, but did not start dating until she was a sophomore in college and he was a junior at West Point.
Katherine Indira Duceman and Bryan James Plummer were married Dec. 29 at the Arnold Arboretum in Boston. Rick Michalka, a friend of the couple, received temporary permission from the State of Massachusetts to officiate.
The couple met at Columbia, where the bride received a master’s in public administration and the groom a master’s in international affairs.
The bride, 29, is a senior associate at the Boston College Center for Corporate Citizenship in Chestnut Hill, Mass. From 2011 to 2013 she worked in the Obama White House as a staff assistant in the Office of Public Engagement. She graduated cum laude from Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass., and also holds a master’s in public affairs from Sciences Po Paris.
She is the daughter of Dr. Arlene Indra Ramsingh and Dr. Barry W. Duceman of Miami. The bride’s father, who is retired, was the director of biological science for the New York State Police in Albany. Her mother, also retired, was a senior research scientist at the New York State Department of Health in Albany.
The groom, 35, is a senior education coordinator for the International Rescue Committee, a humanitarian organization based in New York. He graduated from McGill University in Montreal.
He is the son of Trudi I. Plummer and Bruce Plummer of Toronto. The groom’s father is a principal in foreign exchange at Bank of America in Toronto. His mother, also retired, was the manager of Leaside Curling Club in Toronto.
The bride and groom will use the surname Duceman-Plummer after the wedding.
Bronwyn Anne-Thompson Haltom and Thomas Hicks Midanek were married Dec. 29 at Loft 310, an events space in Kalamazoo, Mich. Randy Campbell, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the occasion, officiated.
The bride, 27, and groom, 29, own THM Consulting, a political and marketing consulting firm based in Kalamazoo, for which she specializes in digital consulting, client management, copy writing and creative design, and he in general consulting and advertising.
The bride, who graduated from the University of Michigan, is a daughter of J. Colby Wingate and Richard Carothers Haltom of Kalamazoo. The bride’s father owns Lawton Ridge Winery in Kalamazoo. Her mother is the co-author of “Cooking with Gluten and Seitan” (Book Publishing Company, 1993).
The groom, who graduated from American University, is a son of Deborah Hicks Midanek Bailey of Grenada, Miss., and James I. Midanek of Wilmington, Del. The groom’s mother is the founder and managing partner in Solon Group, a company in Grenada, Miss., that focuses on turnaround situations, restructuring and financing for companies. His father is the chief investment officer at the Bank Corp in Wilmington.
The bride and groom met while working at the White House in March 2017. At the time, they were both regional political directors in the office of political affairs. “It’s our understanding that we will be the first couple to get married after meeting in President Trump’s White House,” Ms. Haltom said.
Ruby Kaur Gill and Dr. Raja Ravinel Narayan were married Dec. 29 at the Fairmont San Jose hotel in San Jose, Calif. Pundit Parma Sharma, a Hindu priest, officiated.
Dr. Gill, 31, is a product manager at Dave Health, a company that develops medical devices in San Mateo, Calif. She graduated from Boston University and received a Ph.D. in biomedical engineering from the University of California, Davis.
She is the daughter of Jaswinder K. Gill of San Jose and Satwant S. Gill of Palm Harbor, Fla. The bride’s father is the director of program management at Tech Data, an information technology and services company in Clearwater, Fla. Her mother is a research and development engineer at Honeywell in Sunnyvale, Calif.
Dr. Narayan, 31, is a general surgery resident at the Stanford University Hospital and a postdoctoral research fellow at the Sloan Kettering Institute, where he studies genomic targets for liver and pancreatic cancer. He graduated from the University of California, Berkeley, and received a master’s degree in public health from Yale and a medical degree from the University of California, Irvine.
He is a son of Sarita D. Narayan and Ravindra P. Narayan of Union City, Calif. The groom’s mother is a patient financial clearance supervisor at Stanford Health Care in Newark, Calif. His father is an electrical engineer at Innovative Circuits Engineering, a design, manufacturing and engineering services company in San Jose.
The couple met in 2016 through a mutual friend who went to elementary school with the groom.
Shuai Fang and Di Pan were married Dec. 29 at Kualoa Ranch, an events space in Kaneohe, Hawaii. Jenny Warshafsky, a friend of the couple who was ordained through American Marriage Ministries, officiated.
The bride and groom met at Princeton, from which each graduated, he with high honors.
Mrs. Pan, 28, is known as Lucy. She is a senior solutions consultant at MiQ Digital, a marketing intelligence technology company in New York. Until earlier this year she was also the finance director and a member of Epic Motion, a nonprofit Manhattan-based hip-hop dance company; in April 2017, she starred as Delilah in the company’s piece “Delilah & Samson,’’ which was performed at the Manhattan Movement & Arts Center.
She is a daughter of Jenny Zhao and Sheng Fang of Houston. The bride’s father is a lead scientist at Halliburton, the oil and gas service company based in Houston. Until earlier this year he worked as a research scientist at Baker Hughes, an oil and gas company, where he developed about 40 patented drilling technology inventions. Her mother is a principal database administrator in the information technology department at United Airlines, also in Houston.
Mr. Pan, 29, is a vice president on the interest rate volatility trading desk at JPMorgan Chase in New York. In May, he received a Yoga Alliance certificate after completing a 200-hour yoga teacher training program at Sonic Yoga in Manhattan, and now teaches there.
He is the son of Yingbo Ye and Shisheng Pan of Parsippany, N.J. The groom’s mother is an AutoCAD designer at Sesi Consulting Engineers in Pine Brook, N.J. His father is a structural engineering consultant based in Parsippany.
Ann Liz Murugi Mathews and James Francis Pereira were married Dec. 29 at the Roundhouse, an events space in Beacon, N.Y. Matthew Pellegrini, a friend of the couple and a Universal Life minister, officiated.
The bride, 30, is a managing director at Goldman Sachs in Manhattan. She graduated from Duke.
She is a daughter of Rose N. Mathews of Ozone Park, Queens and the late Mathai Mathews, who lived in Kerala, India.
The groom, 37, is an executive at HFZ Capital Group, a real estate investment and development company in Manhattan, where he oversees development of properties. He graduated from the New York Institute of Technology.
He is a son of Linda Pereira of Port Jefferson, N.Y., and Joseph Pereira of Setauket, N.Y.
The couple met in 2013 at Bounce Sporting Club, a restaurant and bar in Manhattan.