ALBANY — Well, that escalated quickly.
Senator Kevin S. Parker, a Brooklyn Democrat with a colorful reputation, casually tweeted at a Republican spokeswoman on Tuesday and told her to commit suicide.
He then deleted the Twitter post and apologized — only to come back at the spokeswoman less than an hour later, drawing calls for disciplinary action.
Given that it was Albany, of course, there were more than a few layers of back story, complete with barely buried feelings of party betrayal, memories of disastrous legislative sessions and the real possibility of parking placard impropriety.
It seemed to all begin on Tuesday with a Twitter post from Candice Giove, who works for the outgoing Republican majority leader, John J. Flanagan. Ms. Giove called attention to the possibly inappropriate use of Mr. Parker’s state-issued parking placard.
Mr. Parker, who is fond of bow ties and blunt-force bons mots, apparently did not like her tone.
“Kill yourself!” he wrote to Ms. Giove, the Republicans’ deputy communications director.
The attack immediately drew a startled response from Ms. Giove — “Did a senator just write this to me?” she wrote — and a barrage of criticism from people touched by suicide and Democrats like Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul, who said that such a remark sounded “wildly inappropriate” when told of it during an event in Albany.
The kerfuffle also underscored the kind of challenges that the incoming Senate majority leader, Andrea Stewart-Cousins, may now face in leading a 39-member conference with a terrible track record of serving in the majority.
Indeed, the last time that Democrats led the Senate, in 2009-10, the chamber was crippled by defections and dysfunction that led to Republicans’ regaining and maintaining their own majority for the next eight years — often with the help of a group of rogue Democrats known as the Independent Democratic Conference, which collaborated with the Republicans (more on this in a moment).
Then, less than an hour after making his apology, Mr. Parker decided to tweet some more. He suggested that Ms. Giove had been “on the wrong side of history for every important issue facing New York State,” pointing out Ms. Giove’s former role as a spokeswoman for the I.D.C., which was viewed by many Democrats in the state as treasonous for its long partnership with the Republican leadership.
Ms. Giove did not return fire — or return requests for comment.
The incident has already cost Mr. Parker one post: He agreed to step down from his role as a chairman of Jumaane Williams’s campaign for New York City public advocate.
Nor was that the first time Mr. Parker had found himself in the headlines: In 2005, Mr. Parker had been arrested and charged with punching a traffic agent when he noticed the agent was writing a summons for the senator’s double-parked car. The charges were eventually dismissed.
Then, too, there was that time in 2009, when Senator Parker was indicted on a charge of assaulting and menacing a New York Post photographer who was staking out the senator’s mother’s home. He was later found guilty of two misdemeanor counts of criminal mischief but acquitted of more serious felony charges. He received three years’ probation and a command to attend an anger management class.
Mr. Parker’s office did not return requests for comment on Tuesday’s Twitter statements or his use of the Senate parking placard, and it was unclear if the incident would derail his political career, or simply add to its pockmarked legacy.
One of the recent bills that Mr. Parker introduced would allow authorities to access an individual’s social media records before issuing a handgun license.
In explaining the need for that bill, Mr. Parker gave advice that he might have been wise to have later heeded.
