Albert Frère, a Belgian high school dropout who parlayed the profits from his father’s nail factory into a fortune worth billions, and whose multinational mergers and acquisitions helped solidify the economic integration of Europe, died on Dec. 3 in Gerpinnes, Belgium. He was 92.
His death was announced by Groupe Bruxelles Lambert, the holding company that he and Paul Desmarais, a Canadian entrepreneur, bought in 1982 to manage their investments.
Mr. Frère, who was named a baron by King Albert II of Belgium in 1994, knew no borders as he bought and sold major stakes in blue-chip conglomerates. Those conglomerates also ignored national boundaries in Europe as they merged with other companies or acquired them.
After buying a stake in the Belgian oil company Petrofina, for example, Mr. Frère later sold it to a French competitor, Total.
Often described as the Warren Buffett of Belgium, Mr. Frère operated without fanfare from a luxurious apartment in Paris and from Charleroi, a city in southern Belgium near the town of his birth. He became, according to Forbes, the wealthiest man in his own country and was among the richest in Europe, with a net worth estimated at close to $6 billion.
Mr. Frère was born on Feb. 4, 1926, in Fontaine-l’Évêque, in Belgium’s coal and steel region. His father, Oscar, a nail and chain merchant, died when Albert was 17. The business was largely idle during World War II, but Albert dropped out of school in the mid-1940s to help run the plant with his mother, Madeleine.
Post-World War II reconstruction made the family nail company profitable, and Mr. Frère, recognizing that the Korean conflict would create a demand for steel, invested in a plant and eventually controlled half the country’s production. He made a windfall in 1979 when the Belgian government nationalized the industry before prices slumped.
After he established Pargesa Holding in Geneva with Mr. Desmarais (who died in 2013), the partners took over Groupe Bruxelles Lambert in 1982. Mr. Frère engineered the 2007 merger of Suez SA, a waste and water company, with Gaz de France, and sold his 25 percent stake in the German media company Bertelsmann for $5.8 billion in 2006.
Mr. Frère and Bernard Arnault, the chairman of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the French luxury-goods firm, jointly owned the Chateau Cheval Blanc vineyard in Saint-Émilion, France.
Mr. Frère retired as chief executive of Groupe Bruxelles Lambert in 2015.
His survivors include a son, Gérald, from his first marriage, to Nelly Poplimont; and a daughter, Ségolène Gallienne, from his second marriage, to Christine Henning.
His son is the chairman of Groupe Bruxelles Lambert and vice chairman of Pargesa; his daughter is on the board of both companies. A son from his second marriage, Charles-Albert, died in a car accident in 1999.