It’s been more than a week since Kevin Hart was announced as host of the 91st Oscars ceremony and then stepped down in response to criticism over homophobic Twitter posts. The Motion Picture Academy still hasn’t found a replacement.
That’s because it’s a thankless job. As a recent “Saturday Night Live” skit put it: “Who will risk everything for the chance to gain nothing?” No wonder many celebrities would rather not put their reputations on the line when the gig draws so much criticism.
While there’s a chance the academy will go on with no one at all, the world hasn’t given up just yet. Many stars have suggested names. Some have even nominated themselves. If the academy had to choose a host, here are the brave people who would be happy to take up the challenge.
After Hart said he was out, Nick Kroll and John Mulaney, the stars of “The Oh, Hello Show,” jokingly announced on Twitter that they, or rather, their aging Upper West Side alter egos George and Gil, had been chosen to replace him. And they’re taking the job very seriously.
On Dec. 6, the actress and late-night host Busy Philipps succinctly offered to take Hart’s place, writing on Twitter, “I AM AVAILABLE.” On Dec. 7, she reiterated: “I will say this again. I AM TECH AVAIL.” Later that day, Philipps nominated herself for the third time and suggested six other women for the job.
When TMZ approached Oswalt with the idea, he said “of course” he would host if offered — just not right now. “I would hire Tiffany Haddish or Billy Eichner; use me in the future,” he said.
It didn’t stop there. Shortly after, Oswalt, who has emceed an awards show for the Writers Guild of America, wrote a very lengthy Facebook post in which he listed his candidates for the job and explained why he thought he wasn’t a good choice.
The “Evil Dead” star has fought countless monsters in B-movie thrillers. But can he handle the academy?
Even before Hart stepped down, the stand-up comic Rhea Butcher raised her hand and showed off her Oscar-worthy wardrobe.
The comedy writer Megan Amram (“The Good Place”) has made it her life’s mission to win an Emmy. In her web series, “An Emmy for Megan,” Amram meets the minimum requirements to qualify for a nomination in the short form comedy or drama series category. But as per recent rule changes, her series no longer makes the cut. So she’s looking to the Oscars.
The “Gilmore Girls” actor is advocating a populist vote.
Remember Tom Green, of “The Tom Green Show”? The Canadian comic has been fairly quiet in recent years. But last week he saw an opportunity to resurface his name in the cultural conversation.
Given Green’s track record as an outrageous prankster, it’s safe to say the academy will probably pass on his offer. After all, who needs a wild card onstage after the 2017 envelope mix-up?