No one ever said being White House chief of staff was easy.
Dick Cheney, who served in the role for President Gerald Ford, blamed the job for his first heart attack. President Barack Obama’s third chief, Bill Daley, came down with shingles from the stress.
But despite the pressure, it was considered one of Washington’s most coveted gigs. It was a job that men (and they’ve all been men) schemed to get, waging behind-the-scenes campaigns to win over the president and his family.
As with many of this city’s long-held principles, though, that is no longer the case in the Trump era.
Nick Ayers stunned President Trump over the weekend when the 36-year-old political operative turned down an offer to replace John F. Kelly as chief of staff, a rejection some called “a humiliation” for the president and his children.
It’s hard to grasp how embarrassing Mr. Ayers’s decision is for the Trump administration without understanding what, exactly, he was passing up.
Chief of staff is no ordinary government job. They are The Gatekeeper in a building full of gatekeepers. This is the person who translates the president’s goals into reality, who manages not only the leader of the free world but how he wields the power of a massive government bureaucracy.
“You can very well make the argument that the White House chief of staff is the second-most-powerful job in government,” James A. Baker III, who served in that role under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush, has said.
So, why is President Trump struggling to find someone to take the job? Yes, there’s the challenge of managing a chaotic man described as “undisciplined” by Rex Tillerson, his former secretary of state, last week. (Mr. Trump shot back a few hours later, calling Mr. Tillerson “dumb as a rock” and “lazy as hell.”) And there are plenty of storms on the horizon: a Democratic-led House eager to investigate, a re-election campaign, a possible economic slowdown and an active special counsel investigation.
But we wanted to know what’s going on inside the building that makes finding someone — anyone — for this job so hard. For answers, we turned to our ace White House correspondent Katie Rogers.
Part of the problem, she said, comes down to two people: Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s daughter and son-in-law. Unlike a typical White House, Mr. Trump runs his administration like the family business he left behind in New York.
Mr. Kushner and Ms. Trump had pushed Mr. Ayers to the point that his name tended to make headlines whenever the couple got too excited about replacing Mr. Kelly, with whom they had often battled.
The president’s children are likely to remain a significant hurdle for anyone on the shortlist to replace Mr. Kelly. Factions exist in any White House, but the key difference here is that Mr. Kushner and Ms. Trump have signaled in recent months that they are here to stay, and that family members are more likely to outlast any other staffer.
Earning the Trump gold seal of trust has proved to be tough for many advisers close to the president. Steven Mnuchin has the family’s trust from his work on the campaign, but he is more interested in keeping his current job as Treasury secretary. Robert Lighthizer, the U.S. trade representative, has the president’s trust, but does not necessarily have the administrative experience. As of Monday afternoon, Mark Meadows, the Republican congressman of North Carolina, was the only likely candidate to publicly voice his interest in the job.
Does he have the support of the Trump family? Not compared to the others.
Would you dare to ballpark the cost of fed-level election campaigns this fall? Part two of this would be taxpayer outlay, but that’s optional. Thank you.
Hi Juliana! You’re in luck — the Federal Election Commission just released their final batch of midterm spending reports last Thursday, meaning we can finally answer this question.
To crunch the numbers, I reached out Rachel Shorey, our resident data guru here in Washington.
She told me the candidates, outside groups and political parties reported to the F.E.C. that they spent a total of $4.7 billion on the midterm race, with more than half of that coming from candidates.
That whopping number is how much was raised from private donors. But, as for how much the elections cost taxpayers? The short answer is: No one really knows.
There are plenty of costs: ballot printing, cyber security protections, staff at polling locations and voter file maintenance, to name a few. In many jurisdictions, school board elections, special City Council races and all kinds of other local contests are held throughout the year — not just in even-numbered Novembers — making elections a year-round job.
But there is one cost the federal government shouldered during the midterms: Air Force One. According to an analysis by Quartz, the more than 40 political rallies attended by President Trump during the midterms cost more than $17 million in air travel alone.
When presidents use the plane for campaign purposes, their political party or re-election campaign is supposed to cover a portion of the operating costs. So far, the Trump campaign has reimbursed the Treasury just $112,000 for air travel in March and April, according to the report.
• Rick Scott, the incoming Republican senator from Florida, had the most money of any candidate in the country, bringing in nearly $84 million. That includes nearly $64 million of his own money — the most any candidate spent on their own campaign this year.
• As expected, Beto O’Rourke, the Texas Democrat, raised the most from contributions, bringing in nearly $81 million.
• One interesting tidbit: Voters in North Dakota were a whole lot more expensive than voters in Florida. Heidi Heitkamp and Bill Nelson raised nearly the same amount — about $32 million. That gave Mr. Nelson nearly four dollars to spend per Florida voter. Ms. Heitkamp, meanwhile, had a little over $98 per voter in North Dakota.
This kind of spending differential is part of why it’s so hard to extrapolate national messages from a midterm campaign. The differences between the states — and the political strategies necessary to win them — are vast.
• The apps know where you were last night. And the day before that. They’re selling it all to advertisers, hedge funds and retailers, a New York Times investigation finds.
• A video of police in Brooklyn trying to remove a 1-year-old from a woman’s grasp has prompted fury online and renewed questions about aggressive policing of unarmed civilians.
• The story behind an awkward and illuminating tradition at the Supreme Court: the group photograph taken when a new justice joins the court.
There’s always a tweet.
