Mark Morris’s riotous and poignant take on ‘The Nutcracker’ returns to the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Through Dec. 23, bam.org.
Dances turn into classics for a reason. And in Mark Morris’s “The Hard Nut,” returning to the Brooklyn Academy of Music, there are plenty of them, from the pop-art designs inspired by the cartoonist Charles Burns to the yule log burning on a television set during the party scene. Morris bases his version of holiday classic on E.T.A. Hoffmann’s “The Nutcracker and the Mouse King.” It’s both a riot and a poignant tale of a young girl’s awakening.
Dec. 16; netflix.com.
On Saturday, Dec. 15, Bruce Springsteen will pick up his acoustic guitar at the Walter Kerr Theater for the last of his 236 performances of “Springsteen on Broadway.” But for those of us who couldn’t wrangle a ticket to the Boss’s one-man confessional — or who’ve been dying to unleash their hands in rhythm to “Dancing in the Dark” ever since he shut down clappers cold in early performances — there is hope.
What Virgil Thomson once called the “music appreciation racket” — the plethora of books, radio programs, and lectures devoted to explaining classical music — reached its zenith at midcentury with Leonard Bernstein’s Omnibus television programs and Young People’s Concerts. But the immersive audio experience of podcasting offers the tantalizing promise of renewal.
Dec. 17-22; 54below.com.
Through Dec. 21; pacegallery.com.
It’s no surprise that Pace Gallery’s “Agnes Martin/Navajo Blankets,” where serene abstractions by the 20th-century painter alternate with chief-style textiles from the early 19th century, is the first of its kind. There’s no particular historical connection between the two bodies of work, though Martin did live for many years in New Mexico.
Dec. 21 and 22; ticketmaster.com.
For nearly a decade, the Polish director Pawel Pawlikowski struggled with how to tell his parents’ love story — the 40 years they’d spent chasing each other across the Iron Curtain in what he has called “a never-ending disaster.” He finally decided to make a film that’s not actually about them. The protagonists in his latest work are named after his mother and father, Zula and Wiktor, and are given familiar temperaments, but the similarities mostly end there.
In “Cold War,” Zula, an enigmatic young singer from a provincial Polish town, worms her way into auditions for a folk-arts ensemble, and soon into the fantasies of its artistic director, Wiktor. When the group visits Berlin, Wiktor persuades Zula to escape with him — thus beginning a chase across time, borders and musical genres, from Polish songs and Parisian jazz to a Hollywood-esque rock around the clock. Shot in black-and-white, with a soundtrack that aches, it’s a ravishing study in passion and tyranny.
