Good Wednesday. Want this by email? Sign up here.
Facebook let some of the world’s largest technology companies have more intrusive access to users’ personal data than it had previously disclosed. That’s according to an investigation by Gabriel J.X. Dance, Michael LaForgia and Nicholas Confessore of the NYT, based on 270 pages of Facebook’s internal documents and interviews with more than 60 people.
Why it matters: Since the Cambridge Analytica scandal, Facebook has insisted that it does not sell data. But the NYT’s reporting suggests that it’s been eager to barter for arrangements that could speed its growth.
More Facebook news: The company published an update to an audit on civil rights on its platforms. Sheryl Sandberg said the company needed to do better on that front.
The two huge pharmaceutical companies announced this morning that they would combine their consumer-health units into a joint venture that will eventually become a separate company. The deal covers an array of familiar products, from Advil to Sensodyne.
The details: GlaxoSmithKline will own a 68 percent stake in the venture, and Pfizer will own the rest. The companies plan to close the deal in the second half of 2019, and then to list the resulting venture on British stock markets within five years.
This is about chasing bigger profits. Pfizer and Glaxo have both been looking to focus on their prescription-drug units, which have higher margins than consumer health.
But it could also create bigger risks. Prescription drugs are expensive to develop and can lead to large booms and busts. Pharma companies have traditionally relied on consumer lines for some insulation against that volatility.
Trump asked the Fed to ‘feel the market.’ Is he right?
When U.S. central bankers meet in Washington today, they’re likely to announce their fourth interest-rate rises of the year.
What to expect: During a policy statement at 2 p.m. Eastern, the central bank is widely expected to raise rates by a quarter point to the range of 2.25 percent to 2.5 percent, the highest in a decade. Policymakers are also expected to signal that, while they aren’t done raising rates, future increases will be less frequent and less predictable.
President Trump is to dissolve what was once billed as the charitable arm of his financial empire and give away its remaining assets, as part of a continuing action by New York’s attorney general, writes Shane Goldmacher of the NYT.
What happens next: “In addition to closing the charity, her office has pursued a lawsuit that could bar President Trump and his three oldest children from the boards of other New York charities, as well as force the payment of millions in restitution and penalties,” writes Mr. Goldmacher.
Can $2 billion end a national security nightmare?
The Chinese telecom company Huawei is in the middle of the U.S.-China trade war, with America and several other Western countries talking about its hardware as a threat to national security. That’s forcing it to make some painful changes.
Now the company is pumping $2 billion into cybersecurity. It’s building labs and hiring experts, Reuters reports, to demonstrate that its network equipment can be trusted.
But it has a lot of persuading to do. Despite all its protests, the company is practically locked out of the U.S., prohibited from building 5G networks in Australia and New Zealand, and under scrutiny in Britain, France and Japan.
Are algorithms sending stock markets wild?
The Fed has been blamed for the recent market volatility. So have slowing global growth and President Trump’s trade wars. But some observers point to a different culprit.
Fact check: The recent triple-digit moves in the Dow Jones industrial average may seem big, but they need to be viewed in context. With the midpoint of the index’s trading range sitting at roughly 25,000 over the past year, 500 points is a 2 percent move — which is fairly typical over the past decade.
They tumbled more than 7 percent on Tuesday, to their lowest levels in more than a year, writes Clifford Krauss of the NYT.
Elon Musk showed off the first operational tunnel dug by his Boring Company. Elsewhere, his private space company, SpaceX, reportedly raised $500 million.
