LONDON — After an embarrassing setback in Parliament, Prime Minister Theresa May toured European capitals on Tuesday, meeting with leaders and looking for some way to shore up support back home for her imperiled agreement on Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union.
Her retreat undermined the tenuous hold on power by a prime minister whose opponents, both inside and outside her party, have been speaking openly about trying to topple her. It also left Britain’s exit from the European Union, or Brexit, in limbo, with lawmakers and analysts alike saying it was anyone’s guess what would happen next.
Jeremy Corbyn, leader of the opposition Labour Party, suggested on Tuesday that he would try to bring down the government through a vote of no confidence, but refused to say when. Leaders of several smaller opposition parties this week urged Mr. Corbyn to make a no-confidence motion, vowing to support it.
“We need to do the appropriate thing at the appropriate time to have a motion of no confidence in order to get rid of this government,” he said.
On Tuesday afternoon, Parliament held an emergency debate on the postponement of the vote, called by Mr. Corbyn — essentially a chance for lawmakers to vent their discontent.
Parliament will get a chance to vote on the agreement sometime before Jan. 21, government officials said on Tuesday; there had been speculation that a vote could technically be delayed until March, when Britain is scheduled to leave the union at the end of the month. But opposition lawmakers said they had little faith in such assurances, accusing Mrs. May of having reversed several previous commitments, including the promise of a vote on Tuesday.
“Now that the government has pulled the vote, we don’t know when a vote will come, or even whether a vote will come,” said Yvette Cooper, a Labour member of Parliament.
Mrs. May met Tuesday morning in The Hague with her Dutch counterpart, Mark Rutte, who is seen as her closest ally within the European Union, and then flew to Berlin to meet with Chancellor Angela Merkel. Later in the day, she planned to travel to Brussels to meet with European Union leaders. The bloc’s heads of government are to meet on Thursday and Friday.
“What the prime minister is doing, I think absolutely rightly, is making a last attempt to see whether she can get further concessions from our partners in the European Union,” said Philip Hammond, the chancellor of the Exchequer.
But ahead of Mrs. May’s European meetings, European Union officials insisted that there could be no changes to the text of the agreement reached last month between the bloc and Mrs. May’s government, after nearly two years of negotiation.
European Union officials voiced frustration and impatience with the paralysis in London. Mr. Juncker described Brexit, which he and other officials had hoped was a settled matter, as “a surprise guest” at the summit meeting this week, and not a welcome one.
In Parliament on Monday, Mrs. May spoke of seeking assurances from European Union leaders about the deal, particularly on the status of Northern Ireland, but she dodged repeated questions from other lawmakers about whether she would try to alter the agreement.
In the 2016 referendum on whether Britain should remain in the European Union, Mrs. May did not support the leave option, which won 52 percent of the vote, but she has promised consistently to carry out that mandate. Under current law, Britain will withdraw on March 29.
Many British lawmakers who oppose Brexit still hope to prevent it from happening, aiming to hold a second referendum and get a different result.
For members of Parliament who support Brexit, the biggest sticking point in Mrs. May’s deal is the arrangements for Northern Ireland.
For many years, there has been no “hard” border between Ireland, a European Union member nation, and Northern Ireland, a part of Britain — no walls, no checkpoints, and no barrier to the movement of people and goods. Ireland, Britain and the European Union all support keeping it that way, but it is unclear how to do so if Britain is to have its own trade, customs and immigration rules.
Under the agreement, Britain would remain largely within the European Union’s customs and trade system for the next two years while a long-term pact is negotiated.
But if such a pact were not reached by December 2020, the deal provides a “backstop” that would keep the border open by maintaining a close customs relationship between Britain and the European Union, and keeping Northern Ireland aligned to the union’s rules.
Hard-core Brexit supporters argue that Mrs. May’s deal ties Britain indefinitely to the bloc’s rules, and could also create one system for Northern Ireland and another for the rest of the country.