WASHINGTON — As the third government shutdown of the Trump era dragged into Christmas, lawmakers from both parties said on Monday that the partial lapse in government funding was in large part the consequence of Congress’s ceding of power to the executive branch, a longstanding trend that may have peaked in the Trump era.
On Christmas Eve, Mr. Trump kept up his efforts to put his own spin on the shutdown, again floating the prospect of going around Congress to find funding for his promised wall on the southwestern border. Lawmakers had abandoned the Capitol and given up negotiating an end to the impasse until later this week.
It was not clear whether that was a path toward signing legislation to reopen the government without additional wall money or a new provocation.
“The complete Wall will be built with the Shutdown money plus funds already in hand,” wrote Mr. Trump, who later lamented that he had been left alone at the White House, away from his Florida estate and forced to confront opposition to his demands for wall funding.
“I am all alone (poor me) in the White House waiting for the Democrats to come back and make a deal on desperately needed Border Security,” he wrote.
In fact, there will be no “shutdown money” — any momentary savings realized from not paying federal workers will be gone once they receive back pay. If anything, government shutdowns cost taxpayers money in efficiencies and the cost of closing down and restarting programs.
Mr. Trump’s jab was another indication of the president’s assumption that his power, expanded by his predecessors, was not held in check by Congress. Speaker Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin could have forced a vote on a Senate-passed stopgap spending bill that would have kept the government fully funded through early February, likely passing it with Democratic support. A senior Republican aide said that was Mr. Ryan’s intention until Mr. Trump called on Thursday to say he would veto it.
Such a vote would have infuriated Mr. Ryan’s right flank, just as similar moves by his predecessor, John A. Boehner, did during earlier fiscal impasses. But because Mr. Ryan is retiring in days, he would have had little to lose.
Instead, he chose to shield Mr. Trump rather than seeing whether he would make good on his veto threat.
Current Republicans were more sympathetic. By passing a separate bill that would have kept funds flowing, with $5.7 billion for the wall, Mr. Ryan forced the issue back to the Senate, where Democrats were balking at any wall funding. That at least gave them the chance to hold Democrats responsible for the shutdown.
But Democrats saw a missed opportunity to reassert Congress’s power to govern.
Senator Pat Roberts, Republican of Kansas, cradling a poinsettia after he concluded a pro forma session of the Senate, said his colleagues had tried to persuade Mr. Trump to sign an agreement to keep the government open into the new year but had failed.
The desultory impasse has prompted some lawmakers to lament the magnification of what one former legislator described as “the natural tension between Article I and Article II of the Constitution” — Article I governing the legislative branch and Article II covering the executive.
“As Capitol Hill became more polarized, presidents became more willing or reliant on executive orders to overcome an obstinate Congress,” said former Representative Steve Israel of New York, who once led the Democratic campaign arm.
Representative Thomas Massie, Republican of Kentucky, said the problem was hesitation on the part of congressional leaders.
Mr. Massie was booed on the House floor last week after insisting on a series of roll call votes in the days leading up to the shutdown, an act of protest after the House Republican leadership blocked a vote on his war powers resolution to end support for the war in Yemen.
And while he criticized Mr. Ryan for failing to keep regular order in the chamber, he echoed support for the speaker’s decision to negotiate a different stopgap bill with billions of dollars in wall funding and disaster relief.
The stakes of the shutdown have been further watered down by the number of other crises buffeting Washington, some of the president’s making: the resignation, and then forced departure, of Mr. Trump’s defense secretary; the plummeting of the stock market; and Mr. Trump’s vendetta against the Federal Reserve chairman, Jerome H. Powell.
While no legislative action is expected before Thursday, when both chambers reconvene, the possibility of the impasse lasting until Jan. 3, when Ms. Pelosi is expected to reclaim the speakership, is becoming increasingly more likely. Without a majority in both chambers, lawmakers said, it will force Mr. Trump to realize how much more difficult it will be for him to enforce his own agenda.
