There might be nothing wrong with it at the moment — you probably have some terrific investments. But a retirement account has to shift its balance as you age.
When we’re young, it’s best to be aggressive. Stocks, stocks and more stocks will ensure that your portfolio grows. Even though stocks rise and fall, over time they are the best way to build a nest egg. But as you get closer to retirement, you need to shift your portfolio to reduce the amount devoted to those volatile stocks, since a plunge at a moment when you can least afford it could slash the savings that you need to live on.
So at that stage in your life, experts suggest you load up on bonds, which tend to fluctuate less, and extremely stable investments like money market funds. Bonds don’t earn as much as stocks do, generally, and they can certainly decline as investments when markets slump. But they won’t plunge nearly as much as stocks — and sometimes they even go up when stocks go down.
There is an old rule of thumb for asset allocation: Subtract your age from 100, and the resulting number is the percentage of your investments you should have in stocks. Because people live longer than they used to, and because investments like Treasury bonds don’t pay as much as they used to, rule-of-thumb watchers have revised the number to subtract from 110 or even 120.
Depending on your stomach for risk, you might hold on to your stocks even longer.
Staying in the stock market very late in the game is smart only if you’re wealthy enough, or, say, have the stability of a pension or the expectation of an inheritance, and “the market is just a game for you,” Mr. Fredrickson said.
At the moment, he is helping two of his clients find a better balance for their portfolios. John D. Marry and Nancy Laughlin have been together for 44 years, and worked together at the accounting giant Deloitte. When they retired from the firm, however, they didn’t stop working.
He had also taken out home equity loans on a couple of properties he owns, he said, and used the money to live on so that they could keep their savings in the market, which also “turned out to be just one of those lucky things — a dumb gamble that worked out,” he said.
Shouldn’t he be backing off stocks and rebalancing his portfolio at the age of 70? He acknowledges that it is sensible advice, he said. But “I’m inclined to ignore it,” especially since they are still working. His wife, however, “calls my attention back to reality on a regular basis.” And, as the second year of the Trump administration nears a close, however, he confessed to being wary of equities, because Mr. Marry said he had little faith in the person in the White House, and he knew that no bull market lasts forever.
Sheryl Garrett, a consultant to financial planners who lives in Arkansas, recommends that her clients take a close look at “target date funds” that automatically adjust over time to balance risk and reward, becoming more conservative as the client nears the date of retirement. She said that she preferred low-cost funds like the Vanguard Life Strategy funds because of the low costs and low tax impact, but said she had seen similar offerings from many other companies, including Betterment and Charles Schwab.
The most important thing about target funds, she said, is the set-it-and-forget it peace of mind that they can bring. “I am a fan of rebalancing or thinking about rebalancing, on an annual basis,” she said. But she also knows that her customers are busy and harried. And target funds relieve them of some of that burden.
That meant making more conservative investments for herself than she advises for some clients. So her retirement fund is at a low 20 percent equity, half what it had been for years. At the rule of thumb of 100 minus her age, her stocks should make up 45 percent of her portfolio.
