In the stop-motion animated film “La Casa Lobo” (The Wolf House), a young woman emerges from the walls and melts into the floor, paintings cry, a tree grows in a living room and pigs transform into children.
The Chilean artists Cristóbal León and Joaquín Cociña created each image of their visually stunning and horrifying film using life-size models and sets that are in a constant state of evolution. To do so, they set up temporary studios within art gallery spaces and museums from Chile to Amsterdam, creating the film with art aficionados as their witnesses.
Now the finished work will receive another art-world screening at Art Basel Miami Beach, as Upstream Gallery from Amsterdam presents the work in the “Positions” section, with an exhibition entirely devoted to this single work by Mr. León and Mr. Cociña. A limited edition of six copies of the film are on offer, priced at 30,000 euros (about $34,000) each.
Mr. León and Mr. Cociña spent five years creating the 73-minute film, in art institutions such as Casa Maauad in Mexico City, the Buenos Aires Museum of Modern Art, the Museo de Arte Contemporáneo in Santiago and the Media Arts Biennial of Chile in Santiago de Chile, among other locations. They did this in part because they knew the filmmaking process would be lengthy — they needed 12 shots for each second of footage — so they didn’t want to create it all in solitude.
“The process of the filmmaking had a sculptural quality and a material quality, and we wanted to be able to show that to the public as well,” Mr. León said during a video interview with the two artists from their homes in Chile. Mr. León will be at Art Basel for the opening.
It is their first feature-length movie, although the duo have made many short animated films that explore similar visual and thematic territory, such as “Los Andes” and “Lucía,” since they began working together in 2007.
“La Casa Lobo” tells the story of Maria, a young woman who lives in a German colony in Chile, who has been threatened with 100 days of solitary confinement for not taking proper care of pigs on the farm. She runs off into the woods, where she is chased by a wolf, but finds a small, abandoned, dilapidated cottage. Inside, there are two pigs, whom she promises not to eat but to protect from the wolf.
Alone in the cottage, Maria begins to imagine things — to hallucinate or to dream — and the pigs transform into a boy and a girl, her children, whom she tries to raise with a sense of security despite the constant threat of the wolf outside the door. But the dream continues to evolve and shift into nightmarish territory, as their food runs out and the wolf draws nearer. The film has many fairy-tale elements, drawing especially on the Three Little Pigs and Hansel and Gretel, and is both surrealistic and Dada-esque.
“La Casa Lobo” had its premiere at the 2018 Berlin International Film Festival, the Berlinale, where it won a prize, and has since traveled to film festivals around the world, winning best animated feature film at the Monterrey festival in Mexico, best Latin American film at the Quito Latin American Film Festival in Ecuador and the public prize and best cinematography at the international film festival in Valdivia, Chile.
The narrative was inspired in part, the artists said, by a true story that is probably better known in South America than in the United States. It begins in a German colony reminiscent of a traditional Bavarian settlement known as Colonia Dignidad, or Dignity Colony, which a group of German émigrés set up in southern Chile after World War II. In 1961, a former Nazi corporal, Paul Schäfer, who had been charged with sexually abusing boys at a German orphanage, became the colony’s leader.
During his nearly 40-year rule, he turned it into a horror camp, where children were separated from their parents and sexually abused, and adults were drugged and made to work in slavelike conditions, under constant surveillance. The Chilean military dictator, Gen. Augusto Pinochet, was not only aware of the colony and its leader, but also used it as torture camp for dissidents and political detainees from 1973 onward, according to the National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation report, an investigation of human rights abuses under the Pinochet government.
The story of the Dignity Colony was explored in the 2015 film “The Colony,” directed by the Academy Award-winning filmmaker Florian Gallenberger and starring Emma Watson. The story, Mr. Cociña said, was already very familiar to Chileans, so the references in his film will be accessible without too much explanation.
“Basically the love for German culture is mixed with fascism and mixed with the history of colonization,” he said. The film explores, in a visceral way, how one thing can morph into another in very fluid process, turning a dark corner at any moment.
