244 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $26.
Illustrated. 176 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $25.
The day Lucia Berlin was born, in Juneau, Alaska, in 1936, an avalanche wiped out a third of the town, or so she later wrote. Mythic stories gravitated to her, and in death she acquired one more: that of a writer who died too young and went unrecognized in her lifetime. In truth, when she died, at 68 in 2004, she had published 76 stories and six collections, for which she received several prizes. And yet, just as in her writing, the myth is truer than the truth. She should have written more. She should have been more celebrated. In 2015 Farrar, Straus & Giroux published “A Manual for Cleaning Women,” a 400-page volume of her re-collected tales. It was rapturously received: Here was a writer’s writer who, at the same time, had tremendous popular appeal. The book made the New York Times best-seller list. She was canonized alongside Richard Yates and Raymond Carver, and her own heroes, William Carlos Williams and Chekhov.
And yet, Berlin is not only a soulful chronicler of the lost corners of America, whose semi-autobiographical stories brim with red caliche clay, arroyos, drainage ditches and smelter towns. She is not only a writer of vivid bursts of language: “Pete scowled; dominoes clicked. The daiquiris were strong. Cold, cold, delicious!” She is also a distinctly female voice, a raspy Marlene Dietrich. She was a beautiful woman who dared to know it, who could feel a bullet zing against the car and say, “‘Hot damn!’ … An adventure,” and also write, with urgent honesty, of motherhood and love. In death, she became the patron saint of every coastal cool girl, every exhausted mother, every daydreamer of plane tickets, every chaser of her next broken heart. The simultaneous publication of a new volume of old stories, “Evening in Paradise,” and an unfinished memoir (along with photographs and letters), “Welcome Home,” is an event sure to be greeted with elation.
The list of houses is the bare-knuckled spine holding together a body of work in which each story shows you a single detail, in high definition. In Berlin’s stories, her alter ego changes names — Maya, Laura, Maggie — but the scattershot particulars of her life hold constant. In “La Barca de la Ilusión,” Maya attempts to keep Buzz (an analogue for Buddy Berlin, her third husband and great love) away from the vicious heroin dealers who trail him through Mexico. When one shows up in their secluded paradise, Maya “didn’t speak or think. She stabbed him in the stomach with the paring knife. Blood gushed down his white sharkskin pants. He laughed at her, grabbed a rag.” The image slips a knife into the reader: Maya’s determination and helplessness laid bare. As the two men shoot up by the fire, Maya watches from the bed. The dealer pitches forward into the flames, overdosed, dead. Buzz dozes. Maya hauls the corpse into a canoe and pushes it out into the bay.
In “The Wives,” the character Laura says, in passing: “I once stabbed a connection, in Yelapa. I didn’t even hurt him, really. But I felt the blade go in, saw him bleed.” The woman she is speaking to puts on a Charlie Parker record and changes the subject. In her memoir, the section on Yelapa ends: “All young, handsome ex-beach boys, smart and mean. Whispers in our garden, laughter in the dark by the datura tree.” In the list of houses, Yelapa becomes simply: “Sharks, scorpions, coconut grove — THUD THUD — three kids. Hurricane.” The knife, the inevitable tragedy of addiction, the dealer’s corpse: THUD THUD.
“I write to fix a reality,” Berlin told the students who interviewed her. I don’t think she meant “fix” as in “amend,” but “fix” as in “affix,” to keep in place. There are lines of unforgettable lucidity that carry over near verbatim from the memoir to the stories. “I held the hot part of the cup and gave him the handle” becomes “She did things like hold the hot part of the cup when she passed him coffee, offering him the handle.” For a raconteur like Berlin, it seems likely that the stories influenced the memoir as much as the reverse.
“One day in class, I read a passage where one of Cervantes’s characters, in an insane asylum, says that he could make it rain whenever he felt like it,” Berlin writes in her memoir. “I understood in that moment that writers could do anything they wanted to do.” The classroom scene appears in “Andado: A Gothic Romance,” one of the strongest stories in “Evening in Paradise.” Fourteen-year-old Laura is studying “Don Quixote,” and her teacher, believing she hasn’t read the book, quizzes her on the passage: “Laura smiled. She had just seen it. I’ll rain whenever I feel like it.” The scene ends here; the main event of the story is a weekend trip Laura takes to the vacation home of one of her father’s business contacts. On the train ride there, the man slips his arm around Laura to steady her. “This would never happen to her again. When she grew older she would always be in control, even when being submissive. This would be the first and last time anyone took over herself,” Berlin writes. It rains virtually the entire weekend. After their horse-drawn carriage slips off a bridge into an icy river, the man tells Laura to strip off her clothes and, in his words, ruins her. Is the story Berlin’s way of reasserting control over events of her own life? Did it rain the night she was “ruined”? It doesn’t matter. As Berlin wrote in a letter to Dorn, “It’s raining here now, drizzling and downpouring — not today but in general.” It rained in general. It rained whenever she felt like it.