WASHINGTON — President Trump, who has long believed that he is his own best adviser and spokesman, was forced to test that idea on Friday when few of his allies seemed willing to publicly share in his evident satisfaction with the tumultuous events that have buffeted the White House in the past few days.
Despite a drop in the markets, growing fallout over his abrupt decision to pull troops from the Middle East and the ensuing resignation of his defense secretary, not to mention a looming government shutdown, the president seemed nothing but sanguine.
That part, at least, is true.
Facing alarm over his decision to pull troops from Syria and Afghanistan, Mr. Trump bragged on Twitter that he had personally “done more damage” to the Islamic State than other recent presidents. As several of his senior aides dashed to Capitol Hill hoping to find a last-minute deal to avert a partial government shutdown over Mr. Trump’s $5 billion demand for border wall funding — an eventuality he promised to take responsibility for just a week ago — the president walled himself off at the White House and blamed the Democrats.
“The Democrats now own the shutdown!” Mr. Trump declared on Twitter, passing the mantle he had once proudly claimed for himself.
As his emissaries, including Vice President Mike Pence, his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, and his incoming acting chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, tried and failed to negotiate with Democrats, Mr. Trump shared a photo of a design of the “beautiful” spiked border wall in whose name he had decided to hold the government hostage. He then shared another one of himself seated behind the Resolute Desk, signing “many bills” before the federal government careened toward closing.
As he lost the public support of those once willing to step forward on his behalf, Mr. Trump grew angry over his news coverage and told people close to him that he would be fine without Mr. Mattis. He rebuffed them for even expressing concern.
Mr. Trump also privately groused about having to postpone departure plans for his 16-day trip to Mar-a-Lago, his Florida resort. On Friday, Melania Trump, the first lady, had already made plans to leave town with the couple’s son Barron, according to her spokeswoman. Mr. Kushner and his wife, Ivanka Trump, the president’s daughter, who are also planning to go to Mar-a-Lago, were preparing to stay with Mr. Trump in Washington, an administration official said.
Outside the family, a litany of staffing problems loomed as the shutdown deadline drew nearer. Mr. Trump privately complained that Mr. Mulvaney, who stepped into the vacancy left by John F. Kelly after others turned down the chief of staff position, had given him few options for averting the shutdown.
The consequences of Mr. Trump’s self-sown chaos reverberated throughout the broader Trump orbit, where some conservatives alarmed by Mr. Mattis’s departure said privately that they were finally fed up with the president and regretted having worked to support him. Other allies agreed with his idea for a path out of the Middle East, just not the chaos with which it was done.
With whispers abounding through Mr. Trump’s camp, Democrats were far more willing to point out publicly what people close to the president said privately.
Given Mr. Trump’s rapidly draining cabinet — he has yet to announce a replacement for Mr. Mattis or Ryan Zinke, the departing interior secretary — an immediate question is who may be willing to replace them.
Two possible replacements for Mr. Mattis — Jack Keane, a retired Army vice chief of staff, and Senator Tom Cotton, the Arkansas Republican and decorated Army veteran — have both said that pulling thousands of troops out of Syria could have grave consequences for the Kurdish fighters left to battle the Islamic State.
Mr. Mattis was among the few who made clear his differences with the president. Inside the White House, several aides said that while they recognized that the situation there is fraught, they have remained quiet to maximize their own ability to help manage a destabilized situation.
Others have adopted the president’s view that any bad coverage is the fault of the Democrats or the news media.
That aggressively partisan stance overshadowed two rare bipartisan victories delivered by Congress this week.
One was the farm bill and another the First Step Act, the most significant changes to the federal criminal justice system in decades.
After the passage of the farm bill, hailed as a model of compromise, the good feeling was spoiled in the minds of Democrats when the administration sought to use regulatory power to mandate food stamp restrictions that lawmakers had agreed to protect. And when Mr. Trump assembled lawmakers and outside advocates on Friday for a ceremonial signing of the First Step Act, he found himself snubbed by nearly every Democrat who had been involved in the yearslong legislative effort.
A spokesman for Senator Cory Booker, Democrat of New Jersey, who has made criminal justice changes the centerpiece of his time in Washington, said he had been invited but was unable to attend because he was “working to avert a shutdown” at the Capitol.
