Europe|Theresa May Tried to Lead Britain to a Brexit Compromise. Was It Too Late?
Theresa May Tried to Lead Britain to a Brexit Compromise. Was It Too Late?
LONDON — The full weight of two and a half years of struggle was visible on Prime Minister Theresa May’s face when she appealed to her colleagues to let go of their passionate, polarized beliefs and support her plan to leave the European Union in a vote on Tuesday.
If Mrs. May’s appeal for compromise has rung hollow, it is due in part to her own choices.
By the time she revealed her true plan, presenting the country with a compromise that should have appealed to moderates, she had few reserves of trust or loyalty to draw upon.
Mrs. May, 62, could have been the perfect person to carry a message of compromise. She is an old-fashioned English public servant, devoid of bombast and rhetorical flourish, and uninterested in personal power. She had not created the churning whirlpool of ideology and grievance around Britain’s exit from the European Union, and this gave her some authority to bring it to an end.
During the weeks since Nov. 15, when Mrs. May released a 585-page agreement on withdrawing from the bloc, the prime minister has exhibited an air of noticeable calm, as if she is watching something predictable unfold.
 A bigger surprise, it seems, was the rejection of moderates. Ian Dunt, the author of “Brexit: What the Hell Happens Now,” said Mrs. May had been so preoccupied by fractures within the Conservative Party that she failed, until now, to address splits in the country.
Oddly, Mrs. May’s weaknesses as a politician — her dislike of the spotlight, her lack of a political tribe — were part of why she was chosen as prime minister in the first place. In 2016, the country was exhausted with upper-crust game players like David Cameron, her predecessor, who had casually led the country into turmoil by promising a referendum on leaving the European Union, never expecting that the Leave side would win.
To a fragile, stunned country, Mrs. May looked like a “safe pair of hands.” The daughter of a small-town vicar, she was diligent and cautious, not a member of any of Westminster’s political camps, or party to back-channel conspiracies. She had shown toughness and flashes of bravery in six years as home secretary. In the evenings, when her colleagues fanned out to social clubs and dinner parties, she would dine alone with her husband in the Commons.
Some of this aloofness was natural: When she rose through the party, she was one of very few senior women.
Brought into office with the central goal of negotiating Brexit, Mrs. May set about winning the confidence of her party’s right wing — not a simple task since in the referendum campaign she had supported remaining.
She built a team that including dedicated Brexiteers, among them her closest adviser, Nick Timothy, and echoed their thoughts in early speeches.
“Too many people in positions of power behave as though they have more in common with international elites than with people down the road, the people they employ, the people they pass in the street,” she said at a Conservative Party conference in October 2016.
She followed this up by articulating a series of “red lines,” promising to exit the customs union, single market and European Court of Justice. These promises would box her in, glossing over the fact that leaving the customs union would require establishing a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. But they kept her hard-line critics on board.
With the publication of her withdrawal agreement, Mrs. May ended her fence-sitting — and enraged the hard-Brexit faction.
Daniel Hannan, one of the founders of Vote Leave, said her deal “ends free movement, but otherwise keeps us in the E.U.” The worst betrayal, he said, was her acceptance of the so-called Irish backstop, which locks Northern Ireland into continued membership in the customs union until a trade deal is mutually agreed upon.
Her critics on the left say she wasted precious time soothing hard-line supporters of Brexit.
If Mrs. May had begun to build alliances with business, Scottish Unionists, Labour moderates and members of the Green party, she might have laid the groundwork for compromise, said Ms. Hazarika, a longtime adviser to Labour politicians.
“The country was very, very divided,” Ms. Hazarika said. “I think the mistake she made, she should have reached out to other people at that stage. I think she could have found allies.” Mrs. May’s secretive style, though helpful strategically, made it difficult to build those bridges.
Historians will dispute whether such a thing was ever possible. The justice minister, Rory Stewart, who in recent days has emerged as one of the country’s most passionate voices for compromise, said the prime minister had no choice but to be cautious as she threaded her way through a field of adversaries.
He said that those pushing for a hard Brexit, like the Tory lawmaker Jacob Rees-Mogg, were “never going to be comfortable with us remaining in a close, comfortable arrangement with the E.U.” and that the notion that Labour moderates would help her was delusional.
“There has never been a time since the Second World War where Labour has ever crossed the floor to help the Conservative Party at a time of crisis,” Mr. Stewart said.
Mrs. May’s strategy could collapse this week. If she leaves, it will be with the admiration of many Britons, who respect her uncomplaining grit. Ms. Perrior, her former aide, said Mrs. May was intent on protecting the Conservative Party — “it’s the main thing she loves, along with her husband, Philip” — from fatal fracture.
Mr. Menon, the professor, was less sympathetic.
