Opinion|Can You Like the Person You Love to Hate?
Can You Like the Person You Love to Hate?
Bari Weiss and Eve Peyser were Twitter enemies. Then they met.
Ms. Weiss is a writer and editor for the Opinion section. Ms. Peyser writes about politics and culture for Vice.
 That’s the overwhelming feeling I get when I spend too much time on Twitter. It makes me feel anxious and angry and amped up. And that’s on a day when I’m not even trending as a Very Bad Person.
This fall I read Jaron Lanier’s book “Ten Arguments for Deleting Your Social Media Accounts Right Now.” He helped me see that these feelings were the inevitable result of being manipulated by this behavioral modification machine.
I didn’t delete my account — yet! I know! I am full of shame! — but I did change the way I use it (no looking at my mentions; far less tweeting; aiming to highlight the work of people I like rather than criticize the work of those I don’t). It also made me think about how I saw other Twitter users, like Vice’s Eve Peyser. She was clever and often funny — and I disagreed with her about just about everything. Sometimes she jabbed at me. I watched her posts with a suspicious side-eye.
But I wondered: If we had met at a dinner party rather than on Twitter, would we have liked each other? Was social media, as Mr. Lanier’s book suggested, creating a sense of intense conflict where there might be intense conversation? Did we actually dislike each other, or was Twitter just making us think we did?
We ended up at the same conference, and you asked if I wanted to hang out. I thought there was a solid chance you were going to try to James O’Keefe me.
This is the story of how we went from being enemies to friends.
 You’re the perfect target for media leftists because you look like you’d be one of us, but in fact, you have contrarian views on subjects like Israel and #MeToo.
Hating you was the natural position for me to adopt. After all, I’m a social democrat who eagerly voted for Bernie Sanders in the 2016 primaries and has contemplated purchasing a “Free Palestine” T-shirt.
So I proceeded as one does these days: tsk-tsking various columns of yours, occasionally snarking about you on Twitter, and ascribing to the belief that The New York Times’s decision to hire you was most likely bad for America and the future of liberal democracy.
But I always had this nagging feeling that the Bari Weiss cyber outrage was overblown. Then, we became friends, and every tender thought I’d had about you was confirmed.
BARI: I was scared of you. Or rather, you were like the caricature of the person I know hates me on the internet: Gawker Media alum, probable Democratic Socialists of America member, many tattoos. That’s like my personal axis of evil.
Then we ended up at the same conference, and you asked if I wanted to hang out.
I thought there was a solid chance you were going to try to James O’Keefe me, which is why I suggested swimming — quite hard to wear a wire in a bathing suit — but it ended up being really fun. We talked almost nothing about politics, but about relationships and love and how we grew up.
The other thing that was sort of strangely serendipitous: The night before I had had a horrible experience with two other people at the conference who confronted me in a bar about my views in a particularly vicious way that was intended to humiliate me. I was shaken up by it.
You had actually heard about it from the guy involved, who was bragging to you about bullying me, thinking he had come upon someone like-minded. In a way, this was perfect timing for me to meet you because I allowed myself to be vulnerable and to talk about it with you.
EVE: We also connected over our Jewish upbringings, being women writers, and finding common ground over the absurd aspects of internet outrage culture. Social media has the tendency to flatten people. It gives us the ability to immediately post any passing thought, which doesn’t lend itself to thoughtfulness or nuance. Not only can someone become a caricature of her stupidest tweet, but it creates an environment in which the most bombastic, aggressive takes about the hot topic of the day get the most engagement. Feuds flourish; offering the benefit of the doubt to another person is a sign of cowardice, or of not being sufficiently moral.
This isn’t to say you should befriend raging bigots or violent abusers, but having an ideologically diverse group of friends helps you better understand your own convictions.
For a long time, I giddily partook in the feud culture platforms like Twitter engender. During the 2016 election, multiple people I was friendly with in real life blocked me for being too salty about Hillary Clinton’s shortcomings, even though I ended up voting for her. I loved making fun of bad tweets, and my followers loved to retweet my most vicious messages.
But slowly, something changed in me, and I needed to opt out of the cruelty of online discourse. It was partly because, as my following increased, I began to receive annoying backlash for any quasi-controversial tweet, but also because I’m in my 20s, and every day I’m re-examining who I am and growing into a more mature version of myself.
When we decided to work on an article together, I told you I wanted to write about baking sourdough bread. Because making a tangible, edible, distinctly uncontroversial object by hand felt like the opposite of the online hellspace you and I first encountered each other in. Even though our views differ in so many ways, we managed to connect over feeling utterly exhausted by the hyperpoliticized world we live in.
BARI: The article was very good and very funny. And you actually schlepped from Brooklyn to bring me homemade sourdough, which was delicious. I was also really struck by the essay you wrote shortly after for Vice about deleting your old tweets — and the embarrassment of facing them. This was no small thing, because you averaged something like 35 tweets a day. You didn’t mention me in there, but I felt like maybe it was a (loving) subtweet?
EVE: It’s funny — despite my history of snarking about New York Times Op-Ed articles I disagree with on Twitter, I didn't subtweet you as much as my peers did. In part, it was because I had secretly found myself agreeing with some of your Op-Ed essays, like the one you wrote about the Aziz Ansari sexual misconduct allegations. I respected your willingness to point out the obvious flaws of a poorly reported “exposé” in an environment where offering that sort of opinion would generate considerable backlash.
I definitely don’t hate you, but it seems I got my wish.
 I am struck by how some on the left are talking about the people — especially white women — who voted Republican. Their message seems to be, “We need a re-education camp for white women who are clearly motivated solely or primarily by racism.” It’s about shaming people. And shame, at least in my experience, doesn’t make people change their minds. It just makes them dig in.
EVE: In these divisive times, the increasingly moralistic left has adopted this idea that those who don’t agree with you politically are the enemy. (And vice versa.) I think it’s a self-defeating way of looking at things. If we dismiss the almost 63 million people who voted for Trump as irredeemably evil, where does that leave us as a society? You voted for Clinton, and yet, when we became friends, I worried I’d get “canceled” if Twitter found out.
Of course, we have to acknowledge that we are privileged enough to be able to have this sort of discourse, to be friends despite our differing beliefs. Not everyone has that option.
BARI: That’s right. I’m certainly not going to invite the conspiracy theorist who called my rabbi asking about me out for coffee. Likewise, a black student at the University of North Carolina probably wouldn’t feel safe meeting with a Richard Spencer foot soldier. And so on.
The people who get under my skin the most on social media are not the neo-Nazis — they are so transparently evil that there doesn’t seem to be a way to engage — but people who are closer to me and to my orbit. They’re the ones I may be able to persuade — I have hope for you, Eve! — or be persuaded by.
EVE: The odd thing about social media is that it’s made me emotionally immune to the worst abuse — an anti-Semitic misogynist threat doesn’t get to me in the same way someone who agrees with me 90 percent of the time insulting me does. I always go back to what Freud called “the narcissism of minor differences,” a theory that asserts that closely related groups of people engage “in constant feuds and in ridiculing each other” to satisfy aggressive impulses and strengthen the bonds within the opposing factions.
BARI: The truth is we haven’t talked a lot about politics. I know we disagree about many things. But that was obvious before we met. And so I was more interested in learning about the parts of you that weren’t readily apparent on Twitter. And I figured if we actually liked each other then, later, there would be plenty of time to talk politics.
Outrage and negativity are the most ‘engaging,’ and so that’s what we’re fed.
I do wonder, though, what are the limits of friendship for you and have they changed under Trump?
The longer I write about politics, the more open I am to being friends with people of all ideologies. My favorite part of my job is having the opportunity to interview people I don’t see eye-to-eye with, and trying to understand how and why their worldview is the way it is. I reject the idea that by virtue of being friends with you, I am somehow condoning the beliefs you have that I disagree with. This isn’t to say you should befriend raging bigots or violent abusers, but having an ideologically diverse group of friends helps you better understand your own convictions.
I’m also open to being friends with all sorts of people because my leftism is informed by a sense of radical empathy. We should live in a country where the military doesn’t wage needless war on other nations and where everyone has equal rights and access to free health care and other social services because, fundamentally, everyone deserves to be treated kindly.
BARI: And yet I think the animating impulse of our era, certainly politically, is destruction. I know this risks ending on a dark note, but doesn’t it seem that the organizations and the people who get the most attention are destructive? On social media this isn’t just speculation. Outrage and negativity are the most “engaging,” and so that’s what we’re fed.
The disciplined among us — and I’m hoping to get there — might get off these platforms entirely. One thing we all can do is make the effort to engage in real life.
Maybe you have a political nemesis whom you subtweet. Perhaps you have a Facebook foe. Or maybe your enemy is sitting across the campus library or in the cubicle next to you. If so, we’ve got a challenge for you: Invite that person to have a beer or coffee, or join you in a FaceTime chat. Tell us how it went.
Or maybe you’re a step ahead of us and you’ve already found a way to bridge the gap. We’d love to hear from you, too.
We may contact you and feature your story in a project on this subject.
Eve Peyser writes about politics and culture for Vice.