With $136 billion in assets and enviable access to exclusive investment opportunities, Ivy League universities have long boasted that their endowments earn higher returns than other investors.
This year the 10-year returns achieved by the endowments for all the Ivy League schools lagged a plain-vanilla portfolio of stocks and bonds, according to a new study by Markov Processes International, which closely monitors the performance of Ivy League endowments. It’s the first time that has happened in the 16 years for which Markov has data on all the Ivy League endowments.
The simulated portfolio is conservative, made up of 60 percent stocks and 40 percent bonds, and it achieved an annualized return of 8.1 percent. Not one Ivy League school beat that performance, although Princeton came the closest at 8.03 percent, edging out Columbia (7.98 percent). Far behind were Cornell, with an annualized return of just 4.8 percent, and Harvard, in last place at 4.5 percent.
A slightly more aggressive mix of 70 percent stocks and 30 percent bonds surpassed the Ivies’ results by an even greater margin.
That the Ivy League universities, with access to some of the best minds and investors with the best track records, would fall short of a simple, low-cost approach over a decade is startling. For individuals considering following their approach, the message should be clear: Don’t.
“Anyone trying to emulate the Ivies should be very cautious and skeptical,” said Jeff Schwartz, Markov’s president.
You’d think the lackluster returns would lead the Ivy League schools — as well as other large institutional investors — to question this approach. On the contrary, though, investors, mostly large institutions, in 2017 poured a record $754 billion into the kind of high-cost assets that form the core of the Ivy endowments, according to the research firm Preqin.
All of the Ivies (as well as other schools with huge endowments) have wholeheartedly embraced what has become known as the Yale model, which calls for heavy allocations to these so-called alternative investments. That class includes private equity, venture capital and hedge funds, as well as real estate and natural resources.
These alternatives share a common fee structure, which is typically 2 percent of assets under management plus 20 percent of any gains. As the recent results make clear, those high fees don’t guarantee high returns.
Andrew Golden manages Princeton’s $24 billion endowment. He trained alongside David Swensen, the inventor of the Yale model, and remains a firm believer, at least for big-endowment schools like Princeton. “I wouldn’t recommend it for my mother,” he said in a recent interview.
If anyone has bragging rights, it would be Mr. Golden: At 14.2 percent, Princeton had the highest returns in the Ivy League in the most recent fiscal year. Princeton led the pack in the last decade and placed second, at 11.4 percent annual returns, over the last 20 years.
“Focusing on the calendar just leads to short-termism,” Mr. Golden said.
Princeton aims for a 10 percent annualized return, which is close to the long-term return for the S&P 500, not adjusted for inflation. To get that result, Princeton’s endowment is heavily weighted toward equities, albeit in the context of alternative strategies. It has just 5 percent in fixed income and cash. Such an equity-heavy allocation means assuming higher risk, Mr. Golden acknowledged, which he believes is appropriate for Princeton’s overall strong fiscal position.
No one will accuse Mr. Golden of short-termism. Even the 10-year period is too short to measure meaningful results, he said, at least for an institution with an infinite time horizon. By that standard, a decade is a blip.
Indeed, Princeton and the Ivy League as a whole remain far ahead of the performance of the 60/40 mix over the last 15- and 20-year periods. Mr. Golden noted that Princeton’s endowment fared badly in 1998-99, toward the end of a bull market, only to weather the bursting of the tech bubble. The fund finished the 20-year span far ahead of a 60/40 blend.
That helps explain why so many institutions have been reluctant to pare back their expensive investments in hedge funds and venture capital — high returns that beat the 60/40 mix could be just over the horizon.
Of course, extremely long measurement periods are convenient for underperforming asset managers, who can always argue that it’s too soon to brand them a failure.
All the Ivy League endowment managers “will say that, since their institutions are perpetual, they believe in this strategy for the very long term,” said Christopher Philips, head of Vanguard Institutional Advisory Services and a champion of Vanguard’s low-fee index fund approach. “I think some of them are actually hoping for a bear market to shake out the excess” and lift their performances relative to boring, low-cost funds.
Mr. Philips concedes that the Ivy League schools and other “mega-endowments” do have advantages, including access to an elite group of managers.
When will a reckoning come? Check back in another decade. By then, many of the current managers of university endowments will have settled into very comfortable retirements.