THE BOTANICAL WORLD OF HARRY POTTER TOUR SERIES: POTIONS at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden (Dec. 9, 2:30-3:30 p.m.). Who knew that Hogwarts had a campus in Brooklyn? This public garden is inviting eager young scholars to continue their exploration of the Harry Potter world here, where they can find plants that have roots in the real world as well as in J. K. Rowling’s imagination. Participants will meet at the Steinhardt Conservatory, where each will receive a copy of an O.W.L. (Ordinary Wizarding Level) exam, the kind Harry took. This will ask them to find a list of potion-worthy species, like squill, cinnamon, ginger and monkshood, in the conservatory, where an alchemy table will also offer demonstrations of plant-based chemistry. Hogwarts teachers (garden guides) will provide information and a small take-home prize to each visitor who completes the test.
‘BUTTONS: A NEW MUSICAL FILM’ at select theaters nationwide (Dec. 8, 12:55 p.m.). It’s been more than 50 years since Dick Van Dyke kicked up his heels onscreen in the original “Mary Poppins” movie. Yet Van Dyke, now almost 93, can still dance, and he proves it not only in the forthcoming “Mary Poppins Returns,” but also in this holiday film, which Fathom Events will present in participating theaters for just one day. Directed by Tim Janis in the style of an old-fashioned MGM musical — it includes a song by Paul McCartney — “Buttons” focuses on two orphaned children in an early-1900s New England mill town. Misfortune haunts them until the arrival of a pair of mysterious, possibly angelic visitors, portrayed by Van Dyke and Angela Lansbury.
‘A CHARLIE BROWN CHRISTMAS LIVE’ at ShapeShifter Lab (Dec. 8-9, 2, 4 and 6 p.m.; through Dec. 16). Charlie Brown has never been a popular kid, but there are always good reasons to join him for the holidays. One is this annual presentation from Pig Brooch Theater Company. It delivers, word for word, Charles M. Schulz’s original script for the animated television special “A Charlie Brown Christmas,” which aired for the first time on ABC in 1965. The show also features a live jazz trio playing Vince Guaraldi’s score for the television production, in which a glum Charlie, at first depressed by the season’s commercialism, learns from Linus what’s really worth celebrating.
HOLIDAY PET SUPER ADOPTION at the Meadowlands Exposition Center, Secaucus, N.J. (Dec. 8, 10 a.m.-7 p.m.; Dec. 9, 10 a.m.-5 p.m.). A toy or a video game may be fun, but it won’t love you back. Sponsored by Best Friends Animal Society, this adoption fair offers more than 600 dogs and cats, already vaccinated, microchipped and spayed or neutered, from local shelters and rescue groups. Admission is free, but potential pet owners should bring cash or a credit card (adoptions start at $25), along with identification and, if they rent their homes, proof that animals are permitted. (Some rescue organizations have further requirements.) The event welcomes current furry companions, too: People for Animals will provide a limited number of free vaccinations and microchips, first come first served; after the free supplies run out, it will offer the services at a low cost.
MUSICTALKS: HANUKKAH CONCERT FOR FAMILIES at the Yeshiva University Museum (Dec. 9, 11 a.m.-1:15 p.m.). Hanukkah may be the Festival of Lights, but this joyous holiday is also about sound, and you’ll hear a lot of it — klezmer, Ladino, opera, jazz, traditional songs — at this family celebration, presented by the museum and the Center for Jewish History. Intended for those 4 and older, the fun begins with an art workshop to create pouches for gelt (the coins, often made of chocolate, given out at Hanukkah). Young visitors can also go on a scavenger hunt through the exhibition “Hey, Wow! The Art of Oded Halahmy,” where they will see mixed-media sculptures reflecting Hebrew letters and Jewish history. At noon, the cellist Elad Kabilio and his chamber ensemble MusicTalks will perform — singing along is encouraged — and host a “musical instrument petting zoo,” at which children can handle and try out violins, drums, clarinets and more.
OWL PROWL THROUGH HIGH ROCK PARK (Dec. 8, 4-6 p.m.). Cliff Hagen has mastered an unusual language: He speaks owl. Hagen, president of Protectors of Pine Oak Woods, a conservation group on Staten Island, will demonstrate his fluency on Saturday. Scheduled around sundown, when many owls awaken hungry, this hike will explore High Rock Park, one of the borough’s deeply wooded areas. (Participating families should meet at 200 Nevada Avenue.) Using calls, hoots and whistles, Hagen will try to lure screech owls and great horned owls, which often respond vocally and emerge.
