The demand for shark fin soup is decimating some shark species. Congress should act to protect them.
Ms. Savitz is a marine biologist with the conservation group Oceana.
Driven by demand for shark fin soup, shark fins have become so valuable that many species of this ocean predator are being decimated. It is a particularly cruel business. Every year, tens of millions of sharks end up in the fin trade, caught by fishermen who hack off their fins and, in many cases, toss them back into the ocean to die.
This practice is known as shark finning. It has been banned in the waters of the United States since 2000. But the fins of legally caught sharks can still be sold in much of the country. More troubling, thousands of pounds of fins are being imported into the United States every year — including from countries that allow finning.
Twelve states have banned the trade in shark fins. Now the United States should do the same. A bipartisan proposal that Congress has been considering for more than a year would do just that. The legislation would make it illegal to possess, buy, sell or transport shark fins or any product containing shark fins, effectively shutting the door on imports to and exports from the United States.
The bill passed the Senate Commerce Committee last year and awaits a vote. But in the House, it remains stuck in committee, though 84 House Republicans, including nearly a dozen committee leaders, have signed on as co-sponsors. Congress should make it a priority before the end of the lame duck session to pass the bill and send it to President Trump for his signature.
In fact, more than 70 percent of the 14 most common shark species involved in the shark fin trade in Hong Kong, the epicenter of the business, are considered at high or very high risk of extinction.
There’s also a business imperative for doing this. In Florida, for instance, healthy shark populations drive hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue and support thousands of jobs in shark-related diving activities. Contrast that with revenues from the shark fin trade. Last year, the United States imported about 540,000 pounds of shark fins worth about $1.1 million and exported about 230,000 pounds valued at nearly $900,000. The illegal trade no doubt pushes those figures higher. In June, the Coast Guard seized finned shark bodies, along with 11 fins, off the coast of Florida.
Of course, this legislation won’t end the problem, though it will help. In China, a concerted effort by government and conservation groups has reduced Chinese consumption of shark fins by 80 percent in the past decade. More needs to be done elsewhere, as there are signs that shark fin soup is gaining popularity elsewhere in Asia.
By imposing a nationwide ban on the trade of shark fins, Congress would remove the United States from the fin trade entirely, improve enforcement of the current finning ban and send a message to other countries that the United States condemns finning as a cruel practice that should not be allowed to continue.
The legislation has the votes to pass. It deserves a vote.
Jacqueline Savitz is the chief policy officer for North America for Oceana.