WASHINGTON — The Louisiana State Police have begun an investigation of T.M. Landry College Preparatory School, leading a coordinated law-enforcement response to allegations of physical abuse at a school that gained national attention for vaulting working-class black students to the nation’s most elite colleges and universities.
The State Police investigation comes two weeks after The New York Times published a report detailing physical violence, emotional abuse, and transcript fraud at T.M. Landry, a small private school in Breaux Bridge, La., which has been featured on national television, showered with donor dollars and hailed as a model for preparing African-American children for college.
Viral videos of students getting into Harvard, Yale, Wesleyan and other elite institutions attracted the attention of the “Today” show, “Ellen” and other news media and entertainment outlets, but many of those students’ transcripts were filled with courses not taken and grades not earned, while personal essays and recommendations were embellished with hardscrabble stories that bore little resemblance to the students’ real lives.
But the abuse allegations may prove to be the downfall of the school’s founders and chief administrators, Michael and Tracey Landry.
T.M. Landry College Prep, a small private school in Louisiana, boasted about its record of sending black students from working-class families to top universities. But there’s more to the story.
A high school student in front of a laptop, surrounded by classmates, dressed in college gear. A moment of suspense, and then … [Cheers] It was a scene repeated over and over again. Students from one Louisiana private school opening acceptance letters from their dream colleges. The videos often went viral. This one, of a 16-year-old student getting accepted to Harvard, racked up over 8 million views. [Cheers] But there was more to the story. Students told us many of their college applications included false information provided by their school’s administrators. And the cheers in these videos covered up an ugly reality of abuse and intimidation at T.M. Landry College Prep. “Abusing emotionally, physically. We realized, O.K. something’s not right. Everything is wrong with T.M. Landry.” Sixteen-year-old Megan Malveaux is a former student. “There was this little kid, he was probably about 7 or 8, and he was acting up in class. Mr. Mike, he had took the kid by the neck and picked him up and body slammed him on the table.” Mr. Mike is Michael Landry. He and his wife, Tracey, founded the school. It costs up to $725 a month to attend, and received national attention for its 100 percent college acceptance rate. In various TV interviews, they pitched a message of hope and hard work. “We’re changing society. We’re giving hope.” “Go big or go home.” The Landrys denied falsifying transcripts and college applications, and any allegations of abuse. But they do maintain that physical punishments are doled out because they love their students and treat them like family. The Landrys told the story of young black kids from a working-class community, who overcame systemic barriers to achieve success.  And the videos were crucial in promoting that message. Parents say they had no idea what was going on. “All the videos, I was excited for all the kids, because they’re kids.  If you want the best for your kid, you need to send them to T.M. Landry. You know, you speak to anybody in Louisiana, they’re telling you.” When the cameras were off, students say they were pitted against each other, interrogated and humiliated. Students say they were also physically punished. Sometimes they would be forced to kneel on rocks, rice or hot concrete, for hours. “I remember the first time I was put on my knees was because he gave me a test and I failed it.” A New York Times investigation found that behind the scenes, the Landrys filled out transcripts incorrectly to reflect classes the kids say they never took and grades they never earned. “My transcript was messed up because he messed up my birthday because apparently I was born the year my mom was. He put classes that I never even took, like chemistry.” Students told The Times that the Landrys told them to lie on their college applications about growing up in households marked by poverty, crime and drug addiction. If they refused, they say the Landrys threatened to do it for them. A look back reveals clues about Michael Landry’s temperament, like in this recent pitch that became a passionate outburst. [Bangs fist] “Excuse me, ma’am.” But this was a rare glimpse at his frightening tone. The Landrys produced a steady stream of promotional material, painting a positive picture of an unconventional school. “T.M. Landry is a no-frills school.” “No classrooms, no walls, no books.” “Teachers without certifications. Classes with no teachers at all.” After the acceptance videos started gaining traction in 2016, press from around the country started showing up at their door. “Walking around campus, we saw that weird Landry style.” Outsiders marveled at how the Landrys could make the impossible happen. “So, O.K. this is incredible.” “The results speak for themselves.” “Go Landrys —” “They have figured out the secret sauce —” “They really have.” In media interviews, they called themselves a family — “Family first —” that pushed kids to their academic limits. “They will make it. No is not an option. Failure is not an option.” Former students and parents told us that for visits like these, students would be forced to spend days rehearsing what to say to reporters. “I plan to attend Harvard University.” “Harvard University.” “Stanford University.” “Cornell.” “Brown.” “We have this trig book, which is like from M.I.T., so we just basically teach each other.” For the high school students, there was a singular focus: practicing for the ACT. For younger kids: a loose and insufficient curriculum that has left many grade levels behind. When their methods were questioned, the Landrys were quick to dismiss any suspicions.  Because they were getting all of this attentions from news channels. They were in articles. I was so brainwashed and I was thinking, he can’t do no wrong. But as you can see since I’m sitting here, I was all wrong.” Now, many in the T.M. Landry community say they feel swindled out of time, money, and ironically, an education.
Since The Times published its article, more than a dozen people have reported additional incidents of what they called abuse to authorities, according to a law enforcement official who requested anonymity because he was not authorized to speak about the cases. Those statements include allegations that Mr. Landry placed a developmentally disabled boy in a closet, lifted another student by his collar and shoved him to the ground on his knees, and hit elementary school students with a belt.
The local sheriff’s office also released graphic details of a battery charge in 2012 that The Times reported last month. While it was previously known that Mr. Landry pleaded guilty in that case to whipping the student, the report detailed additional allegations of choking, slapping and forcing a child to eat rat feces.
The report included a witness statement from a 13-year-old student who said that he, too, had been whipped, choked and lifted off the ground by the neck. The student accused Mr. Landry of stepping on his face and kicking him in the stomach.
The Breaux Bridge Police Department also reopened a criminal investigation into whether Mr. Landry battered a student named Nyjal Mitchell, who had spoken with The Times.
“These families feel that the current law enforcement response is long overdue,” said Ashlee McFarlane, a lawyer at Gerger Khalil & Hennessy in Houston, who is helping dozens of parents, students and former staff members work with investigators.
The Landrys have denied abusing children but refused to discuss the Mitchell case. They did not respond to requests by email, text and telephone for comment on the State Police investigation and the new allegations of abuse.
After being inundated with calls and reports last week, the local police met with representatives from the St. Martin Parish District Attorney’s Office, the parish sheriff’s office and the State Police to discuss how to proceed. Because the school has had four locations over the past 13 years, the abuse of some of the children may have taken place in different jurisdictions. The law enforcement agencies decided that the State Police should lead the investigations.
A portion of a report from the St. Martin Parish Sheriff’s Office.
But the halting response of local law enforcement has left some families skeptical that Mr. Landry will be held accountable.
Mr. Mitchell’s family filed complaints with the Breaux Bridge police in February 2017, alleging multiple instances of choking, dragging and hitting. But a case summary obtained by The Times showed that the police believed the incidents occurred outside the city limits, and sent the file to the sheriff’s department in St. Martin Parish, Louisiana’s equivalent of a county. The sheriff’s department interviewed the Mitchell family but did not indicate whether it was moving forward.
Students said Mr. Landry coerced them into saying they did not witness what happened to Mr. Mitchell. One graduate, who requested anonymity for fear of retaliation, said she and her peers kept Mr. Mitchell’s assault a secret because they wanted to get into college.
After The Times’s story, the Breaux Bridge police determined that at least one incident occurred within town limits and reopened the investigation.
In response to a request for comment on the Mitchell case, the St. Martin Parish sheriff’s department said that it could share information about only the 2012 incident, and that other cases pertained to “potential criminal litigation” and could not be discussed.
The details of that 2012 case were strikingly similar to the allegations later made by Mr. Mitchell.
In that case, Mr. Landry was accused of choking, slapping and slamming a 12-year-old boy onto the floor, then putting his foot on the child’s head. He is said to have dragged the student, made him kneel and forced him to eat rat feces. Mr. Landry admitted to investigators that he had whipped the boy with his belt.
The investigators took photos of the child’s bruises and welts, and captured text messages from Mr. Landry to the parent admitting that he had whipped her child. Mr. Landry told investigators that the boy’s mother had given him permission to physically discipline her child, but she said that was a lie. Mr. Landry pleaded guilty and served a year of probation, according to court documents.
The 2012 episode was reported to the Louisiana Department of Children and Family Services, but the sheriff’s report noted that the agency declined to investigate “because the report did not meet the legal and policy definition of child abuse and neglect” and because the student no longer attended T.M. Landry.
In a statement this week, a spokeswoman for the agency, Heidi Rogers Kinchen, said the department did not have the authority to investigate or respond to the recent abuse allegations at T.M. Landry.
The agency only investigates abuse perpetrated by a “caretaker,” Ms. Kinchen said, defined in state law as “any person legally obligated to provide or secure adequate care for a child.” That includes parents, guardians or employees of a public or private day care center.
The Times story also prompted Daphne Hall to report what she said was abuse of her son, who is developmentally delayed, with the Breaux Bridge police. Two students told Ms. Hall that Mr. Landry had put her son in a closet.
Her son, now 6, told her last week that Mr. Landry also placed him in a trash can. Ms. Hall said that while attending kindergarten at T.M. Landry, her son would say, “I belong in the trash.” She said Mr. Landry had told her that the boy had gotten into the trash can by himself.
“I can’t believe I actually paid for someone to harass and torture my child,” Ms. Hall said.
Bryce Cormier, the father of a former T.M. Landry student, said he filed a police report last year accusing Mr. Landry of throwing his son to the ground and forcing him to kneel. He placed his children in a new school but could not get official transcripts from T.M. Landry.
His wife, Tanya Cormier, asked the police to help her get her children’s transcripts, according to the police report. The police told the Landrys that withholding the records was “pointless,” and they eventually produced a “report card type document,” according to the report.
Cameron Gray, who attended T.M. Landry in the 2016-17 school year, said he witnessed Mr. Landry run into the building, grab a classmate by the throat and throw him into a closet. He said Mr. Landry berated him for his low A.C.T. scores and dim Ivy League prospects, and encouraged his peers to tease him.
His parents pulled him out of the school last summer after his mother discovered him on the balcony of his summer vacation rental, contemplating suicide.
“Mental abuse leaves a different type of scar,” Mr. Gray said.