WASHINGTON — President Trump invited reporters into the Oval Office on Christmas morning to listen to him call military troops overseas. He then unleashed another demand for a border wall — a $5 billion price tag that has stalled the federal government through the holidays — and introduced a murky new claim that federal workers are happy to work for free until the wall is fully funded.
Mr. Trump described immigrants as criminals and human traffickers, and espoused plans for his wall. But he declined to answer questions that invited him to be more specific, especially on a contract he said was signed Monday to begin construction on a lengthy section of the barrier.
Later Tuesday, the White House had no comment about a Border Patrol announcement that an 8-year-old Guatemalan boy had died in custody early on Christmas morning, raising new questions about the administration’s zero-tolerance policies on detained migrants.
Mr. Trump, in the Oval Office session, offered no indication of when he thought the partial government shutdown might end.
The president has remained at odds with congressional leaders since funding for nine departments and numerous federal agencies lapsed at midnight on Friday. Since then, both Republicans and Democrats have been unwilling to budge from their strongly held positions on border security and wall funding. Lawmakers are becoming resigned to the prospect of the government remaining closed until the new year, when the majority shifts to Democrats in the House.
Mr. Trump, who delayed any departure plans for a 16-day vacation to his Florida estate, remained in Washington, where he spoke to reporters and offered contradicting assertions about the fate of his signature campaign promise.
Mr. Trump said “there may be the case of an Olympic champion who can get over the wall, but for the most part you are not able to do it.” He said the wall would be as high as 30 feet, roughly the equivalent of a three-story building.
In the same discussion with reporters, Mr. Trump both insisted, without evidence, that the wall was being built and could be “either renovated or brand-new by Election Day,” and reiterated his demand that Congress allocate billions of dollars for it. Mr. Trump again said that he was pushing ahead with a stretch of wall construction in Texas, claiming that he had signed a contract to build a large portion at a “great price,” but he declined to give additional details.
No legislative action to resolve the shutdown is expected before Thursday, when the Senate and the House reconvene. Members of Congress have noted the increased possibility that the impasse will last at least until Jan. 3, when Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, is expected to reclaim the speakership.
Without a majority in both chambers, lawmakers said, Mr. Trump will quite likely realize how much more difficult it will be to enforce his agenda.
On Christmas Day, the president also veered into an unprompted attack on James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director he fired more than a year ago.
