WASHINGTON — After weeks of discussions about his future, Zachary D. Fuentes, the 36-year-old deputy White House chief of staff, had a plan.
Mr. Fuentes told colleagues that after his mentor, John F. Kelly, left his job as chief of staff at the end of the year, he would “hide out” at the Eisenhower Executive Office Building, adjacent to the White House, for six months, remaining on the payroll in a nebulous role. Then, in July, when he had completed 15 years of service in the Coast Guard, Mr. Fuentes — an active-duty officer — would take advantage of an early retirement program.
Mr. Fuentes has become one of the most controversial aides inside the West Wing, earning nicknames like “Zotus” (Zach of the United States) and “prime minister” for his approach to other White House officials. Even before Mr. Kelly was asked by Mr. Trump this month to leave, Mr. Fuentes had been looking for a way out, after the president had begun to sour on him. For weeks, Mr. Trump has complained about both Mr. Kelly and Mr. Fuentes, primarily over the debacle of the president’s canceled visit to an American military cemetery near Paris in November.
Once Mr. Fuentes’s six-month plan came to light, several administration officials cautioned that it would almost certainly get attention and create negative headlines for the administration. Now, his path out is unclear.
Mr. Fuentes previously worked as a military aide to Mr. Kelly when he was the secretary of the Department of Homeland Security. The department, which includes the Coast Guard, is now led by Kirstjen Nielsen, who had held Mr. Fuentes’s role at the White House until Mr. Kelly pushed for Mr. Trump to name her as the Homeland Security secretary.
The Coast Guard instituted the early retirement program five years ago to align with ones in other branches of the armed forces, which used the authority to help control the size of their forces. The program allowed the agency to grant early retirement with partial benefits to limited numbers of officers and enlisted service members with fewer than the standard 20 years of service.
The Coast Guard used the authority sparingly in recent years, granting early retirement with benefits to only 90 or so officers. When Congress earlier this year wrote legislation reauthorizing the agency, the Coast Guard initially did not include an extension of the program among a list of requests, according to government officials familiar with the exchange.
Only in November, as the bill was closed to changes and winding its way to passage, did the agency add an extension of the authority to its wish list. Mr. Trump signed it into law on Dec. 4 without the early retirement program included.
Instead, the extension through 2019 was packaged with a list of otherwise noncontroversial technical corrections to the bill this month. In explaining the request, Coast Guard officials cited the need for parity with other armed forces. They also told the policy writers that there might be an immediate need for the authority, and that it would be used, at most, for 10 individuals, all officers, the government officials said.
Coast Guard officials insisted that an extension of the program had been requested several months ago, and they took issue with the idea that it was done to help any single person. But a congressional official said lawmakers had received a written request on Nov. 19 to have it restored.
Representative Bill Shuster of Pennsylvania, the retiring chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, accepted the requested changes and this week introduced legislation in the House that would codify them into law. House lawmakers were preparing to push the package through the chamber on Wednesday, but confronted with questions about the early retirement extension, they decided to pull just the provision to ensure that the rest of the technical changes could become law.
As Mr. Kelly’s closest aide, Mr. Fuentes has wielded disproportionate power in the Trump White House. He has influenced a number of personnel decisions, and has frequently traveled with Mr. Trump as part of a rotation of deputy chiefs of staff.
Attention has focused on Mr. Fuentes since Mr. Trump came under sharp criticism for canceling his appearance at an American military cemetery near Paris to mark the 100th anniversary of the end of World War I, a move that was ostensibly made because of rainy weather.
Public accounts at the time said Mr. Fuentes had merely delivered the news to Mr. Trump that officials said the weather made it too difficult to fly the presidential helicopter, Marine One, the 50 miles from Paris to the cemetery.
But two people with direct knowledge of the events said that Mr. Fuentes had decided on his own, well before the military aide on duty made a determination, to tell the president that the weather was too poor to travel by helicopter.
Mr. Trump could have traveled by motorcade, but those familiar with the discussions said that Mr. Fuentes told the president that it would not be a problem if Mr. Kelly went without Mr. Trump.
Mr. Trump was savaged in the news media for skipping the cemetery visit, a fact that he blamed on Mr. Kelly, even though other aides repeatedly told him that it had been Mr. Fuentes’s doing, according to the people with knowledge of what took place.