WASHINGTON — Senator James M. Inhofe, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, came under fire on Thursday for purchasing tens of thousands of dollars of stock in a leading defense contractor just a week after he successfully lobbied the Trump administration to increase military spending.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Inhofe, Republican of Oklahoma, said he canceled the transaction, which was performed by a third-party adviser who manages his investment portfolio, after he was made aware of it by The Daily Beast. Citing his role as committee chairman, a position he assumed in September, Mr. Inhofe asked the financial adviser to no longer purchase defense or aerospace holdings, said the spokeswoman, Leacy Burke.
According to a Senate financial disclosure report, Mr. Inhofe bought $50,000 to $100,000 worth of stock on Tuesday in Raytheon, a major Massachusetts-based defense contractor that has won billions of dollars in missile contracts from the Pentagon.
That transaction came a week after President Trump, following a meeting with Mr. Inhofe, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and Representative Mac Thornberry, the departing chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, reversed a pledge to reduce military spending. Mr. Trump instead indicated that he planned to request that Congress increase the Pentagon’s budget to $750 billion for the 2020 fiscal year, from $717 billion.
Ethics watchdogs said the purchase raised questions about conflict of interest, an issue that has dogged some of the senator’s peers in Congress, including Tom Price, a former health and human services secretary in the Trump administration who traded stocks in health companies while serving on a health-related House subcommittee.
Lawmakers are allowed to trade stocks provided that their purchases are informed only by information that is already publicly available, according to federal ethics laws. Representative Chris Collins, Republican of New York, was indicted in August on charges of insider trading after he dumped his stock in a drug company.
Mr. Collins’s case raised questions about the propriety of his being the largest shareholder of a drug company and a member of its board while sitting on a House committee with jurisdiction over health care companies.
Mr. Inhofe said he had intentionally used an investment management company to avoid the appearance of conflicts of interest.
