The Learning Network|Should Radio Stations Stop Playing ‘Baby, It’s Cold Outside’?
Should Radio Stations Stop Playing ‘Baby, It’s Cold Outside’?
How do you feel when you hear the song? Does it bring you holiday cheer? Or does it make you cringe? Do you feel differently listening to the song this year than you have in the past? Why or why not?
Rock Hudson did it with Mae West. Ray Charles did it with Betty Carter. Lady Gaga and Joseph Gordon-Levitt did it with a modern twist.
And somewhere along the line, the 74-year-old song “Baby, It’s Cold Outside” became a holiday standard, in heavy radio rotation, playing overhead in department stores, and covered on Christmas albums.
“I’ve got to get home,” the woman sings in the duet. “But baby, it’s cold outside,” the man replies. “The answer is no,” she protests later. By the end they’re singing the chorus together.
Now, a long-simmering debate over the lyrics has reached a boil. The annual holiday culture wars and the reckoning over #MeToo have swirled together into a potent mix. Say — what’s in this drink?
Several radio stations have pulled “Baby” from the air. Arguments have erupted on social media, and multiple panels on Fox News and CNN have latched on to the debate.
William Shatner has emerged as a vocal champion of the song. “You must clutch your pearls over rap music,” he told one critic, urging him to listen to a 1949 classic version on YouTube.
To some modern ears, the lyrics sound like a prelude to date rape. The woman keeps protesting. “I ought to say no, no, no, sir,” she sings, and he asks to move in closer. “My sister will be suspicious,” she sings. “Gosh, your lips look delicious,” he answers. She wonders aloud what is in her drink.
“I think the song has always been creepy, but we didn’t have the words to explain why,” said Lydia Liza, 24, a singer-songwriter.
But some believe this to be a case of political correctness run amok. “Do we get to a point where human worth, warmth and romance are illegal?” the conservative commentator Tucker Carlson argued on Fox News.
— When you listen to the song now, what do you hear? Flirtatious banter between two consenting adults? A woman who is genuinely resisting a man’s advances and a man who refuses to take “no” for an answer? A feminist protest against societal norms that constrain female sexuality? Or something else? Explain why you think the way you do.
— Susan Loesser, the daughter of the song’s creators, said, “You have to look at things in cultural and historical context.” To what extent do you agree with this statement? Does understanding the cultural and historical context in which “Baby, It’s Cold Outside” was written change your opinion about it? Is it appropriate to re-examine the lyrics in today’s context, especially in light of the #MeToo movement? Why or why not?
— How much do gender roles matter in this song? For instance, do your feelings change when the male and female parts are switched, as in the version performed by Lady Gaga and Joseph Gordon-Levitt, or when it’s sung by people of the same gender, as in the version sung by Chris Colfer and Darren Criss on “Glee”? Are these adaptations less offensive? Why or why not?
— How does the song compare with others that are played on the radio? Is it more or less offensive than others with vulgar language or sexually explicit lyrics you hear?
— Taking all of the above into consideration, do you think radio stations should stop playing “Baby, It’s Cold Outside”? In your opinion, is the song problematic? Or is this a case of political correctness run amok?
