LONDON — The gallerist Selma Feriani’s debut at Art Basel Miami Beach is likely to garner a lot of attention because she has chosen to exhibit the Saudi female artist Maha Malluh, whose work over the years has taken a critical look at the impact of globalization and consumerism on everyday life in Saudi Arabia and the Middle East.
The exhibition will feature new pieces from the artist, who, by reassembling items that were once of great importance in popular customs — like cassette tapes of religious lectures from the 1980s and enameled dishes that were part of the region’s nomadic food tradition — creates a social commentary on contemporary throwaway culture and the loss of traditions.
Born in Tunisia, she has become a global leader in the promotion of contemporary artists from the Middle East and North Africa, not only by participating in fairs like FIAC and the Armory Show, but also by working with institutions on shows with artists that she represents (one of them, Ismaïl Bahri, just had a one-man show at the Hermès Foundation in Brussels).
Ms. Feriani also wants to create a stronger arts infrastructure in her country. Without a contemporary art museum in Tunisia, and with many collectors interested only in more commercial decorative art, she said, she understands the importance of working closely with collectors and art enthusiasts on education and engagement. She has also worked to build the community, offering artist residencies and free studio spaces where they can work on projects.
Ms. Malluh’s dish tower, also from the “Food for Thought” series.
That eye for compelling art was developed over the decades, thanks in large part to Ms. Feriani’s mother, Essia Hamdi, a gallerist who runs Le Violon Bleu in Tunisia, where she shows modern art. “She was the one who really put me on this journey, taking me almost everywhere with her,” Ms. Feriani said over coffee in London, where she was showing work at the 1-54 art fair. That included visits to artists’ studios, attending exhibition openings and going to art auctions while she was growing up.
So in 2009 she set up her gallery in London, though she had few contacts outside the world of banking and finance. “It was very difficult to bring an artist to show here from the Middle East,” she reflected, saying there was a lack of interest and money.
“Even if you went to the big art fairs around 2010, you would not find that many artists from the region,” she said. In the spring of 2013 she moved back to Tunisia and decided to open a gallery on the outskirts of Tunis (her London gallery for the last few years has served as more of an administrative space, though she will be moving it to West London and reopening it in the spring). “The idea for me to open the space in Tunisia was to follow the artists, so I can take their practice forward and make the work universal,” she said.
