WASHINGTON — A federal judge in Texas struck down the entire Affordable Care Act on Friday on the grounds that its mandate requiring people to buy health insurance is unconstitutional and the rest of the law cannot stand without it.
But in the new case, the 20 plaintiff states, led by Texas, argued that with the penalty zeroed out, the individual mandate had become unconstitutional — and that the rest of the law could not be severed from it.
Many Democrats successfully centered their midterm campaigns on protecting the Affordable Care Act’s insurance mandates for pre-existing conditions.
Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, one of the few Democratic senators to save his seat in a heavily Trump-friendly state, excoriated his opponent, West Virginia’s attorney general, Patrick Morrisey, for joining the lawsuit decided in favor of the Republicans on Friday.
Democrats in Wisconsin campaigned on a pledge to withdraw the state from the suit, and after they won, that state’s Republican Legislature passed legislation blocking the newly elected Democrats from withdrawing. That legislation was signed into law on Friday by Gov. Scott Walker, who lost his bid for re-election in November.
But most Republican candidates insisted during the campaign that they did not want to withdraw protections for pre-existing conditions, and most were silent after Friday’s ruling.
In his ruling, Judge O’Connor agreed with the plaintiffs that the individual mandate could not be severed from the rest of the Affordable Care Act because it was “the keystone” of the law, essential to its regulation of the health insurance market.
“The individual mandate is inseverable from the entire A.C.A.,” he declared.
The judge said he would not “parse the A.C.A.’s provisions one by one,” but had to invalidate the whole law, including the expansion of Medicaid and the requirement for employers to offer coverage to workers. “The Medicaid-expansion provisions were designed to serve and assist fulfillment of the individual mandate,” he wrote.
At oral arguments before Judge O’Connor in September, California and the other intervening states had argued that the mandate could not be unconstitutional if it was not forcing people to pay penalties anymore. But even if Judge O’Connor threw it out, they said, the rest of the law could legally be severed from it and survive.
The ruling came a day before the end of the fifth open enrollment season for Affordable Care Act coverage in most states, one in which sign-ups for “Obamacare,” as the coverage sold through the law’s marketplaces is known, have declined so far by about 12 percent compared with last year.