In short: more sex and CBD, less spending and screen time.
As we look back on the mania that was 2018, one thing is clear: We can do better! Enter our annual guide to the lessons we learned, based on which Styles stories you read most this year, and see how to put them to use in 2019.
Which isn’t to suggest that if you don’t have sex your partner will cheat, but just to confirm what we all basically know: Sex is good for humans (and their relationships).
*In ways that are entirely consensual, of course.
Want to live a better life with us in 2019? We want to send you fun emails. Sign up here!
Less news = more happy.
Things are looking good for CBD. This summer, the Food and Drug Administration approved a CBD-based drug for the first time, and a prominent researcher at N.Y.U. School of Medicine called CBD “the most promising drug that has come out for neuropsychiatric diseases in the last 50 years.” Mandy Moore is using it! CBD, or cannabidiol, is a chemical found abundantly in the cannabis plant and may help treat illnesses, including Parkinson’s, epilepsy and cancer, as well as insomnia and anxiety.
Hide the phones.
We’re all getting wise to the harmful effects of screens, but what’s surprising — and not a great sign — is that the people responsible for the gadgets and how they are used are keeping them far away from their own kids. In Silicon Valley, children are being asked to rediscover card games, board games and the outdoors. Maybe the rest of us should, too.
People in the FIRE (Financial Independence, Retire Early) movement are devoted to living frugally and investing their cost savings so they can stop working in their 30s or 40s. Even if you’re not ready to adopt all their tenets, cutting some spending (if you’re able to) can always help.
Be wary of the so-called wellness gurus.
(This author notwithstanding.) While the pursuit of wellness is more important than ever, beware the snake oil salespeople peddling elixirs like charcoal and supplements and grounding bedsheets, cautions Dr. Jen Gunter. Focus on the tried-and-true self-care methods: sleep, exercise and science.
As always, dress for joy.
Embrace your nocturnal tendencies.
Or at least find a job that has flexible work hours, which an increasing number of companies do. The paradigm of success seems to be shifting from the early riser who gets to the office before everyone else to “late-night coders, digital nomads, freelance moguls and co-working entrepreneurs,” Alex Williams wrote (probably late at night).
Recent data support his hypothesis that night owls aren’t total disasters: Some studies suggest that they take more risks and may even be more intelligent.
Therapy usually helps.
When all else fails, seek someone whose job it is to help you not fail. The advice given by the professional advice givers Cheryl Strayed and Steve Almond often came back to the same recommendation: Sometimes a therapist can best help you in the long term.
Life is a crush of requests, both professional and personal. You must be the keeper of your time and allow yourself to say no more often. If you don’t, you may burn out and come to hate everything and everyone, including your friends and family and the things formerly known as “fun.” Don’t let that happen to you in 2019.
