But then she got a call from her publicist, who told her to get ready for a more prominent appearance: on NBC’s “Late Night With Seth Meyers.” “The biggest thing I’d done before that in terms of TV was a local morning show in Dayton, Ohio,” Ms. Makkai said.
Mr. Meyers has made it something of a habit to invite novelists onto his program, which averages 1.5 million viewers. In his nearly five years as host of “Late Night,” he has brought on a few dozen literary writers, many of them far from household names.
“As much as I love having Stephen King or Jonathan Franzen or George Saunders, we also saw it as an opportunity to have diverse writers and writers who are publishing their first or second novel, because this will probably mean more for them than people who are already established,” Mr. Meyers said in an interview.
In a television landscape where literature has become largely overlooked, late-night hosts like Mr. Meyers and Trevor Noah have made it their mission to put a spotlight on writers — giving them an enormous amount of influence in the publishing world.
The morning shows, which once featured interviews with acclaimed novelists like E. L. Doctorow and William Styron, have largely tilted toward lifestyle and diet books and celebrity memoirs, with occasional appearances by best-selling authors or roundups of summer fiction.
Late night looked particularly barren after Jon Stewart, a champion of serious nonfiction, left “The Daily Show” and Stephen Colbert ended “The Colbert Report,” another reliable outlet for publishers. Mr. Colbert, who now hosts the most-watched show in all of late night on CBS, has mostly left noncelebrity authors behind. And other author-friendly TV hosts — Charlie Rose and Tavis Smiley — were ousted in sexual misconduct scandals.
Those departures — following the end of Oprah Winfrey’s daytime talk show and her original book club, which could turn an obscure novel into an overnight blockbuster — felt like a devastating loss for the literary world, as publishers fretted that books were being edged out of popular culture.
The cumulative effect of those losses, and the growing fragmentation of the media landscape, have made it harder for publishers and authors to drive readers to a book with a well-placed TV appearance. Even when authors do land one of the coveted spots, the sales boost isn’t what it used to be, in part because viewers have turned from network and cable television to streaming services and social media. Still, apart from an in-depth interview on NPR’s “Fresh Air” or a major literary award, few things can drive instant sales as dramatically as a television appearance.
The turbulent political climate has meant that the authors getting the most television coverage — and netting the highest sales — are the ones whose books feed into the news cycle. The appetite for political books has exploded, with sales in that category reaching 11.7 million copies in 2018, up from 9.2 million in 2010, according to NPD BookScan.
Michael Wolff and Bob Woodward, who each got wall-to-wall cable news coverage with their exposés on the inner workings of the Trump administration, had two of the best-selling books of 2018. Michelle Obama’s memoir sold more than two million copies in its first 15 days.
Some industry analysts blame the relentless news cycle for the precipitous decline in fiction sales. Publishers’ revenue from adult fiction fell to $4.38 billion in 2017, down 11.5 percent from 2015, while adult nonfiction sales rose nearly 11 percent to $6.18 billion, according to the Association of American Publishers.
These new spots for novelists on late-night television have offered publishers some relief.
The guest list for Mr. Meyers’s show in the last few years reads like a roll call of some of the most groundbreaking literary writers at work today: Tayari Jones, Marlon James, Celeste Ng, Sunil Yapa, Viet Thanh Nguyen and Jesmyn Ward.
Mr. Noah, who succeeded Mr. Stewart as host of “The Daily Show” on Comedy Central three years ago, has been intent on booking writers who have rarely been given the chance to address a mainstream television audience before.
“I’ve tried to build upon the legacy I’ve inherited from Jon by trying to find more diverse voices, and trying to find more writers who may not be the best-selling writers who we were already interviewing,” he said in an interview.
Mr. Noah’s guests have included Yaa Gyasi, whose debut novel, “Homegoing,” traced the impact of slavery across 300 years; the indigenous writer Terese Marie Mailhot; the Nigerian novelist Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie; and the poet Kevin Young.
For some writers, a nod from Mr. Noah can alter the trajectory of a book, leading to other media appearances, more reviews and speaking gigs, all of which generate sales.
Darnell Moore went on “The Daily Show” last summer to talk about his debut memoir, “No Ashes in the Fire,” which recounts his experience growing up as a gay black man. In the green room, Mr. Noah rattled off some key themes from the book that he would probably mention on the air.
“It was a heart-wrenching story, but it was powerful, it was funny,” he told Mr. Moore.
Mr. Moore later said he had been stunned by the interest in his memoir that the “Daily Show” interview generated.
The ripple effects of a late-night appearance can be significant. After Mr. Young appeared on Mr. Noah’s show in April, his poetry collection, “Brown,” went from an Amazon ranking of 2,712 to 335.
Paul Bogaards, executive vice president and director of communications for Alfred A. Knopf, said he saw a “huge spike” in sales for “Homegoing” after Ms. Gyasi went on “The Daily Show.” He attributed the effect not just to the TV exposure but to Mr. Noah’s palpable enthusiasm for the novel.
Of course, a few literary-minded late-night hosts can’t fully compensate for shifts in the media ecosystem. For a new or relatively unknown author, publishers increasingly have to cobble together an elaborate publicity plan that includes podcast, TV and radio interviews and coverage by blogs or YouTube book reviewers. And for authors of serious nonfiction about subjects other than politics, opportunities on television are hard to come by.
The industry may never fully recover from the loss of Ms. Winfrey’s original book club on her daytime talk show, which ended in 2011 and averaged roughly seven million viewers a day. Some of her choices, among them Eckhart Tolle’s “A New Earth” and Wally Lamb’s “She’s Come Undone,” went on to sell millions of copies. She brought the club back in 2012, but without a daily talk show it has not had the same impact.
“I said: ‘You’re kidding. He actually reads them?’” she said in an interview.
Most of all, she said, being on late night reinforced the idea that literary fiction remains relevant.
