Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, used his final address to reflect on his time as the House speaker. He said he regretted that he didn’t execute his plans to overhaul Medicare and Social Security.
Now, we have taken on some of the biggest challenges of our time. And we have made a great and lasting difference in the trajectory of this country. And I acknowledge, plainly, that my ambitions for entitlement reforms have outpaced the political reality, and I consider this our greatest unfinished business. And, ultimately, solving this problem will require a greater degree of political will than exists today — and I regret that. But when the time comes to do this, and it will because it must, the path ahead will be based upon the framework that we have laid out to solve this problem. As Trey said, as all my colleagues here know, I never wanted to become speaker. I was just a policy guy — I like to think I still am.
WASHINGTON — Speaker Paul D. Ryan, the self-styled conservative thought leader who struggled to govern in the era of President Trump, declared on Wednesday that politics in America is “broken,” sounding a parting message of alarm about the outrage-fueled discourse of the day even as his exit from Congress seemed to underscore it.
Mr. Ryan, a former vice-presidential nominee from Wisconsin, reluctantly accepted the mantle of House speaker in 2015 after House Republican hard-liners torched his predecessor, John A. Boehner. He used his farewell address to defend his brief record and burnish a legacy of dubious accomplishment. Those achievements include the enactment of large tax cuts that fulfilled the fondest dreams of Republicans, especially the significant lowering of corporate tax rate, but they left in their wake an enormous and growing federal deficit that Mr. Ryan once viewed as a nightmare.
He waxed regretful about his inability, after years of grand talk, to restructure Medicare and Social Security and rein in the largest drivers of the nation’s debt.
But beyond policy disappointments, Mr. Ryan used his final moments as speaker to point to the deeply corrosive nature of politics in the age of Mr. Trump, effectively diagnosing the forces that weakened him and ultimately led a man once viewed as the party’s future to retire from one of the most powerful posts in Washington at the age of 48.
Mr. Ryan never spoke Mr. Trump’s name — although he made a late edit to his remarks to add a single mention of “the president and the vice president, who became my partners in government” — but his speech was a stinging indictment of Mr. Trump’s breed of politics.
He might have been talking about himself.
Mr. Ryan’s speech was part of an elaborate valedictory tour that he and his staff have undertaken in recent weeks, including a six-part online video series documenting his career-long quest to enact tax cuts. It is meant to burnish his image as he leaves Congress, the improbable final chapter — at least for now — of a meteoric ascent in Republican politics that stalled unmistakably with the rise of Mr. Trump and his anti-establishment fervor.
Intentionally or not, it served to highlight, in the waning hours of all-Republican rule on Capitol Hill, how the party has changed since Mr. Ryan — a proud member of the Republican establishment, known for his zeal for overhauling entitlements — was viewed as one of its most promising rising stars. With Mr. Trump in the White House, Mr. Ryan’s strain of Republicanism is seen as a liability and an object of disdain from the party’s ultraconservative base, which prizes partisan battling over governing and regards legislative negotiating as weak capitulation.
Many of the House members from that base are integral parts of the outrage machine, taking their turns before the Fox News cameras and committee microphones to amp up their messaging. And Mr. Ryan did little to rein them in.
On Wednesday, the departing speaker was introduced by his Representative Trey Gowdy of South Carolina, who referred to him as “the smartest kid in the room” and recounted his hero worship of Mr. Ryan as a newly elected member of Congress, when he showed up at Mr. Ryan’s office asking for an autograph.
When Mr. Gowdy was being attacked by Tea Party activists in 2011 for supporting measures to keep the government funded over the objections of a band of ultraconservative Republicans who refused to do so without spending cuts, he said Mr. Ryan had volunteered to call his detractors and try to reason with them.
Yet those same dynamics gave outsize influence to members of the Tea Party-fueled House Freedom Caucus, who took down Mr. Boehner and were a constant thorn in Mr. Ryan’s side, refusing to vote for spending measures or other legislation its members deemed insufficiently conservative. Their power only grew with the election of Mr. Trump, whose hard-line immigration policies and ultrapartisan style matched their own.
“Our problems are solvable if our politics will allow it,” Mr. Ryan said, in an apparent nod to his own inability to maneuver in the current environment.
Mr. Ryan departed in many ways as he arrived, calling for sweeping initiatives he has long championed but been unable or unwilling to tackle, including a broad anti-poverty initiative, a revamp of entitlement programs, and an immigration compromise that couples border security with legalization for millions of undocumented people living in the United States.
“In order to truly enforce the law, you have to get people right with the law,” Mr. Ryan said, pointedly suggesting that the debate over immigration, the issue that powered Mr. Trump’s political rise, was having a damaging effect on the politics of the moment.
