WASHINGTON — On Sept. 16, 1991, Angela Merkel, then a young protégé of Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, watched in the Oval Office as her boss and President George Bush wrestled with the sudden collapse of the Soviet Union. Without an influx of emergency aid, Germans feared that refugees could pour across the border, threatening the stability of their newly reunified country.
With Mr. Bush’s death, a generation of Cold War leaders has passed from the stage. Of the major figures of that era, only Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet Union’s last leader, is still alive. But at 87, he is too ill to attend Mr. Bush’s funeral. Mr. Kohl died last year; even his protégé Ms. Merkel, who will go to the funeral, is now in the sunset of a political career that made her Germany’s first female chancellor.
Ms. Merkel’s reminiscences about Mr. Bush were all the more poignant, given that she was about to sit down with Mr. Trump, who grew up during the Cold War but has gleefully tried to dismantle the European and global institutions that Mr. Bush and his Cold War-vintage colleagues built.
It is easy to forget, as the tributes to Mr. Bush pour in, that these Cold War partnerships were not without their bumps. While Mr. Bush and Mr. Kohl agreed on the need for food and medicine for the Soviets, they differed over how quickly to provide economic assistance. Mr. Bush wanted the Soviets to undertake sweeping market-oriented changes first.
Some analysts argue that it is pointless to pine for the restoration of the American-led international order that Mr. Bush helped create. That system was beginning to fray well before Mr. Trump took office, for all sorts of reasons unrelated to him, and it is likely to keep unraveling, regardless of who follows him into the White House.
Still, Mr. Kornblum and others said, there were lessons to be learned from Mr. Bush’s approach to foreign policy, which can be applied to the upheavals of today. He was a master at building coalitions, a skilled diplomat who understood how to corral balky allies, like Britain and France, and deal adroitly with failing adversaries, like the Soviet Union.
By declaring his faith in a united Germany, even before the fall of the Berlin Wall, Mr. Bush helped secure a united Europe. He also frustrated last-ditch Soviet efforts to dissolve the Atlantic alliance. Mr. Gorbachev paid his respects.
In addition to winding down the Cold War, historians credit Mr. Bush with helping facilitate the reunification of Germany and Europe, as well as the peaceful dissolution of the Soviet Union. And he was an apostle for free trade, negotiating the North American Free Trade Agreement and laying the groundwork for the World Trade Organization.
The contrast with Mr. Bush was on stark display at the Group of 20 meeting in Buenos Aires. Mr. Trump declared that he and Ms. Merkel would talk about trade, saying that Germany knew how unacceptable Americans found its trade surplus. As Ms. Merkel has pointed out to him in previous meetings, Germany, as a member of the European Union, cannot negotiate independently on trade with the United States.
Mr. Trump did not mention the issue that most concerned Germany at this meeting: the clash between Russian and Ukrainian naval vessels, which the Germans view as a drastic escalation of President Vladimir V. Putin’s predatory behavior toward his neighbor.
Nor did he mention Ms. Merkel’s struggle to keep the European Union intact, amid a wave of nationalist fervor across the Continent. To the extent that Mr. Trump mentions the bloc at all, he tends to disparage it.
Mr. Trump’s aides played up their effort to discredit another of Mr. Bush’s legacies, the World Trade Organization. The communiqué released by the Group of 20 after the meeting said, “the system is currently falling short of its objectives and there is room for improvement” — language inserted at the request of the United States.
As Mr. Trump has gotten to know Ms. Merkel over the last two years, their relationship has become laden with symbolism: the great disrupter facing off against the last defender of the liberal world order. But it is not clear Mr. Trump fully grasped the contradictions between Ms. Merkel’s encounter with Mr. Bush, and his relationship with her.
“I found that very interesting,” Mr. Trump said again.