For 150 years, the justices have sat, not always happily, for an extraordinary series of group portraits.
Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh stood in the back row, on the far right, beaming.  Off to her right, Justice Stephen G. Breyer appeared to chuckle at a joke he had just recalled.
It was the latest installment of an awkward and illuminating tradition at the Supreme Court: the group photographs prepared when a new justice joins the court. Last month, the justices took their places, in strict order of seniority, and tried to smile for the cameras.
A Supreme Court photographer also takes pictures. Until recently, the justices voted on which of those would be the official photograph.
“It is not clear when the justices began voting for their preferred pose, but the process goes at least as far back as the Taft court” in the 1920s, Franz Jantzen, one of the court’s photographers, wrote in 2015 in The Journal of Supreme Court History. If there were 5-to-4 splits, they have not been reported.
The 2017 official photograph, according to notes to an exhibit at the court, included an innovation. It looks like a class photo, but it is a composite.
“This is the first official color group photograph for which color film was not used,” the notes said, “and the result is the first to combine each of the justices’ individual choices, from several poses, into a single image.” The photo appeared on the court’s website without acknowledgment that it was a composite.
The Supreme Court is resistant to change. For the past 50 years, the elements of the group photographs have been identical. They are taken in the court’s east conference room, in front of red velvet drapes.
Some traditions are older. Since 1899, the justices have arranged themselves in order of seniority. These days, that means the chief justice is seated in the middle, with his four longest-serving colleagues seated at his sides. The four more junior justices stand, with the newest on the far right.
The first group photograph of the justices in their robes was taken in 1867, by Alexander Gardner. The justices have assembled 52 more times since then, generally whenever a new member joined. In 2003, after the justices had been together for nine years without a change in personnel, they added a bonus sitting.
The news photographers have to work fast. Decades ago, they were allowed three minutes, but Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, who was not known for his patience, thought that too generous. He gave the photographers two minutes. Last month, Kathleen Arberg, the court’s public information officer, used a stopwatch to count down the allotted 120 seconds.
The main thing photographers want in those two minutes is a formal group portrait in which the justices look at the camera.
That can be hard to achieve, particularly if Justice Clarence Thomas is in characteristically gregarious form.
Justice McReynolds was indeed an anti-Semite and racist, but that particular story was false, as Mr. Jantzen documented in his 2015 essay. The misunderstanding arose from a 1924 letter from Justice McReynolds, who told Chief Justice William Howard Taft that “I absolutely refuse to go through the bore of picture taking until there is a change in the court” — meaning the arrival of a new justice.
The justices had sat for a portrait in 1923, and no new justice had been appointed since then. In his letter, Justice McReynolds said nothing about Justice Brandeis.
A Taft biographer, Alpheus T. Mason, misinterpreted the letter. A review of his biography in 1965 in The Times Book Review repeated the error, giving it “a crucial nudge toward its current popularity,” Mr. Jantzen wrote.
