BRUSSELS — America’s allies in Europe and Asia thought they had learned to digest and compensate for the instinctive unpredictability of President Trump. But the bitter resignation of Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and the abrupt announcement of plans to withdraw troops from Syria and Afghanistan are being viewed as watershed moments for Washington’s relations with the world.
But they also had faith in Mr. Mattis, who presented himself as a man of continuity and of traditional alliances, and who worked to strengthen them considerably regardless of the views held in the White House. He was also regarded by traditional allies as their most sympathetic and effective conduit to Mr. Trump, and as the “adult” of last resort able to restrain, balance or ignore the whims of an unpredictable president.
For François Heisbourg, a former French defense official, it was a landmark moment of an American president under fire, in open opposition to his intelligence and military structures, acting with utter disregard for traditional American allies in his sudden decisions to pull troops out of Syria and Afghanistan.
Mr. Trump is often scornful of America’s decades-old network of multilateral alliances, seeing them as a costly burden. They were created after the catastrophes of World War II, both in Europe and in Asia, and aimed at supporting delicate, battered democracies and deterring the ideological and imperial ambitions of both Communist powers, Russia and China.
These alliances cost the American taxpayer real money, of course, but the payments were not altruistic — they prevented the United States from having to engage in yet another global conflict, another world war. And they created increasingly wealthy markets for American products, both industrial and agricultural.
In turn, many allies fought alongside the United States in its wars — in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan. And when Al Qaeda attacked the United States on Sept. 11, 2001, NATO exercised Article 5 of its treaty: If one NATO country is attacked, all NATO countries will be considered under attack and will join in defense.
In Beijing, China’s military leaders are certain to be pleased. To demonstrate American support for Taiwan, the self-governing island that China claims as its territory, Mr. Mattis dispatched warships to the Taiwan Strait three times this year. He also pushed back hard against Beijing in the South China Sea, sending warships close to disputed islands that China claims.
A new American defense secretary whose thinking would be more in line with Mr. Trump’s could be an opportunity for China, said Wu Xinbo, director of the Center for American Studies at Fudan University.
But now, “it is evident” that Mr. Trump’s decision to withdraw from Syria “profoundly changes the situation,” Ms. Parly told RTL radio. The Islamic State is not dead, as Mr. Trump asserted, she said.
Britain, with troops alongside American forces in Afghanistan, must also recalibrate, said Ivor Roberts, a former ambassador.
The United States has been so indispensable for so long at the geopolitical table. But many analysts say Mr. Trump’s volatility and disregard for allies could fundamentally diminish America’s global clout if the country is no longer seen as a dependable ally.
“President Trump seems to think he can have it both ways,” said Karin von Hippel, director of the Royal United Services Institute for Defense Studies, a military research institute in London. “Withdraw U.S. troops from every deployment, reduce financial support for international institutions such as NATO or the U.N., cede U.S. leadership on peace processes in places such as Syria, Yemen, Libya — and still keep the prominent seat at the table.
More immediately, the abruptness of Mr. Trump’s latest moves, coupled with the Mattis resignation, left many allies feeling left out.
Another Japanese official, however, expressed confidence that the military alliance with the United States would remain strong given Mr. Trump’s close personal relationship with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.
The unexpected troop withdrawals in Syria and Afghanistan did not just startle allies, some analysts predicted the moves could diminish American leverage, rather than enhance it.
“Trump has pulled the rug out from under our negotiators in both Syria and Afghanistan,” said R. Nicholas Burns, a former American diplomat who has been critical of Mr. Trump. “Why will the Russians and Iranians make concessions to us in Syria now that they know we are leaving? Why will the Taliban deal seriously with us now that they know half our troops will be withdrawn so suddenly?” he asked, referring to possible peace talks in Afghanistan.
To many analysts, the whole flurry of changes is dizzying, but also the new reality.
