Two years ago, lawyers for Major League Baseball sent a confidential document to the players’ union containing startling allegations against two of the game’s top agents.
The document — a signed affidavit from a man who had worked for the agents — said the agents had helped him to cover up a star player’s use of performance-enhancing drugs and to break other union rules.
The lawyers from Major League Baseball acknowledged to the union that the former employee had a checkered past — the employee had gone to prison for his role distributing banned drugs to players and he said he helped the former All-Star outfielder Melky Cabrera cover up a positive drug test.
But M.L.B.’s lawyers had previously sent the union information from others making similar allegations about the same agents, Sam and Seth Levinson. They told the union they found the former employee’s new claims credible.
The players’ union, which unlike M.L.B. is empowered to police agents, initially acknowledged that the allegations were serious, and pledged to investigate.
But its apparent unwillingness to hold the Levinsons and their agency, ACES, to account has also caused resentment among other agents, many of whom have privately expressed dismay that the players’ union failed to fully investigate the accusations against the Levinsons, and contend the union has shown favoritism toward them.
Nunez, the former employee, in February sued the Levinsons, who dispute all the claims he has made against them and continue to represent star players. But M.L.B. continues to believe Nunez is telling the truth.
Club owners have an inherently adversarial relationship with agents, whose duty is to extract as much money as possible from teams for their clients. But the past two baseball commissioners, Bud Selig and Rob Manfred, were so troubled by the repeated allegations by former associates against the Levinsons that they took the unusual step — at least three times in the past six years — of providing the union with information tying the Levinsons to their players’ use of banned drugs.
In 2012, Nunez, then an employee of the Levinsons, took the blame for facilitating Cabrera’s drug use and trying to cover it up. Cabrera was suspended for 50 games, and the union barred Nunez from being an agent for life. He spent three months in prison for his role in referring players to a South Florida clinic, Biogenesis, that provided athletes with performance-enhancing drugs.
But after his release in 2015, Nunez went to Major League Baseball and said he took the blame for the Cabrera situation in exchange for a payment from ACES he never accepted, and he said that now he wanted to tell the truth. Before M.L.B. took Nunez’s affidavit, it had one of its outside lawyers, Andrew Levi, investigate Nunez’s claims.
Levi, who spent several days interviewing Nunez and reviewing documents, said it was nearly impossible to believe that Nunez had acted alone in the cover-up.
In the affidavit, Nunez also told investigators of how the Levinsons directed him to make payments of close to $50,000 to family members and friends of the pitcher Fernando Rodney from 2010 to 2012 to persuade Rodney to stay with ACES at a time the pitcher was threatening to leave the agency. Those payments would be a violation of union rules.
The Levinsons said the only payment they made was for training and transportation — which are allowed under union rules — and not as an inducement to keep Rodney as a client.
The union had investigated the Levinsons twice before for their possible role in players’ drug use, and each time it cleared the agents. After the second investigation, the union said the Levinsons — and Nez Balelo, another agent who was also investigated over similar claims surrounding Ryan Braun’s positive drug test and cover-up in 2011 — all remained in “good standing.” But it had never talked to Nunez, and it refused to share any of the details of its investigation with M.L.B., angering the commissioner’s office.
Nunez had declined to cooperate with union investigators because he was facing criminal charges at the time. After M.L.B. forwarded his new affidavit to the players association in 2016, the union acknowledged the seriousness of the charges and promised to investigate the Levinsons again.
“Given the seriousness of the allegations made in the affidavit, we will be investigating this matter further under the MLBPA Agent Regulations and we aim to do so in a timely fashion,” the union’s general counsel, David Prouty, said in a letter to M.L.B. in 2016.
The union then told Nunez’s lawyers it wanted to speak with him but under certain conditions, including its insistence that he sign a nondisclosure agreement. After some negotiations about the length of the proposed agreement — the union wanted the time limit to be at its discretion, meaning it could have been in effect forever — Nunez refused to sign it.
Nunez said he has not heard from the union again. He said in an interview with The New York Times that he felt he was doing the union a favor by providing it with information it needed to investigate the allegations against the Levinsons, but he saw no need for him to agree to keep silent.
Moe Fodeman, an expert on white-collar and internal investigations and a partner at Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati in New York, said that if investigators are refusing to talk to witnesses who may have information because they will not sign nondisclosure agreements, that can call into question the legitimacy of the inquiry.
“At the end of the day, if the person is the only one with information concerning a serious allegation, there may be no choice but to forgo an NDA if there’s going to be a legitimate internal investigation,” he said.
The union also appears to have declined to investigate Nunez’s claims about how Rodney’s family members were given secret payments in the hopes that they would persuade the player to stay with the agency.
Nunez told M.L.B. that one of Rodney’s cousins, Cila Mabel Hernandez, would confirm the payments. In an interview with The New York Times, Hernandez said she had not been contacted by the union.
Erik Groothuis, Nunez’s attorney in the lawsuit against the Levinsons, said Nunez originally tried to get “justice” through M.L.B. two years before he filed it.
