SEOUL, South Korea — South Korea is holding its breath for what its president, Moon Jae-in, has repeatedly said could happen by the end of December: Kim Jong-un’s visit to Seoul, which would be a first for a North Korean leader.
When the two Korean leaders met in September in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, Mr. Kim agreed to visit the South Korean capital “at an early date.” But he has yet to accept Mr. Moon’s invitation to visit by the end of December.
If Mr. Kim doesn’t show up in Seoul this month, it will be a huge letdown for Mr. Moon, who has repeatedly told his people that Mr. Kim promised to try. The South Korean government has been preparing for the visit for weeks. A large artwork showing Mr. Kim and Mr. Moon smiling and shaking hands was even installed last week outside the Blue House, Mr. Moon’s official residence.
But with only three weeks to go, the window appears to be closing for a December visit, and officials have begun sounding less optimistic. And any delay could complicate efforts for a second summit meeting between Mr. Kim and President Trump, though some analysts say that Mr. Kim may see no incentive to meet Mr. Moon before sorting out his differences with Mr. Trump.
Mr. Moon has been the most ardent champion of engagement with North Korea, even as his country’s ally the United States was more focused on enforcing sanctions to force Mr. Kim to give up his nuclear weapons. Mr. Moon has met Mr. Kim three times since April, helping broker Mr. Kim’s summit meeting with Mr. Trump earlier this year, and has been urging them to meet again to help break a logjam in nuclear disarmament talks between their governments.
But neither Pyongyang nor Washington seems to be in a hurry, putting Mr. Moon in an awkward spot.
Mr. Trump has said he is likely to meet Mr. Kim again in January or February but also that he doesn’t want to play a “time game” with the North Koreans. Before Mr. Trump meets Mr. Kim, United States officials want guarantees that in a second summit meeting, Mr. Kim will make a more concrete commitment to a “final, fully verifiable denuclearization,” first by declaring all his country’s nuclear assets.
But North Korean officials have argued that handing over a list of nuclear assets and their locations before the U.S. takes trust-building measures like easing sanctions is “like giving away target coordinates” for pre-emptive strikes from the United States, according to South Korean officials.
A meeting in New York between Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and North Korea’s leading nuclear weapons negotiator was called off early last month. Stephen E. Biegun, a former Ford Motor executive, has yet to meet his North Korean counterpart four months after being appointed as Washington’s point man on North Korea.
A Kim visit would be a badly needed boost for Mr. Moon’s domestic standing as well.
Mr. Moon’s approval ratings have depended heavily on progress in his efforts to build and expand inter-Korean ties. They soared as high as 80 percent in the wake of his first summit meeting with Mr. Kim in April, but have recently slumped to 50 percent with deepening frustrations over the lack of progress in ending the North Korean nuclear problem, as well as youth unemployment and other economic issues.
A Kim visit would mark a new milestone in inter-Korean relations.
North and South Korea have held five summit meetings since 2000, three of them between Mr. Kim and Mr. Moon this year. But all five meetings took place in either Pyongyang or Panmunjom, a truce village straddling the inter-Korean border. Mr. Kim became the first North Korean leader to set foot on South Korean soil when he walked across the border in April to meet with Mr. Moon on the South Korean side of Panmunjom. But he has never visited Seoul. Neither did his father and grandfather, who had ruled North Korea before him.
Some South Korean news outlets have surmised that the two Koreas may have already agreed upon the details of Mr. Kim’s visit to Seoul later this month, but are withholding them until the last minute because of North Koreans’ concern for the security of their leader.
Mr. Moon’s critics say he is spoiling North Korea by appearing too eager for Mr. Kim’s visit.
“Our government’s submissive attitude can make North Korea arrogant and trigger a backlash from our people,” Sohn Hak-kyu, leader of the opposition Bareun Mirae Party, told reporters on Monday.
And Mr. Kim probably wouldn’t get the same welcome in Seoul that Mr. Moon received in Pyongyang, where tens of thousands lined the streets to greet him.
In recent weeks, political activists have held competing rallies in central Seoul, either encouraging a visit by Mr. Kim to Seoul or opposing it. Some officials hope that Mr. Kim will be able to address the South Korean Parliament, but conservative politicians have opposed the idea unless North Korea apologizes for starting the 1950-53 Korean War.