Two bartenders plan to open Jewel of the South, in homage to Joseph Santini and his brandy crusta.
New Orleans has a good track record for celebrating its native cocktails. The drinks are so beloved by locals that there may as well be huge statues of the Sazerac and Ramos Gin Fizz in Jackson Square.
One classic New Orleans cocktail, however, has suffered from neglect. The brandy crusta is a Cognac drink supported by lemon juice, Curaçao and maraschino liqueur. But its defining aspects — both very theatrical — are a long lemon twist that snakes inside the glass and a sugared rim (the crusta).
The drink was the invention of the New Orleans bartender Joseph Santini, who served plenty of them at his 19th-century bar, Jewel of the South. Cocktail experts believe that the crusta opened the door for many of the cocktail sours to come, not least of all the Sidecar.
“Santini is the guy who was really monumental in the development of cocktails in the state, and he’s kind of gotten short shrift,” said Nick Detrich, a New Orleans bartender.
Mr. Detrich and Chris Hannah, another local bartender, intend to correct that injustice. Later this month, they plan to open a new bar called Jewel of the South, dedicated to the spirit and memory of Santini. Its signature drink will be the brandy crusta. Like its namesake, the bar will be in the French Quarter, inside a Creole cottage on St. Louis Street that dates from the 1830s.
Mr. Detrich, who used to tend bar at Cane & Table, approached Mr. Hannah about the Santini-bar idea in 2016. Mr. Hannah was the logical man for the job: A decade earlier, soon after he began bartending at the French 75 Bar, inside Arnaud’s restaurant, he put the crusta on the menu.
The cottage that will house the bar is unusual for the French Quarter — a stand-alone structure with no buildings on either side. The ground floor of the two-story cottage is designed like a tavern; the second floor will be more for dining, with a small bar.
In addition to the brandy crusta, the bar will serve other classic New Orleans cocktails, as well as some original drinks, all made with flair.
Jewel of the South, 1026 St. Louis Street, New Orleans, no phone or website yet.
