If you can say it, you might see it in Peter Gordon’s not-so-simple puzzle. And so on.
TUESDAY PUZZLE — Peter Gordon brings us a puzzle with a businesslike demeanor that follows a top-to-bottom gradient in difficulty (to me, at least). He is the most recent subject of Deb’s constructor profiles, and an early-in-the-week specialist who is great at making a solve accessible to the masses, while slipping in some nuance or eccentricity that makes a grid memorable, challenging and satisfying.
I had “redfaced” for REDDENED, and appreciated the double “Destruction” clues — I love seeing the evocative HAVOC.
36A: An “Old Russian autocrat” is often a “tsar” and sometimes a CZAR. A CZAR is sometimes an old Russian autocrat but often a “politico” or “honcho.” No big deal, here — I did have “pest” for BOZO at 25D for a minute, but both “tsar” and CZAR are known to me. It made for an interesting topic to research, though, as far as usage is concerned. I always thought that CZAR was the newer word and more idiomatic, but it turns out that’s debatable. In The Times, as per our stylebook, “tsar” is verboten.
64A: This clue reminded me to mention how much I love you guys and your “oh, I finished today’s in 2:37 and I usually finish a Tuesday in 2:35” comments. I got to this entry and spent about 90 minutes on YouTube, mainly listening to Hot Chocolate, with a little Vanilla Fudge, before coming back to the puzzle to fill in BAND. Do you take those intermissions, and do you count any of those intermissions in your solve times? I have this neon pink Christmas cactus that blooms around now, no matter how neglected, that makes me think of this song! It brightens my day every single time I hear it.
10D: I thought this was clever and got stumped for a minute; I always think of a “bye” at a tournament as a free ride to the next round, but in tennis you have to earn every step to the finals, and a “bye” is just a fare thee well, or an AU REVOIR.
50D: Impenetrable fill for me but it’s a thing; light years, or LTYRS, are indeed an astronomical distance. Looks like text speak, which people use to relay statements LTYRS faster than we can actually speak, it seems.
Mr. Gordon is playing with sibilant alliteration today in his six theme entries, at 17A, 22A, 28A, 40A, 47A and 57A. They’re all two-word phrases (or a full proper name) in which each word begins with an S. That’s probably enough for a Tuesday, but there’s at least one more wrinkle, which is that each of these theme entries, from top to bottom, begins with an S and an alphabetically progressing vowel, A, E, I, O, U and Y, in that order.
The third personal wrinkle that I had was that these entries increased dramatically in difficulty from top to bottom, but if you’re a fan of 47A or 57A (or both) then you certainly weren’t in my slow boat. I had no memory of SUDDENLY SUSAN, which ran from 1996 to 2000; I’d also never heard of SYLVIA SYMS, which feels like a major transgression after looking her up. The Times obituary does say that Ol’ Blue Eyes called her “Buddha” because she was short and round, but it’s still an exalted compliment, I guess. She definitely personified cabaret!
The first four entries to the theme weren’t stumpers for me, ranging from something I consider a New York institution, to something Washingtonian, a child’s poem and a poetic phrase.
