The announcement came a week after New Zealand’s Parliament passed a law that will ease restrictions on medicinal marijuana.
Public opinion in New Zealand has become more supportive of recreational cannabis use in recent years; an October poll by 1 News found that 46 percent of those questioned favored legalizing the drug, while 41 percent were against. The poll questioned 1,006 eligible voters and had a margin-of-sampling error of 3.1 percent.
“That’s because of two things — the advancement in the medicinal cannabis regime and the law just being passed, and also just that gathering sense of global opinion that the war on drugs is lost and that the health approach is the one to take,” she said.
If more than half of voters taking part in the referendum support legalization, New Zealand will join a handful of countries that have legalized marijuana use outright, including Canada and Uruguay; in the United States, several states have also legalized it. Dozens of other countries and states have decriminalized recreational use, legalized medicinal cannabis or eased enforcement of possession laws.
Figures from New Zealand’s Ministry of Health said that in 2015, about 8 percent of the people acknowledged having used cannabis in the previous year. Small-scale, personal use is largely ignored by the police, although as in the United States, studies have shown that minorities are more likely to be arrested and prosecuted for it.
New Zealand is known as being socially liberal, with previous governments having decriminalized prostitution and legalized same-sex marriage. But neither of the two major parties, center-left Labour — which leads the current government — or center-right National, had previously been willing to touch the issue of recreational marijuana.
But Labour’s hand was forced in negotiations after the September 2017 election, during which neither major party won enough seats to govern outright. To win the support of the left-leaning Green Party — one of two parties that have given Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern the majority she needs to govern — Labour agreed to put cannabis legalization to a public vote.
“Politicians are the most risk-averse group of people that I have ever met,” said Chlöe Swarbrick, a Green Party lawmaker who has advocated legalizing cannabis.
There had not previously been “the will to invest in evidence-based policies” on controversial issues like marijuana, she said.
“It means we don’t end up with a Brexit-type situation when we’re trying to figure out what a ‘yes’ vote actually means,” she said.
Mr. Little, the justice minister, told Radio New Zealand in May that while holding the referendum during the 2020 election would be convenient, since voters would already be heading to the polls, some of his colleagues would not want the issue dominating an election campaign.
But voters’ attention could be split even further, with cannabis unlikely to be the only issue up for a public vote. Mr. Little has indicated that a referendum question about euthanasia might also be on the 2020 ballot, along with a third on a possible change to New Zealand’s mixed-member proportional electoral system.
Commentators said it was unusual to have so many social issues up for debate at once. The government is also considering easing laws on abortion, which is criminalized in New Zealand but is generally allowed if a woman has the approval of two doctors.
“In an ideal world, the two largest parties probably wouldn’t want a cannabis referendum associated with the general election,” said Ms. Young, the political analyst.
She said the Labour and Green parties would hope for a strong turnout among young voters who favor legalizing marijuana, while a vote on the euthanasia issue would be likelier to mobilize older voters.