WASHINGTON — The special counsel’s investigation was grinding relentlessly onward, with President Trump’s former national security adviser pleading for leniency in his case and his former fixer about to be sentenced for his crimes. But Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani, was in Manama, Bahrain, on Tuesday, meeting with the king and the interior minister of an important United States ally in the Middle East.
But Mr. Giuliani was not in Bahrain, a country with a record of human rights abuses, on official business. He was there to seek a lucrative security consulting contract with the government.
The trip was part of a concerted push Mr. Giuliani has undertaken in the last few weeks to win business from governments around the world — including in Africa and South America — for a firm he owns called Giuliani Security and Safety.
In his role representing Mr. Trump in the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, Mr. Giuliani is not a government employee, and is not subject to government ethics rules, including prohibitions on outside work.
But as his visit to Bahrain showed, Mr. Giuliani’s various interests can lead to confusion over the nature of his role. And foreign officials who have reason to want to get in or stay in the Trump administration’s good graces could view hiring Mr. Giuliani’s firm as a good way of doing so, according to ethics watchdogs.
Reached in Bahrain on Tuesday night, Mr. Giuliani said that the efforts are completely unrelated to — and do not capitalize on — his representation of the president.
“I’m probably the most ethical person you ever met,” he said. “I follow all the rules. I have no desire to trade on anything,” added Mr. Giuliani, whose response as mayor of New York to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks cemented his status as a household name and an emergency response expert.
Mr. Giuliani’s company has provided advice and training in policing, terrorism prevention, intelligence and emergency response to governments in South America, the Middle East and Eastern Europe, among other regions, for years. It is currently pursuing work in the Democratic Republic of Congo, as well as a contract with an infrastructure fund focused on Latin America.
The confusion also underscores the gap between political norms in the United States versus those in many parts of the Middle East, Africa, Asia and the former Soviet states, where overt efforts to buy favor are more commonly accepted as the way things work.
The perception that such an approach can yield success in Washington has been exacerbated in the Trump era, veteran lobbyists say, because of Mr. Trump’s inclination to value the counsel of a small coterie of friends, relatives and allies over the federal government’s experts.
In Mr. Giuliani’s case, the perception is amplified because of his overlapping roles as a public figure in his own right, a longtime friend of the president’s and the lead lawyer on a relatively small team upon whom Mr. Trump is relying to save his very presidency.
He said his security consulting contracts have long included clauses stipulating that he will not lobby on behalf of clients before the United States government.
And he pointed out that he resigned from a position at the law firm Greenberg Traurig, for which he had represented foreign clients being prosecuted by the United States government, when he joined Mr. Trump’s legal team in April to try to help the president resolve the investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election and possible ties to Mr. Trump’s team.
His continued work for Giuliani Security and Safety poses no such conflict, he asserted, though he said he has dialed back his involvement in it to focus on representing Mr. Trump, which he has been doing for free.
But now, Mr. Giuliani said, he has more time to focus on reinvigorating his business as he prepares to return to it full-time after he finishes his work for Mr. Trump.
“We’ve done everything we can do. There’s not much more they’re going to call upon us to do,” he said, referring to Mr. Mueller’s team. He cited Mr. Trump’s submission of written responses to questions from Mr. Mueller, and what he said was a draft of a defense report prepared by the president’s legal team that he said was ready to counter potentially damaging findings from the special counsel.
“It doesn’t mean I’m not going to be doing anything, but it’s not going to be anything close to a full-time job,” Mr. Giuliani said.
The Giuliani team pitched Bahrain on a plan to train the country’s forces to prevent terrorist attacks and to protect its desalination plants. Mr. Giuliani said his company has not entered into a contract with Bahrain, and he would not comment on any potential terms, but people familiar with the type of work proposed said that such services could cost several million dollars.
But working in Bahrain has its own sensitivities. While Bahrain is an ally and is home to a United States Navy base, the State Department has repeatedly called out Bahraini leadership for human rights abuses including killings and torture by security forces and restrictions on free expression.
Mr. Giuliani said that the Bahrain pitch was arranged by Robert Stryk, a lobbyist who had worked with Trump campaign officials and has emerged from relative obscurity to become an influential behind-the-scenes deal-maker in Mr. Trump’s Washington.
Mr. Stryk’s firm, Sonoran Policy Group, signed a $500,000-a-year contract in February to help Bahrain and its ambassador to Washington “facilitate meetings and interactions with U.S. administration officials,” according to lobbying filings.
The ambassador, Sheikh Abdullah bin Rashid bin Abdullah al-Khalifa, is the son of the interior minister, Sheikh Rashid bin Abdullah al-Khalifa. In a photograph released by the country’s news agency, both men, along with the country’s chief of police are pictured meeting on Tuesday with Mr. Giuliani; John P. Huvane, the chief executive of Giuliani Security; Mr. Stryk and one of his company’s officials, Kirsten Fontenrose, who resigned last month from a White House post overseeing American policy toward Saudi Arabia.
In a statement, the embassy said officials from Bahrain “regularly meet with public and private officials from the United States” but did not respond directly about a potential contract with Mr. Giuliani.
Mr. Stryk’s firm did not respond to questions about the Bahrain trip, or its relationship with Mr. Giuliani. A person familiar with the relationship said that Sonoran works with Mr. Giuliani’s firm and other companies to offer its clients access to consulting services beyond lobbying and public affairs.
Mr. Stryk also appears to have played a role in Mr. Giuliani’s effort to win a contract for security consulting work in the Democratic Republic of Congo through an Israeli firm called Mer Security and Communication Systems, which has worked for years with the Congolese president Joseph Kabila.
Mer had agreed in July to pay Sonoran Policy Group $1.25 million to lobby in Washington for Mr. Kabila’s government, which was facing threats of additional sanctions from the Trump administration for human rights abuses and corruption.
