ROME — This time, Italy’s populists blinked.
Since taking power in June, Italy’s populist government has outmaneuvered political opponents, out-screamed its loudest critics, used the press for target practice and waltzed away from scandals unscathed. Italian and European liberal forces that sought to stop their rise have seemed powerless to lay a glove on them.
But on Wednesday, the populist juggernaut slammed into reality, the only force that seems capable of slowing it down.
After months of torturous negotiations, acrid insults, internal tensions and enough social media airtime to fill a Netflix series, Italy’s populist leaders bowed to the demands of the European Union to roll back its expensive, rules-flouting budget. It did so in the face of costly penalties and potentially debilitating economic punishment inflicted by the international markets, real-world forces that threaten to inflict genuine pain on their electoral base.
Investors, on edge over the possibility of Italy, the eurozone’s third-largest economy, causing an economic disaster that could infect all of Europe, breathed a sigh of relief. Markets reacted warmly to the deal, and the Milan-based stock market rallied and borrowing costs fell.
Italy, saddled with a debt equal to 131 percent of its gross domestic product, more than double the eurozone limit, had provoked a head-on confrontation with the European Union by disregarding the bloc’s financial rules. It proposed an expensive budget with big-ticket items to deliver on campaign promises.
The initial budget spent billions on a universal income plan, essentially an enormous unemployment program, that would benefit the base of the anti-establishment Five Star Movement in the chronically underemployed south. Five Star’s coalition partner, the League, demanded tax breaks and a lowering of the retirement age. Critics considered the promise a hand out for the League’s base of workers in the north.
The initial budget had a spending deficit equal to 2.40 percent of gross domestic product, a figure considered onerous for a country with such a burdensome debt.
For months, Italy refused to budge. But on Wednesday, it yielded by shaving billions of euros off the budget.
Speaking in Brussels, Valdis Dombrovskis, the European Commission vice-president responsible for the euro, announced that the agreement would leave Italy with a budget deficit next year of 2.04 percent of gross domestic product.
To bring Italy back into the fold, Brussels, which originally wanted the budget spending to be no more than 1.6 percent, chose vinegar over honey. Eager to instill structural changes in Italy, it took a hard line and made it clear that it would begin a process that could punish Italy with costly fines for breaking its agreements.
In addition to trimming its spending plans, the Italian government responded by promising to sell off public buildings and to impose stiffer fines and higher interest rates on tax dodgers.
It revised its growth forecast from 1.5 percent, which Europe and the markets found deeply unrealistic, to less than 1 percent, which Europe and the markets find only mildly unrealistic.
Officials in Europe, who are eager to prevent more chaos in what many consider the soft southern underbelly of the European Union, characterized the deal as Italy’s recommitment to the bloc and to the euro.
The Italians tried, with some difficulty, to claim they had gotten what they wanted.
In an address to the Italian Parliament, which will have to approve the budget by the end of the year to avoid another round of negotiations with Brussels, Italy’s prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, said that the “determined” negotiations had paid off. He said the government never did anything to “betray the trust” of its voters.
Contrary to the official statement in Brussels, he said, plans for a universal income and lowering the retirement age would not be delayed, a claim helped by the fact that no official start date for the programs had ever been offered.
It sure seemed like they had.
On Wednesday, he sounded like he suddenly took those rules more seriously. “To have avoided the infringement procedure is the victory of common sense for the good of Italian citizens,” he said.
“In a decisive manner, with this measure, with this budget, we will have abolished poverty,” he said on Italian television.
Throughout the negotiations, Italy’s populists tried to rally popular support against Brussels with their usual mix of aggressive language, social media attacks and public outrage. Mr. Salvini insinuated that the Commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, was a drunk, while the Five Star co-founder, Beppe Grillo, mused about his potential mental illness.
But none of it seemed to work.
On Wednesday, critics of the government hoped to exploit the government’s vulnerability. The previous government argued that the negative reactions of the financial markets to the government’s provocations had cost Italians real money.
