Real Estate|The Right Backdrop for Art Is Bold. Or Maybe It’s Neutral?
The Right Backdrop for Art Is Bold. Or Maybe It’s Neutral?
Hanging art is easy. It’s choosing the color that goes behind it that can be a little tricky.
 But before you hang it on the wall, consider the backdrop.
The color you paint your wall is as important as the frame you select, said Donald Kaufman, a color consultant who has worked with the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York and the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles.
If a frame is good, he explained, “it completely disappears” — and the same goes for the wall color.
So how do you choose the right color for your art? We asked the experts for guidance.
Begin by considering the entire room — the architectural details, the furnishings, the flooring and the amount of natural light the space gets — as well as the kind of mood you want to create. The goal, Mr. Kaufman said, is to find a wall color that will minimize any “discordant elements” that distract from the art.
That’s something color consultants have to do even when they’re working with museums. When Mr. Kaufman developed a color scheme for the second floor of the American Wing at the Met, he said, he had to take into account several periods of American art, as well as varying lighting across galleries and architectural details like limestone wainscoting and light oak floors. The wall color he chose had to make “the stone look good without making the floor look bad,” he said, and also “neutralize the architecture,” allowing the curators to organize the paintings thematically.
The color he settled on was “a medium, warm neutral,” he said, that “took its cue” from the stone, creating a cohesive environment that receded so artwork like Emanuel Leutze’s “Washington Crossing the Delaware” and John Singer Sargent’s “Madame X” came to the fore.
The color of the paint isn’t nearly as important as its intensity, he said, and how it affects the way various elements in the room work together.
Now that you’ve taken the surroundings into account, focus on the art. But don’t try to match it.
On the other hand, “if you are showcasing bold graphic pieces, a backdrop that provides contrast is preferable,” said Joa Studholme, the color curator for Farrow & Ball.
So what should you choose instead? “You might want to think about a shade that is reminiscent of the era of the artwork, like Georgian-inspired Paean Black,” she said. In October, Christie’s used the dark, red-based color as a backdrop for paintings and porcelain featured in its sales brochure, while the inky Stiffkey Blue was paired with French furniture, lighting and sculpture.
“Many representational pieces from the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries look most ravishing against strongly colored walls, even lacquered ones,” Mr. Drake said, citing the example of his own bedroom, where Deborah Oropallo’s “Napoleon, 2001” hangs against deep gray lacquered walls.
“The severity of the wall color, Benjamin Moore 2129-20 Soot, is a fantastic contrast to the light and exuberant palette in the artwork,” he said.
Flat paints offer the least reflective finish, followed by matte, eggshell and gloss, which is highly reflective.
Ms. Studholme recommended flat paint for highlighting watercolors and oils, because its lack of sheen allows the art, not the wall, to reflect light. With other types of art, a high sheen is preferable.
“If you want to make a big show of a piece of art,” Ms. Studholme said, paint everything in a room the same color, including the trim and moldings, so you have “as few distractions as possible.” When the architectural details are the same color as the walls, they form a single backdrop that visually recedes, making the art the focal point.
Or you could try the opposite strategy: Paint half the wall a different color. Paradoxically, that can also enhance the artwork.
That’s what a client of hers did in a vacation house on the southeastern coast of England, painting the wainscoting in dark-gray Mole’s Breath, with Ammonite, a much lighter color, above. It “made the room feel larger and more airy, as well as providing the perfect backdrop for a naïve oil of a local landscape,” she said.
And it’s surely the easiest way.
If you have an eclectic mix of pictures, Ms. Studholme recommended choosing a dark charcoal gray, like Farrow & Ball’s Down Pipe. Or if you prefer white, she said, look for a pure white, like Farrow & Ball’s All White, which lacks the cold, blue undertones of a brilliant white.
