Politics|A Shutdown Looms. Can the G.O.P. Get Lawmakers to Show Up to Vote?
A Shutdown Looms. Can the G.O.P. Get Lawmakers to Show Up to Vote?
WASHINGTON — Just days before a deadline to avert a partial government shutdown, President Trump, Democratic leaders and the Republican-controlled Congress are at a stalemate over the president’s treasured border wall. But House Republican leaders are also confronting a more mundane and awkward problem: Their vanquished and retiring members are sick and tired of Washington and don’t want to show up anymore to vote.
Call it the revenge of the lame ducks. Many lawmakers, relegated to cubicles as incoming members take their offices, have been skipping votes in the weeks since House Republicans were swept from power in the midterm elections, and Republican leaders are unsure whether they will ever return.
It is perhaps a fitting end to a Congress that has showcased the untidy politics of the Trump era: Even if the president ultimately embraces a solution that avoids a shutdown, House Republican leaders do not know whether they will have the votes to pass it.
The uncertainty does not end there. With funding for parts of the government like the Department of Homeland Security set to lapse at midnight on Friday, Mr. Trump and top Republicans appear to have no definite plan to keep the doors open. It is clear that as Democrats uniformly oppose the president’s demand for $5 billion for his border wall, any bill that includes that funding cannot pass the Senate, and might face defeat in the House, too.
In the final moments of complete Republican control of government before Democrats assume the House majority in January, Republicans find themselves once again trapped between Mr. Trump’s messaging and their own political reality.
While Mr. Trump insisted that he had the votes to push $5 billion in wall spending through the House, Republican leaders in the chamber are keenly aware that their rank-and-file members are in no mood to return to Washington days before Christmas to battle over his long-unfulfilled signature campaign promise.
“No one has any idea what the play call is — we don’t know what’s going on,” said Representative Ryan A. Costello, Republican of Pennsylvania, who, because he is retiring, has already surrendered his office suite for a cramped cubicle.
And he’s one of the lawmakers who have actually been showing up. In recent weeks, anywhere from a handful to more than two dozen Republicans have failed to cast votes on individual bills, leaving leaders uncertain of their numbers. Some lawmakers cited personal reasons; Representative Lynn Jenkins of Kansas, following guidance given months ago that Congress would adjourn by Dec. 13, may miss votes to get married, while Representative Walter B. Jones of North Carolina, who was re-elected, is taking a leave because of illness.
Mr. Trump himself is scheduled to leave on Friday for a 16-day vacation at his Florida estate.
But even those who have no pressing commitments have grown weary of trekking to the Capitol as Congress grinds to a close. One senior Republican aide, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said some lawmakers no longer even wanted to see one another’s faces.
That dynamic is all the more potent for Republican leaders who have spent the last two years trying, with mixed success, to govern while skirting the unfiltered remarks and tweets of a president who cares little about the finer points of legislating, and whose agenda often diverges from their own. Now they find themselves trying to cope with the no-win situation Mr. Trump has created as he insists on building a wall supported by a minority of Americans.
Mr. Ornstein, a sharp critic of Mr. Trump, said the president may be spoiling for a shutdown to draw attention away from his legal exposure, both in the special counsel’s investigation into his campaign’s ties with Russia and in his former lawyer’s conviction for campaign finance crimes he said were directed by Mr. Trump.
“The closer it gets to him, the more he wants a distraction and the more he wants to gin up his base, but from the perspective of Republicans, doing a shutdown while they’re still running everything just makes them look like idiots,” Mr. Ornstein said.
Lawmakers appeared resigned last week to the fact that the outcome of the impasse was up to Mr. Trump. “I think the president does a lot of his own negotiating, and his own thinking, and you can tell that,” said Senator Richard C. Shelby, the Alabama Republican who is the chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee.
After the Oval Office meeting last week between Mr. Trump and the top House and Senate Democrats, staff members for House Democrats began working on legislation that would reopen the government on Jan. 3, when they are in control, without allocating any wall spending. The measure most likely would fund the government in full for the rest of the fiscal year, according to an aide familiar with the work.
At the White House last week, after the news cameras had departed, Mr. Schumer and Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the top House Democrat, raised the prospect that Ms. Pelosi could pass such legislation — and force Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, to choose between accepting a bill without wall funding and reopening the government, or keeping it closed.
Mr. Trump did not respond.
Beyond the spending impasse, however, there have been some successes in the waning days of legislative debate. After months of stalled negotiations, a huge farm bill and an overhaul of how Congress handles sexual harassment slid through both chambers and await Mr. Trump’s signature. And after intense lobbying from the White House and both parties, Mr. McConnell agreed to schedule a floor vote for a bipartisan criminal justice bill.
Some of the lawmakers who have helped negotiate the current spending bills have voiced frustration that their work — the first time in years that the two chambers had passed a number of spending bills in regular order — may be derailed in the closing moments of this year’s session.
