Chronic shoulder pain drove Franklin from the sport, but she had a rewarding career full of memories she will carry forever.
Missy Franklin had just announced her retirement, hastened by chronic shoulder pain, in a letter posted on ESPN’s website when the first mournful emails arrived in my inbox. People expressed surprise that one of swimming’s brightest lights would leave the sport at “only” 23. This kind of sentiment, however well intentioned, underscores a lamentable byproduct of the professionalization of Olympic sports. No longer do we grant our stars a graceful exit.
Good for her. Franklin always seemed to have her size 13 feet firmly planted on the ground. After three years of health woes that might have squeezed anybody’s passion into pulp, Franklin used her farewell address to talk about the intrinsic rewards she reaped from swimming: the lifelong friends, the lasting memories, the lessons in leadership, sportsmanship, goal-setting, time management, perseverance and humility.
Franklin secured her legacy when she won five medals, including four gold, at the 2012 Olympics in London. Everything that followed — six gold medals at the 2013 World Championships; the first women’s 200-yard freestyle faster than 1 minute 40 seconds, the 2015 N.C.A.A. team title with the University of California, Berkeley; the 2016 Olympics, where she won gold on a relay — was foam on the wave.
Franklin made superstardom look effortless, even as she raced in a 200-meter freestyle and a 100-meter backstroke 14 minutes apart at the London Olympics. But that kind of fame and excellences comes at a price.
She laughed, but at that moment the price of being America’s chlorine queen seemed exorbitant. Her farewell letter provided proof that even as many openly yearned for Franklin to reclaim her past glory, she was continuing to grow in ways that no timing system could measure.
If Franklin had been a teenager in the 1950s or 1960s, her career would have been over after her five-medal first Olympics, and, like Donna de Varona, she probably would have transitioned from the pool to the broadcasting booth.
If Franklin had been a teenager in the 1970s, she probably would have been done with swimming, like Tracy Caulkins, while she was still in college.
Advancements in training, equipment, and nutrition — along with an influx of cash for the elite few — have helped prolong athletic careers, but the Olympians who compete into their 30s should never be considered the norm. Perhaps especially if they are early bloomers like Franklin, who was 5 feet 11 inches, at 13, when she became one of the youngest participants at the 2008 Olympic trials.
The wear and tear of competing at a high level inevitably takes its toll. All the more so if you are a global brand ambassador being tugged at like the last cashmere sweater in a sale pile — as Franklin was in the lead-up to the 2016 Olympics.
Instead of ruing Franklin’s exit from the sport, her legions of fans should be grateful for how long she stuck around. Every athlete, however wondrous, has a shelf life. If tendinitis in her shoulders hadn’t brought her to the end, something else would have — emotional burnout or maybe emerging new interests.
Franklin, who is engaged to be married, said she was looking forward to becoming a mother, and wants to be able to fully engage with her future children without being restricted by physical pain. The only reason to mourn Franklin’s retirement would be if the curtain was falling on her best act, but Franklin sounded as if she got exactly what she needed from swimming to continue her personal and professional evolution.
