Movies|Who’s Better Suited for Award Season Than Richard E. Grant?
Who’s Better Suited for Award Season Than Richard E. Grant?
It was an early November morning at a West Hollywood screening room, and the woman with the vegan-leather handbag was determined to speak to Richard E. Grant.
In that fact-based dramedy, the 61-year-old Grant plays a disarming and dissolute gadfly named Jack Hock, and the way the young woman approached Grant reminded me of the way Jack Hock sidles up to the author Lee Israel (played by Melissa McCarthy) and quickly becomes her partner in a lucrative, larcenous forgery scheme.
At the screening room, the 6-foot-2 Grant, clad in a Union Jack vest, took note of his chic questioner and bent forward to greet her.
“Do you think you’re a golden retriever?” the woman asked him.
Grant blinked. As her query hung in the air, so did the handbag.
“People were here by 9,” a young publicist assured Grant.
The event was organized for Bafta members, who vote on the British equivalent of the Oscars, and it was the latest stop on a promotional tour meant to propel Grant into the award-season conversation as a contender for best supporting actor. In the weeks to come, Grant would find himself nominated for a Golden Globe and a SAG Award, but on the day I shadowed him, he still wondered if all these events would amount to something. This sort of press blitz was all very new for Grant, who got his first film role in the 1987 cult comedy “Withnail & I” because an up-and-comer named Daniel Day-Lewis turned it down.
While Day-Lewis has since become an above-the-title star and the only man to ever win three Oscars for best actor, Grant found himself shaped by an acting teacher who told him he was too “lantern-jawed, tombstone-faced, and sepulchral-featured” to ever make it as a lead. Not that it deterred Grant from acting: When critics of “Withnail” used the same pejoratives to describe him, “I thought, ‘Well, at least I got the part,’” Grant said.
He has continued to work steadily since, bringing his loopy comic brio to bear in guest appearances on shows like “Game of Thrones” and “Girls” and movies that run the gamut from “Gosford Park” to “Hudson Hawk.” Still, those supporting roles are the sort of thing an actor can do for a long time without being singled out for special recognition, which is what makes this moment so sweet for Grant.
 They asked Grant about playing an alcoholic in both “Withnail & I” and “Can You Ever Forgive Me?” despite the fact that he is a teetotaler, which is mentioned so prominently on his Wikipedia page that it comes up in every interview.
JACK HOCK IS one of those people, and the character is far closer to being a hound than the man who portrays him: Jack is so delighted by good gossip that as he runs his mouth, he might as well be wagging a tail. Jack also has a nose for trouble and proves to be a disastrous house sitter, yet remains so endearing that Lee can’t quite shake him as her friend.
A subsequent viewing, with an audience and a finished soundtrack, convinced Grant that there was more to the story: As his funny scenes became more bittersweet toward the end of the film, people cried. In September, Fox Searchlight flew Grant and McCarthy to the Telluride Film Festival in Colorado and the reaction was even more rapturous. As great reviews came in from the trades, studio executives asked Grant whether he would be free from November to January.
Later that day, I met Grant in his dressing room for “The Late Late Show With James Corden,” where a segment producer was giving him the run of show. “So you play an alcoholic in this movie,” said the producer, “but you’re a teetotaler in real life?” Grant nodded dutifully.
After their segments were over, and McCarthy and Grant had been made to play a game modeled after “The Price Is Right,” Grant returned to the dressing room and sprawled out on a chair, exhausted. “James knows who I am in England, but the audience here has no idea what movies he’s talking about,” Grant fretted.
You could tell Grant was taking notes. When Corden asked how he was so good at playing an alcoholic despite decades of sobriety, Grant met his host’s enthusiasm with the zeal of someone hearing the question for the first time. I noted that Grant would probably spend the next three months delivering variations on the same answer, and only a consummate character actor could find new line readings to last that long.
“Three months?” he asked. That would take him to February and the Oscars. Grant did the mental math and smiled.
