For President Trump, 2018 has been a year of perpetual motion. He has presided over near constant turmoil as he has increasingly relied on his own instincts. In just the last week, the flurry of activity has rocked the government, the military and the markets.
Here’s a look at the major events — some high, some low — that have undoubtedly shaped Mr. Trump’s thinking heading into 2019.
The government shut down for three days starting at 12:01 a.m. on Jan. 20.
Days later, Mr. Trump delivered his first State of the Union address.
Balking at an immigration deal, Mr. Trump asked lawmakers in the Oval Office why there were so many people from “shithole countries” coming to the United States, rather than from places like Norway.
After President Trump used vulgar language about immigrants, TV news grappled with a question: Were his comments racist?
Michael D. Cohen, Mr. Trump’s longtime personal lawyer, said that he had paid $130,000 out of his own pocket to Stormy Daniels, a pornographic-film actress who had claimed to have had an affair with Mr. Trump.
A gunman opened fired at Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., killing 17 people.
Hope Hicks, the White House communications director, told House investigators that her work for Mr. Trump had occasionally required her to tell white lies. A day later, she announced her resignation.
Mr. Trump, defying opposition from his own party and protests from overseas, signed orders imposing stiff and sweeping new tariffs on imported steel and aluminum.
Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson was fired, to be replaced by Mike Pompeo, and H.R. McMaster, the president’s national security adviser, was forced out and replaced by John R. Bolton.
President Trump announced that the C.I.A. director, Mike Pompeo, will replace Rex Tillerson as secretary of state.
The March for Our Lives rally, one of hundreds of protests held across the world, took place in Washington to call for action on gun violence.
The special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, subpoenaed the Trump Organization to turn over documents, including some related to Russia.
John Dowd resigned as Mr. Trump’s lead lawyer for the special counsel investigation.
Mr. Trump denied knowledge of hush payments to Stormy Daniels.
President Trump’s former lawyer Michael Cohen has been sentenced to prison for offenses, including paying women for their silence during the 2016 election. Here’s a look at how this could affect the president.
The story of President Trump’s involvement in hush payments to a porn star and a former Playboy model in 2016 is once again in the spotlight. Trump’s former lawyer Michael Cohen pleaded guilty to violating campaign finance law and prosecutors say Trump directed the illegal payments. What does this mean for Trump? No one knows yet. Here’s what we do know. Did Trump know about the payments to Stormy Daniels and Karen McDougal? Yes. Trump initially pleaded ignorance. Reporter: “Mr. President, did you know about the $130,000 payment to Stormy Daniels?” “No.” But prosecutors say the evidence shows that he was aware of both cases. Cohen’s lawyer released a secretly recorded conversation between Cohen and Trump that seemed to be about the McDougal payments. Trump: “Listen. What financing?” Cohen: “We’ll have to pay —” Trump: “Pay with cash —” Cohen: “No — no, no, no, no, no, no — I got — no, no, no.” What was the motivation for the payments? Prosecutors say, to hide a potential sex scandal. Both women were paid off in the final months of the 2016 presidential campaign. Trump claimed he made the payments for personal reasons, tweeting that it was a simple private transaction. But prosecutors say Cohen admitted that Trump directed him to make the payments to bury accusations Trump feared could jeopardize his candidacy. Why does the motivation matter? It will determine if it’s a campaign finance violation. Prosecutors say that by suppressing the stories, Cohen and Trump deceived voters and tainted the election process, which is breaking campaign finance law. So, what comes next? Unclear. On Dec. 12, Cohen was sentenced to three years in prison for multiple crimes. The Justice Department has decided it can’t prosecute a sitting president. But if Trump loses re-election, it’s possible prosecutors could try and charge him in 2021.
Mr. Trump pulled out of the Iran nuclear deal.
Mr. Trump revamped his legal team for the Russia investigation.
The American Embassy in Israel was moved to Jerusalem. The same day, mass protests along the Gaza border raged anew.
The Department of Homeland Security enacted a “zero tolerance” immigration policy, causing the forced separation of migrant families at the border.
Outrage over the separation policy swept the country, prompting the administration to launch an aggressive defense.
Under enormous political pressure, Mr. Trump signed an executive order meant to end family separation.
Mr. Trump met with Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s leader, in Singapore and discussed eliminating the North’s nuclear arsenal.
President Trump spoke about his agreement with Kim Jong-un for the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, and his plans to invite the North Korean leader to the White House.
During a news conference in Helsinki, Finland, Mr. Trump stood next to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and publicly challenged the conclusion of his own intelligence agencies that Moscow interfered in the 2016 presidential election.
Many Republicans were not pleased with the performance.
Several members of President Trump’s party criticized the remarks he made suggesting that Russia did not interfere with the 2016 presidential election.
Scott Pruitt, the E.P.A. chief, resigned under a cloud of ethics scandals.
Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh was nominated by Mr. Trump to fill a vacancy on the Supreme Court left by the retirement of Justice Anthony M. Kennedy.
Paul Manafort, Mr. Trump’s former campaign chairman, was convicted of five counts of tax fraud, two counts of bank fraud and one count of failure to disclose a foreign bank account.
Senator John McCain of Arizona died at 81. Mr. Trump was not invited to the funeral. While the president was absent from Washington National Cathedral, he was a clear point of contrast to the former senator.
Senator John McCain’s daughter Meghan McCain delivered an emotional tribute to her father that included a steely rebuke to President Trump.
We gather here to mourn the passing of American greatness. The real thing, not cheap rhetoric from men who will never come near the sacrifice he gave so willingly. Nor the opportunistic appropriation of those who live lives of comfort and privilege while he suffered and served. The America of John McCain is generous and welcoming and bold. She is resourceful and confident and secure. She meets her responsibilities. She speaks quietly because she is strong. America does not boast because she has no need to. The America of John McCain has no need to be made great again, because America was always great.
Mr. Cohen, pleading guilty to a litany of crimes, said in court that Mr. Trump had directed him to arrange payments to two women — including Stormy Daniels — during the 2016 campaign to keep them from speaking publicly about affairs they said they had with Mr. Trump. Federal prosectors affirmed this months later.
After an initial round of confirmation hearings, Judge Kavanaugh reappeared on Capitol Hill to testify about allegations of sexual misconduct. One accuser, Christine Blasey Ford, also delivered emotional testimony.
Judge Kavanaugh was confirmed by the Senate to the Supreme Court.
The Trump administration, Mexico and Canada negotiated a new trade deal to replace Nafta, called the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement, or U.S.M.C.A.
A member of the Trump administration, identifying himself or herself as a senior official, wrote an opinion article for The New York Times, claiming to be a “member of the resistance” in the administration.
Jamal Khashoggi, a columnist for The Washington Post who was critical of Saudi Arabia’s rulers, was killed at the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul.
The United States unemployment rate dropped to 3.7 percent.
11 people were killed when a gunman, shouting anti-Semitic slurs, opened fire at a synagogue in Pittsburgh.
A man in Florida was arrested in connection with a wave of mail bombs that targeted people critical of Mr. Trump, including former President Barack Obama, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., the actor Robert De Niro and CNN.
A wildfire in Northern California became the deadliest in the state’s history.
Mr. Cohen pleaded guilty to lying to Congress and said Mr. Trump had been more involved in discussions over a potential Russian business deal during the presidential campaign than previously known.
Democrats won control of the House, picking up 40 seats in the midterm elections.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions was forced out of his post. Matthew G. Whitaker stepped in as the acting attorney general. The next month, Mr. Trump nominated William P. Barr for the job.
The 41st president, George Bush, died at age 94. Mr. Trump was invited to the funeral but did not speak.
Days before the deadline for a new spending bill, Mr. Trump, Vice President Mike Pence, Senator Chuck Schumer and Representative Nancy Pelosi greeted journalists in the Oval Office for a photo opportunity that morphed into an extraordinary on-camera policy debate.

Mr. Trump announced that John F. Kelly, the chief of staff, would leave the administration. Mick Mulvaney, his budget director, would fill the post as acting chief of staff. Ryan Zinke, the interior secretary, was also ousted.
Mr. Trump abruptly ordered the removal of American troops from Syria and a drawdown of forces in Afghanistan.
The next day, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis resigned, writing Mr. Trump a letter saying that the president deserved a defense secretary whose views were “better aligned” with his.
President Trump appointed more generals to senior positions than any other modern president. But with the resignation of Jim Mattis, no will generals remain. Here’s what happened.
“I see my generals — those generals are going to keep us so safe. These are central casting — if I’m doing a movie, I pick you, general.” President Trump likes to talk about America’s generals. “Remember the old days of General MacArthur and General Patton and these great generals.” Although, he’s been less kind to modern-day generals. “I know more about ISIS than the generals do, believe me. And I can just see the great — as an example — Gen. George Patton spinning in his grave. General MacArthur is spinning in his grave.” But since his election, Trump has put four of them in senior positions, the most of any modern-day president. “They say he’s the closest thing to Gen. George Patton that we have, and it’s about time. It’s about time.” Now, there’s none left. So, what happened? First to go was Michael Flynn, a retired Army general. He was an early and vocal supporter of Trump. “He will lead from the front, not from behind.”  But soon, it came out that Flynn misled White House officials about his contact with Russia’s ambassador. He was forced to resign. Next to go was an active-duty Army general, H.R. McMaster, who replaced Flynn. McMaster pushed for a bigger U.S. military commitment in Afghanistan and Syria. He was also a fierce critic of Vladimir Putin. “We might show him the beaches of Normandy, where lingering craters and bullet holes demonstrate the West’s will to sacrifice.” Trump, on the other hand, had opposing views on all of the above, and the two never developed a personal chemistry. John Kelly, one of the two former Marine Corps generals, was the next to go. He was briefly Homeland Security secretary, then Trump made him chief of staff. “He will do a spectacular job, I have no doubt.” And Kelly was given credit for bringing discipline to the West Wing. But Trump grew wary of Kelly’s strict management style — “As questions persist over Kelly’s defense of Porter —” and of Kelly’s part in several controversies. For his part, Kelly was reported to frequently call the president an “idiot.” Although, he’s denied this. Now, James Mattis is the last general to leave the cabinet. Early on, he seemed to elicit the most enthusiasm for Trump. “General ‘Mad Dog’ Mattis.” Mattis has generally kept a low profile, but in recent months his relationship with Trump is said to have soured. They butted heads on a range of issues: NATO policy, North Korea and finally, withdrawing U.S. troops from Syria. In his resignation letter, the retired Marine general cited a difference of views with Trump. With Mattis gone, the White House will be without one of the few officials viewed as able to keep an unpredictable president in check.
Mirroring sharp declines in other stock markets, the tech-heavy Nasdaq entered bear territory, down almost 22 percent from its August peak.
The government partly shut down for the third time this year after Mr. Trump made clear that he would not accept a spending bill that did not include $5 billion in funding for a wall along the southern border.