One of the biggest jobs in music journalism sat vacant for two and a half years. Now Billboard magazine has finally found its new top editor: Hannah Karp, a former reporter at The Wall Street Journal who joined Billboard as its news director last year.
Ms. Karp, 38, will assume the role of editorial director in the wake of a troubled time at the publication, which was started in 1894 to cover the outdoor advertising industry.
In July, John Amato resigned as the chief executive of the Hollywood Reporter-Billboard Media Group during an internal review initiated by its parent company, Valence Media. The inquiry was spurred by a report in The Daily Beast that said Mr. Amato had interfered with decisions regarding articles about Charlie Walk, a prominent record executive and longtime friend who had been accused of sexual misconduct.
Mr. Walk, who denied the allegations against him at the time they were made, was subsequently fired by his label, the Republic Group.
In interviews with The New York Times after Mr. Amato’s resignation, five current or former Billboard employees described an environment in which corporate meddling in editorial decisions was not limited to the coverage of Mr. Walk.
Now Ms. Karp has a chance to set things right at the leading trade music publication.
“As a journalist, I’m really excited to lead a really amazing team of people and expand and deepen our coverage of the music business itself, which is going through such an exciting and fascinating transformation,” Ms. Karp said.
Deanna Brown, the managing director at Valence Media, said the company had consulted over several months with the Poynter Institute, which teaches journalistic ethics and practices, on how to reinstate a healthy relationship between Billboard’s business and editorial divisions.
By promoting Ms. Karp, Ms. Brown said, the company is reinforcing its commitment to disinterested news coverage.
She said she planned to expand international coverage and focus on technology, investments and the music industry’s legal landscape.
“Music is a product that touches nearly everyone on the planet, and everyone should know how it gets made behind the scenes,” she said.
Modi Wiczyk, a co-chief executive of Valence Media, said Ms. Karp was the right person for the job.
Although Billboard’s charts remain the go-to measurement of success in the industry, their status has been challenged by the reams of data coming out of Spotify, Shazam and YouTube.
