Words become medicine as Anu Garg helps his formerly self-reliant mother recover from a stroke.
The hardest part of a stroke is not the medical event, but what comes after. It’s a long, slow recovery of both the mind and the body.
In December 2017, my mother had a stroke. At the time, she was in Mumbai with my little brother. Her right arm, leg, eye — the whole right side was paralyzed. We didn’t know if she would walk and talk again. But she did, with lots of love, support and physiotherapy. And a little help from crossword puzzles.
It seemed to me that her brain also needed some exercise, so I decided to introduce her to crosswords. She has an M.A. in sociology and her native language is Hindi, but she can understand a bit of English. Crosswords are not as popular in Hindi-language newspapers and magazines, so I found some Hindi crosswords online and printed one for her to solve. As we sat together, I explained how Across and Down clues worked. Soon she was hooked. One by one, we plowed through each of the clues.
A stroke often comes with short-term memory loss. Sometimes Mom would be confused, considering an Across word, but looking for its clues in Down, or vice versa. Or she’d start considering a clue for a word that was already done.
I began to consider how a child’s and parent’s roles eventually become reversed. When I was growing up, my father was busy with his state-government job. It was my mother who raised me and my three siblings. She always made time to tutor us and helped us with our homework. I don’t remember my early childhood days (would that be a long-term memory loss?), but I imagine that when she helped me with my math or language homework, she’d know the answer but let me figure it out myself.
Honestly, the improvement is glacial. What is an eight-letter word that any recovering PATIENT ought to have? PATIENCE. Both derive from the same Latin root pati (to suffer).
I watch my parents and realize that this is where we all are heading, sooner or later. No pill or magic potion is going to work here. There’s so much pain in the world, so many are suffering, and in the end it doesn’t matter what religion or sect we follow, how big our bank balance is or what model car we drive. The best we can do is to love one another. To do my duty and not hurt any one, that is my religion.
It takes Mom an hour or more to complete a crossword, but she doesn’t give up if a couple of words are left unsolved. I am the one who suggests that we check the answers. No, Mom, I wouldn’t tell your teacher if you looked at the answer sheet for your crossword homework.
My father, who turned 80 this year, (and is showing his age) would chime in from time to time and help us out with obscure words. He was typically quick to become irritated, but when he’s kibitzing with us and our crossword puzzles, he forgets his cross words.
But now this is different. This is personal. We are a mother and son, on a mission to find our way through the maze of black-and-white squares until we have traversed it completely. Along the way, we stop to ask for directions (Thank you, online dictionaries!) Once we have completed the trip, I might have learned the name of some rarely-used spice, an obscure synonym for a traveler, or the name of a long-forgotten king from the time of British Raj.
Mom has never shied from work and likes doing everything herself. Now she has Pinky, a full-time caretaker. She has still not regained full control over her arm and leg. While physical disability is unnerving, it’s the memory loss that gets to her. Sometimes after waking up, she lies on the bed for quite some time.
Eight years ago, I was at home in Seattle and my brother in Mumbai called to say that our mother was diagnosed with breast cancer. When I called Mom, I found it hard to stop the tears flooding my eyes.
“You’re strong,” I said.
“Why are you crying then?” she said. “You can be strong too!” She went through chemo, surgery, and everything else that comes with cancer without ever complaining.
But this stroke thing is different. The physical and mental toll, combined with age, can be hard.
Neighbors stop by to cheer her up.
“You look great!” one would say.
“I saw you last week and I see so much improvement,” another would say.
My habit became printing a crossword, putting it on a clipboard, and presenting it to her. One day, I printed two, but put them both on the clipboard. Mom solved the first one, instinctively flipped the page, discovered the second crossword and got started on it. As long as she’s doing crosswords, I’m hopeful.
Someday, I hope to introduce her to cryptic crosswords.
Anu Garg is the founder of Wordsmith.org, a community of word lovers in 170 countries. He has written three best selling books on words.
