CARRICKMACROSS, Ireland — In 2011, when 8-year-old Rebecca Keenan saw Kate Middleton wearing a veil of Carrickmacross lace to marry Prince William, she made a decision. Her First Communion veil would be the same kind of lace and be made by her grandmother, Elizabeth Daly.
“Rebecca knew exactly what she wanted,” recalled Ms. Daly, who now has been creating Carrickmacross lace for 41 years. “Flowers, no crosses.” It took eight weeks of daily work to complete the piece.
There are many kinds of lace, including needle lace, made with a needle and thread; machine made; and bobbin lace, made by manipulating bobbins of thread on a pillow. The Carrickmacross style combines needlework and appliqué.
To make the veil, Ms. Daly tacked a paper pattern onto a layer of organdy and a layer of net, the veil’s body. To outline flowers and leaves, she used an appliqué technique, holding a cotton thread in place on the patterns and sewing tiny, close stitches across it, through the entire paper-fabric sandwich. She then selected from among the 15 stitches used by Carrickmacross makers to fill in the outlines.
Finally, Ms. Daly carefully cut away the paper pattern and any unwanted organdy, revealing the design on the net.
In addition to being a fond grandmother, Ms. Daly is chairwoman of the Lace Gallery of Carrickmacross, a cooperative of 15 lace workers founded in 1984 in the small town, about 60 miles northwest of Dublin. The gallery exhibits vintage wedding veils and christening gowns and sells smaller items, including wedding garters, Christmas decorations and lace brooches like the one that Enda Kenny, the former Taoiseach, or prime minister of Ireland, brought to the White House for Melania Trump in 2017.
Ms. Daly said the lace makers “use the exact same techniques as 200 years ago.” They were developed during the 1820s by Margaret Grey Porter, the wife of a local rector, who had collected samples of Italian lace during their honeymoon. She and her maid, Ann Steadman, copied the samples and then taught the skills to local farm girls in hopes they could then earn an income.
Soon the Italian influence evolved into a distinct style of Carrickmacross lace. Characteristic motifs include flowers, leaves, hearts, bows and Celtic designs, as well as pops — small raised circles dotted around the larger pattern.
The lace, crafted in farmhouses, became popular with Queen Victoria and fashionable aristocrats of the day. During the Great Famine of 1845-1849, local lacemakers were credited with keeping many families alive.
By the late 1800s, the area’s lace industry had almost died out, but it was abruptly revived in 1890 with the arrival of the Sisters of St. Louis. The French order of nuns came to Carrickmacross to open a primary school and, talented needlewomen and dynamic businesswomen, they also established a lace academy, teaching hundreds of pupils.
When the convent closed in 1988, the nuns gave hundreds of patterns, some dating from the 1800s, to a student, P. J. McCabe. Now, at 64, he is an artist and a man who has been described as the last Carrickmacross lace designer.
Ms. O’Reilly has been working on a First Communion veil for the daughter of an American couple, a project that she said would take “the guts of six weeks to make” and will sell for 450 euros, or $509. The standard communion veil is 31 inches in diameter but, she said, they opted for a 36-inch version, decorated with a flower and bow pattern, so it could be used again as a short wedding veil.
“We don’t do this for money, it’s for the love of it,” she said. “We might charge €3,000 for a wedding veil that takes a year.” There are a handful of other lace makers in the area who are not affiliated with the cooperative, but they charge similar prices.
A detail of a wedding veil made in 1957 and purchased for £25. The owner visits the gallery regularly to see it.
Caoimhe Collins, 29, is an art teacher who joined the classes in 2015 to make her own wedding veil. “People don’t get the process of making lace. I didn’t ‘til I started,” she said.
