Whatever the president says, the Fed chairman, Jerome Powell, is not the problem.
 Since President Trump once owned casinos, you’d think that he might have caught on by now. Then again, those casinos went bankrupt, an outcome that Mr. Trump blamed on anyone not named Donald Trump.
The Federal Reserve Board has had the temerity to do exactly what it had signaled for months it would do, steadily raise interest rates to prevent the economy from overheating. The Fed is legally mandated to maximize employment and contain inflation, not to prop up the stock market on presidential orders. Mr. Powell also signaled that the Fed would pause in this rate-raising mode if the economy began to slow. Wall Street was not surprised in the least by this pronouncement.
What surprised Wall Street — what terrifies Wall Street — was Mr. Trump’s inquiry as to whether he had the power to fire Mr. Powell, whom he appointed in February. That injection of uncertainty was then magnified when Mr. Mnuchin announced from his Mexican vacation spot that he had chatted with six big bank C.E.O.s in an attempt to assure investors that there was adequate liquidity in the financial system. Anyone who experienced the Great Recession might recall that merely raising the idea that there might not be adequate liquidity immediately injects doubt into investors’ minds about adequate liquidity, whatever assurances you attach afterward. The Dow promptly had its worst Christmas Eve trading day ever, disgorging 653 points, or 2.9 percent. After a slow start on Wednesday, major market indexes roared back, with the Dow climbing more than 1,000 points, or almost 5 percent.
Mr. Trump was in Iraq, and off Twitter, on Wednesday.
Mr. Trump is King Minus. Everything he touches turns to lead. And everyone else is at fault but him. He can’t understand it. Didn’t he give Mexico and Canada a great deal in replacing Nafta with Naft2? He thinks so, even though the Canadians fought furiously until they got an agreement they could live with; the Mexicans are still on the fence, if you’ll pardon the pun.
In Mr. Trump’s snow-globe reality, our days are merry and bright as long as he’s in charge. It’s only when those other fools interfere — the courts, the Fed, Congress, whoever is chief of staff — that things go wrong. Thus the government shutdown that he bragged he would own he now says belongs to the Democrats. No one is buying that one, not even in his own party. And no one is buying his $5 billion Mexico wall, either. And that includes the Mexicans. Nor should they. The number of people entering the United States from Mexico has been declining for a decade, but Mr. Trump has now wasted hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars placing American troops in Texas to protect us from an immigration threat that doesn’t exist.
The really scary part, if one continues this historical comparison, is that the Great Depression was ended not as much by smart economic policy as it was the end of a failed foreign policy marked by American isolationism in the years leading to World War II. Today, Mr. Trump’s America First posture is behind his abrupt decision last week to withdraw antiterrorism troops from Syria. His own generals — “my generals” — and national security staff have warned that such a retreat could allow the shattered Islamic State to regroup and spread global chaos again.
Forced to forgo Florida and hunker down in the White House because of the government shutdown he orchestrated, Mr. Trump even managed to tarnish Christmas for one youngster. During a photo-op phone conversation, he called into question the 7-year-old’s belief in Santa Claus.
