This movie introduces its heroine on what looks like her deathbed, as she gives someone behind the camera instructions for her funeral. But the nearly 90 minutes that follow might convince a viewer that Julita Salmerón, whose son, the Spanish actor Gustavo Salmerón, directed this frank and affectionate portrait, will live forever.
In the next scene, Julita sits at a kitchen table and her son is heard offscreen saying he doesn’t know how to “start this documentary.” Julita counters with her own misgivings about being the subject of “this documentary.” Both are being at least a tiny bit disingenuous. Gustavo Salmerón is a longtime moviemaking professional (although this is his first time directing a feature), and Julita appears to be an old hand at playing to the camera. The movie’s title derives from what Julita says she wanted from life before she got married. She carries the air of someone who gets what she wants, and in short order we learn that after marrying she had six children.
The monkey’s tale comes a little later on. This was advertised as an animal that had been trained to sit and eat at a human dinner table, like a member of the gentry. This was false. Julita recounts the story of how the monkey once bit through her hand, tearing through nerve and exposing bone. So that put her off the monkey business for a bit.
Her upper-middle-class milieu did not position her as an obvious castle purchaser, but an inheritance windfall, about which she’s disinclined to go into much detail, enabled the acquisition. She revels in the wall hangings and armor that decorate it, and in its large kitchen — “if you’re wondering why I’m fat, here you go,” she proclaims as she glides into the room — but not in a conspicuous-consumption way. Her mode is more eccentrically whimsical than grossly materialistic.
Along with the loving portraiture are elements of peculiar mystery; various members of the family are preoccupied with the loss of some human remains that Julita, who’s a bit of a hoarder, has spoken of. Just as you’re wondering if the movie is going to simply stay in those realms, the filmmaker reveals that the family is losing the castle. Intimidatingly high figures are thrown around and a move is contemplated, then put into action.
