When the cold snaps, our rinks come alive.
Each year, droves of would-be ice queens and kings wobble onto the frozen expanse at Wollman Rink in Central Park. From gifted athletes to teetering toddlers, they are looking to showcase their figure eights and pirouettes — or simply make it around while staying upright. It can be hard to keep your seen-it-all-before, New York cool while flat on your back(side), of course, but it is the indomitable city spirit that gets us back on our feet and ready for more.
While Wollman is the marquee public rink in the city, there are dozens of places to skate in New York, from Prospect Park to Coney Island to Clove Lakes Park on Staten Island. In fact, there are plans to convert the Kingsbridge Armory in the Bronx into an enormous nine-rink complex. Skating is a citywide affair, and has been for a long time.
In the 1950s, skaters spun and wobbled to canned organ music, rumbas and fox trots. Visitors cooled their heels while the ice was cleaned by enjoying candy apples, hot dogs and 25-cent pizza pies. By the late ’70s, rinks began to experiment with disco music. (“It makes the skaters wild,” a manager said in 1979, though it was unclear if he meant that in a good or bad way.) But early risers who made it through the frigid dawn to Lasker Rink, at the north end of Central Park, could skate without music, accompanied only by the meditative whispering of blades on newly squeegeed ice.
Incongruous worlds collided at the rink, sometimes literally. While the nearby Rockefeller Center Skating Pond gained a reputation as a see-and-be-seen locale, Wollman, with its more affordable fees (Rockefeller Pond has always been significantly more pricey), brought together school groups from the Bronx with residents of the Plaza, mink coats and home-decorated skates.
New Yorkers have slid, skidded and triple-lutzed around Wollman for nearly 70 years. And every year, the visitors arrive in waves — undeterred by long lines, unruffled by rubbing shoulders in a microcosm of the five boroughs — to strut their stuff, fall flat on their face and get up to try all over again.
“Old-time bonfires have been replaced by powerful floodlights,” ran our original caption, marveling at the modernized rink in 1951.