Mr. Trump’s sudden announcement that he was firing a man who had already quit was the exclamation point to a tumultuous week at the Pentagon, where officials have been reeling from day after day of presidential tweets announcing changes in American military policy.
Mr. Mattis had wanted to stay through a NATO defense ministers meeting scheduled for February, hoping to enshrine recent moves by the alliance to bulk up its security compact as a bulwark against Russia. But Mr. Mattis’s resignation letter did him no favors on that count: It had become hard to envision how he could continue for two months to represent a president whose own views toward Russia are far more benign.
As it became clear that the two men’s ideas of how to treat both friends and adversaries were so publicly at odds, the White House decided that there would be no reason for Mr. Mattis to stay on during what two officials called his “lame duck” period.
On Sunday, a senior administration official would not say what that ultimately meant for the timetable for troops in Syria, but said the president had reiterated to Mr. Erdogan that the United States would remain there long enough to ensure an orderly handover and “help out logistically” to eradicate any territory still held by the Islamic State.
The official spoke amid reports that Turkey was moving troops near a town in northern Syria held by Kurdish allies of the United States, even though Turkey had said it would put off a promised offensive after Mr. Trump’s hasty decision to leave Syria.
Mr. Mattis resigned on Thursday in large part over that pullout order. The defense secretary was also upset about Mr. Trump’s decision to bring home half of the 14,000 American troops stationed in Afghanistan and his order to deploy American troops to the border with Mexico.
Mr. Mattis, a retired four-star general, led the United States Central Command, which oversees military operations in the Middle East and Southwest Asia, from 2010 to 2013. His tour there was cut short by the Obama administration, which believed he was too hawkish on Iran.
By Sunday morning, Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, had informed Mr. Mattis that he would have just over another week in his current job. Mr. Pompeo and John R. Bolton, the president’s third national security adviser since taking office, are left to direct policy while the president considers an official replacement for Mr. Mattis. In a call with reporters, a White House official framed Mr. Shanahan’s tenure as one that could keep daily operations stable in the interim.
Brett H. McGurk, the special presidential envoy to the coalition fighting the Islamic State, is also stepping down over Mr. Trump’s decision to pull troops from Syria, telling colleagues this weekend that he could not in good conscience carry out Mr. Trump’s new policy.
Mr. McGurk, a seasoned diplomat who was considered by many to be the glue holding together the sprawling international coalition fighting the terrorist group, was supposed to retire in February. But according to an email he sent to his staff, he decided to move his departure forward to Dec. 31 after Mr. Trump did not heed his own commanders and blindsided America’s allies in the region by abruptly ordering the pullout.
Mr. Shanahan, who, like Mr. Mattis, is from Washington State, was at Boeing for 30 years, in a number of jobs including general manager of the 787 Dreamliner and senior vice president of supply chain and operations. Aides say that Mr. Trump likes him in part because he often tells the president that he is correct to complain about the expense of defense systems.
“Patrick has a long list of accomplishments while serving as Deputy, & previously Boeing,” Mr. Trump tweeted.
At the Defense Department last year, Mr. Shanahan scuttled a pledge to destroy the military’s existing stockpile of cluster munitions, allowing the military to once again arm itself with a type of weapon that has been banned by 102 countries largely because of concerns that the arms disproportionately harm civilians.
Asked about the decision at a conference in October, Mr. Shanahan attributed the move to what he said was the threat posed by North Korea.
On Sunday, in N’Djamena, Chad, President Emmanuel Macron of France criticized Mr. Trump’s decision to withdraw American forces from Syria, saying that “an ally must be reliable.” French forces are part of a coalition led by the United States aimed at destroying the Islamic State, but it is unclear what will happen to the coalition now.
