Music|Did Dvorak’s ‘New World’ Symphony Transform American Music?
Antonin Dvorak, whose Symphony No. 9 (“From the New World”) is central to the worldwide orchestral repertory.
Did Dvorak’s ‘New World’ Symphony Transform American Music?
History books have long asserted that the symphony was the first to make classical music “sound American.” But it’s not true.
Antonin Dvorak, whose Symphony No. 9 (“From the New World”) is central to the worldwide orchestral repertory.Credit...
Sunday is the 125th anniversary of the premiere of Dvorak’s Symphony No. 9 (“From the New World”) at Carnegie Hall. Latching onto its unforgettable melodies, including the famous tune that inspired “Goin’ Home,” audiences around the world have craved this lush, dramatic work ever since.
American composers were wrestling with national identity long before Dvorak’s arrival. Speaking at the annual convention of the Music Teachers National Association in 1884, the Boston composer George Whiting invoked the pianist Louis Moreau Gottschalk’s Creole-inspired music of the 1850s and argued that composers should work with “Creole melodies of the South” to create a particularly American style. Reprints of Whiting’s speech appeared widely in the musical press and inspired impassioned rebuttals around the country.
Drawing compositional inspiration from black musical idioms was also nothing new. Henry Schoenefeld, based in Chicago, explained in the program note to his 1890 “Suite Characteristique” for string orchestra that an “American school will be based upon the Negro melodies of the South, as the Russians have founded the Russian school by looking to the Slav melodies” — a formulation that nearly matched what Dvorak would recommend later. Featuring a tambourine, triangle, and tam-tam, the suite’s second movement attempted to capture the vitality of black vernacular dance with syncopation, unusual chromatic lines and colorful effects in the strings.
Around this time, the philanthropist Jeannette Thurber invited Dvorak to become director of her new National Conservatory in New York. When the news of his appointment became public in 1891, critics immediately doubted that he could help American composers find a national voice. And Dvorak openly denied that the United States could ever develop a truly national style.
The conductor Franz Xavier Arens, based in Milwaukee, wanted to prove otherwise. Early in 1892, he toured Central Europe, with Schoenefeld’s suite anchoring an all-American orchestral program. The suite’s evocation of black American musical idioms delighted audiences. A Viennese critic wrote that “this picture from the Negro life of the South is distinguished through lively shaping and unusually clever exploitation of unfamiliar musical elements,” while a writer in Leipzig described it as “the most specifically American” piece on the program. Reports on Arens’s concerts spread in German-language newspapers for weeks.
Accounts of foreign enthusiasm reached the United States two months before Dvorak’s arrival. A.J. Goodrich, then the leading American music theorist, commented that Schoenefeld’s music had “attracted instant attention, for here was a motive not already developed by Brahms, Dvorak, Saint-Saëns, Grieg or Tschaikovski.” When Dvorak finally arrived, the idea of mixing black vernacular idioms with conventional classical idioms had fascinated musicians across Europe and the United States for nearly two years. That he would be asked to weigh in on the subject was all but inevitable.
He immersed himself in this burning topic soon after arriving. He listened to one of his black conservatory students, Harry Burleigh, sing spirituals and studied the Louisville music teacher Mildred Hill’s scholarship on black folk songs.  And the manuscript for Schoenefeld’s new “Rural Symphony” sat on Dvorak’s desk awaiting judgment in a conservatory-sponsored contest. (It eventually won.) By May 1893, Dvorak had seen and heard enough.
The symphony’s “true” identity — American? Czech? something else? nothing at all? — has remained a source of debate to this day. But these discussions have taken for granted that the piece was sui generis and have obscured Dvorak’s original purpose: to acknowledge contributions black musicians had already been making to the American cultural landscape. The “New World” Symphony moved one of Dvorak’s black students, Will Marion Cook, to muse on whether black composers might become the voice of the nation.
