BEIJING — A former Canadian diplomat has been detained in China, according to Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, less than a week after Canada announced the arrest of a senior Chinese tech executive, angering the government in Beijing.
The detention could inflame tensions between China and Canada, which are already sparring over the arrest in Vancouver in early December of Meng Wanzhou, the chief financial officer of Huawei, a Chinese tech conglomerate.
The former diplomat, Michael Kovrig, has worked since early 2017 for the International Crisis Group, an independent nongovernmental organization that tries to defuse international conflict.
Previously he worked for the Canadian foreign service, where he had risen to be vice consul at the embassy in Beijing. He is a well-known specialist on East Asia and Chinese foreign policy.
“We are aware of the situation of the Canadian detained in China,” Mr. Trudeau told reporters on his way into the House of Commons in Ottawa.
The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs had no immediate comment.
Two friends of Mr. Kovrig’s in Beijing said they had been unable to reach him by phone or email. Both requested that their names not be used, fearing unwelcome attention from the Chinese authorities. Calls to Mr. Kovrig’s two cellphone numbers went unanswered.
Mr. Kovrig’s last activity on his Twitter account, a retweeted comment, appeared on Sunday.
It is unclear whether Mr. Kovrig’s disappearance is related to his work for the crisis group. He specialized in sober analyses of North Korea, tensions over the South China Sea, China’s involvement in international peacekeeping and other diplomatic issues.
He has often been quoted in the news media and has written commentaries for newspapers, including the South China Morning Post in Hong Kong.
Mr. Kovrig is well-known to many foreign residents of Beijing. In his work as a diplomat, he was especially interested in Xinjiang and Tibet, two large regions of China where there is considerable discontent among ethnic minority groups with Communist Party rule.
Before becoming a diplomat for Canada, Mr. Kovrig worked for the United Nations in New York and was an analyst specializing in China at the Rhodium Group, an economic research institute. He speaks fluent Mandarin.
A former Canadian ambassador to China, Howard Balloch, said that although he did not know the details of Mr. Kovrig’s disappearance, it seemed to be connected to the arrest of Ms. Meng, the Huawei executive.
Ms. Meng is accused of fraudulently evading United States sanctions against Iran, and she could be extradited to the United States to face charges.
Mr. Kovrig’s disappearance is likely to stir memories of Kevin Garratt and Julia Dawn Garratt, a Canadian couple who were running a coffee house on China’s border with North Korea when they were arrested in August 2014.
Ms. Garratt was released on bail and allowed to leave China, but Mr. Garratt was deported in 2016 after being tried and found guilty of spying, a charge that he later said was unfounded.
The couple’s supporters said the Chinese authorities had used their arrest to try to secure a deal with Canada over the arrest of a Chinese businessman, Su Bin, residing in Canada. He was extradited to the United States, where he pleaded guilty to stealing military secrets.
James Zimmerman, an American lawyer in Beijing who was hired by the Garratt family to press for the couple’s release, said by email that if Mr. Kovrig had been detained, the Chinese police could hold him for 37 days without access to legal counsel.
“There is very little transparency in this process,” he added.