NEWARK — As evidence mounted that Newark’s drinking water was contaminated by lead, top officials began an urgent giveaway of tens of thousands of filters and told residents that the problem was limited to one of the city’s two treatment plants.
But city documents and other records show that an engineering study that led to the distribution of filters, which was made public in October, only focused on one plant. Now the state is directing Newark to assess whether treatment methods at the second plant are protecting water from being contaminated by lead. Since 2017, samples of tap water taken at residences served by that plant have shown elevated lead levels.
But Newark changed course after the study found that lead was leaching into the water because of ineffective corrosion treatment at the city’s Pequannock plant. Since July, lead levels in more than half the samples tested at homes served by the plant have exceeded 15 parts per billion, the federal threshold for action.
A review of city records, obtained through a public records request, shows that lead levels recorded since January 2017 in neighborhoods served by the second plant, the Wanaque, were not nearly as high. Still, those levels, including a few above 15 parts per billion, were among the highest from the Wanaque in the past decade. One sample of residential tap water that came from the Wanaque tested at 182 parts per billion. Two of the dozens of city schools found to have high lead levels in their drinking water two years ago are served by the Wanaque.
In a recent letter, state regulators also asked Newark to investigate whether elevated levels in the Wanaque service area are caused by water leaks from the Pequannock — the two water systems border each other at certain points. The city, in a written response to the state, said “blending is occurring” between the systems, most likely when pressure valves are opened during emergencies like fires and water main breaks.
City officials said the plan to distribute 40,000 filters was aimed at neighborhoods served by the Pequannock because so far there was no evidence that corrosion control was not working at the Wanaque.
But the Natural Resources Defense Council, which sued Newark and the state in June, accusing them of violating federal safe drinking water laws, said the city was downplaying lead levels in neighborhoods, like the East Ward, that were served by the Wanaque. More than a fifth of samples tested at residences served by the Wanaque in the second half of last year yielded levels above five parts per billion.
“To hand wave and say there’s no problem when there are numbers above the federal threshold, and when they haven’t taken a recent hard look at how the corrosion control is working, is inappropriate and deeply concerning,” said Erik Olson, senior director for health and food for the environmental group.
No amount of lead exposure is known be safe for children, whose mental and physical development can be impaired, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
And many experts say that the federal action level of 15 parts per billion, established in 1991, is outdated and fails to take into account new research on the effects of lead exposure.
At recent community meetings, city officials have said that anyone can request a water test and would receive a filter if lead levels exceeded the federal threshold. Officials declined to say how many water tests had been requested or performed since the distribution began. Last spring, the city also announced a plan to help residents replace lead pipes connecting the city’s water main to residential plumbing systems.
Mr. Baraka has defended the city’s response, chafing at suggestions that Newark’s problems echo those of Flint, Mich., even using the hashtag #NewarkIsNotFlint.
The state said it would wait for the city to complete its new assessment before answering questions about the Wanaque.
The Natural Resources Defense Council questioned why the Wanaque had not already been studied and said the state had done a poor job of oversight.
Danielle Fienberg, 30, has followed Newark’s response with dismay.
“I cannot believe they’re not giving out filters in the East Ward,” she said.
After she and her husband, John, moved to the neighborhood from Queens in 2016, their 2-year-old son Theo’s blood lead level was measured at 6.6 micrograms per deciliter, above the recommended limit of 5 for young children set by the C.D.C. When city officials tested the family’s drinking water in January 2017, they found lead levels of 9.77 parts per billion.
The Fienbergs immediately stopped drinking from the tap. Three months later, Theo’s blood lead level fell by half. Ms. Fienberg said she was relieved, but felt guilty that she had let him drink the water in the first place.
Theo was later diagnosed with autism and a form of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. The Fienbergs do not believe either was caused by the lead exposure but that it did exacerbate his symptoms.
Their younger daughter was born without complications, but the family soon moved to Elizabeth.
