What would its political parties look like? And what does the answer say about where the two parties stand today?
It’s been said in recent years that the American system of government is coming to resemble a parliamentary system, characterized by political parties that operate with much stricter ideological discipline than we’ve been accustomed to.
With that in mind, and contemplating the Democrats’ return to power in the House of Representatives, here’s a little thought experiment. Suppose we did have a parliamentary system. How many political parties would we have? And what can this thought experiment tell us about the nature of our two parties and the dysfunction we see daily?
Before we start, I should note that the way we elect members of Congress is the reason we don’t have a parliamentary system. We use single-member, winner-take-all districts. These kinds of districts produce two-party systems. I don’t have the space here to go into why. Just Google “Duverger’s Law” if you’re interested.
For present purposes, let’s just imagine that we had a pure parliamentary system in which we elected our representatives by proportional representation, so that if a minor party’s candidates got 4 percent of the legislative votes, they’d win 4 percent of the seats. What might our party alignment look like?
Party One Let’s start with the party of the center-left. It’s a socially liberal and fiscally moderate party that believes in abortion rights and gun control, and government intervention in the market up to a point. It would tilt toward a free-trade position. This would be the party of the Democratic leaders, Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi, although Ms. Pelosi would probably represent its left flank, and it’s the kind of party that might nominate for president anyone from Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota to Michael Bloomberg.
Party Two Let’s call this one Bernie’s party. This is the party of Medicare for All, free college, breaking up the big banks and all the rest. It would be more aggressively redistributionist than Party One. Organized labor would be more oriented toward this party, although it would have many friends in the first party as well. Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez would be its stars, and Mr. Sanders or Ms. Warren might carry its presidential standard.
A number of mainstream liberals would find themselves torn between these two parties, but they’d have to choose one or the other, as there would be no room for three big parties of the left. I suspect many might go back and forth, depending on the issues of the moment and whom each party chose as its leader.
Party Three Now we get to the smaller parties. There’s always a Green Party in parliamentary systems. Indeed, we have one in this country, too, but our Green Party is irrelevant nationally. In a parliamentary system, though, the Green Party would have a handful of seats in Congress, as it does in many European parliaments. Some present-day Democrats — those who regard climate change as the most important issue facing the country and the world — would, in a parliamentary system, be Greens.
Party Four Given the diversity within this country and depth of passion that millions of people bring to these issues, it’s reasonable to think that there would be an “identitarian left” party populated by some number of African-Americans, Latinos and L.G.B.T. people. The logic of a parliamentary system is such that it would make sense for these groups to band together and use their handful of votes as leverage to win concessions from the larger parties.
One can envision maybe some other small parties — a party organized around gun control, say. But that would probably be the basic lineup on the broad left. Now, what about the right?
Party Five A white ethnonationalist party organized around opposition to immigration, low taxes, a strong military and traditional values. There are parties like this across Europe. And, um, while we’re at it, there’s one like it in the United States.
Party Six As Party Five would essentially be the Trumpist party, it seems likely that an anti-Trump party of the right would arise, committed to free trade and somewhat more modern attitudes toward, oh, race and the Constitution, for starters. This party would have numerous adherents among conservative pundits. Among actual politicians, however, the record suggests that the numbers would be exceedingly small.
As on the left, there might be a few offshoot parties. There might be a Second Amendment party; there might even be a white supremacist party, which rejected the cleansing euphemisms that most racists have learned to adopt. But these would be minuscule, rarely winning a single seat.
Now, let’s look back over this list. If I’m right, the Democrats would split into four parties, and the Republicans into two, although the second one would be tiny. In other words: The Trump-era Republican Party already is in essence a parliamentary party. This will be especially so in the next Congress, given the retirements of some of the last Republicans who could plausibly be called moderates (Charlie Dent of Pennsylvania) and the defeat of others (Mike Coffman of Colorado).
The Democrats, however, are an unruly bunch. There’s a lot they agree on in terms of broad principles — doing something about climate change, raising wages, expanding health care. But boy do they disagree on how to go about doing them. Some of these fights will inevitably define the 116th Congress. Medicare for All provides a perfect example. There are going to be perhaps 235 Democrats in the new Congress, and just over half that number has co-sponsored the Medicare for All bill. The other near-half is against.
Indeed, the Democrats’ battles aren’t even limited to being between its parliamentary factions. Ms. Pelosi has already survived two mutinies, both emanating from within Party One!
The upshot of all this? Democrats had better concentrate on the things that unite them: fighting voter suppression, addressing prescription drug costs (that’s small ball for those on the left, but they don’t disagree), investigating the Trump administration.
The Democrats will never be a party characterized by parliamentary discipline; unlike the Republicans, their constituencies are too heterogeneous. But both of their major factions owe it to their adherents, as we hurtle toward 2020, to keep the infighting to an absolute minimum.
Michael Tomasky is a columnist for The Daily Beast, editor of Democracy: A Journal of Ideas and a contributing opinion writer.