Every year, J. D. Power highlights the automobiles that retain the highest percentage of their original price after three years. But the vehicle that beats them all never makes the list.
This winner would seem an unlikely value champ. It looks much as it did 72 years ago, when it made its debut. It has a sparse half cubic foot of luggage space, and its base model sports an anemic 3.2 horsepower generating a top speed of 40 miles per hour. But there is a good reason it didn’t make the list. It’s not a car. It’s a scooter. Very specifically, a Vespa scooter.
Across all 24 classes of vehicles considered in the Resale Value Awards, average retention value for four-wheelers was 55.7 percent. For all Vespas it was 72.1 percent, according to data from J. D. Power, giving Vespa an edge by over 16 percentage points. With the exception of collectible vehicles, Vespa scooters hold their value better than anything else on the road, including other scooter and motorcycle brands.
Two Vespa models outpaced the rest of the line: the Sprint 150 and the GTS 300, which retain an average of 79 percent of their original value after three years. They beat the best cars, trucks and sport utility vehicles, including the overall winner, the Dodge Heavy Duty Ram 3500 (75 percent); the best compact premium sporty car leaders, the Porsche Cayman and Boxster (58.9 percent); and even the celebrated 911 (58.7 percent). They beat the large premium S.U.V. winner, the Cadillac Escalade (56 percent). They crushed the leading small car, the Ford Fiesta (43.2 percent).
One reason may be that Vespa holds a unique place in its market. While cars from Porsche, Land Rover or Mercedes might duke it out for premium buyers, the scooter business is different.
This isn’t strictly true. Honda offers the Metropolitan, Yamaha the Vino 50 and Genuine the Buddy, to name a few.
According to Genuine’s vice president for sales and operations, Trey Duren, all three of those brands outsell Vespa in the United States. All three are also less expensive than the Vespa. But none have achieved the Vespa cachet or retention value.
Traditionalists contend that even though maxis have step-through frames and small wheels — the hallmarks of a scooter — they are in a class all their own. “When you get into the maxi scooter, you’ve lost the scooter thing,” said Peter Lundgren, president of the Lambretta Club USA and a Vespa owner.
There are also budget imports, mostly from China, that make no pretension to luxury or retention value. While people who want a scooter will most likely buy a Vespa, Honda, Yamaha or Buddy, there are also people who simply need a scooter. They may be so economically pinched that it is the only roadworthy vehicle they can afford.
A respectable Chinese-made scooter will run less than $2,000 new, will get around 140 miles per gallon and will cost less than $100 a year in insurance. Many states require neither a driver’s license nor registration to ride the streets on a scooter with a 50cc or smaller motor.
As for retention value, there is none. “Most of those will end up in a dumpster,” said Colin Shattuck, author of “Scooters: Red Eyes, Whitewalls and Blue Smoke” and owner of Sportique Scooters in Colorado.
Vespa has stuck close to the aesthetic of its original 1946 debut, adding to its mystique. It also kept metal bodywork where competitors have used plastic.
The Vespa construction is distinct among modern scooters. It has a monocoque frame, which means the bodywork is the frame, not separate body panels attached to the frame as with other scooters. That makes it lighter and more rigid.
Piaggio, which makes the Vespa, acquired a reputation for reliability even though it quit importing new models to the United States between 1981 and 2000. (Some importers brought them in through 1986.) Because the scooters were still sold worldwide, parts remained reasonably easy to get. In contrast, many notable scooter companies, such as Lambretta and Cushman, went out of business, leaving owners to scrounge for parts.
The least expensive scooters are often no better. “You will have a problem with availability of parts, and repair shops don’t want to service them,” said Lenny Sims, who tracks the motorcycle business as vice president for specialty markets at J. D. Power.
Buying a new Vespa is not a low-cost venture. The most basic Primavera 50cc lists for $3,800. The special-edition Vespa 946 RED is the most expensive at $10,500. A portion of its price goes to RED, a charity founded by the U2 lead singer Bono to fight H.I.V. and AIDS in Africa.
On top of that are dealer fees. “At the two different Piaggio dealers here, it’s $700 minimum,” said Mr. Shattuck, who does not sell new Vespas. He said to expect $300 to $900 in fees. “Additional dealer profit is what it is, really,” he said.
