A small lizard is among the elite group of animals that race across the surface of water.
The Asian house gecko can move across water at great speed by using a half-running, half-swimming motion.
How nice it must be to skate on a pond when it’s not even frozen. Lots of insects can do it, like these water striders. Since they’re so small, surface tension holds them up. Bigger creatures, like these grebes, rely on muscle power. They slap the water with their feet and follow through with a paddle-like push. The famous basilisk lizards do the same thing. And now, we can add the Asian house gecko to this elite group. Field researchers in Singapore discovered that geckos, too, can run across water when they’re scared, as you can see in this rare footage. Amazingly, they go just as fast on the water as they do on land. Researchers tested the mechanics of this motion in a lab at the University of California, Berkeley. What they found is that geckos slapped the water with all four feet, trapping pockets of air. That helps with the follow-through stroke as they push forward. Their tail also undulates like a snake or an alligator swimming. You only see that from above. These two engines — feet and tail — raise the gecko’s body high enough above the surface so that it hydroplanes. The gecko’s movement also depends on surface tension. Look what happened when the researchers added soap to the water to reduce that tension. The geckos floundered, struggling to stay above the surface. They could still move along, but only at about half-speed. It was too much for some of them. They just went on strike and stopped altogether — proving that geckos are not only fast, but smart.
The Asian house gecko can move across water at great speed by using a half-running, half-swimming motion.CreditCredit...Pauline Jennings, UC Berkeley. Courtesy of PolyPEDAL Lab, UC Berkeley.
Many insects can skate, stride or whirl around on the surface of the water. But larger animals usually have to swim.
There are a few exceptions. The famed Basilisk lizard zips along, slapping down its feet so fast that it seems to be outrunning the possibility of sinking.
A few bird species, like Western grebes, eiders and mallards run along the water as a prelude to taking off.
That seemed to be about it, until researchers found Asian house geckos, in Singapore, apparently running across the surface of water.
They weren’t fully upright, like the basilisk lizards, but they definitely weren’t swimming. It looked like most of their body was above the water line, and they were going fast.
Their water speed was “virtually indistinguishable from their land running speed,” according to Jasmine A. Nirody.
Dr. Nirody, who will start research at Rockefeller University this coming year, and Judy Jinn, were graduate students in the lab of Robert J. Full at the University of California, Berkeley, when they decided to subject the geckos’ water running to greater scrutiny. They built a tank, acquired some house geckos and used video to document the geckos’ water running in a controlled environment so that it could be mathematically analyzed.
As they and their colleagues reported in Current Biology, geckos use both running and swimming motions.
They run on all four legs, slapping the water with their feet the way grebes and basilisks do, finishing the leg movements with paddle-like strokes that help raise most of their body above the water surface and push them forward.
They also swim, using their tails the way alligators do, in an undulation that can only be seen from above.
Also, their skin is very slippery, or hydrophobic, and that helps their bodies hydroplane as the feet and tail power them forward.
The researchers also showed that surface tension was important. When they added soap to the water in the test tank to reduce surface tension, the geckos floundered, moving at a much slower speed and failing to get enough of the body above water to hydroplane.
The soapy water struggles were apparently exhausting, Dr. Nirody said, because some of the geckos just stopped, as if the effort was just too much.
Some actually sank to the bottom of the tank and stayed underwater. They can hold their breath for quite a while, Dr. Nirody said. She speculated that this behavior might be an alternative to the fast running, which seems to be a response to fear.
If you can’t outrun them, save your strength and hide on the bottom. Smart geckos.