“I wouldn’t be as big as I am today without chocolate milk,” Mr. Perdue told reporters in May 2017, while discussing his plan to relax Obama-era school lunch rules. It was one of his first days on the job.
This week, the United States Department of Agriculture announced its final plans to lower nutrition standards for grains, flavored milks and sodium in school cafeterias that were part of the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010 and that Michelle Obama, the former first lady, had advocated.
Not all food service administrators have problems with the current rules. Ann Cooper, the food service director for Boulder Valley Schools, in Colorado, said the district served only whole grain-rich foods and never received complaints.
It is hard for many students to even tell when foods like tortillas are made with some whole grain flour, said Ms. Cooper, who is also the president of the Chef Ann Foundation, which provides grants to help schools serve healthier food.
“The kids told me that the flavored milk, which was limited to nonfat, was not as tasty as they would like,” Mr. Perdue said at the May 2017 news conference.
Mr. Villarreal said when flavored milk was removed from the menu, milk consumption did drop temporarily until students became accustomed to the unflavored version. “If I can educate the kids to drink nonflavored milk, then we’re doing a service for those kids,” he said.
The School Nutrition Association, an advocacy organization that represents school-food professionals, cheered the new regulations in a news release on Thursday, praising the Trump administration for its flexibility with the standards. The group counts many of the country’s largest food companies among its backers.
Karen Perry Stillerman, a senior analyst with the Union of Concerned Scientists, said it was unclear why the Trump administration would backtrack when schools were in good standing with the nutritional goals. A 2016 news release from the U.S.D.A. said that more than 99 percent of schools in the country reported that they were meeting the Obama-era standards.
Ms. Stillerman said she would prefer that the government offer extra help to schools that were not meeting the nutritional requirements rather than lowering the standards across the country.
