The Conceptualist pioneer Lawrence Weiner and the London designer Jonathan Ellery met by chance in a Berlin bar. They wound up with a new book. But it was not a soft landing.
Mr. Weiner is one of the fathers of Conceptual art, which, beginning in the 1960s, attempted to turn its back on object-making and instead present ideas themselves, in the most evanescent of forms, as art works. His foundational 1968 statement helped set the terms of the movement, or at least the terms of the debate over its terms:“1. The artist may construct the piece.
“2. The piece may be fabricated.
“3. The piece need not be built.
If you think of this three-point proposition as the Father, Son and Holy Ghost of the Conceptualist creed, Mr. Weiner’s work has often existed in Holy Ghost mode. Works like “An Object Tossed From One Country to Another” (1969) or “Stacks of Severed Trees Laid Beside a Fissure in the Earth” (2007) remain purely linguistic sculpture, verbal descriptions of actions or states not enacted or embodied; an object is not tossed; trees are not severed.
The highly anticipated book, “Here It Is, Here It Aint,” to be published in January by Browns Editions, is an elliptical 68-page waltz of words and images that shimmies poetically away from attempts to elucidate narrative or metaphor, though it may be offering some considerations about the present political climate. (Mr. Weiner’s phrase “With a Lateral Move Forward,” in bright red lettering, is the first thing the reader sees.) It is the first collaboration in many years by Mr. Weiner, who has previously made books with fellow artists like Edward Ruscha and John Baldessari and writers like the French scholar Luc Vezin.
Mr. Ellery recently visited Mr. Weiner’s studio in Manhattan’s West Village. These are edited excerpts from their conversation.
RANDY KENNEDY At the time you met Lawrence in Berlin, did you know who he was?
JONATHAN ELLERY No idea. Just the other guy at the bar. A perfect way of meeting, really.
LAWRENCE WEINER We got to know each other and we kept talking. And I must say I like to work with people who are good at what they do, who know how to do things. I relate it to brushing your teeth before you go out on a date.
ELLERY [Laughs.] There’s an analogy!
WEINER I mean there’s a dignity and respect that should be involved in making something. In getting it right. Making the design suit the gravity of what you’re trying to put out.
KENNEDY You’ve collaborated often on books, but this is the first time with someone who hails primarily from the design world.
WEINER People often see art and design as very, very different worlds, but I disagree. Every time you make a work of art and have to show it to somebody, there are theatrics involved. Theatrics require a sense of design.
ELLERY: Lawrence has always been well loved in the design world but mostly, I think, because he works with type. It suits designers. They’re not thinking much deeper. They just like the aesthetic: ‘Oh, it’s type!’ But for me, Lawrence was the only person I’d ever worked with who had done more books than I had. His team was as sharp as me and my team about ink and paper and binding, about smell and feel.
WEINER Which was lucky. But I think we’re missing the point of what’s worthwhile to talk about. It’s not about the specifics. It’s about the concept. Why would you throw a very talented designer and, it turns out, a reasonably talented artist together in the same pot? It’s what we thought we were going to get that interested me.
WEINER We’re stuck in an aesthetic now in the art world where people have the answer and then try to rationalize the question. We did this in order to enter something into the culture in a way that the culture has to adapt in order to use it. Well, that’s what art should do!
KENNEDY Do you think the book feels like a document of its time?
WEINER I don’t really know what ‘a document of its time’ means. I think of this as two people who have a tendency to tell the truth and of the possibility that truth might collect. I’m very pleased we got a book out of this. I thought we were going to lose our friendship in the middle, if you want to know the truth. It didn’t look good.
ELLERY It’s not easy to put two strong sensibilities together, even if the people tend to get on with each other.
WEINER This was about making each one of these pages into the right thing without having to explain it. You miss it sometimes, you don’t see it the same way. What can you do?
ELLERY There’s a page of mine in the book with writing that says ‘A soft landing is not a given.’ And it wasn’t. It’s wonderful to have this book in the world, but it was quite rough along the way. As I guess it should be. But I wouldn’t recommend it to anyone. Would you, Lawrence?
WEINER Oh, God no. Not unless you’re a masochist.