Illustrated. 767 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $40.
This is a superb biography. Yet it begins in the most inauspicious place. It is 1964, and Saul Bellow has just become absurdly rich and famous. His struggle, doubt, grit, immigrant story, artistic dreams — all were told in Volume 1 of Zachary Leader’s biography, “To Fame and Fortune.” Here in Volume 2, “Love and Strife,” the novel “Herzog” is published on the very first page and reaches “No. 1 on the best-seller list, supplanting John le Carré’s ‘The Spy Who Came In From the Cold.’” Never again would Bellow, about to turn 50 years old, lack for wealth, power, awards or flunkies to stand by him, ready to take his coat and do his bidding. The temptation for someone in his position was to become an insufferable, spoiled monster.
And Bellow quickly gave in to temptation. “Bellow’s bad temper in the late ’60s was by no means directed exclusively at would-be biographers, radical students and aggrieved wives,” Leader begins a sentence, apologetically, on just Page 65. Bellow had so many targets to attack, whether insulting them face to face or in blistering letters or put-downs circulated through intermediaries. One of his favorite one-liners ran: “Let’s you and him fight.” The most salient recipients of Bellow’s bad temper in this biography were his three sons, each from a different mother — the oldest 21 when this volume starts, the youngest just 1 year old and about to be abandoned after yet another divorce.
This is a social or “crowd” biography of a quietly provocative kind. It is brilliantly calibrated to explore Bellow’s own central theme as a novelist: the conflict between solitary genius and the constraints of community. The latter, Bellow ambivalently portrayed in his novels as the “potato love” of the family, the “humanity bath” of the streets, and the rough-edged, criminal temptations of the 20th-century city.
The vein that successfully keeps one focused on Bellow, and enchanted, is the novelist’s excerpted prose. It knocks you back on your heels. Not just in the novels and stories, but in letters to every sort of addressee, from intimates, to fans, to politicians, Bellow’s prose is electric.
I have always found Bellow’s artfulness to cloy over the length of his longest novels. He made himself a fiction writer by force of mind, hard work and sheer will, plus study of the greats. He remained a lifelong student of the highest caliber: co-teaching with philosophers, metabolizing esoteric doctrines, even directing the Committee on Social Thought at the University of Chicago. (By all accounts he was an elegant, sensible, fair administrator and exceptionally respectful boss to all employees and subordinates.) The level of planning and strain in his greatness, especially once the Bellow “voice” is set (by “Herzog,” surely), can be fatiguing.
Leader finds Bellow out in his letters, unpublished manuscripts and published books, and pulls gems into the light. The surprise and treat of this book is how much Bellow stayed a master, sentence by sentence, every time he picked up a pen.
Leader goes back to investigate the truth of each influence, with eye-popping results. He digs up the reality behind the vile young radical who taunts the professor-hero in “Mr. Sammler’s Planet” and the racially charged Chicago murder case in “The Dean’s December,” and sits down to interview the source originals for minor characters.
It is given to Bellow’s granddaughter Juliet to put her finger on the element in his psychology that seems to have dominated Bellow’s character and complicated so many friendships and relations. “He was in many ways a very thoughtful and kind person, but I think his need to be the top dog, the best, was very deep.” The energy of one-upping his close friends, surviving them only to write affectionately about them in novels, let Bellow continue to produce new masterpieces despite the cosseting upholstery of his fame and fortune, all the way from “Humboldt’s Gift” (1975), about dead Delmore Schwartz, to “Ravelstein” (2000), about dead Allan Bloom, published when Bellow was 85.
This in the end is what wins one over to Bellow, in Leader’s portrayal, despite his tyrannies and impressive capacity for giving offense: how many individuals he held together (even when pushing them away), how much sociability he ruminated for art.
