John C. Reilly knows the value of a great partnership, and since September he’s doubled up in “Ralph Breaks the Internet” (with Sarah Silverman), “The Sisters Brothers” (Joaquin Phoenix) and “Holmes & Watson” (Will Ferrell).
Now comes “Stan & Ollie,” opening Friday, Dec. 28 in New York and Los Angeles before a national rollout on Jan. 25. In it, Reilly plays the outsize Oliver Hardy to Steve Coogan’s diminutive Stan Laurel, snagging a Golden Globe nomination for best performance by an actor in a motion picture, musical or comedy.
“Stan & Ollie” has plenty of both — the classic slapstick, the sweetly zany song-and-dance routines — as it follows the legendary duo through variety halls in 1953 Britain while the men try to jump-start their stalled careers. And their bickering wives (Shirley Henderson and Nina Arianda) say what their husbands dare not.
Jan. 4-12; winterjazzfest.com.
It’s never hard to find jazz in New York City, where one night’s worth of bookings can range from classic bebop to the most outré fringes of the avant-garde. That might explain the sheer breadth of Manhattan’s largest and most forward-looking jazz festival, the Winter Jazzfest, which has steadily expanded steadily its founding as a one-day, one-location concert in 2005.
This year’s edition supplements its two-day marathon on Jan. 11 and 12 (over 100 artists across 11 downtown venues) with a half one on Jan. 5, featuring a comparatively manageable six stages. The festival’s 2019 artist-in-residence, the genre-agnostic singer, bassist and bandleader Meshell Ndegeocello, will perform during both the full and half marathons. She will also helm a Prince tribute concert at Le Poisson Rouge (Jan. 4) and play from her own catalog at the intimate club NuBlu 151 (Jan. 10).
Jan. 1; Netflix.com.
Haven’t heard of Marie Kondo and her mission to “spark joy” by decluttering the world? You must have been buried under a mountain of stuff.
Now, timed perfectly to resolutions season, Netflix is unveiling “Tidying Up With Marie Kondo” on New Year’s Day. In eight episodes, Kondo tutors Americans at pivotal points in their lives — a new marriage, a baby’s arrival, an empty nest, a husband’s death — in her KonMari Method, which advocates simplifying, organizing and storing in five categories (clothing, books, paper, miscellaneous, which she calls komono, and sentimental items). Then there’s folding, folding, folding, accompanied by crying, crying, crying.
Jan. 4-13, americanrealness.com.
The dancers aren’t the only ones on the brink of exhaustion by the end of this jam-packed festival, which started 10 years ago as the brainchild of Thomas Benjamin Snapp Pryor. Mercifully, it’s a good tired.
Through June 23, 2019; mcny.org.
Don Freeman is most famous for his 1968 children’s book “Corduroy,” about a lonely department-store teddy bear finding a friend. The story is sweet but deeply melancholy, and Freeman’s illustrations, which combine saturated colors with a muscular line, have a beguiling gravity.
Jan. 3-Feb. 9, romanticcentury.org.
The great Italian conductor Arturo Toscanini was in his 60s when a gang of fascists assaulted him in 1931 Bologna for refusing to play their anthem. With Benito Mussolini in power at home and Adolf Hitler ascendant in Germany, Toscanini looked on in horror as European nations codified bigotry into law and hurtled toward war. Hitler once sent him a fawning letter, hoping in vain to lure him to perform at the Bayreuth Festival. Mussolini wiretapped Toscanini’s hotel room and, overhearing him decry anti-Jewish measures, had his passport taken away.
Jan. 3-5; nyphil.org.
The conductor Paavo Jarvi is a mainstay at the New York Philharmonic: This March marks the 20th anniversary of his first appearance with the orchestra, and last season he led a bracing account of Sibelius and Rachmaninoff. This week, Jarvi fills in last-minute, as the hotly anticipated debut of conductor Mirga Grazinyte-Tyla was postponed because of the birth of her first child.
