Come on. You know you don’t really want to leave.
Ms. Collier is a writer.
COAT Please don’t make me go outside again today.
 Anyway you already caught up with all your friends through me this week. And whatever attractive stranger you think you’ll meet at that party is already on this dating app. You don’t have to work up courage, tactfully figure out if someone’s single, or overcome any social anxiety to approach me. Besides, love is fleeting and romantic dissatisfaction is mostly inevitable, but technology is forever.
WINDOW Dang, it’s really coming down out there.
COUCH You sure you want to get off me? I’m really warm and comfortable, and I pair well with hot cocoa, which I know you have in the pantry.
PANTRY Oh, I’ve got all sorts of cold weather snacks that pair well with couches in addition to hot cocoa. Cider doughnuts, cinnamon sticks to steep in stove-heated cider, popcorn, maple cookies, a variety of herbal teas, the ingredients to a hot toddy and mulled wine.
TV I’d like to point out that you haven’t watched me in a while. There’s plenty to binge.
FRIDGE Do you need to make food for the week? Well, neither of your roommates is here. You could have the whole kitchen to yourself and listen to a podcast while cooking! You love doing that. There’s a new investigative piece on public school systems waiting for you, and it is informative.
FIREPLACE I was made for nights like this.
DRESSER If we’re really going through with the party idea, we have to be strategic. Double layering might help on the way over, but then you’ll be too hot at the party. In fact, you’re doomed to either be too cold on the way there or too hot once you arrive, right? There’s no perfect outfit for a party in the middle of winter. We go through this every year.
MIRROR You know what the snow and wind’s going to do to your hair.
BLANKET That’s it, dear. Stay right where you are. You can see your friends in three months when it’s warm outside again.
Amy Collier (@Amy_Corp) is a writer in Boston.