The crossword editor, Will Shortz, announces new rates for crossword constructors.
When I became the Times crossword editor in 1993, the payment rate for contributors was $40 for a weekday puzzle and $150 for a Sunday. These amounts were embarrassingly low, but they were in line with what other “elite” publications were paying. Traditionally, crossword construction has not been a very lucrative field.
Over the years, these rates have increased numerous times. The Times currently pays $300 to $450 for weekday puzzles and $1,000 to $1,200 for Sundays. These are by far the best rates of any open market for puzzles, but they still don’t truly reflect the time, effort and skill involved in producing high-quality work.
The two-tiered scale began several years ago. Its purpose is to reward the most reliable contributors and to encourage them to contribute more often. It’s also a recognition that, generally speaking, puzzles from regular contributors require less editorial time and effort.
Unlike many other publications, The Times maintains an open submissions policy, which means that anyone can send in a puzzle for review. (Our specifications are here.) Joel Fagliano, Sam Ezersky and I look at every submission, and everyone gets a response.
The competition is fierce. We get 10 or more submissions for every one that we accept.
The range of contributors is broad. In my 25 years at The Times the ages of published constructors have varied from 13 to 101. Thirty-seven teenagers have had puzzles published. The average age of contributors today is probably in the upper 30s. Published constructors have hailed from 47 states plus D.C., six Canadian provinces and nine foreign countries. Only about 15 percent of published constructors nowadays are women — which is about the same as the percentage of submissions that come from women. We’d like to increase that.
On behalf of everyone on The Times’s games team, I’d like to thank all the contributors for their puzzles, which provide so much pleasure to so many people.
And if you’re a crossword constructor who has something special, send it in. We’d like to see it.