In her memoir “Slow Days, Fast Company” (1977), Eve Babitz described the joys of “4/60 air conditioning,” which is what you get when you’re on the freeway with all four windows down and you’re traveling at 60 miles per hour.
The best of Babitz’s writing keeps the windows cranked down, too, and she is always moving at speed. The recent rediscovery and reissue of her books — her memoirs are especially resonant — has been a deep pleasure to witness.
Lili Anolik helped jump-start the Babitz revival five years ago when she published a warm retrospective of the author’s life in Vanity Fair. Anolik is back now with “Hollywood’s Eve: Eve Babitz and the Secret History of L.A.,” an expansion of that profile.
This is awkward. When did “logic” and “facts” and “firsthand accounts” get such a bad rap? (Did I miss a memo?) Anolik makes a show of tossing her car’s steering wheel out the window at the first turn.
The resulting book is good and bad in almost equal measure. It’s good because Anolik has an instinctive grasp of why Babitz mattered as a writer and because, despite her apparent protestations to the contrary, she’s done her homework. “Hollywood’s Eve” fills in many of the gaps in our knowledge of Babitz’s life and work.
It’s bad because it’s so breezily written, as if willing itself to become a work of what used to be called the New Journalism, that “4/60” does not begin to cover it. Reading it, you feel you’re taking part in three conversations, two on call-waiting.
Anolik’s book is filled with interjections such as “I’ve got to break in here, say something” and “Hang on a second” and “Wait, I want to withdraw that statement” and “Now, look sharp because things are about to take a turn for the funky.” Her insights deserve better than this flip tone.
What “Hollywood’s Eve” has going for it on every page is its subject’s utter refusal to be dull. “I think I’m going to be an adventuress,” Babitz reports saying as a child to her mother, in “Eve’s Hollywood” (1974), her first memoir. “Is it all right?” It was, and it is.
When she was barely out of her teens, Babitz posed for a now-famous photograph of herself playing chess with Marcel Duchamp. He was clothed; she was naked. Babitz was beautiful and wild and opinionated.
Babitz was 28 and approaching burnout (she termed it “squalid overboogie”) when she began to write in earnest. With the help of Joan Didion, a friend, she sold an essay to Rolling Stone in 1971. Babitz being Babitz, she slept with Grover Lewis, her Rolling Stone editor, and later with the editor of her first book.
Didion’s intervention is interesting because it’s among this book’s contentions that Babitz’s literary career was a reaction to that of her famous friend. Where Didion took a fundamentally dark view of Los Angeles, Babitz had a feel for her hometown’s charms and celebrated them.
Babitz had affairs with Warren Zevon and Annie Leibovitz and Steve Martin. (She advised Martin to wear white suits.) She once wrote a letter to Joseph Heller, the author of “Catch-22,” that contained two sentences: “I am a stacked 18-year-old blonde on Sunset Boulevard. I am also a writer.” She spent the entirety of her first book advance on a big meal at her favorite restaurant, Musso & Frank Grill, ordering the caramel custard for everyone in the house.
Her books — there were memoirs, and then novels — never sold very well. She did too much cocaine. She wrote a screenplay for the Eagles, and when they delayed paying her she threatened to kill herself. (They paid.) She got into Alcoholics Anonymous in the early ’80s.
Babitz suffered third-degree burns over much of her body in a freak accident in 1997, when she tried to light a cigar in her car, a VW Bug that Steve Martin had bought her, and her skirt and pantyhose caught fire. She essentially disappeared from public life. She is now 75. Anolik tracked her down in Los Angeles, where she listens to right-wing talk radio and mostly lives like a recluse.
In “Slow Days, Fast Company,” Babitz observed that “the best way to approach anything was to be introduced by the right person.” Anolik’s book succeeds in its primary mission: It sends you racing to read the work of Eve Babitz.