
In the era of Google Maps, one might be tempted to believe that there are no undiscovered corners of the Earth.
But a cave with an opening that can accommodate the Statue of Liberty, and a roaring river running through it, has been discovered in a remote area of British Columbia in Wells Gray Provincial Park, about 280 miles northeast of Vancouver.
“As far as North America goes, this is a honking big cave,” said John Pollack, a career caver and governor of the Royal Canadian Geographical Society, which last week announced the cave’s existence.
The cave was discovered in early spring when a group of biologists and researchers conducting a mountain caribou census first noticed what looked like a black hole on the snow-covered slope.
The helicopter pilot sent photos to Dr. Catherine Hickson, a geologist who worked for decades on the Geological Survey of Canada and conducted her Ph.D. research in the park. Dr. Hickson quietly assembled a team of experts, including Mr. Pollack, and raised about 5,000 Canadian dollars (including some of her own money) to make a site visit.
But first, they had to wait for the winter snow to melt.
From left to right: John Pollack, Ken Lancour, Catherine Hickson, Lee Hollis, Tod Haughton.
On Sept. 9, a five-person team took a 50-minute helicopter ride from Clearwater, Canada, to the northeast corner of the park, a rugged area that has almost never seen humans.
The exact location of the cave has not been divulged, partly to discourage Instagram tourists and amateur climbers.
Mr. Hollis, circled in red in the photo above, is standing to the right of the pit.
The opening of the pit, called a swallet, is unusually large: spanning about 330 feet in length and almost 200 feet across.
Using a laser beam, the team measured the depth at about 450 feet. But they believe it to be much deeper.
Its other distinguishing feature is a gushing river formed by melting glaciers above. It exits the cave about 1.3 miles away through another opening, called a resurgence.
Mr. Pollack took hundreds of photographs from various heights in the helicopter and stitched them together to create the 3D rendering above.
“Caves are hard to measure because they’re so irregular,” said Mr. Pollack, who has been surveying them since the late 1960s.
Mr. Hollis was the person on the September expedition who descended into the cave. He carried about 50 pounds of gear, including a hulking battery-powered hammer drill to set bolts into the rock and about 500 feet of rope.
“In my 30-plus years of caving, this is by far the biggest pit that I’ve had the privilege to descend,” he said.
According to Dr. Hickson, the cave is most likely tens of thousands of years old, and the rocks are hundreds of millions of years old.
They’re what’s known as “stripe karst,” which means layers of marble, schist and quartzite that, over millenniums of pressure and heat, have fused together to form a stripelike pattern.
Mr. Hollis descended about 280 feet into the maw of the cave as the cascade roared. Because the cave is in a shaded area, the bottom of the pit was full of last winter’s snow, creating a misty haze.
The September expedition took about 10 hours. The team is planning to make at least two more forays between now and 2020.
“As a geologist, there aren’t necessarily a lot of things we do that excite people,” said Dr. Hickson.
But there is a mystery here, she said.
