WASHINGTON — President Trump has often bragged about having his pick of only the best people to serve in his administration.
Being publicly rejected by his first choice for chief of staff — and embarking on a very public search for someone else — has made Mr. Trump’s claim harder to back up.
A shortlist of last-ditch possibilities has emerged, including family-vetted officials like Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, and Robert Lighthizer, the United States trade representative, but only one possibility — Representative Mark Meadows, the hard-right Republican congressman from North Carolina who is so far not quite inside the Trump children’s circle of trust — has voiced interest.
After Nick Ayers, the Georgia political operative who was the president’s top pick, declined the job — something of a plot twist in a presidency notorious for its episodic cliffhangers — Mr. Trump is without a Plan B. Several of his aides expressed frustration that months of intense campaigning to replace John F. Kelly — an effort led by Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner, the president’s elder daughter and son-in-law — resulted in yet another chaotic staffing scramble in a White House splintered by factions and rife with turnover.
Mr. Trump faces a week marked by negotiations with Congress over a possible government shutdown and difficult negotiations over the funding for his long-promised border wall. But on Monday, according to several people close to the administration, the president was more focused on his success in dispatching Mr. Kelly than on his anger at Mr. Ayers.
But for Trump family members, the debacle amounts to a survivable setback. And the couple are now back to assessing a last-ditch list of possible candidates.
Others who know Mr. Trump hinted that the president dislikes being embarrassed, and that the abruptness of Mr. Ayers’s rejection might not have worn off. After all, aides to Mr. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence had been preparing as recently as Sunday morning for Mr. Ayers to take the job, and for another aide, Jarrod Agen, to temporarily assume Mr. Ayers’s current duties as Mr. Pence’s chief of staff.
To make room for Mr. Ayers, Mr. Trump, who famously avoids one-on-one interpersonal conflict, had been trying for a while to pull the trigger on firing Mr. Kelly. Famous for the “You’re fired!” catchphrase and also for hating confrontation, Mr. Trump had looked for others to do the work for him last week — even attempting to arrange for Mr. Ayers to fire Mr. Kelly — according to three people familiar with the events.
Finally, Mr. Trump persuaded Mr. Pence and Mr. Ayers to join him in hashing things out with Mr. Kelly in the presidential residence on Friday night. But instead of sticking to the plan to let Mr. Kelly leave with dignity, which Mr. Ayers and others in the White House had urged the president to do, Mr. Trump decided to announce it himself on Saturday.
Finding a replacement for Mr. Kelly is in many ways just the latest staffing snare in a White House that has struggled to fill even low-ranking jobs. Staff turnover for senior aides, according to the Brookings Institution, sits at 62 percent.
But the chief of staff job is often described by those who have had it as the worst in Washington, even when times are good.
Mr. Mnuchin is in a similar position. He has earned the confidence of the president and his children from his time on the 2016 presidential campaign, and his name has been floated repeatedly as Mr. Kelly’s successor. But a person familiar with Mr. Mnuchin’s thinking said that he was more interested in keeping the job he has now.
Mr. Meadows, the chairman of the conservative House Freedom Caucus, does not enjoy the same confidence of the Trump children that Mr. Mnuchin does. But he is the only person to express public interest in replacing Mr. Kelly.
After keeping silent much of the day, Mr. Meadows told reporters on Monday evening that he was not “campaigning” for the job but would be “interested” if an offer were made.
Asked by a reporter about the infighting and “constant shivving” among White House staff, Mr. Meadows unexpectedly broke into laughter.
Mr. Lighthizer, another replacement option, has a good relationship with Mr. Kushner, West Wing officials said, but he has little experience in the type of administrative duties that the job would require.
Other options range from the possible — including Mick Mulvaney, the director of the Office of Management and Budget — to the unlikely, including Chris Christie, the former New Jersey governor and head of the Trump transition team, who angered Mr. Kushner for sending his father to jail while he was a federal prosecutor.
Mr. Trump, who enjoys embarrassing reporters and planting his own information about staff machinations, has mentioned several other names. They included Matthew G. Whitaker, the current acting attorney general who nearly every West Wing staff member has said could not be a realistic option, but who Mr. Trump likes personally.
Some White House aides made the same point about Mr. Ayers, who has never faced extensive scrutiny of his finances or his previous political work. They said that those questions were almost certain to come if he ascended to the higher job.
That included not just his personal fortune — worth somewhere from $12.2 million to $54.8 million — but also his tenure as executive director of the Republican Governors Association and working for Eric Greitens, the former governor of Missouri, who resigned in disgrace after a woman accused him of physically abusing her during a nonconsensual relationship.
Mr. Kushner wants Mr. Ayers to take over running the “super PAC” backing the president, which people close to Mr. Trump believes needs the kinds of fund-raising boost that Mr. Ayers can provide. Such a move would keep him in the Trump orbit, which Mr. Trump’s children in the White House want.
Mr. Kelly, meanwhile, is said to be furious with Ms. Trump and Mr. Kushner. One senior administration official said that Mr. Kelly was known to have kept written notes about Mr. Kushner and Ms. Trump and the things that they had done or requested, which he conspicuously left on his desk in view of his staff.
Mr. Trump, who was said to be distrustful of Mr. Kelly’s personnel judgment, will not be consulting Mr. Kelly on his successor, people close to him said. Still, Mr. Kelly returned to the White House in his role on Monday, and attended a meeting with the president.