LOS ANGELES — “Mary Poppins” was the first film the director Rob Marshall saw as a boy, so when Disney approached him about directing a sequel, the prospect was exciting — and intimidating.
Although Marshall has won many awards for direction and choreography for feature films and television specials, he had never worked in animation. He built a team under the leadership of the veteran Disney/Pixar writer Jim Capobianco. Working with a small group of artists in the Bay Area, Capobianco prepared preliminary storyboards for the sequence.
He presented them to Marshall, the writers David Magee and John DeLuca, the composer Marc Shaiman and others in the Hyperion Bungalow, a relic of the 1930s Disney studio that had been moved to the company’s Burbank headquarters. As everyone wanted to recapture the feeling of the original film, it felt right to begin planning the sequence using actual drawings rather than computer images.
The director Rob Marshall narrates a sequence from the film that mixes live action with animation.
Combining the media was a technique Walt Disney used when he first came to national prominence in the mid-1920s with his short “Alice” comedies, which placed a live-action little girl within an animated setting. Although film technology has advanced enormously since then, the crew of the new film, “Mary Poppins Returns,” still faced problems integrating the media seamlessly.
The animators strive to create convincing performances for their characters — who have to react to the live actors’ actions. For example, engineering a scene so an actor and an animated character touch requires almost microscopic precision: If anything is out of place, the drawn and live elements will seem to slide over each other, spoiling the illusion that they’re sharing a space.
Making the live actors look at home in the cartoon world was essential to the sequence, and artists from all the departments worked synergistically.
The music hall scene was the first sequence the filmmakers shot. Marshall edited it while the rest of the filming was going on, to give the animators time to draw the other characters.
James Baxter, an animator whose first job at Disney was on the live action/animation combination film “Who Framed Roger Rabbit,” said the footage of the reference dancers was helpful.
If Marshall worried about matching the standard Walt Disney had set in the original “Mary Poppins,” the animators knew that the cartoon sequences had largely been drawn by Milt Kahl, Ollie Johnston and Frank Thomas, three of Disney’s “Nine Old Men,” whose work remains the gold standard of animation, even in the age of CGI.
