HAWTHORNE, Calif. — Fed up with Southern California vehicle snarls, Elon Musk set out to solve the persistent urban irritant: the traffic. But rather than build atop the highway system, where his Tesla cars travel, or in the sky, home to his SpaceX rockets, he sought an answer under his feet: tunnels.
On Tuesday, Mr. Musk unveiled the first mile-long stretch of his underground vision of a transit system in Hawthorne, a suburb of 90,000 people about 15 miles southwest of Los Angeles. It is the home of both SpaceX and his tunneling enterprise, called the Boring Company.
But the promotional event, which attracted hundreds of people who lined up to see the tunnel, fell short of earlier promises of a system that could transport up to 16 people at a time in electric-powered pods. Mr. Musk said he had abandoned that concept in favor of a system using more conventional passenger vehicles.
Angie Reyes English, a former member of the Hawthorne City Council, was among the first visitors to go through the tunnel. She said she had voted for the project and was glad to see the result.
The entrance to the tunnel sits across the street from the SpaceX headquarters and the Hawthorne Municipal Airport, next to a single-family residence and behind some storefront-style buildings.
Test rides on Tuesday featured Tesla Model X electric cars that were lowered on a circular panel to a lighted pathway several stories underground that is wide enough for a single vehicle. The concrete walls are painted white, with a single fluorescent bar on the ceiling that lights up blue or green throughout the tunnel’s length.
A pair of clamps attached to the Tesla’s front wheels keeps the car on the track as the vehicle moves under its own power. The company says speeds of 150 miles per hour will be possible, though the test run was far slower.
Until now, the company has used standard tunneling equipment, but it expects to roll out newly engineered technology as its efforts continue. Mr. Musk said about $10 million was spent on the first mile of the system, which took about a year to complete, largely because of hurdles with permits and licenses.
But costs are likely to rise. Subway tunneling elsewhere in the world can cost $1 billion a mile or more; Mr. Musk has said that figure must be reduced by a factor of 10 to make his system viable on a larger scale.
Even then, the Hawthorne tunnel is at best a proof of concept. To make such a system extensive enough to serve one of the world’s biggest metropolitan areas, with private funding, seems a herculean proposition.
One hurdle may be to convince urban planners that it is a practical way of easing the traffic crush.
“We’ve never built our way out of congestion,” Mr. Moore said. “I think there are cheaper ways to provide better transportation for large numbers of people.” For example, Mr. Moore said managing highway traffic with tolls or other economic policies could help reduce congestion.
The tunnel was first expected to be more of a mass-transit system, but that prospect seems gone with the decision not to use the 16-passenger pods.
The system that Mr. Musk proposes for Los Angeles, called a loop, is distinct from the transportation mode known as a hyperloop — something he and others are also developing. The hyperloop uses a vacuum to reduce friction to achieve speeds up to 600 m.p.h., while the loop does not require that technology because it is designed for slower speeds and shorter distances.
“The loop is a step toward hyperloop,” Mr. Musk said.
Richard Branson’s Virgin Group is also developing a hyperloop, called Virgin Hyperloop One. The venture has built a test track in the Nevada desert and is in talks to build a line connecting Kansas City and St. Louis.
Mr. Musk said his concepts had attracted significant attention from cities across the country, and he defended tunneling against criticism that it might be disruptive to neighborhoods. “You cannot see, hear or feel tunnel construction,” Mr. Musk said.
Last month, however, the company dropped plans for a tunnel in West Los Angeles in settling an environmental lawsuit brought by neighborhood groups. Mr. Musk said that the tunnel was no longer needed and that the company was focusing on other projects.
In addition to its efforts in the Los Angeles area, the Boring Company is proposing lines in Chicago and the Washington-Baltimore corridor. The company raised $112.5 million in capital earlier this year, with more than 90 percent coming from Mr. Musk, whose net worth has been estimated at more than $20 billion.
The Boring Company is still determining what its fares will be but says they will be comparable to those in other mass-transit systems, or cheaper. Mr. Musk said passengers not riding in their own cars might be transported in vehicles owned by the Boring Company for about $1 per ride.
