ROME — Things started going downhill for Pope Francis this year on a plane returning from a trip to Chile. In a demonstration of remarkable tone deafness to the issue of clerical sex abuse — and to the media environment in which he operates — the pope doubled down on accusations of calumny against survivors of clerical sexual abuse.
Standing next to the pontiff as he spoke that day in January 2018 was Greg Burke, the Vatican communications director, whose counsel he had not solicited before speaking. In fact, Mr. Burke, an American, rarely had significant access to the pontiff, who keeps a small circle of special advisers, or to the Vatican power players who often kept the press office out of decisions critical to the pope’s message and agenda.
On Monday, amid tumult in a Vatican communications department undergoing an overhaul and ahead of a critical February meeting on clerical sex abuse, Mr. Burke and his deputy, Paloma García Ovejero, abruptly quit.
Their supporters said they had grown frustrated with years of seeking, and failing, to modernize the Vatican’s rickety and anachronistic communications department and to convince the pope and his top lieutenants that in an age defined by media, communications could not be an afterthought.
Francis on Monday named Alessandro Gisotti, a longtime employee of the Vatican’s communications apparatus, as an interim replacement.
People with knowledge of the deliberations leading to the resignations said they had been in the works and were not a direct response to overhauls announced this month inside the larger communications apparatus. Francis recently replaced the editor of the Vatican newspaper L’Osservatore Romano and named a new director of editorial content for all Vatican media, the Italian journalist Andrea Tornielli.
But the resignations did apparently reflect contrasting visions between Mr. Burke and the entrenched Vatican bureaucracy over how a press office will need to operate in 2019.
The Vatican newspaper and radio and other assorted media are oft-ignored outlets for papal speeches and church-focused content, but Mr. Burke and his supporters wanted the press office to have a role in shaping, or at least protecting, the pope’s message on the front lines of social media, international media and global perception. They sought to make clear to Francis and other church leaders that when it comes to how his message plays in the wider world, the pope does not have the benefit of infallibility.
They were apparently ignored.
In October, the pope and his top advisers failed to closely consult with the press office on a decision to give a heroic send-off to Cardinal Donald Wuerl, the archbishop of Washington, when he stepped down. The pope cited the “nobility” of Cardinal Wuerl, who had recently been named in a Pennsylvania grand jury report that accused church leaders of covering up abuse, for volunteering to resign.
The pope’s lengthy and gushing letter, which was released directly by the Archdiocese of Washington, reaffirmed for many critics the notion that Francis fundamentally did not understand the damage the sexual abuse scandal posed to the church.
Critics and supporters of Francis say that the pope’s grave missteps in responding to sex abuse have risked eroding his moral authority and, as a result, his political capital on issues dear to him, such as defending migrants and the environment. Observers of the Vatican have pointed out that one need not look far back in the history of the church to find entire papacies derailed by avoidable public-relations accidents.
In 2006, early in his pontificate, Francis’ predecessor, Benedict XVI, delivered a speech in Regensburg, Germany, that offended Muslims, who saw it as an attack on Islam. It was far from an isolated incident, and was followed by a spate of public-relations disasters, including lifting the excommunication of a priest in 2009 who some Vatican officials knew to be a Holocaust denier.
Those missteps deeply handicapped Benedict’s papacy, and in 2012 the Vatican, in a rare acknowledgment of error, hired Mr. Burke from Fox, where he was a Rome correspondent. A devout Catholic, Mr. Burke joined the Vatican’s Secretariat of State as a communications adviser.
And then, in 2013, it seemed there would be nothing more to worry about.
The election of Pope Francis was for Mr. Burke and the Vatican press shop manna from heaven. For years, it seemed Francis could do no wrong. His folksy candor and occasional bombshells — “Who am I to judge” he once said when asked about gay priests — all helped cement his status as radical reformer and great communicator.
In 2015, Mr. Burke became the Vatican’s deputy spokesman and in 2016 he became the face of the Vatican. The ascent of an American with deep experience in global media, and then the hiring as his deputy of Ms. García, from the Spanish broadcaster Cadena Cope, seemed consistent with the pope’s efforts to de-Italianize the Roman bureaucracy that runs the church and better reflect its universal character.
While still far short of transparent, Mr. Burke and his team added briefings, sought to depend less on stilted prepared speeches and brought in associates who could talk to reporters in their own languages. Mr. Burke himself learned Spanish and sought to use modern technology to de-emphasize the necessity for reporters to be in the Vatican press office, a seemingly trivial innovation that democratized information and took some power away from the gossipy, and largely Italian, press corps.
But Mr. Burke and his aides never cracked the pope’s inner circle, or really even his outer one. And without real access to the pope, and without the buy-in of players in the Roman curia, they were powerless to influence Francis’ message or impose message discipline on a pope whose own blind spots have increasingly led him into danger.

There are likely to be more headaches to come after the February meeting, including the findings of a canonical investigation into former Cardinal Theodore McCarrick, who has been accused of sexually abusing minors and adult seminarians.
The pope is also scheduled to make trips to Panama, the United Arab Emirates, Morocco, Bulgaria and Macedonia.
Mr. Burke has other plans.
