LONDON — Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege, who won this year’s Nobel Peace Prize for their campaigns to end mass rape in war, condemned on Monday what they called the international community’s indifference to wartime sexual violence and pleaded for new efforts to arrest or punish those responsible.
Two months after being jointly awarded the prize, Ms. Murad and Dr. Mukwege, 63, a gynecological surgeon from the Democratic Republic of Congo who has treated thousands of women in a country once called the rape capital of the world, delivered blunt and searing speeches at the Nobel awards ceremony in Oslo.
In a year when survivors of sexual violence and the #MeToo movement focused the world’s attention on sexual abuse in the home and the workplace, the award cast a spotlight on two regions where women have paid a devastating price for years of armed conflict.
Ms. Murad described growing up in the northern Iraqi village of Kojo, where she dreamed of finishing high school and opening a beauty parlor.
Kojo became one of the first Yazidi villages to to be overrun by the Islamic State, or ISIS, in August 2014. Women and girls were separated from the men, who were driven to a field outside the town and executed. Ms. Murad said she lost her mother, six brothers and her brothers’ children. She was taken to a slave market, where she was sold to a judge.
In the years since she escaped sexual slavery and began speaking publicly about the plight of the Yazidi minority, the perpetrators had faced no punishment, she said. She asked that the United Nations protect Yazidis seeking to return to their villages and that the world provide asylum and immigration options to victims.
But she said the fate of more than 3,000 women and children in the Islamic State’s grip was still not known and that girls continued to be sold as slaves and raped daily.
Dr. Mukwege echoed her calls for prosecuting wartime rapists. 
“This red line would consist of imposing economic and political sanctions on these leaders and taking them to court,” he said.
Dr. Mukwege recalled an 18-month-old girl who arrived in an ambulance at Panzi Hospital in Bukavu, where for years there was little electricity or sufficient anesthetic. He walked into an operating room to find the nurses sobbing; the girl had been penetrated by an adult. Her bladder, genitals and rectum were badly injured.
Villagers in eastern Congo have fallen prey to militias, bandits, government soldiers and foreign armies. Dr. Mukwege said hundreds of thousands of women had been raped, more than four million people had been displaced and six million people had been killed.
“This human tragedy will continue if those responsible are not prosecuted,” he said.
Everyone who uses a smartphone, Dr. Mukwege said, was benefiting from minerals mined in Congo under often inhumane conditions that help fuel war and conflict. He said the United Nations had already found evidence of hundreds of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Congo.
Dr. Mukwege urged global institutions to name the perpetrators and lend support to survivors. He described the case of a woman named Sarah who had been repeatedly gang raped but who recovered from her injuries and, with a $50 grant, built a small business and bought a plot of land.
