A new retrospective book “Seeing Deeply” reveals his decades-long exploration of community, memory and photography.
As a socially conscious teenager, Dawoud Bey was intrigued by the controversy over the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s 1969 exhibition, “Harlem on My Mind: Cultural Capital of Black America, 1900-1968.” The show featured photos, audio and text about daily life in Harlem. It did not, however, include paintings, drawings or sculptures by African-American artists, which sparked protests organized by the Black Emergency Cultural Coalition. Mr. Bey, then 16, went on his own to the museum, hoping to see the picket lines and find out more, but when he arrived there were none that day.
A sense of fate drew him inside.
He was immediately struck by James Van Der Zee’s photographs of Harlem residents. As he walked through the show, seeing the work of African-American photographers in a museum profoundly affected Mr. Bey’s ambitions and what he thought could be possible for himself. Just the year before, his godmother had given him his first camera.
Thus began his education in photography, influenced by the works of artists like Charles White, Romare Bearden and Emory Douglas, the minister of culture for the Black Panther Party whose graphic art appeared in the organization’s newspaper. Mr. Bey’s touchstones in photography included Roy DeCarava, Walker Evans and Gordon Parks, and even his own family’s photo albums. These explorations gave him a sense of what his own subject matter could be, leading to his first series, “Harlem, U.S.A.,” which he spent five years making and was exhibited at the Studio Museum in Harlem in 1979.
An impressive 40-year retrospective of his work is now showcased in a 400-page book, “Dawoud Bey: Seeing Deeply,” published by the University of Texas Press. Essays by leading curators and critics introduce each section and show the many ways Mr. Bey places value on the full exploration of the medium of photography, agency, representation, community and memory juxtaposed with loss.
The book’s cover features a striking image, from his “Black-and-White Type 55 Polaroid Street Portraits” series, of a young black girl with a knife-shaped nose ring, staring directly into Mr. Bey’s lens. Framing his subjects with subtlety, he concentrates on people others take for granted.
Mr. Bey returned to Harlem in 2014 to photograph a city in the throes of gentrification for his “Harlem Redux” series. As Harlem's physical and social landscape changed drastically, Mr. Bey’s images offer a meditation on the loss of cultural memory, place and identity. It was his first sustained project that was not portrait based, using a more conceptual visual language. Amid a backdrop of increased tourism, the erasure of community and the demolition of landmarks, Mr. Bey documented the privatization of public space through steel gates and fences, exploring the notion of areas that were shared, but off-limits.
A sense of deep contrast and close attention runs throughout Mr. Bey’s oeuvre, most notably in “The Birmingham Project,” which also looks at collective history and memory. Prompted by the 50th anniversary of the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church, he set out to reflect the painful legacy of racism, showing children the same age as the four girls and two boys killed in 1963, alongside adults who in 2013 were the same age that the children would have been.
In “Class Pictures,” Mr. Bey’s portraits of high school students are paired with the subjects’ words, giving self-representation and self-definition a place. The portraits are meant to be displayed both in galleries and in conversation with communities as a part of his collaborative practice, which has influenced curators and educators to consider how their work could have a greater impact, believing that young people have a rich interior life.
Fayemi Shakur is a writer and visiting lecturer at Rutgers University-Newark, in the Department of Art, Culture and Media. Her writing has been featured in Hyperallergic, HYCIDE magazine and MFON: Women Photographers of the African Diaspora.
Follow @nytimesphoto and @7fayemi on Twitter. You can also find us on Facebook and Instagram.