A friend of mine, a fellow fact-checker, recently described how strange it is to be one of us right now. Two years ago even family members didn’t know what our work entailed; now we’re getting thanked by strangers for upholding the foundations of liberal democracy.
Fact-checking is a very particular, very quiet profession. We’re the invisible spelunkers sent deep down into the story. We call back subjects; we confirm the spelling of names; we make sure we aren’t saying cement when we should say concrete. Sometimes our job amounts to much more than that, but it never comes with a byline. “It’s a job that’s traditionally meant to happen offstage,” my friend said.
When John D’Agata and Jim Fingal’s “The Lifespan of a Fact” came out in 2012, it was unlikely material for a book, let alone a Broadway play. The slim volume is a quasi-Talmudic exchange, the text of Mr. D’Agata’s essay framed by snide disputes with his fact-checker, Mr. Fingal, in the margins.
I wasn’t yet a fact-checker at the time, but “Lifespan” left a bad taste. How could a writer be so surly, so unkind to the person assigned to help him? It’s a deliberate parody, but not an equal one. Mr. D’Agata frames himself as a grandiose, don’t-you-dare-unweave-my-rainbow-type Byronic villain; Mr. Fingal frames himself as a pedant. It’s clear who the hero is supposed to be.
The imbalance of power carries over to this theatrical adaptation (by Jeremy Kareken, David Murrell, and Gordon Farrell), which opened this fall to warm reviews at Studio 54, where D’Agata (Bobby Cannavale) may be ridiculous but gets a back story, and Fingal (Daniel Radcliffe) just gets to be ridiculous and correct.
I know it’s all in good fun, but I watched with what have come to be called “rep sweats” — the anxiety of the underrepresented, facing that one shot to be seen. Realistically this was the only chance I’d ever have to witness fact-checking on stage, let alone on Broadway.
In the play, Fingal has about four days to check a 15-page article (an essay, D’Agata protests) on a teenage suicide in Las Vegas. Cherry Jones, as the magazine’s editor, offers him the job “as long as you understand the compromises.” She means the negotiation between quality journalism and ad revenues, but the caveat is much broader, and occupies the play’s heart: How do you compromise between truth and fiction? When, if ever, is it worth the cost?
D’Agata sees facts as a delightful collage assembled around meaning. “I take liberties with things that deepen the central truth of the piece,” Mr. Cannavale says. He describes a Las Vegas resident as a Mississippi woman, “to underscore the transient nature of the city.” The piece is organized in nine sections, one of which muses on the epistemological implications of nine, to evoke the nine seconds it took Levi Presley to fall to his death. Inconveniently he actually fell for eight.
Other explanations are less coherent. D’Agata writes that 34 strip clubs banned lap-dancing on the day Levi died. Are you counting partially or fully nude clubs? Fingal asks. Go-go bars? “I picked 34 because I liked the rhythm,” D’Agata answers.
It’s funny, but the premise isn’t quite right. Checking isn’t really about Googling. More often it involves speaking to specialists, and to subjects. “If there’s a person mentioned,” Ms. Jones’s character warns Mr. Radcliffe’s, “confirm they exist.” The line gets a huge laugh, but it’s totally routine. Once I had to call an editor’s father to confirm a few tattoos.
Certainly there were moments I recognized from work. Mr. Radcliffe, in his plaid shirt, is sporting authentic fact-checker mufti. (I may have worn one to the theater.) An argument about the number of cars that constitutes a jam recalled a debate about what counts as bite-size. When Ms. Jones explains that the magazine has traded its fact-checking department for “added functionality” in digital — ouch.
And while I personally wouldn’t have flown across the country to verify a pavilion’s red brick composition (spoiler alert: it’s brown), I had to laugh at Mr. Radcliffe’s earnestly compiled notebooks, as the only person in the theater scribbling quite so much in hers.
The production takes, as D’Agata might, its little liberties. A new checker would probably start by checking the price of headphones, not a glitzy big-name exposé on Las Vegas and the nature of mortality. And a checker would give the editor much less information about low-level problems. “I don’t have a codebook that tells me what matters and what doesn’t,” Mr. Radcliffe says, apologetically. “It’s called judgment!” Ms. Jones yells.
The truth is that fallibility is deeply embarrassing. Most writers are grateful, gracious. A few realize they’ve built a house of cards, and in their panic they lash out. For our part it’s humbling to say we, accepting responsibility for errors we haven’t made, extending forgiveness to the writer and to ourselves. Fact-checking is a test of character for both sides, an experiment in generosity.
I understand why a play about fact-checking is an opportunity to think about truth, but the reality is that what we do is so much more limited. Fact-checking is a rococo practice whose original object was simply shielding publications from liability. Often it comes down to who agrees and who doesn’t, who will say something and who won’t. The brick company won’t sue — red it is. Mr. Radcliffe protests that this feels like a negotiation. It always was.
It’s the we that we protect while fact-checking, not some ideal of pure truth. You try to protect the publication, and to protect the writer from herself. Invariably you get to know the subjects and you want to protect them too. The checker is the mediator, the invisible shield between the writer and the world. The measure of success in our job is essentially the ability to disappear.
That’s why we feel strange when people tell us what we do is important, or bigger than it is. It’s such a small, specific thing. It really is, for the most part, offstage.