Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain is fighting for her political life after a right-wing faction in her party triggered a no confidence vote. She then faced tough questions and criticisms from other lawmakers in Parliament.
LONDON — On Wednesday, finally, Theresa May raised her voice.
The British prime minister’s voice was hoarse and her face was pale, and who could blame her? Her two years of negotiations on exiting the European Union were a hair’s breadth from ending in a meltdown. Rebel Tories had called a no-confidence vote, forcing her to plead with her own lawmakers to give her more time. The promise she made in order to win the vote Wednesday night was a humiliating one: that she would step down as prime minister before the next election.
At the weekly Question Time in Parliament, she found someone she could take it out on. She leaned over the table toward the opposition leader Jeremy Corbyn and spat out her disdain for him. She was seething.
“All he wants to do is create chaos in our economy, division in our society and damage to our economy,” she said, raising her voice to be heard over the cheers from her backbenchers. And Mr. Corbyn raged back, accusing Mrs. May of leading her fractured country into a deepening, increasingly risky political crisis.
For many months, Mrs. May had maintained a robotic calm about the unraveling of her Brexit negotiation, pretending not to see that it was speeding toward a brick wall.
To save her job, Mrs. May had two arguments to put forward. First, she argued, changing leaders so close to the March 29 deadline for withdrawal from the European Union could open the door to something worse — a Labour government or a reversal of Brexit.
The more important case was made at 5 p.m., behind the closed doors of a wood-paneled committee room, where Mrs. May promised Conservative lawmakers that she would step down before the next general election, currently scheduled for 2022.
Matt Hancock, cabinet secretary for health and social care, also described this promise as a turning point.
But not everyone was moved. Lee Rowley, another lawmaker, told Mrs. May that “stamina is not a strategy,” according to journalists present.
Then they voted. Mrs. May won, but not comfortably. Two hundred lawmakers backed her, and 117 voted against.
At the announcement, the Tories jumped up and erupted into applause, but it was hardly a real success. Margaret Thatcher, who won 204 votes in a similar contest, was so weakened that she stepped down the following year.
Anand Menon, a professor of foreign affairs at King’s College London, said Mrs. May’s poor showing will complicate her efforts to find backing for her withdrawal agreement, which early this week appeared likely to be defeated by a crushing margin.
Mrs. May has long been known for her unruffled exterior, which earned her the nickname “the Ice Queen of Westminster.” Her approach to obstacles has been to ignore them. An aide once described Mrs. May holding a news conference in a basement room that was suddenly cast into pitch darkness by a power outage. Instead of pausing or even remarking on it, she simply called out “next question” and continued as if nothing had happened.
The awkward timing of the leadership challenge, with a countdown ticking to the March 29 Brexit deadline, may have worked in her favor, some observers said. Its failure provides Mrs. May with a degree of protection, since according to Tory rules, rebel members can call a no-confidence vote only once a year.
Moderation has been Mrs. May’s selling point the whole time. In the chaotic wake of the 2016 referendum, she offered herself to the country as a pair of “safe hands,” the epitome of old-fashioned, small-c conservatism in a time of turmoil. She had devoted much of her life to the Conservative Party, stuffing envelopes for party events as a teenager.
But upon taking power, she seemed perhaps a bit too old-fashioned for her country. The Conservative Party had barreled past her, embracing an anti-Europe agenda that had been dismissed for 20 years as too radical. Mrs. May was reflexively secretive about the progress of negotiations. She tried hard to win over Conservative hard-liners, but made little effort to win allies among Remainers and centrists. On Wednesday, facing her possible removal, Mrs. May did not even try to invoke loyalty, instead casting herself as the least-bad option.
