ROME — Pope Francis on Friday called on clerics who sexually abuse minors to hand themselves over to civil authorities and prepare their souls for eternal judgment, saying that the Vatican would remove the priests who prey like wolves on their flock and endanger the credibility of the whole church.
The pope’s remarks came in his traditional Christmas address to the bureaucracy that runs the Holy See, a speech that has become an annual excoriation of the careerism, sins and corruption that he says have infected the Catholic hierarchy.
“To those who abuse minors, I would say this: Convert and hand yourself over to human justice, and prepare for divine justice,” Francis told the Roman curia, with cardinals in black cassocks and red skullcaps gathered around him in the frescoed Clementine Hall of the Vatican’s Apostolic Palace.
In doing so, he said, these priests rip apart the priesthood, besmirch their innocent brothers and discredit the Roman Catholic Church, which has been “buffeted by strong winds and tempests” this year.
“Often behind their boundless amiability, impeccable activity and angelic faces, they shamelessly conceal a vicious wolf ready to devour innocent souls,” he said.
The sexual abuse crisis has continued to expand throughout the church. New reports and grand jury investigations from multiple continents have detailed how abuse has ruined the lives of young victims and their families for decades.
The crisis has also badly damaged the church’s standing and imperiled the papacy of Francis, who turned 82 this week. For all his efforts to reform the church, the pontiff long failed to understand the gravity of the scandal that most threatened the church and his other priorities.
Francis seemed to have woken up to the issue this year amid the furious backlash to his stated faith in Chilean bishops over the “slander” of abuse survivors. He ultimately dispatched investigators and accepted the resignations of some Chilean bishops. In the United States, where the crisis has exploded in the past few months, he has also accepted the resignations of prelates, though sometimes reluctantly.
But even as the pope has spoken out in increasingly forceful tones against abuse, victims and their supporters contend that he has taken little concrete action to solve the problem. They took Friday’s speech as more evidence that the pope needed a reality check when it came to sex abuse.
“At a moment that cries out for visionary leadership and radical change, the pope is indulging in make-believe and misdirection,” said Anne Barrett Doyle, a co-director of BishopAccountability.org, which tracks clergy sex abuse cases.
Critics also argue that the pope’s collegial emphasis on a response originating from local bishops is misplaced, citing longstanding patterns of abuse and cover-ups by many of those same bishops. Only a centralized, explicit zero-tolerance order from the Vatican will carry weight around the globe, they say.
The Vatican has raised expectations that an extraordinary meeting in February would result in tangible changes and not just more tough talk. The pope has summoned the presidents of bishops’ conferences around the world to address the abuse issue.
But the church still struggles to respond consistently and effectively to individual cases. This week, the pope accepted the resignation of a bishop in Los Angeles facing abuse allegations, but a priest in New York, whose victims have been compensated by the New York archdiocese for substantiated claims of abuse, continued to preach days before Christmas.
Some defenders of the church argue that the priesthood has been unfairly targeted and that the problem of sexual abuse is just as common in other institutions.
The pope also seemed to use the address to indirectly confront his enemies within the hierarchy who, in the hopes of defending the church orthodoxy from what they consider his progressive dilution of church law, weaponized the sexual abuse crisis to weaken his pontificate.
The former papal envoy to the United States, archbishop Carlo Maria Viganò, went so far this year as to publicly accuse the pope of covering up abuse and to demand his resignation. His accusations are so far unsubstantiated, and the pope has responded only indirectly, by talking about the devil’s influence inside the church.
“They always find excuses,” he added, “including intellectual and spiritual excuses, to progress unperturbed on the path to perdition.” He recalled Saint Augustine’s warning that the path to hell was paved with good intentions.
But those priorities have become overshadowed by a darkness within the church itself, and Francis signaled that he had come to understand that a failure to remove the blight within would weaken his ability to act on the global stage.
