Alain E. Kaloyeros, the central architect of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s largest economic development efforts, was sentenced on Tuesday to three and a half years in prison for his role in a bid-rigging scandal involving the governor’s signature upstate revitalization plan, the so-called Buffalo Billion.
Dr. Kaloyeros, 62, whom Mr. Cuomo once called a genius and described as “New York’s secret weapon,” had conspired to steer hundreds of millions of dollars in state contracts to favored firms in Buffalo and Syracuse, prosecutors charged.
“Kaloyeros’s willingness to lie and cheat tainted the Buffalo Billions with fraud and cynicism,” the judge, Valerie E. Caproni, said before imposing the sentence, which also included a $100,000 fine.
Dr. Kaloyeros, in brief comments to the judge, said the harm done to his family, former colleagues and taxpayers weighed heavily upon him.
“I feel an enormous responsibility for the hurt and loss I have caused others,” he said.
Dr. Kaloyeros is the last major defendant to be sentenced in a series of state corruption prosecutions first announced nearly four years ago by Preet Bharara, then the United States attorney in Manhattan, in what he made a campaign against Albany’s culture of secrecy and influence peddling.
Another of Mr. Cuomo’s associates, Joseph Percoco, was convicted in March of soliciting and accepting more than $300,000 in bribes from executives of two firms with state business. Mr. Percoco, once one of Mr. Cuomo’s closest advisers, was sentenced to six years in prison.
Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, had appointed Dr. Kaloyeros, then the president of the State University of New York Polytechnic Institute, to oversee the Buffalo Billion project, which has funneled $1.5 billion to upstate and western New York.
The government did not allege that Dr. Kaloyeros profited financially through the bid-rigging scheme, but rather that he used it to strengthen his relationship with Todd R. Howe, a former lobbyist with ties to Mr. Cuomo, and with the governor himself.
Judge Caproni suggested the same motive in her remarks. While she called the lack of monetary gain a significant mitigating factor, “regardless of whether he profited financially, he profited politically,” she said.
She also noted that Dr. Kaloyeros had deleted incriminating emails from a personal account, an act that prosecutors had portrayed as an attempt to obstruct the investigation.
Geoffrey S. Berman, the United States attorney in Manhattan, said in a statement after the hearing that “public corruption — especially at such a disconcertingly high level in Albany — contributes to the frustration and eroding faith” of New Yorkers in their government.
But ultimately, Mr. Podolsky said, Dr. Kaloyeros decided that his loyalty lay not with taxpayers, but with preserving his own influence.
“When Dr. Kaloyeros’s power was at risk, and when he wanted to expand that power, he was willing to abuse the authority that was conferred on him,” he said.
According to prosecutors, Dr. Kaloyeros and Mr. Howe had conspired to award lucrative contracts to two firms — LPCiminelli, a Buffalo construction management firm, and COR Development, a Syracuse-area company — whose executives were major donors to Mr. Cuomo.
They said that Dr. Kaloyeros and Mr. Howe had tailored requests for proposals to fit the special qualifications of the two firms, both clients of Mr. Howe’s, and to ensure that they were chosen for the projects.
They accused Dr. Kaloyeros of engineering the plan to tailor the requests and said that he himself had sat at his computer to draft the “fraudulent language” they contained.
LPCiminelli received a contract to build what became a $750 million solar-panel plant on the banks of the Buffalo River, while COR received contracts worth more than $100 million on other projects.
Dr. Kaloyeros’s lawyers, arguing for leniency, underscored that the scheme had yielded no financial gain for their client and had been aimed at furthering the state’s revitalization. They asked for a sentence at the low end of a range of four to 10 months.
After the hearing, the lawyers, Reid H. Weingarten and Michael C. Miller, called their client an innocent man who would appeal his conviction.
