We start the final day of 2018 with the continuing government shutdown, Senator Elizabeth Warren’s preparations for 2020, and an investigation into the C.I.A.’s shadow war in Afghanistan.
With the partial government shutdown now in its second week, President Trump has reassured allies that he won’t yield on his request for $5 billion in funding for a border wall. But negotiations with Democratic leaders are at a standstill, and each side says the ball is in the other’s court.
What’s next: Democrats are preparing to pass a bill to fund the government as soon as they take control of the House on Thursday. However, uncertainty over what Mr. Trump might sign threatens to extend the shutdown, which affects 800,000 federal workers and has shuttered parts of nine cabinet-level departments.
Another angle: The concrete wall that Mr. Trump has repeatedly called for isn’t actually a wall and hasn’t been viewed as such since “early on in the administration,” the departing White House chief of staff, John Kelly, said in an interview. Mr. Kelly’s last day on the job is today.
The Democratic senator from Massachusetts said in an email to supporters this morning that she was forming an exploratory committee, which allows her to raise money and fill crucial staff positions before a formal kickoff of her presidential bid.
Ms. Warren, 69, is among the best-known Democrats seeking to take on President Trump, who has already announced his re-election campaign. But she also faces challenges: recent controversy over her claims to Native American heritage, skepticism from the party establishment and a lack of experience in a presidential race.
Watch: Ms. Warren has a long history of trading barbs with the president.
Explainer: Election Day is just under two years away, but Ms. Warren is right on schedule for a presidential campaign, history shows.
Democrats flipped four Republican-held congressional seats last month in Orange County, which had been a Republican stronghold for decades.
The results reflected an increase in the number of immigrants, nonwhite residents and college graduates that has transformed the Los Angeles region, a Times analysis of demographic data going back to 1980 shows.
Notable: The shift is viewed by leaders in both parties as a warning sign for Republicans, as suburban communities like Orange County are likely to be battlegrounds in the 2020 elections and beyond.
Afghan forces trained and overseen by the Central Intelligence Agency have managed to hold the line against militant groups including the Taliban and the Islamic State.
But the forces have also operated outside battlefield rules intended to protect civilians, conducting night raids, torture and killings. Some Afghan and U.S. officials say the campaign is alienating the Afghan population and undermining American efforts to strengthen Afghan institutions.
How we know: For months, The Times has investigated complaints — at times almost weekly — that the C.I.A.-sponsored units have conducted raids on or killed civilians. The Times went to the sites of half a dozen raids, often less than 24 hours after the forces had left.
In 2006, Boeing hired the prestigious consulting firm to evaluate a proposal to mine titanium in India, through a foreign partnership financed by the Ukranian oligarch Dmitry Firtash.
McKinsey’s evaluation included a PowerPoint slide that described the potential partner’s strategy for winning mining permits, which included bribing Indian officials.
The mining venture never materialized, but the PowerPoint slide, now known as Exhibit A, is a critical piece of evidence in the tangled international battle over the extradition of Mr. Firtash, who has been charged in the U.S. with bribery.
Why it matters: The case exposes what McKinsey and other American consulting firms risk as they conduct business in countries where ethical standards are not the same as those at home.
He was a brash Brazilian-born and Lebanese- and French-educated engineer who flourished at Renault. In 1999, he went to Japan with plans to carry out an American-style restructuring of a failing Nissan. He wasn’t expected to succeed, but he did.
Now, just as unexpectedly, Carlos Ghosn is in a Tokyo jail, accused of failing to report millions of dollars of income.
Syria withdrawal: Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina suggested on Sunday that President Trump’s plan to pull American troops from Syria within 30 days had been slowed. Mr. Graham, a Republican critic of the president’s decision, said that he felt “a lot better” about it after a lunch at the White House.
Obamacare ruling: The Affordable Care Act, which was ruled invalid by a federal judge in Texas this month, will remain in effect while that ruling is appealed.
Long-delayed vote in Congo: After a wait of more than two years, the election to replace President Joseph Kabila, who has led the Democratic Republic of Congo for 18 years, was marred by lost voter rolls and malfunctioning machines.
Newspaper cyberattack: Malware that disrupted the printing operations of The Los Angeles Times and several other publications originated from outside the U.S., the California paper said.
From The New York Times’s editorial board: The anti-abortion movement has created legal scaffolding for the idea that a fetus has full rights. So miscarriages are sometimes treated as manslaughter or feticide, and women’s rights over all are eroding.
Snapshot: Above, a family-friendly pre-midnight fireworks display in Sydney Harbor today. The east coast of Australia rang in 2019 16 hours before the Eastern U.S.
In memoriam: Nancy Roman was NASA’s first chief of astronomy and the first woman in a leadership position at the space agency, where she oversaw early planning for the Hubble Space Telescope. She died on Wednesday at 93.
N.F.L. playoffs: The first wild-card games are on Saturday, after the Baltimore Ravens and the Philadelphia Eagles squeaked into the 12-team postseason field.
College football championship: It’s Alabama versus Clemson again. The teams will play next Monday, the third time in the past four seasons that they’ve faced each other for the national title.
Credit...Julia Gartland for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Ali Slagle.
Cook: Radicchio, Gorgonzola and hazelnuts combine in this hearty vegetarian pasta.
See: You have two days — today and tomorrow — to catch the Bodys Isek Kingelez exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. You can also see images of the Congolese artist’s colorful utopian city models on MoMA’s website, along with videos.
Look: We collected some of our favorite arts photography published this year by The Times.
Watch: Any of the movies on former President Barack Obama’s list of his favorites of 2018, which he posted on Instagram alongside his favorite songs and favorite books of the year. There’s a lot of crossover between his list and our movie critics’ Top 10 lists.
Smarter Living: Ring in the New Year by getting rid of your Christmas tree, but try to avoid the landfill. First, see if your town has guidelines. If not, visit Earth911 and search your ZIP code for places that recycle.
We also have tips on mixing great cocktails at home and on making tech work for you in the New Year.
The wave of new year celebrations is already underway, beginning today on several Pacific islands including Samoa, and arriving three hours later in Sydney, Australia. Hong Kong and Beijing enter 2019 after six hours, Moscow after 11, Paris after 13 and London after 14.
After 19 hours, 2019 will begin in New York, where hundreds of thousands of revelers will gather in Times Square one of the world’s brightest outdoor spaces, with a long history of neon lights and signs.
The famous ball that will drop there at midnight is lit by 32,256 LEDs, or light-emitting diodes, which are more efficient than older sources.
In the mid-1980s, when officials redesigning Times Square sought to battle urban blight and crime, minimum levels of brightness became a part of the zoning code. With it, a new type of measurement was introduced: the LUTS, for Light Unit Times Square.
That’s it for this briefing. We’ll be off tomorrow but will return on Wednesday. Happy New Year!
To Gilbert Cruz, our culture editor, for the leisure-time ideas, and Kenneth R. Rosen for the Smarter Living tips. Tessa Bangs wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode revisits a Times investigation into the taxes of President Trump and his father, Fred.
• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: Take a card from the deck (4 letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• The Times’s printing plant at College Point in Queens, N.Y., produces nearly 41 percent of the day’s newspapers. The rest are printed at 26 locations around the country. The international edition is printed in 35 locations around the world.