Sit back and watch our Q. and A. with George R. R. Martin, a groundbreaking pas de deux and Natasha Lyonne’s crossword jokes.
The artist and collector invites T into his eclectic home.
Hey, you’re late! The ice cream is melting. Come on in. Well, I would say my house has a lot of stuff in it. Some people are shocked when they come in, which is not my objective. This is the office. This is Joan Collins’s desk that I got at an auction in California. This is a lamp by John Wesley. These are the Warhol “Ladies and Gentlemen“... and this is a John Kacere. This is the dining room where I read the morning paper. And this is my hero sandwich. It’s not real. You know, I love anything that seems really fake. This is my bust of George Washington. I have an Americana fetish. My Budweiser wallpaper... And this is the foyer/studio. My Bicentennial shirt collection. And this is a print by Peter Saul, Angela Davis being crucified by the Department of Justice. This is our bedroom. I have a lot of ties. And this is by Jonathan Borofsky. It’s one of my favorite pieces in my collection. And this is my library. I love this painting by McDermott & McGough. And this is my Nelson Madela couch with matching suit. Thanks for coming.
For our inaugural online art issue, the visual artist and collector Cary Leibowitz — known in the ’80s and ’90s as “Candy Ass” — took us on a tour of his jam-packed Harlem abode. “My house has a lot of stuff in it,” he said. “Some people are shocked when they come in, which is not my objective.” Among the standout pieces in his home are Joan Collins’s old desk, a bust of George Washington, Budweiser-print wallpaper and a Nelson Mandela couch — with an outfit to match.
From Broadway to the experimental downtown scene, theater in New York ruled supreme in the early 1980s. As part of our annual Culture issue, which this year focused on the city from 1981-83, we assembled some of the era’s notable alumni for a photo shoot. Watch as they catch up with one another and remember how it all began.
The actress reads the poem “Old Wives’ Tales on Which I Was Fed” by Jenny Xie.
The number of rice grains left in your supper bowl foretells how many pockmarks will appear on your lover’s face Sleeping on your back will flatten your head’s shape but sleep on your stomach and you’ll induce nightmares Eating the fat inside the crab sharpens the mind so too with roe extracted from a steamed fish Never let your feet touch cold water from the bathtub or the sea on days when you’re menstruating Pinch the nose before age six when the cartilage is pliable so the nasal bridge will grow narrow and high Drift asleep with your hair wet and you’ll suffer from decades of migraines You’ll wreck your eyesight poring over pages in low light but looking at all things green from a distance can coax it back.
As part of our ongoing video series Read T a Poem, the award-winning actress Glenn Close recited “Old Wives’ Tales on Which I Was Fed” by Jenny Xie.
The craft-obsessed fashion designer Adam Selman was an obvious candidate for T’s video series Make T Something, in which participants create something in under an hour using only a few select items and one object of their choosing. For inspiration, Selman mined his own life: “I’ve been hitting the gym hard lately,” explained the designer, who swears by Barry’s Bootcamp (“I need someone to yell at me”). Watch the video to see what he made.
The writer of “A Game of Thrones” fields questions from New York Times staffer superfans.
[music] Joffrey is Trump. They have the same level of emotional maturity. Joffrey likes to remind everyone that he’s king. We’re not an absolute monarchy like Westeros is. We’re a constitutional republic. And yet Trump doesn’t seem to know what that means. He thinks the presidency gives him the power to do anything. It’s kind of ironic, ’cause I started writing “Game of Thrones” all the way back in 1991, long before anybody was talking about climate change. But there is – in a very broad sense – there’s a certain parallel there. We’re fighting our own battles. We’re fighting over issues, important issues, mind you – foreign policy, domestic policy, social responsibility, social justice. All of these things are important. But none of them are important if, like, we’re dead and our cities are under the ocean. We spend 10 times as much energy and thought and debate in the media discussing whether or not N.F.L. players should stand for the national anthem than this threat that’s going to destroy our world. Well, I think there are a lot of things going on in the world of Seven Kingdoms and Westeros that could be lessons to any ruler, past or present. The very simple statement is made that the king is about justice, or what is a king for? We don’t have kings. We have presidents and congressmen and all that. But it’s still what it’s about. It’s about serving the people and leaving the country in better shape when you leave office than it was when you took office. No. Of course, I hoped it would be popular. I mean, you write a book or a series of books, and you hope that people will read them and enjoy them and that enough people will buy them so that you can continue to pay your mortgage and write other books. So you’re always hoping for a level of popularity. And I’ve been very fortunate in that regard. My career’s had ups and downs since I sold my first story in 1971. But there have been more ups than downs, and I’ve won awards, and I’ve had books that sold well. But nothing compared to how these books have sold. Pass. I like redheads! I’m married to a redhead. I also like blondes, and brunettes and other people, even women who occasionally shave their head. Many places. Many places. Mostly I’m known for wearing these kind of Greek sailor caps. But I actually have a lot of hats. Some, like the Stetsons and the fedoras and the cowboy hats don’t travel so well with the big brims. Oh, I would probably — the free city of Braavos in Essos would be a cool place to live. Well, we’re presently working on some “Wild Cards” television shows based on the “Wild Cards” series that I’ve been editing for the last 30 years. And that, I hope, will be coming to television in the next year or two. I think the one I’d most like to see would be my historical horror novel “Fevre Dream,” that came out, a vampire novel set on the Mississippi River in the antebellum period. That was probably my best known book before “Game of Thrones.” Read the books.
The author of “A Game of Thrones” — and one of the six cover subjects of T’s 2018 Greats issue — gamely answered (or tellingly declined to respond to) a selection of queries from New York Times employees, on film. Here’s what he had to say about his favorite books, where he gets his signature hats and the “Game of Thrones” character that reminds him the most of Trump. Read the full Q&A here.
The artist remembers seeing a self-portrait by Adrian Piper nearly 20 years after discovering her work.
An artwork that’s been particularly important to me is by the artist Adrian Piper. The title of the work is “Self-Portrait Exaggerating My Negroid Features.” And it’s from 1981. It’s a self-portrait drawn in pencil. It’s had such an importance for so many artists, but it’s tiny. It’s only 10-by-8 inches. The first time I became aware of the piece was when Adrian Piper had a show at the Wadsworth Atheneum in 1980. I was a student at Wesleyan University, and it’s the first time I’d seen Adrian’s work. That particular piece wasn’t in that exhibition, so I must have actually seen the piece in 2000, when she had a retrospective at the New Museum in New York. The self-portrait that she’s drawn in it is as important as the language underneath that self-portrait. That’s been a huge influence on me. The work says it’s a self-portrait, but it’s not a self portrait, because the word “negroid” is about scientific classifications. And that’s external to the self. It makes us think about how what we think of as a self-portrait is actually a portrait of the society that we live in. In 2015, Adrian Piper and I were in the same room at the Venice Biennale. I was nervous. I wasn’t sure how she was going to respond to her placement next to me, and what she thought of the work. But when we actually met, she was incredibly supportive and gracious. It was incredible kind of affirmation. I think Adrian is one of those artists who has made the art we see today — art that addresses the way society is structured, injustice, racism, sexism, things that seem normal when one looks at artwork today — I think Adrian actually opened up the space to make those subject matters in art normal.
What Kind of Art Does an Artist Like?
Here, the painter and sculptor Glenn Ligon talks about an artwork that has been particularly important to him: “Self-Portrait Exaggerating My Negroid Features” (1981) by Adrian Piper. Ligon first encountered Piper’s work in 1980, but it wasn’t until two decades later, at her New Museum retrospective, that he came face-to-face with the small pencil drawing.
The actress pokes fun at the New York Times’s crossword puzzle editor Will Shortz.
How many New York Times users does it take to screw in a light bulb? I would tell you, but you’ve already used up your five free articles this month. Instead, I’ll give you a few Will Shortz-based jokes from the crossword puzzle. Why did Will Shortz go to the therapist? Because he was two down. What kind of a necklace was Will Shortz wearing? Across. What kind of a pillow does Will Shortz sleep on? A down pillow. Those are all my crossword jokes.
As part of our video series Tell T a Joke, noted funny person and “Orange Is the New Black” actress Natasha Lyonne broached a truly Timesian subject: the crossword puzzle.
The 30-year-old blind visual artist was a standout in the New Museum’s 2018 Triennial.
The artist Manuel Solano’s earliest paintings were all about subtle gradient and tone; photo-realistic objects emerged from mist or disappeared in receding space. But in early 2014, the Mexico City-based painter started to go blind as a result of an H.I.V.-related infection. Since then, Solano’s blindness has become complete. It has also become a new way of seeing. The artist has developed techniques for navigating blindness through each new series of paintings, including five large-scale works displayed at this year’s New Museum Triennial. We visited Solano in Mexico City.
A behind-the-scenes look at how 32 extraordinary black male writers came together for a T Magazine photo shoot at the Brooklyn Historical Society, where they shared tributes to their favorite black female writers.
For our Holiday issue, we brought together a group of 32 American men, who, with their peers, are producing literature that is essential to how we understand our country and its place in the world right now. Here, the director Yvonne Shirley captures the writers on set at the Brooklyn Historical Society — and they reflect on the literary women who have shaped their work.