Why Yael Stone is terrified to talk about Geoffrey Rush.
Ms. Weiss is a writer and editor for the Opinion section.
Yael Stone is scared.
We are in New York City, at a ramen place near her apartment in Astoria, Queens, and Ms. Stone, who stars in “Orange Is the New Black,” has barely touched her soup. She tells me she hasn’t been sleeping for the better part of a year.
It’s not just her 6-month-old baby who’s keeping her up, but her decision to come forward for the first time and speak to me about her experiences with Geoffrey Rush, one of the most powerful actors in her native Australia.
Most women who go public with #MeToo stories are fearful for obvious reasons. There is the pain of reliving traumatic experiences. There is the rage of not being believed. And there is sometimes the discomfort of admitting, as Ms. Stone readily does, that she didn’t say “no” and at times even encouraged some of his behavior. She did so, she says, out of fear of offending a mentor and friend.
But Ms. Stone isn’t just afraid of the emotional consequences of talking about her allegations against Mr. Rush, her onetime hero, including that he danced naked in front of her in their dressing room, used a mirror to watch her while she showered and sent her occasionally erotic text messages while she was 25 years old and starring opposite Mr. Rush, then 59, on stage in “The Diary of a Madman” in 2010 and 2011.
She is worried that Australia’s defamation laws will drag her into a legal and financial quagmire.
In the United States, the legal burden is on the person who claims to have been defamed: He or she must prove that the allegations are false. In Australia, in the area of libel law, it’s the opposite. The burden is on the publisher to prove that the allegations against the plaintiff are true. In addition, public figures who sue for libel in the United States must prove that the publisher acted with reckless disregard of the truth, even if the statements prove false.
Geoffrey Rush responds to Yael Stone’s allegations.
Australia’s defamation laws help explain why the #MeToo movement, while managing to take down some of the most powerful men in the entertainment and media industry in the United States, has not taken off there.
“Australia is the only Western democracy without an explicit constitutional protection for freedom of speech,” Matt Collins, a defamation lawyer and the president of the Victorian Bar, told me. “People say that Sydney is the libel capital of the world,” he added.
The upshot: Not only is it easier for a plaintiff to win a defamation suit in Australia, but people are far less likely to blow the whistle on misconduct, knowing what the legal (and therefore financial) consequences might be. Indeed, if a law firm had not volunteered to represent Ms. Stone pro bono, she said, there is no way she would have been able to come forward.
But that financial support goes only so far. Crucially, if the actress is sued and loses, she will be personally responsible for the damages. That Ms. Stone is willing to take such a risk indicates how strongly she feels about the matter.
“I think the fact that she’s speaking about this now is incredibly courageous,” said Brenna Hobson, who was the general manager of the company that produced “Diary of a Madman” and has known Mr. Rush for more than two decades.
For the past year in Australia, the particular woman on fire has been an actress named Eryn Jean Norvill — someone who never wanted to come forward at all.
In late 2017, two front-page articles in The Daily Telegraph reported on Geoffrey Rush’s “inappropriate behavior” during a 2015-16 production of “King Lear” by the Sydney Theater Company. The paper, which memorably dubbed Mr. Rush “King Leer,” didn’t name the young actress who claimed he had harassed her.
Mr. Rush adamantly denied the allegation and accused the paper of making “false, pejorative and demeaning claims.” He sued the publisher, Rupert Murdoch’s Nationwide News, and the articles were removed from the paper’s website.
When Nationwide News submitted its defense, it identified the actress as Ms. Norvill, who played Cordelia opposite Mr. Rush, and her name became a matter of public record. And so for the past several months, Ms. Norvill has been in the headlines as a leading witness in the case, despite the fact that she had complained to the theater company about Mr. Rush’s behavior informally and confidentially.
“What mattered to The Daily Telegraph here was their front page. She didn’t matter,” David Marr, a journalist for The Guardian, told me.
For most Americans, Geoffrey Rush is the guy who teaches Colin Firth not to stutter in “The King’s Speech.” In Australia, he is a theater-industry kingpin, capable of making a career. He was long the president of the Australian equivalent of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and he was named Australian of the Year in 2012.
In 2010, Ms. Stone was offered the role of a lifetime: to play opposite Mr. Rush in “The Diary of a Madman,” to run first in Sydney and then at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in New York.
But things were “weird” from the start of their intensive two-week rehearsal process. Ms. Stone confided in a number of family members and friends who were close to her at the time, and several of them told me in interviews that they remembered many details of her account. Three people who worked on the play also confirmed many aspects of her story.
First there were the texts. They were both affectionate and flirtatious, flowery and yet occasionally vulgar, and would come until the wee hours of the night. Ms. Stone showed a number to me but asked me not to quote from them. Part of her discomfort is probably because, as she put it, she “enthusiastically and willingly” bantered back.
It wasn’t just the texts. There were, she says, “strange intimacies in the dressing room.” Sometimes he would ask her to remove his contact lenses, say, or take off his sweaty costume at intermission. When she would sleep between matinee and evening performances in the cramped space underneath their makeup desks he would join her uninvited.
Then there was the day he held a mirror above her shower.
“I certainly talked about it with Yael afterward. It was one instance of her feeling psychologically and physically intimidated by him,” the person said.
Ms. Hobson, the general manager, said the play’s director, Neil Armfield, knew that something had transpired. “What I did know at the time was that Neil Armfield had spoken to Geoffrey about not walking in on Yael in the shower,” she told me from Scotland.
“I didn’t want him to think I was no fun, that I was one of those people who couldn’t take a joke,” Ms. Stone said.
A person who witnessed the incident recalled, as Ms. Stone did, that it straddled a familiar line. “It was, I suppose, again that line between comical and obscene,” the person said.
When, later, at an awards show connected to the play Mr. Rush touched Ms. Stone’s back “in a very sensual manner” that was “unwanted and sustained” — a significant enough violation that he wrote to her and apologized the next day, calling it “uncalled-for but had to” — she made nothing of it.
Others noticed Ms. Stone’s anxiety. “The play for me was tainted with a certain discomfort because of the dynamic between Geoffrey and Yael — not knowing what exactly was going on or how to respond,” said another person who worked on the show and asked not to be named.
Last month, nearly a year since Mr. Rush filed suit against Nationwide News, the court finished hearing arguments in the defamation case. The judge is supposed to deliver his decision in the new year.
The email is self-aware and generous. “I’m sure that this moment is extremely challenging and my thoughts these last few weeks have come to you many times. I hope you are ok. I worry about you, about Jane and the kids,” it begins, and then goes on to tell him that she was made uncomfortable by him during the play.
Now, she said, “I feel a responsibility to speak, but I know it will cost me friendships.” She hates the idea of hurting a mentor, someone who even helped her get a visa to work in the United States by writing a letter on her behalf.
Again and again, she returned in our conversations to the themes of compassion and change.
That healing, however, is only possible when the truth is recognized — when inappropriate behavior is not waved away because the rehearsal room is somehow unique as a “place of play and experiment,” as the director, Mr. Armfield, said on Australia’s “Q and A” television program in October.
Some things are straightforward.
