It wasn’t what stock market bulls were hoping for.
Stocks tumbled on Wednesday after the Federal Reserve, citing the strength of the economy, signaled that it planned to keep raising interest rates and shrinking the extraordinary amount of support it has provided to financial markets in the decade since the financial crisis.
The S&P 500 stock index finished 1.5 percent lower, bringing its losses for the month so far to 9.2 percent. The benchmark had been higher ahead of the Fed’s 2 p.m. announcement about interest rates and a news conference that followed.
The central bank raised its benchmark interest rate another quarter percentage point.
That increase had been widely predicted. But in the financial markets, hopes had been high that the Fed would simultaneously signal its growing concern about the outlook for economic growth.
Such an outlook is known as “dovish” in financial market jargon. And there had been broad consensus among stock market analysts that the Fed would announce a “dovish hike” — that is, an increase paired with language that indicated it would slow the pace of tightening substantially — on Wednesday.
The Fed did acknowledge growing expectations that the world economy could be slowing. Chairman Jerome H. Powell emphasized that the bank would tailor its policy in response to economic data.
But generally, the central bank highlighted the ongoing strength of the American economy, a reason not to ease off interest rate increases too fast. Unemployment is near 50-year lows, growth in 2018 has been the fastest in years, and even as stock markets have sold off sharply, incoming numbers show little indication that the economy is turning sour.
The market did not make a decisive move lower until Mr. Powell’s post-decision news conference. Close observers of the stock market noted that losses in the S&P 500 accelerated after Mr. Powell answered a reporter’s question about the whether Fed had discussed changing its efforts to shrink the large stockpile of safe government bonds it is holding on its balance sheet.
In the years after the financial crisis, the Fed’s balance sheet ballooned as the central bank engaged in multiple rounds of so-called quantitative easing. The policy, in which the Fed effectively created new money and used it to purchase Treasury bonds in an effort to push longer-term interest rates lower, was also credited with helping to push a broad range of other asset prices — including stocks, corporate bonds and commodities — up sharply as well.
Increasingly, some see the phenomenon as playing a role in the unusually broad headwinds financial markets have faced this year. For the first time in decades, almost every broad asset class has declined or posted minuscule gains this year. And after the sell-off on Wednesday, the S&P 500 is now down 6.2 percent for the year.
Of course, this year’s losses have to be put in perspective. Since the market bottomed in March 2009, the S&P is up 270 percent.
That rally is, by some measures, the longest bull market on record, though its survival is looking increasingly precarious. The drop of the stock market on Wednesday puts the S&P 500 down 14.5 percent from its recent peak — a drop of 20 percent would put stocks in a new bear market.
