WASHINGTON — Matthew G. Whitaker, who was installed last month as acting attorney general by President Trump, has cleared himself to supervise the special counsel’s investigation, rejecting the recommendation of career Justice Department ethics specialists that he recuse himself, according to a letter the department sent to Senate leaders on Thursday night.
The development came soon after the disclosure that the president’s nominee for attorney general, William P. Barr, had written a memo this spring in which he strongly criticized one of the main lines of inquiry by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III — whether Mr. Trump had committed obstruction of justice. Disclosure of the memo raised questions about whether Mr. Barr would order Mr. Mueller to shut down that component of the inquiry if the Senate confirmed him.
Together, the developments underscored the potential threats to Mr. Mueller’s ability to complete his work without interference at a time when his inquiry appears to be drawing closer to the White House and the president’s most trusted associates.
“It’s becoming pretty clear that the president is basing his choices for leadership at the Justice Department on candidates’ criticism of the Mueller investigation,” Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, the top Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee, wrote on Twitter. “We can all see what’s happening here. It’s past time for Congress to pass bipartisan legislation protecting the special counsel’s investigation from political interference,” he said.
Both developments trace back to Mr. Trump’s decision, a day after the midterm elections in which Democrats won control of the House last month, to oust Attorney General Jeff Sessions. Enraging Mr. Trump, Mr. Sessions had recused himself from overseeing investigations related to the 2016 election on the advice of department ethics officials because of his ties to the Trump campaign.
Mr. Sessions’s recusal left the deputy attorney general, Rod J. Rosenstein, in the role of acting attorney general for the investigation into whether the Trump campaign conspired with Russia in its election-interference operation, and whether Mr. Trump later obstructed justice.
After firing Mr. Sessions, Mr. Trump named Mr. Whitaker — whom the White House had earlier imposed on Mr. Sessions as his chief of staff — the acting attorney general until the Senate confirms a successor. He then nominated Mr. Barr, who had served as attorney general under President George Bush, for the position.
The immediate question raised by Mr. Trump’s postelection maneuvers was whether Mr. Whitaker would, like Mr. Sessions before him, recuse himself from overseeing the Russia investigation. Mr. Whitaker had publicly denigrated the special counsel inquiry before joining the administration; had worked on the campaign of a witness in the investigation, Sam Clovis; and had earlier interviewed with the White House to be its top in-house counsel for defending against the special counsel.
The Justice Department had refused to answer questions about whether ethics officials cleared Mr. Whitaker to take over supervision of Mr. Mueller. A senior department official said on Thursday that Mr. Whitaker had not been receiving briefings on the special counsel investigation, but had decided on Wednesday that he would not recuse himself and would instead assume final say over major investigative or prosecutorial actions Mr. Mueller wants to take.
Separately, the Justice Department provided to the Senate Judiciary Committee late on Wednesday a package of Mr. Barr’s writings and speeches. The documents included a 19-page, apparently unsolicited memo Mr. Barr sent to senior department officials in June in which he sharply criticized Mr. Mueller’s focus on whether Mr. Trump had obstructed justice.
Public speculation about an obstruction charge has focused on actions like Mr. Trump’s pressuring the F.B.I. director at the time, James B. Comey, to quash a criminal investigation into his first national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, for lying to investigators about his conversations with the Russian ambassador; Mr. Trump’s firing of Mr. Comey; and the president’s seeming dangling of potential pardons at witnesses in Mr. Mueller’s inquiry.
Mr. Barr’s memo was first reported by The Wall Street Journal.
Several Democrats reacted to the memo and the recusal decision with alarm. Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York, who will soon become chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, suggested that Mr. Whitaker was more concerned with satisfying Mr. Trump than protecting the department’s integrity. He said he would grill Mr. Whitaker at an oversight hearing next month.
In criticizing the notion that the obstruction law can be applied to otherwise lawful presidential actions if they are undertaken with a corrupt motive, Mr. Barr argued that it would open the door to submitting not only presidents but also ordinary Justice Department prosecutors to the risk of second-guessing via criminal grand jury investigations.
“If embraced by the department, this theory would have potentially disastrous implications, not just for the presidency, but for the executive branch as a whole and for the department in particular,” he wrote.
Several law professors criticized Mr. Barr’s memo, saying that it failed to address arguments against its conclusions. Appeals courts, they said, have ruled that acts that would otherwise would be lawful exercises of one’s rights, like a lawyer filing motions against the government, can constitute obstruction of justice if done with corrupt intentions.
And in an analysis on the legal blog Just Security, Martin Lederman, a Georgetown University law professor and former Office of Legal Counsel official in the Clinton and Obama administrations, criticized Mr. Barr for claiming that the Constitution gives the president “all encompassing” and “illimitable” power over law-enforcement matters.
Such “breathtaking claims,” Mr. Lederman wrote, are “inconsistent with vast swaths of U.S. history,” including a 1988 Supreme Court precedent that Mr. Barr did not mention. In that case, the court upheld a statute in which Congress had authorized the appointment of independent counsels to investigate and prosecute executive branch wrongdoing outside the president’s control.
Other legal experts expressed surprise at how Mr. Whitaker had addressed ethics questions: Rather than requesting a formal ethics vetting and opinion under Justice Department regulations, he engaged in an informal conversation with the department’s career ethics lawyers that focused on statements like those he had made as a political commentator.
After reviewing the matter, the ethics lawyers said the decision was a “close call” but advised Mr. Whitaker to recuse himself to avoid the appearance of a conflict of interest, the senior department official said. But the decision ultimately rested with Mr. Whitaker, under department rules.
Mr. Whitaker separately brought together his own ad hoc advisory council of four political appointees within the department, including an unidentified United States attorney.
They recommended that he not recuse himself, arguing that there was no precedent for an attorney general to step aside solely because of appearances, the official said.