Major League Baseball, in conjunction with the players’ union, on Wednesday announced an agreement with the Cuban baseball federation to legalize and streamline the transfer of professional baseball players to the United States and Canada — but the move immediately met resistance from the Trump administration.
The agreement is intended to bring order to the often chaotic path, fraught with human trafficking, by which Cuban players have landed in the major leagues in recent decades.
But within hours of the announcement, the Trump administration had attacked the deal, essentially threatening to scuttle it before it could be put in place.
The White House said in a statement that it would continue to work to restrict the Cuban regime’s ability to profit from United States businesses. It also indicated that the plan would create another human rights issue — one carried out by the Cuban government rather than traffickers.
Many current stars made their way out of Cuba previously, like Yoenis Cespedes of the Mets, Aroldis Chapman of the Yankees, Jose Abreu of the Chicago White Sox and Yasiel Puig of the Los Angeles Dodgers. They followed the path of players like Rene Arocha; Orlando Hernandez, who is known as El Duque; Livan Hernandez; and Rey Ordonez, the former Met who jumped over a wall to escape the Cuban national team during an international competition in 1993.
The three-year deal would create a posting system similar to how players from Japan and South Korea join the major leagues.
According to the agreement, the Cuban baseball federation would free its players to sign with Major League Baseball teams. The players would automatically qualify for a United States work visa and would also have the right to take family members with them and return to Cuba at will.
The deal calls for the Cuban baseball federation to release a player who has accumulated either six years of service time in Cuba or who is at least 25 years old. In exchange, the Cuban federation would receive 25 percent of a player’s signing bonus for a minor league player; for a major league player, the payment would be based on a formula that assesses 15 percent to 25 percent of the signing bonus.
Dan Halem, M.L.B.’s deputy commissioner and chief legal officer, took the lead in negotiations with the Cubans and was joined in the last two days by Manfred as baseball sought approval for the agreement from various branches of the United States government. M.L.B.’s legislative affairs committee, which includes the Yankees’ team president, Randy Levine, also participated in those negotiations. The deal would give scouts access to watch Cuban players at organized showcases.
The Cuban Embassy did not immediately respond to a request for comment. But the Cuban ambassador, José Ramón Cabañas, seemed to express government support for the deal on Twitter.
Antonio Castro, the youngest son of Fidel Castro, who died in 2016, is the vice president of the Cuban baseball federation and has talked of the sport as an instrument to forge better relations with the United States.
Still, for decades, the Cuban government prohibited its players from joining the major leagues, leaving dozens of ambitious players to seek other means to sign with teams. That often led to the players’ being smuggled out in dangerous journeys by sea on speedboats, often at the mercy of human traffickers, smugglers and others looking to earn hefty profits.
Many additional talented players, who could have made millions in the United States, stayed at home to play for meager wages.
Abreu is one of several players with harrowing tales of escape from Cuba, forced estrangement from families left behind and harassment from traffickers even after they arrived in the United States.
M.L.B. and the Cuban baseball federation have been in talks ever since the United States and Cuba began a thaw in relations under the Obama administration in 2014. Soon after that, baseball’s commissioner’s office secured a license from the Treasury Department to legally commence negotiations with the Cubans.
On March 22, 2016, the Tampa Bay Rays played an exhibition game in Havana, attended by President Barack Obama during his visit there, with the long-term goal of encouraging an agreement on the free movement of players. But normalization of relations between the countries has slowed under the Trump administration, and some current administration officials have expressed reservations to M.L.B. and the players’ association about doing business with Cuban entities while a trade embargo, enacted more than 50 years ago during the Cold War, remains in place.
While the Trump administration bristled at the plan, an M.L.B. official noted that in a National Security Presidential Memorandum from June 2017, the government indicated it did not want to affect any existing approvals with Cuba; M.L.B. was granted approval the previous year.
One of the hurdles has been the restriction on money going into Cuba. The policy of the American government has been to allow financial support for everyday Cubans while keeping dollars out of the hands of the Cuban government or military.
Another possible sticking point: The Cuban federation, which is required under Olympic rules to be independent of the central government, can still prevent younger players from leaving Cuba before they reach their 25th birthday or have six years of service time. That would leave those players vulnerable to the dangers of human trafficking if they sought to defect.
This has complicated negotiations between M.L.B. and the Cubans. In the posting agreement with Asian countries, younger players are also prevented from joining M.L.B. teams, but they do not live under authoritarian governments, and M.L.B. was wary of entering into an agreement that would still trap young players who did not want to stay in Cuba.
To address the issue, the deal includes a one- or two-year waiting period for those players once they leave Cuba. If the Cuban federation does not release a younger player and he still leaves on his own, he would not be able to collect any money from M.L.B. for a year or two, depending on when he leaves. The aim is to discourage human traffickers who would not want to wait that long to be paid.
But through the transfer of funds, M.L.B. hopes to provide the incentive for the Cuban federation to release younger players.
There were 25 players born in Cuba playing in the major leagues in 2018. It is thought that most of the best current players from Cuba are already in the major leagues. But the new agreement could help teams uncover and develop other prospects, and could also deter marginal players from leaving their Cuban teams in the hopes of reaching the majors before they are ready. Some who have defected were never signed and reside in other Caribbean nations, waiting for a chance.