JERUSALEM — Israel’s governing coalition said on Monday that the country would hold elections in early April — an abrupt move that experts said was largely aimed at bolstering public support for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu as he battles multiple corruption investigations.
Mr. Netanyahu’s government has become increasingly precarious since the hard-line defense minister, Avigdor Lieberman, resigned and pulled his party from the governing coalition last month, leaving it with a slim majority in the 120-seat Parliament.
The immediate spark for calling the election was a brewing crisis over a proposed law to regulate the enlistment of ultra-Orthodox men in the military. The measure requires approval by a court-imposed deadline of Jan. 15, but does not have enough support to pass in Parliament.
But Mr. Netanyahu is suspected of bribery and other crimes in three graft cases. The attorney general is expected to decide by the spring whether to prosecute him and, if so, on what charges.
Experts said Mr. Netanyahyu’s sudden decision to bring the elections forward might be aimed at trying to pre-empt just that, because a victory would send a strong signal to the attorney general, Avichai Mandelblit, as he considers whether to file charges.
Mr. Netanyahu had previously said he wanted the government to complete its full term, which is scheduled to end next November.
“Netanyahu obviously has finally decided that he wants elections and he wants them fast,” said Reuven Hazan, a professor of political science at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
As the corruption investigations progressed, Professor Hazan told reporters, Mr. Netanyahu saw the possibility of prosecution as an increasingly serious threat.
Political analysts said the dispute over the enlistment law provided Mr. Netanyahu with a convenient premise for calling an early election, allowing him to blame the ultra-Orthodox politicians within his coalition and the opposition parties who are against the legislation.
The looming crisis over the law allowed Mr. Netanyahu to control the timing both of the dissolution of Parliament, expected later this week, and of the next elections, which are expected to take place on April 9.
Still, elections can be a gamble for Mr. Netanyahu, who is banking on winning a fourth consecutive term in office, and his fifth over all.
Despite the corruption investigations, Mr. Netanyahu’s popularity does not appear to have been seriously dented, and his conservative party, Likud, performs far better than any other in polls.
This is in part because many Israelis do not consider any of his current opponents on the right, in the center or on the left as qualified to be prime minister.
Mr. Netanyahu, Israel’s longest-serving prime minister since David Ben-Gurion, has been in power for most of the past decade, in addition to serving a three-year term as leader in the 1990s.
Speaking to a Likud party faction meeting in a live broadcast from the Parliament building shortly after the election announcement on Monday, Mr. Netanyahu opened his re-election campaign by listing what he called the “great achievements” of his departing government, including in security, the economy, transportation, tourism and infrastructure.
He added that he saw his current coalition, made up of right-wing and religious parties, as the “nucleus” of the next coalition.
Last month, with his coalition teetering after Mr. Lieberman’s departure, Mr. Netanyahu berated other coalition members who were threatening to leave, telling them it would be “irresponsible” to bring down the government at such a complex time for national security.
Since then, Mr. Netanyahu has burnished his image as Israel’s top security chief.
He took on the role of defense minister, and the military began a campaign in the north to expose and block tunnels dug by Hezbollah beneath the border from Lebanon, diverting media attention away from Gaza and from Mr. Netanyahu’s political and legal problems.
But Mr. Netanyahu arouses bitter opposition from critics who say he has used his years in power to entrench Israel’s settlement project in the West Bank and to stave off a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as well as to try to curb the influence of the courts, critical news media and other liberal forces in Israeli society.
Members of the political opposition celebrated the announcement of new elections.
“The worst government we’ve ever had is going home,” Merav Michaeli, a lawmaker from the center-left Labor Party, wrote on Twitter.
New, potentially strong opponents may now join the race, like Benny Gantz, a former military chief of staff who has been waiting in the wings, and could even try to bring the center-left parties together to run as a united bloc.
And some analysts suggested that the attorney general could now face public pressure to expedite his decision regarding a possible indictment of Mr. Netanyahu.
In addition, she said, the Israeli public has been exposed to a lot of embarrassing details from the investigations into Mr. Netanyahu over a long period that, cumulatively, could harm him.
