President Trump is in an increasingly precarious legal position, Britain’s prime minister will keep her post, and a Times investigation explains the push to reduce fuel efficiency standards in the U.S. Let’s get started.
Federal prosecutors announced on Wednesday that they had reached a deal with the publisher of The National Enquirer, American Media Inc., which admitted to paying off a Playboy model in 2016 in order to protect Mr. Trump’s presidential campaign.
That payment, as well as one arranged by Mr. Trump’s former lawyer Michael Cohen to the pornographic film star Stormy Daniels, are now being framed by prosecutors as illegal campaign contributions.
Related: Mr. Cohen was sentenced to three years in prison on Wednesday for breaking campaign finance laws, tax evasion and lying to Congress. He said the payments were an effort to cover up the president’s “dirty deeds.” That claim is now corroborated by American Media, which is run by a longtime friend of Mr. Trump, David Pecker.
Explainer: Here’s everyone who has been charged in the investigation by the special counsel, Robert Mueller, into possible links between the Trump campaign and Russia.
What’s next: The prevailing view at the Justice Department is that a sitting president cannot be indicted, although prosecutors in Manhattan could consider charging Mr. Trump after he leaves office.
The embattled British prime minister won a no-confidence vote among the lawmakers of her Conservative Party on Wednesday, but she still lacks enough support in Parliament to pass her plan to leave the European Union. She also stands little chance of winning the concessions from Europe that she needs to break the logjam.
More than a third of the Conservatives voted against Mrs. May, who won the vote after promising that she would step down before the next general election, scheduled for 2022.
What’s next: Mrs. May plans to meet with other European leaders today. She has promised to let Parliament vote on the Brexit plan by Jan. 21, but if there is no agreement then, Britain could face a chaotic departure on March 29. Here are some possible scenarios.
Beijing has tempered its approach to U.S. trade negotiations, even after a prominent Chinese technology executive was arrested in Canada at the prompting of American officials.
China has characterized the detention as a simple law-enforcement dispute while making trade concessions to help defuse tensions — and it may have no choice. With its economy in a sharp downturn, worsened by the trade war, it is negotiating from a position of weakness.
News analysis: President Trump has talked about intervening in the case of the Chinese executive, who is awaiting extradition to the U.S., if it would help achieve “the largest trade deal ever made.” While legal, such a move would set a troubling precedent, experts say.
Related: A second Canadian has been detained in China in an apparent response to the executive’s arrest.
Catch up: Here’s a guide to the recent tensions involving the U.S., China and now Canada.
A Times investigation has found that the Trump administration’s plan to allow cars to emit more pollution has been covertly supported by the country’s biggest oil refiner: Marathon Petroleum.
The campaign to relax fuel efficiency standards has been conducted in Congress, on Facebook and in statehouses nationwide with the help of powerful oil-industry groups.
The impact: The main argument for a shift in standards — that the U.S. is so awash in oil that it no longer needs to worry about energy conservation — clashes with decades of federal energy and environmental policy.
Are we becoming pagans?
There’s not much question that the idea of faith is changing.
Our Opinion columnist Ross Douthat — who wrote a book about modern Christian heresies — wonders whether America might now be best described as pagan.
Limit for Nancy Pelosi: The representative from California announced that she had reached a deal with dissident Democrats to restrict her tenure as speaker to four years.
Apple additions: The technology giant announced today that it would open a $1 billion campus in Austin, Tex., and expand operations in other cities around the country.
Report on school massacre: A state inquiry into the shooting in Parkland, Fla., in February found numerous security and law enforcement failures. Seventeen people were killed in the attack.
Growing power in Hungary: The country’s Parliament, controlled by Prime Minister Viktor Orban’s far-right party, approved the creation of a parallel court system, cementing executive control over the judiciary.
Snapshot: Above, dancers during the annual pilgrimage in honor of the Virgin of Guadalupe, patron saint of Mexican Catholics, in Mexico City on Wednesday.
Rock & Roll Hall of Fame honors: Janet Jackson, Radiohead, Def Leppard and Stevie Nicks are among the new class of inductees, the organization announced today.
Late-night comedy: Michael Cohen denounced President Trump at his sentencing. Stephen Colbert was not won over.
Cook: Meatballs with the savory-sweet flavors of Korean barbecue.
Read: Anna Burns’s “Milkman,” winner of the 2018 Man Booker Prize, debuts on our paperback trade fiction best-seller list. Here are all of our latest lists.
Watch: Lily, a fuchsia Muppet who first appeared on “Sesame Street” seven years ago, returns in this YouTube video as someone homeless.
Listen to: “Clap Your Hands,” a euphoric three-minute New Orleans funk romp. This song from Galactic, featuring Miss Charm Taylor, should have you bobbing your head if not stomping your feet.
Smarter Living: Thinking about sending your kids to college? In 18 years, four years of a public university will be around $184,000 — as long as 2018-19 tuition, fees, room and board grow only 4 percent annually over the next decade. We have a guide about how to manage it, but the first step is clear: Start saving now.
And try to get enough sleep — maybe six to eight hours. More than that, studies suggest, is not great for you.
Maybe the world is not so small after all — even in an age of mass culture.
In Spain, drumming parties called tamboradas continue around the clock for days. Across Georgia, athletes perform chidaoba — wrestling accompanied by music. And in Kazakhstan, horse farmers celebrate the new breeding season with songs, dances and games.
The cultural agency of the United Nations recently added these traditions, and more, to its List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.
The idea is to recognize and preserve unique rituals that have been passed down through generations. Unesco acknowledges music and dance, hunting practices and traditional crafts, knowledge about nature and the universe — in short, the things that tell us who we are.
Traditions in danger of vanishing are given a special designation. This year those included Egyptian hand puppetry and Syrian shadow play.
You can browse hundreds of examples, many with videos, at Unesco’s website.
To Chris Harcum for wrangling our best-seller lists, Eleanor Stanford for keeping an eye on culture and Kenneth R. Rosen and James K. Williamson for Smarter Living ideas. Jean Rutter, our Evening Briefing writer, wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about the rise of far-right extremism in the U.S.
• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: State gambling game (5 letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• While we’re running through our year-end lists, please consider telling us the most interesting things you gleaned from The Times this year.