WASHINGTON — With Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke departing at the end of the year, the agency will likely be run, at least for a time, by its deputy secretary, David Bernhardt, a former oil lobbyist who has played a central role in enacting President Trump’s agenda of rolling back conservation measures and opening up public lands to drilling and mining.
Mr. Bernhardt’s supporters and detractors say that while Mr. Zinke has been the public face of some of the most significant reversals of public land protections in the nation’s history, behind the scenes it has been Mr. Bernhardt pulling the policy levers to enact Mr. Trump’s aggressive energy agenda.
“Bernhardt has been running the policy show ever since he’s been there as deputy secretary,” said Kathleen Sgamma, the president of the Western Energy Alliance, a Denver-based association of independent oil and gas companies.
It was Mr. Bernhardt, for example, who oversaw a controversial revision of a program to protect tens of millions of acres of habitat of the imperiled sage grouse, a puffy-chested, chicken-like bird that roams over 10 oil-rich Western states. Mr. Bernhardt’s proposal to change that plan, released just this month, would strip away protections from about nine million acres of the sage grouse habitat, a move that in a stroke opened up more land to oil and gas drilling than any other single policy action by the Trump administration.
Mr. Bernhardt’s critics contend that much of the experience that gave Mr. Bernhardt his deep policy knowledge — namely, his years representing oil companies — creates a potential conflict of interest given that he oversees policies that could benefit companies he once represented. At the same time, they note that Mr. Bernhardt’s long experience in Washington and with the law means he is unlikely to make ethical missteps.
A spokeswoman for the Interior Department, Heather Swift, did not respond to emails requesting comment from Mr. Bernhardt. An email sent to the Interior Department’s communications office was also not returned.
Mr. Zinke, once a favorite of Mr. Trump’s, drew the president’s ire after allegations of possible conflicts of interest and violations of agency policy triggered numerous investigations. At least one of those investigations has been referred to the Justice Department, a sign that the federal government may open up a criminal investigation into the former secretary.
Mr. Zinke has repeatedly denied wrongdoing. “I followed every procedure, every policy, every rule, and most importantly I followed the law,” he said in an interview in April.
Mr. Bernhardt is expected to serve as acting Interior secretary in the wake of Mr. Zinke’s departure. It remains unclear who might lead the agency in the long term. Mr. Trump could nominate Mr. Bernhardt to be the next secretary, a position that would require Senate confirmation, but it is also possible he might choose someone else. The job has typically gone to Western state lawmakers or governors.
Mr. Bernhardt’s presumed rise to acting secretary echoes the events at the Environmental Protection Agency earlier this year. In July, Scott Pruitt, then head of the E.P.A., was forced to step down amid a series of ethics scandals. He was succeeded in an acting capacity by his deputy, Andrew Wheeler, a former coal lobbyist with a low professional profile but a deep knowledge of the agency he ran and the regulations on industry he sought to undo.
Mr. Bernhardt, a lawyer and former Interior Department official in the George W. Bush administration, lacks the rugged outdoorsy image embraced by Mr. Zinke, a former Navy SEAL who drew praise from Mr. Trump for his out-of-central-casting style.
Environmental and government watchdog groups say that as Mr. Bernhardt has enacted those policies, he has overseen proposals that could create profits for his former clients. Representative Raúl M. Grijalva, the Arizona Democrat who is expected to become chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee once Democrats return to the House as the majority party in January, has said he intends to look at Mr. Bernhardt’s activities within the agency.
“Mr. Bernhardt’s serious conflicts of interest are well known to us, and we’ll be scrutinizing his role in Interior Department decision-making whatever position he holds,” said Mr. Grijalva in an emailed statement.
The energy industry has benefited from policies Mr. Bernhardt has shepherded. The agency has opened up the East Coast to offshore oil and gas drilling for the first time, loosened the standards of the Endangered Species Act, weakened safety regulations for offshore drilling equipment and reduced the boundaries of national monuments to open the land to mining and drilling.
Ethics watchdogs say that despite the fact that Mr. Bernhardt’s former clients are likely to benefit from his policy actions, Mr. Bernhardt has complied with the letter of the ethics pledge, because he has steered clear of enacting policies that have specifically benefited a single former client. Nevertheless, they argue that there remains an ethics issue because he has pushed policies that have broadly benefited the oil and gas industry, including his former clients.
“Bernhardt goes right up to the edge,” said Chris Saeger, the executive director of the Western Values Project, an advocacy organization. “The spirit of these laws is that you shouldn’t use the federal government to enrich people who are close to you, people you used to work for,” he said.
As an example, Mr. Saeger’s group cited a November 2017 move by the Interior Department’s Bureau of Land Management to grant a permit to Eni, an Italian oil company and a former client of Mr. Bernhardt’s, to drill in federal Arctic waters. The permit — the first granted to a company since 2015 — came just months after Mr. Bernhardt was confirmed to his job. The agency has given out many similar drilling permits since then, “But at the end of the day, his former client is still getting what they want,” Mr. Saeger said.
Mr. Bernhardt’s plan to weaken the protection of the sage grouse also translates into a victory for his former oil industry clients, who have long sought such a change. In particular, his former client, the Independent Petroleum Association of America, has pressed for years to reduce federal protection measures on the habitat of the sage grouse, much of which is believed to contain rich deposits of fossil fuels.
In March, a group of oil companies, including the Independent Petroleum Association of America, wrote to Mr. Bernhardt to thank him for his work on actions “that rescinded and revised mitigation policies that far exceeded statutory authority.” The companies also listed policies they hoped Mr. Bernhardt would change, including the sage grouse plan.
