It helped propel the careers of Ella Fitzgerald and Jimi Hendrix. James Brown recorded one of the most famous live albums there. And Aretha Franklin called it home.
Now, the Apollo Theater in Harlem plans to expand its footprint for the first time since 1934, taking on two new spaces — one with 99 seats, another with 199 — as part of the redevelopment of the Victoria Theater, a few doors away, on West 125th Street.
The resulting Apollo Performing Arts Center, announced on Tuesday, will be used to incubate works by up-and-coming artists, particularly performers of color, who might not be ready for the main theater’s 1,500-seat auditorium, Apollo executives said.
“It continues to solidify the Apollo Theater as a vital civic and economic cornerstone of Harlem,” Jonelle Procope, the president and chief executive officer of the Apollo Theater Foundation, said in an interview. She added that she saw the new venue as Harlem’s equivalent to Lincoln Center or the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The idea for expansion was hatched about two decades ago, according to Ms. Procope. In 1983, two years after declaring bankruptcy, the theater received city and state landmark status. Its financial struggles continued, however, threatening its very existence. In 1991, the foundation, a nonprofit, was formed to oversee the troubled institution. The theater’s building is currently owned by New York State and is leased to the foundation.
In the late ’90s, the team behind the Apollo was given the chance to develop the Victoria, a former movie theater built in 1917. But after the Sept. 11 attacks and the economy’s souring, the board chose to focus only on the main auditorium.
New York State, which owns the Victoria, announced an ambitious renovation of it more than a decade ago, but the project faced numerous delays, including a change in developers, before construction began last year. The final product, a public and private partnership, is to include a mixture of residential condominiums, a Marriott Renaissance Hotel and the performing arts center. The Apollo is leasing the space from the Harlem Community Development Corporation.
The challenge, Ms. Procope said, will be in developing a viable business model for the center. Recently, the theater’s finances have been stable. For the fiscal year 2017, the Apollo ran a slight surplus of just over $200,000 on its $15 million budget, its fifth straight year of doing so.
It’s unclear how much the new venues will cost the Apollo. Ms. Procope declined to give exact numbers, but said that much of the capital had come through fund-raising.
“We raised the money we needed to get into the space,” Ms. Procope said, adding that she expects the yearly operating budget to increase to $20 million in the next five years.
The new Apollo facility, designed by the architecture firm Kostow Greenwood, will total 25,000 square feet and will be on the third and fourth floors of the building. As part of the project, renovations that began two years ago at the Apollo Theater will be completed.
The new black box theaters are scheduled to open in the fall of 2020; programming at the main Apollo stage will not be affected by the construction.
Kamilah Forbes, the executive producer of the Apollo, said the new space will allow the Apollo to commission and develop the art, rather than just showcase it.
There will be an emphasis on workshops as well as on producing more diverse pieces than the main stage, such as conceptual performance art. In addition, the new theaters will allow for more partnerships with smaller cultural organizations in the area that otherwise wouldn’t see their works associated with the Apollo name.
