LONDON — Charlotte Prodger, a Glasgow-based artist who makes films using her iPhone, has won this year’s Turner Prize — British art’s biggest accolade.
Ms. Prodger, 44, won the prize on Tuesday night at a ceremony at Tate Britain in London for her video works including “BRIDGIT,” a 33-minute film that features painterly clips of everything from swans feeding among some rocks to a T-shirt drying on a radiator. The images are overlaid with Ms. Prodger and her friends reading excerpts from the diaries she wrote as a queer teenager in rural Scotland, passages from books, and music such as snatches of a pirate radio station.
Mr. Farquharson said Ms. Prodger’s Turner Prize win was timely, not only because of her use of technology — she has also incorporated YouTube clips into her work — but also her focus on “queerness in the broadest sense” and how people’s identities can change over time.
Ms. Prodger’s films are so multilayered that they feel novelistic, Mr. Farquharson added, comparing her work to the novels of James Joyce and Marcel Proust.
“I’m quite overwhelmed,” Ms. Prodger said upon winning, before making a call for support of artists. “I wouldn’t be in this room were it not for the public funding I received from Scotland for free higher education, and later in the form of artists’ bursaries and grants to support not only the production of work but living costs,” she said.
Ms. Prodger is the third woman in a row to win, after Lubaina Himid and the multimedia artist Helen Marten.
“I was very pleased that all the finalists used it,” she said.
Ms. Prodger’s contribution was “the least bad,” he added.
Nevertheless, Ms. Prodger was a surprise winner. The favorite was Forensic Architecture — a research firm that uses architectural technology to investigate human-rights abuses. The other two shortlisted artists were Naeem Mohaiemen, nominated for two long films — one exploring Bangladesh’s politics after independence, the other about a man trapped in an airport — and Luke Willis Thompson, who makes video portraits of victims of police brutality.
Ms. Prodger was born in Bournemouth on England’s south coast, but grew up in rural Scotland. She studied at Goldsmiths, part of the University of London, and at the Glasgow School of Art, and has had solo exhibitions at galleries including the Sculpture Center in New York and the Bergen Kunsthall in Norway.
Although not a household name, Ms. Prodger has been regularly called on to discuss queerness in art by British magazines. “Ultimately, queerness is not a category or a style but a lived experience, which I feel is in danger of being colonized, of being sanitized,” she told Frieze in 2014.
