Politics|Trump Said Amazon Was Scamming the Post Office. His Administration Disagrees.
Trump Said Amazon Was Scamming the Post Office. His Administration Disagrees.
WASHINGTON — President Trump spent much of last spring accusing Amazon of pulling a “scam” on the American taxpayer and ripping off the United States Postal Service. On Tuesday, his administration delivered its own verdict: Not so much.
The task force created by Mr. Trump to investigate the Postal Service’s finances did conclude that the mail system is losing money. But a report issued on Tuesday said that commercial package delivery for Amazon and other e-commerce retailers was actually profitable for the Postal Service and was not costing the United States “massive amounts of money,” as Mr. Trump has suggested in his tweets.
Commercial package delivery is not profitable enough to offset the revenue losses the Postal Service is suffering, however, as Americans mail fewer and fewer first-class letters, and the Treasury Department task force outlined several recommendations to help shore up its finances.
“Should be charging MUCH MORE!” he wrote.
But the report did include some recommendations that made online retailers uneasy. One would push the Postal Service to price package delivery to maximize profits, instead of maximizing delivery volume. Another would force the service to create separate accounting books for letters and for packages, which retailers fear could lead to an increase in package rates.
It also called for steps to reduce the service’s labor costs, including eliminating collective bargaining over pay for postal employees. And it recommended lifting caps on how much the service can charge for letter delivery and giving it power to reduce the number of days it delivers mail — which most likely would mean ending letter delivery on Saturdays.
The task force also proposed creating a complicated new system of pricing for packages, in which it could cost less to send a box of prescription drugs than to send a board game. It would also allow the postal system to charge other delivery services for access to Americans’ mailboxes; under current law, the Postal Service holds a monopoly on what can actually be delivered to a mailbox.
The report was nonbinding. Many of its recommendations will fall into the storm drain of a divided Congress, with Democrats set to take control of the House in January. It was unclear why the administration chose to release the report on Tuesday, when the news cycle was dominated by trade tensions with China and funeral proceedings in Washington for former President George Bush.
Instead, they cast the report as a needed set of reforms for a service that has been losing money for a decade, and is projected to lose tens of billions over the next decade.
