One solution: Start fewer things.
On any given day I have a dozen projects or stories in various states of completion that I’m working (you know, “working”) on.
Of those, maybe I’ll finish two or three this week, come back to another two or three, put a few on the back burner for later and probably let the rest fade into oblivion. It’s not that I don’t believe in those ideas — the opposite, really, I want to do them all! — it’s just that life gets in the way, and we have only so many hours in the day. And I’m guessing this all sounds pretty familiar.
It’s a lot of things, but the factor that has the biggest impact is also the factor that is most under our control: The very decision to start something in the first place.
There’s a “predisposition of humans to underestimate the time it takes to complete a thing” called the planning fallacy, which leads us to overcommit to opportunities at the expense of actually completing them, said Greg McKeown, author of “Essentialism” (one of my favorite books).
 This is yet another case of the unconscious brain working against our self-interests.
Compounding the problem is that starting new things can be exciting, which leads to a loop in which our brains are rewarded for starting something new because it feels good. We’re built to crave that feeling. But once the excitement fades we tend to lose interest in things we don’t truly care about, so they toil away half-completed, nagging at us and adding more stress.
It’s not an easy cycle to break. But it can be broken. The solution?
“Count the full cost,” Mr. McKeown said.
This means that whenever you’re estimating the investment it’ll take to complete something — time or otherwise — multiply it by three. That sounds excessive, yes, but since Mr. McKeown learned this trick, he’s found it to be “absolutely” accurate when making realistic estimates.
But knowing what to do and what not to do is only the beginning. Once you’ve identified that a given idea is worth doing — say, you want to knit a hat — how do you follow through without abandoning it when you hit a roadblock?
It’s important to know some of the reasons we hit those roadblocks, so let’s look at an awful, tired cliché: Perfect is the enemy of good.
Remember, too, that getting distracted and thrown off track can be just as bad as getting bogged down with perfection. We are awful multitaskers in general, so write out precisely what the components of a given project are and how to accomplish them, then pick them off one-by-one.
A great way to get started with this is to identify the tiniest units of progress and just start small — we call this micro-progress. When you start ticking those items off your to-do list your brain gets a chemical reward that encourages you to keep building on those tiny successes. Accomplishments beget accomplishments, and studies show that incremental progress can be a strong motivator.
Finally, know when to cut your losses. Set an arbitrary cutoff to call it quits when something has been lingering in the background for too long. If the hat you’re knitting has been tucked away in the closet for eight months and taunts every time you pick out a sweater, just get rid of it. We have only so much attentional capacity, so don’t let a project you know you’re never going to finish take up any of that space.
When all else fails? Acknowledge that you’ve given up on yet another project, just move on and cut yourself some slack.
What keeps you motivated when you’re about to give up on something? Let me know on Twitter at @timherrera.
P.S. — T Magazine’s editors are answering your questions about what to get the trickiest people on your holiday list, from family members who already have everything to picky friends to significant others with singular tastes. As the holiday season approaches, ask us to draw on our fields of expertise — fashion and beauty, food, home design and books and culture — to find the perfect gift for the otherwise impossible to please. Ask your questions here.
Is Your House Ready for Holiday Guests? Maybe we shouldn’t let house shame creep in and ruin our time with family and friends.
How to Accept a Compliment — Even if It’s From Yourself Acknowledging small wins, even if they barely chip away at our larger goals, can still boost our mood and motivation.
5 Cheap(ish) Things to Pamper Yourself With You deserve it.
How to Keep Your Skin Dewy During the Winter The latest tinted cover-ups deliver deep hydration to smooth your complexion — and not just in the short term.
Do Cruciferous Vegetables Really Fight Cancer? You cannot go wrong incorporating a lot of cruciferous vegetables, which include broccoli and brussels sprouts as well as dark leafy greens like kale and arugula, in your diet.
How to Survive Feeling Homesick Moving out on my own was exciting and scary at the same time. Here’s how I got through it.
This week I’ve invited writer and editor Foram Mehta to tell us why we should think about skipping holiday presents this year.
My husband and I celebrated our first dating anniversary in mid-November, and I was already thinking ahead to Christmas. I’m a fan of simplifying things, so I suggested we give one present to cover both occasions and call it a day.
Truth be told, I was mostly letting myself off the hook. Just thinking about taking sale bait to stand in long lines with equally irritable shoppers is anxiety-inducing. Even worse, sometimes buying holiday gifts can feel like splitting the check at a dinner you’re forced to attend but don’t eat at: The obligatory participation can make even the most jolly among us feel a tad resentful at times.
The solution I’ve found isn’t to become the Grinch or Mr. Scrooge — their shared distaste for Christmas certainly didn’t bring them happiness. Rather, suggest to everyone in your gift-giving circle — whether that means your family, an immediate friend group or whoever you spend your holidays with — that you forego giving gifts and instead, supplement the holidays with new traditions. Try a group volunteering activity, a hot chocolate and movie night or the ever-popular ugly-sweater party. Save the gifts for birthdays, “just because” surprises and other mutually special occasions, and giving will actually be as wonderful as receiving.
As for the work and friend gift exchanges you inevitably get roped into? It’s perfectly O.K. to opt out politely. You can buy your own fuzzy socks and sugar cookie-scented candles this year.