Sophie Ciszek first set foot on the bow of a sailboat in the open ocean at age 2. Her parents, who had met in South Africa during extended cruises, had decided to leave Melbourne, Australia, and take Sophie and her older brother on an extended cruise of their own through the South Pacific.
Now 33, Ciszek has grown up to become one of the premier bowmen in offshore racing after taking part in the last two Volvo Ocean Races and other major regattas.
She is competing in her sixth Rolex Sydney Hobart Yacht Race, which begins Wednesday, this time as part of the elite all-female crew of Ocean Respect Racing.
Jackson, a fellow Australian, saw that during the second leg of the 2014-15 edition of the Volvo Race when Ciszek ruptured a disk during a sail change in the Indian Ocean while racing with Jackson on Team SCA, also composed of women.
“To watch someone so fit be in that situation was hard for everyone,” Jackson said.
Despite receiving painkillers, Ciszek had intense discomfort, including sciatica in her left leg and foot that left her occasionally in tears and disrupted her sleep for nearly two weeks before the crew completed the leg and arrived in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
Close calls are part of the life of a bowman, one of the most demanding and exposed positions in sailing.
“Whether you are male or female, it doesn’t matter, bowpeople are a different and strange breed,” said Ken Read, the former America’s Cup helmsman who won line honors in the Sydney Hobart as skipper of Comanche. “First of all, they are the pure athletes on the boat. The things that are imperative are balance, loving to be soaking wet and being fearless. You’re on the bow with the biggest waves you’ve ever seen in the Bass Strait.
Ciszek enjoys an adrenaline rush and clearly does not mind getting wet: She is also an avid surfer. But hers is not just a job for thrill seekers; it is about thinking ahead, constantly.
Ciszek, who is six feet tall and has a lean and powerful build, gravitated to the bow because of her athletic skills: She played a number of sports growing up in the United States (her father, Joel, is American) and in Australia (her mother, Liz, is Australian).
Ciszek trains for her position, which requires plenty of heavy lifting, by doing body-weight exercises like pull-ups and push-ups, but also by doing squats and dead lifts with free weights.
Cardio training is also important.
Off shore, Ciszek will take shifts at the helm on Wild Oats X, a 66-foot Mini Maxi with a canting keel. “She’s one of the best downwind, heavy-weather helmsmen you’ll find,” Jackson said.
But the bow is her primary work space, and in close quarters, like the start of the Hobart race in crowded Sydney Harbor, Ciszek’s role is also to relay information about the boat’s position back to the helmsman and other decision makers. This will be done with hand signals, although there are less subtle means of communication on board.
On shore, she is drawn to a slower pace, which is why she recently moved to a new home in rural Tasmania, the scenic and bucolic Australian island where the Hobart race finishes. Forty acres of the property are protected land, part of Tasmania’s land conservation efforts. She and her partner live off the grid on the other 10 acres.
That is part of her team’s message. Ocean Respect is sponsored by 11th Hour Racing, a group focused on ocean health. Ciszek recognizes that her own sport, despite being wind-powered, is not yet the ideal role model in sustainability, with racing boats made of carbon fiber that are difficult to recycle.
