DARIEN, Conn. — Beth Bonanno had always looked forward to her special lunch date. She would leave the office to sit with her son, a second-grader, on his birthday and maybe three other days a year.
But then she got an email from the school district: Parents were being barred from the lunchroom.
The email incensed Ms. Bonanno and other parents. And what began as a small debate in the wealthy Connecticut town of Darien erupted into a controversy about parenting that rippled throughout the world.
The divisive issue once again raised a question sensitive to parents and administrators: When to let go?
But what about that hard-to-open milk carton? Elliott Landon, Darien’s interim schools superintendent, essentially told parents that students should learn to deal without them at the table.
A story published by The Associated Press, which ran on websites in places as far as Saskatchewan and Thailand, quoted one parent’s reaction as a “punch in the gut.” The mothers became an easy target online, as people made assumptions about the parents who live in a town where the annual household median income in 2015 was nearly $209,000.
But this kind of policy, and reaction, is not unique to Darien. When parents are banned from the cafeteria, as they were in Beaverton, Ore., in 2017 and Tampa, Fla., in 2016 — the response is well-reasoned, if not emotional. “The rule change is about the school’s convenience, not the interest of parents and students,” Chris Ingram, a columnist and a father, wrote in the Opinion section of The Tampa Bay Times.
The New York City Department of Education said it does not have a blanket policy, but allows individual schools to determine whether parents are allowed at lunch.
Brian Perkins, a former superintendent in New Haven, and now an associate professor of practice in education leadership at Columbia University’s Teachers College, confirmed that parents lunching with their children was not a new or expressly suburban phenomenon. After seeing the email from the school district, however, he was not surprised by the frustration among parents in Darien.
Then again, he said, often parents can have a serious sense of entitlement when it comes to their children.
“We are in a society where people want what they want,” Dr. Perkins said. “The idea that on its face, I’d be told ‘no,’ that I can’t have lunch with my child, is for some, unconscionable.
“Steadily increasing” parent attendance at lunch was why the principals of Darien’s five elementary schools conveyed to Dr. Landon the need for a new policy, according to Tara Ochman, the chairwoman of the town’s Board of Education.
“The principals brought forward concerns regarding the effective day-to-day running of their schools,” Ms. Ochman said.
The presence was so disruptive, she added, that some children had a hard time when their parents left. Others were disappointed that their parents did not come for lunch.
She admitted at that board meeting that even she was surprised when she shed tears.
Parents said they would have been happy to sign up in advance with the schools, or stagger their visits. “There are ways to find a happy medium, and they didn’t think to ask the parents,” Ms. Bonanno said.
Dr. Landon did not return multiple phone calls, nor allow an in-person interview when a reporter visited. None of the five elementary principals would discuss the policy change when Times reporters called and visited the schools.
One mother’s post in a “Darien moms” Facebook group got at least 50 comments in response to the lunchroom ban — some commenters were furious over missing out on a special opportunity, and others were upset that they had not known they could eat lunch with their elementary schoolers. Still others were perplexed that children would even want their parents at the table.
Beth Lane, the mother of a fourth-grader at Holmes Elementary, said that she was fine with the change, but added that she has “less skin in the game” because Holmes had unofficially discontinued the policy several years ago.
“I think it’s healthy for children to have time when their parents aren’t present and where they can interact with other children without the parental structure, which I feel changes the dynamic,” Ms. Lane said.
She said Dr. Landon explained his rationale further at a meeting with the Council of Darien School Parents, of which she was a former co-chairwoman.
“I thought it was the end of it,” she said.
The Newtown school district in Connecticut, which includes a new Sandy Hook Elementary School, however, has a quiet policy. According to a district staff member, parents are allowed to come to the school to have lunch with their children.