WASHINGTON — The Georgetown waterfront apartment where Donna Shalala has spent part of the last two decades is half sanctuary, half résumé.
There is a signed photo of Madeleine Albright, the former secretary of state, walking with Ms. Shalala when both were in Bill Clinton’s cabinet. A gold coffee table is adorned with the visages of the kings of Persia, a reminder of her time in pre-revolutionary Iran as a Peace Corps volunteer. Against a bookshelf a set of golf clubs rests in a bag emblazoned with the trademark orange and green “U” from the University of Miami, the 17,000-student private institution where she was president until 2015.
The shoulder bag left on a chair by the door with a different seal — the House of Representatives — seems like a bit of a letdown. But nevertheless, as she will repeatedly tell you, Ms. Shalala is excited for the next chapter in a career spanning decades: backbench freshman.
Under the circumstances of the moment, her greatest strength — being historically old and experienced in a historically young and diverse freshman class — could become a huge liability.
The newcomers may come to value the woman nicknamed Hurricane Donna, who wrestled with a Republican Congress and spent years testifying before the senior lawmakers she now calls colleagues. But in the meantime, the adjustment could well be brutal for someone who has led staffs of thousands and controlled budgets of millions, or even billions.
And she concedes that her new junior status will be a challenge.
“In my head, I assume it’s a new job, and I’ve got to be careful about not bringing the last job or the last experience to it,” she said, standing in her kitchen with a cup of black coffee.
Ms. Shalala does have some challenges in a Democratic Party that is younger, more diverse and more liberal than Mr. Clinton’s. She must communicate with her district’s significant Hispanic population without fluency in Spanish. As president of the University of Miami, she clashed with custodial workers striking over low pay, though she later earned the support of union workers during the campaign. She enraged Miami environmentalists by selling sensitive and protected land, a decision she insists was within her jurisdiction as university president.
An eclectic arsenal of “Donna stories” has preceded the return to Washington of a woman who preferred to campaign in dog parks, but happily greets everyone from second-grade soccer players to old Republican adversaries on Capitol Hill.
Her freshman classmates have been learning about her by, among other things, revisiting their memories of Ms. Shalala’s tenure during Mr. Clinton’s impeachment, including recollections of her confrontation with Mr. Clinton over his affair with Monica Lewinsky.
Almost forgotten are the opening days of the Clinton administration, when the right deemed Ms. Shalala “the farthest to the left and most controversial” of the Clinton cabinet nominees.
“I’m like a chameleon — I adjust to the job as it is,” she said.
Decades later, Ms. Shalala acknowledges that in this freshman class, she is more centrist than leftist — and on the other side of the generational change she once advocated. She scoffs at the suggestion that she should have stepped aside for the next generation of Democrats.
