Congress, the military and the markets have been in upheaval, and the news is too much to fit in one story. Here’s a rundown of the state of play, with links to our in-depth coverage for further reading.
The Trump administration on Thursday announced the withdrawal of about 7,000 American troops from Afghanistan in the coming months, around half of what the American military has there now.
This comes one day after President Trump abruptly ordered the withdrawal of 2,000 American troops from Syria, overruling many of his top generals and military advisers. The decision, which was announced on Twitter, plunged the administration’s Middle East strategy into disarray, rattled allies like Britain and Israel, and stranded Syria’s ethnic Kurds, who have been faithful partners in fighting the Islamic State.
Congress is careening toward another government shutdown. If lawmakers cannot pass a budget or a stopgap spending bill by Friday at midnight, the government will experience a shutdown for the third time this year.
President Trump torpedoed a short-term spending bill on Thursday that had already passed the Senate and was on deck in the House, doubling down on his demand for $5 billion in funding for a southern border wall. Mr. Trump has made clear that he is willing to take the blame for a shutdown in the pursuit of his signature campaign pledge.
The Senate must return to Washington on Friday to vote on a House-passed stopgap spending bill that included $5.7 billion for the wall and is sure to die.
Stocks seesawed on Friday, after tumbling yet again on Thursday: the S&P 500-stock index declined 1.6 percent, while the Dow Jones Industrial index fell 2 percent. The tech-heavy Nasdaq composite fell 1.6 percent, pushing it 19.5 percent below its late-August peak. A decline of 20 percent marks the official start of a bear market.
Investors are worried that the trade war, rising interest rates (in part a product of the ballooning government deficit), and the end of the windfall from tax cuts will all erode corporate profit growth.
On Wednesday, Jerome H. Powell, the Fed chairman, defended the decision to raise the benchmark rate for the fifth consecutive quarter, a move made despite political pressure and financial market worries.
The benchmark rate will now sit in a range from 2.25 percent to 2.5 percent.