After his appearance in Manhattan led to a brawl, the founder of a far-right group, the Proud Boys, said it was little more than a “fun, silly, men’s club” that had defended itself against an attack by leftist protesters.
But two months later, as prosecutors move ahead with charges, the all-male Proud Boys group is in disarray. Ten members have been arrested in connection with the violence, charged with riot and attempted assault as part of an investigation into their activities.
The Proud Boys have been widely condemned as a hate group. Facebook and Instagram have banned the group. The Southern Poverty Law Center has labeled it a “hate group.” An organization called New York City Antifa, whose members describe themselves as “anti-fascists,” has named the Proud Boys who were involved in the violence and has posted details about their lives on Twitter.
At the same time, previously unreleased video obtained by The New York Times shows that the Proud Boys initiated the attack in Manhattan against a handful of anti-fascist protesters, not the other way around, as Mr. McInnes had initially said.
Prosecutors said at court appearances for some of the accused Proud Boys members that video evidence will prove that the Proud Boys started the fight.
Enrique Tarrio, chairman of the administrative chapter of the Proud Boys, maintained that the group repudiates hate and racism and pointed out it has ordered white supremacists to leave its events in the past.
The violence started on Oct. 12 shortly after Mr. McInnes gave a speech at the Metropolitan Republican Club on East 83rd Street, a bastion of establishment conservatism.
Outside a crowd of left-wing protesters chanted “No Nazis, No KKK, No fascist U.S.A.” After the event, the police kept the attendees and protesters separate, but a handful of leftists, wearing masks, circled the block and tried to intercept the Proud Boys on East 82d Street, the police said.
The security video from a nearby building shows that at 8:19 p.m. two men in Proud Boys shirts, Maxwell Hare and Geoffrey Young, strode briskly east from Park Avenue on 82nd Street toward about six protesters some 100 feet away.
Then, Mr. Hare charged the leftists, and a protester threw a plastic water bottle, which sailed past him, the video shows. Mr. Hare crashed into one of the protesters, hurling punches.
Within seconds more men rushed down the block from Park Avenue and joined the fray, the two videos show. The brawl lasted about 60 seconds.
Both Mr. Young and Mr. Hare have pleaded not guilty and claim through their lawyers they were attacked.
One challenge facing prosecutors is that the victims of the attack have refused to cooperate with the authorities, which means the case will rely heavily on videos from security cameras and onlookers.
“The identity of these Antifa members remains unknown,” Joshua Steinglass, an assistant district attorney, told a judge at an arraignment for seven of the defendants on Dec. 14.
The people who turned out to hear Mr. McInnes speak at the Metropolitan Republican Club in October represented a cross-section of New York’s far-right subculture: libertarians, conspiracy theorists and nationalists who have coalesced around their opposition to Islam, feminism and liberal politics.
Irvin Antillon, 49, who is accused of kicking protesters on the ground, is a member of a Latino skinhead group, Batallón 49, who traveled to Charlottesville last year for the “Unite the Right” rally, where an anti-racist protester was killed, experts said.
In one online photograph, he poses shirtless, showing off tattoos of Nazi symbols.
Mr. Hare, 26, of Harrisburg, Pa., was filmed in early October punching leftist protesters at a “Resist Marxism” rally outside the statehouse in Providence, R.I., and traveled to another far-right rally in Portland, Ore., in August, where Vice News Tonight filmed him wearing what appeared to be a bulletproof vest.
Mr. Young, 38, of Rockland County, N.Y., who is accused of punching and kicking three people, has called Muslims “a virus” who “feed off the host nation until it’s dead” in an online video.
Since Mr. McInnes founded the Proud Boys two years ago in New York, the group has sprouted chapters across the country. Its members have clashed several times with leftist protesters at political events and have shown up at far-right rallies also attended by white nationalists and other extremists.
“I think the president was correct in saying that there were good people on both sides and bad people on both sides,” Mr. Tarrio said.
Footage shows a member of the Proud Boys charging at protesters before the fight began.
Video released by the police shows the fight between the Proud Boys and Antifa protesters.