By almost any measure, China’s economy is slowing. Consumers are cautious. Apartments are sitting unsold. Industrial profits are falling, too.
But China’s state media wants people to look at another indicator: men’s underwear.
Sales of boxers and briefs are surging in Liaoning Province, according to The Global Times, a fervently nationalist tabloid controlled by the Communist Party, bringing a bit of good news to a down-and-out part of China’s rust belt that epitomizes many of the country’s economic problems. Cheered by the prospect of a brighter future, the article argued, Liaoning men are upgrading a part of their wardrobe that most of their friends and family will never see.
In highlighting such an unorthodox economic indicator, The Global Times is harking back to a long tradition of eclectic economic indicators, one that the general public and even some economists like to turn to when the usual yardsticks of the dismal science just won’t do.
But in the case of the Liaoning Underwear Index, economists are — to put it lightly — skeptical.
The drive to find a measure that shows prosperity in one corner of China is perhaps understandable. Chinese leaders are contending with a steady flow of disappointing economic data that has affected confidence among consumers and investors; the country’s stock market has lost a quarter of its value this year. All the while, Xi Jinping, China’s top leader, is navigating a protracted trade war with the United States that, if it intensifies, could make the problem even worse.
Chinese officials have taken steps to insulate the public from the bad news, including censoring local media, while pledging to cut taxes and make other moves to cheer up businesses.
In China, informal indicators have had an even greater appeal because of a general mistrust of official statistics. There’s the Pickle Index, which is used to measure the rate of China’s urbanization. (Migrant laborers like eating pickles, the thinking goes, so when sales are up in a city or region it suggests more laborers have arrived.) Some also track sales of instant noodles, a cheap meal when takeout is too costly.
Liaoning itself provides a handy example. Just one year ago, Chinese officials said Liaoning had padded its growth statistics between 2011 and 2014. Even before that, it gave birth to one of China’s most closely watched unofficial economic gauges: the Li Keqiang Index.
Named after China’s current premier, the Li Keqiang Index got its start when Mr. Li was the top Communist Party official in the province. In 2007, when Mr. Li was party secretary of Liaoning, he told the United States ambassador to China that official figures were “man-made” and that he preferred to track the province’s economic trends through the province’s railway freight volume, electricity consumption and bank loans.
While the Li Keqiang Index has some grounding in economic nuts and bolts, the Liaoning Underwear Index was greeted by economists with a hefty dose of caution.
The JD.com figures are also online only, meaning they don’t include underwear sales in brick-and-mortar stores.
Global Times staff members didn’t respond to calls and an email for comment.
Here’s the thing: Even if its methodology is uncertain, the Liaoning Underwear Index may be coincidentally right.
The province’s figures for industrial profits, production and consumption have been on the rise, experts say. Much of that growth may come from Chinese efforts to rekindle the economy, as it turns away from efforts to cut debt and begins approving the sort of big-cement, big-iron building and infrastructure programs that fueled so much of its growth after the global financial crisis of 2008.
“On the face of it, the Liaoning branch of the National Bureau of Statistics has reported some decent economic numbers for the past few months,” said Victor Shih, an associate professor at the University of California, San Diego.
However, that improvement is coming from a low base. Most recently, the province posted some of the worst economic numbers in the country.
There’s another possibility, he said. Underwear, being soft and eminently foldable, can be easily shipped from one corner of China to the next. So it will go where there are customers.
Perhaps, goes this thinking, Liaoning men are returning home because they can’t find work in any other province. And they have to wear something.