Letitia James, the incoming New York attorney general, has made no secret of how she feels about President Trump.
Nobody is above the law, not even @realDonaldTrump.
Forcing the nation’s top law enforcement official to resign doesn’t give him a free pass—it only raises suspicions.
I want NYers to know I‘ll hold those in power accountable & make sure the Special Counsel’s work continues.
Democratic attorneys general across the country, including Ms. James’s predecessors in New York, have repeatedly used their offices to confront Mr. Trump. But since her election, Ms. James has opened herself up to criticism that she has gone too far in allowing politics to shape her agenda.
Her strident attacks on the president could potentially threaten the legal standing of cases that her office brings against Mr. Trump, his family members or their business interests, legal experts said.
Ms. James has signaled that she will be as aggressive as New York’s current attorney general, Barbara D. Underwood, and her predecessor, Eric T. Schneiderman, both Democrats, in pursuing Mr. Trump in his home state.
She will continue a lawsuit against the Trump Foundation that was filed by Ms. Underwood and may also examine whether Mr. Trump is in violation of the Constitution’s emoluments clause, which bars federal officials from accepting gifts, or emoluments, from foreign powers without congressional approval.
After an investigation by The New York Times showed that Mr. Trump received hundreds of millions of dollars from his parents, most of it by helping them dodge taxes, Ms. James issued a statement calling for “a full examination of these claims” by the state, including the attorney general’s office.
“Donald Trump’s days of defrauding Americans are coming to an end,” Ms. James said.
Mr. Goldman characterized Mr. Trump’s criticism of Ms. James as the right message from the wrong messenger, given how Mr. Trump has used public remarks on Twitter to discredit criminal and civil investigations involving himself, his family and associates.
In an interview, Ms. James defended her remarks about the president, adding that she believed that her race and gender were shaping what she characterized as assumptions and misconceptions about how she would perform as attorney general.
Ms. James is the first woman in New York to be elected as attorney general, the first African-American woman to be elected to statewide office, and the first African-American to serve as attorney general. Before winning election, she was the New York City public advocate.
Ms. James’s role could take on heightened significance should Mr. Trump decide to issue pardons for anyone implicated in the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, into Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election.
Convictions under state law, however, are not covered by federal pardons. Ms. James has championed a change in state law that would allow the prosecution of those who have been pardoned by the president.
The importance of Ms. James’s position was underscored when Ms. Underwood’s office announced on Dec. 18 that Mr. Trump and his lawyers had agreed to shut down the Donald J. Trump Foundation.
That agreement emerged from an investigation that began under Mr. Schneiderman, and from a lawsuit filed by Ms. Underwood.
The lawsuit, which seeks restitution and penalties and could result in Mr. Trump and his three oldest children being barred from the boards of other New York charities, will proceed under Ms. James’s watch.
Mr. Trump’s lawyers had argued that the case should be dismissed because it was politically motivated. A state judge ruled in November that the case could proceed.
Ms. James began her legal career as a lawyer at the Legal Aid Society, eventually becoming head of the New York attorney general’s Brooklyn regional office. In 2003, she was elected to the New York City Council; she was elected as the New York City public advocate a decade later.
As public advocate, Ms. James sought to redefine the position: She filed 12 lawsuits on behalf of city residents, more than all of her predecessors combined, but to mixed results. A small handful of cases were thrown out because judges ruled that she lacked standing to file the lawsuits.
Even inside the attorney general’s office, some shared concerns that Ms. James’s outspoken approach toward Mr. Trump may undermine her efforts.
Eric Soufer, who served as senior counsel for policy for Mr. Schneiderman, said Ms. James’s bluntness had caused “apprehension and uneasiness” among some high-level officials who have left the office after her election.
Ms. James acknowledged that her words and promises would carry more weight as attorney general.
