DealBook|DealBook Briefing: Guess Who Said ‘I Do Not Respect the S.E.C.’?
DealBook Briefing: Guess Who Said ‘I Do Not Respect the S.E.C.’?
Good Monday. Want this by email? Sign up here.
How seriously is Tesla’s C.E.O. taking his recent tussle with the S.E.C.? Not too seriously, if his appearance on CBS’s “60 Minutes” last night is any indication.
Mr. Musk’s tweets are supposed to be vetted. He and Tesla recently reached settlements with the S.E.C. after Mr. Musk wrote on Twitter that he had “funding secured” to take Tesla private. That proved to be false. Among other things, the settlement required that Tesla vet Mr. Musk’s tweets before he posted them.
Any deal must be well defined. “It has to be verifiable, it has to be monitored, it can’t be just vague promises like we’ve seen over the last 25 years,” Mr. Lighthizer said.
Negotiations can’t extend beyond March 1. “As far as I’m concerned, it’s a hard deadline,” he said.
If a deal isn’t reached, the U.S. will impose additional tariffs. If a satisfactory agreement isn’t struck by March 1, the Trump administration will increase levies on $200 billion in Chinese goods to 25 percent from the current 10 percent, Mr. Lighthizer said.
A Huawei executive’s arrest should be irrelevant to the negotiations. “It is totally separate from anything that I work on,” he said about the arrest Dec. 1 of Meng Wanzhou, the Chinese telecom giant’s C.F.O. “It’s criminal justice” and “shouldn’t really have much of an impact” on the talks, Mr. Lighthizer added.
• Mr. Ghosn may have underreported his earnings by $44 million. Prosecutors said they believe he earned about $89 million from 2011 to 2015, but reported around half that amount in Nissan’s financial filings to the Japanese authorities.
What happens next: Bloomberg notes that in Japan a trial would typically take place about 40 to 50 days after indictment was issued, and that “fewer than 1 percent of cases in Japan’s district and county courts resulted in a not-guilty verdict or the defendant being released in 2017.” Prosecutors have said Mr. Ghosn could face up to 10 years in prison if he is found guilty.
China’s leaders are trying to maintain a delicate balance between outrage and necessity amid the unfolding drama over the arrest in Canada of a top executive from the tech giant Huawei, write Keith Bradsher and Raymond Zhong of the NYT.
More Huawei news: Japan has barred the company from obtaining government contracts.
How much could the 1MDB scandal cost Goldman Sachs?
More 1MDB news: Prosecutors say Jho Low, the flamboyant Malaysian financier in the middle of the case, helped siphon billions of dollars from the fund and then went on a colossal spending spree. Tracking down, retrieving and maintaining the money has become a complex multinational operation in itself.
Which companies win when ranked by the priorities of Americans?
• The winner? Microsoft. The company scores highly on its commitments to workers, customers, shareholders and the environment.
• The highest climbers in the ranking improved their performance by focusing on issues like pay equity, diversity and work-life balance.
Compared with averages for the Russell 1000, the 100 companies in the latest listing pay their median workers 26 percent more, have four times as many women directors, recycle eight times as much waste and give six times as much to charitable causes per dollar of revenue. They also score a higher return on equity, by five percentage points.
Trade tensions aren’t fading. Investors view a resolution to the impasse between the U.S. and China as crucial to the survival of U.S. economic expansion, but the arrest of the Huawei executive Meng Wanzhou has put a new strain on the relationship.
The global economy is slowing. China is growing at the slowest rate in nearly a decade. The export-driven economies of Japan and Germany both contracted in the third quarter.
The U.S. may follow. So far, the American economy has weathered the storm, but there are signs that might not continue, particularly in sectors that are sensitive to rising borrowing costs.
Questions hang over corporate earnings. Investors have zeroed in on comments by executives about whether next year might be the beginning of the end for the second-longest business cycle expansion on record.
All those factors help explain why December, historically a good time for investors, is off to a difficult start. And investors’ growing wariness about buying shares after sell-offs for the first time since the dot-com era suggests that the bull market is in its late stages, writes the WSJ’s Akane Otani.
There is no shortage of online upstarts trying to lure customers away from the big banks. A new entrant, Good Money, is seeking to differentiate itself as the most socially progressive of the bunch.
Led by Gunnar Lovelace, a founder of the online organic-food retailer Thrive Market, Good Money said Monday that it had raised $30 million from Galaxy Digital, Breyer Capital and others.
Good Money says it will offer free A.T.M. withdrawals, no overdraft fees, low consumer loan rates and 2 percent interest on F.D.I.C.-insured savings accounts. Every customer will get equity in the company when opening an account, and can build up that equity by using the service.
John Kelly is stepping down as President Trump’s chief of staff. Nick Ayers, Vice President Mike Pence’s chief of staff and a favorite to succeed Mr. Kelly, is leaving the administration and won’t take the job. Representative Mark Meadows, the chairman of the conservative House Freedom Caucus, is reportedly a new favorite to move into the role.
• Uber reportedly filed paperwork with the S.E.C. on Thursday to go public. Here’s what an I.P.O. race with Lyft means for the companies.
• The European Court of Justice said that the U.K. can unilaterally stop the Brexit process. A parliamentary vote on the current Brexit deal was scheduled to take place tomorrow, but reports suggest it may now be cancelled.
Thanks for reading! We’ll see you tomorrow.
