MANCHESTER, England — José Mourinho was almost out of time. He had only a few hours before Manchester United’s power brokers would begin to discuss, in private, the prospect of drawing the curtain on his reign as the club’s manager. He had less than two days before it would all be over.
He did not know that, not for certain, as he sat in front of the news media at Anfield on Sunday evening. He has been around for long enough to have had an inkling of what was coming, though. To have had a sense that defeat at Liverpool may have been one defeat too many, that the gap between United, sixth in the Premier League, and its old rival, perched at the top, had grown too wide.
Mourinho looked, then, a man in need of comfort, and solace. There has been precious little of it in these last few months, as Manchester United’s season has lurched from disappointment into despair. There has always been a crisis around the corner: that is the way it is, at a club this size, and it is the way Mourinho makes it, too. On Tuesday, the club ended that crisis and released Mourinho.
All season, there had only been one place Mourinho could go for escape: a place where he is never questioned, where he is the lord of all he surveys, where he has an answer for even the most searching of questions. At Anfield, on Sunday, he went there again: talking about how great he was in the past.
Mourinho’s former glories have been a theme this season: how frequently they are mentioned has tended to exist in inverse proportion to how well Manchester United is playing. It was after a 3-0 defeat at home to Tottenham in August that Mourinho demanded more “respect, respect, respect,” and took time to remind everyone that he had won more Premier League titles himself than all of the other 19 managers in the division put together. “Two for them, three for me,” he said.
It was after his team conceded a late equalizer to Chelsea that he responded to the taunts of the home crowd by raising three fingers, one for each of those Premier League titles. It was as his team was being humbled at home to Juventus that he made the same gesture to the Italian team’s fans, this time, in reference to the three trophies he had won as manager of Inter Milan, their great rival.
There was defiance in those gestures, in those words. Mourinho’s addiction to the past may have been compulsive, reflexive, but at least he was coming out fighting.
At first, anyway. The more Mourinho played the trump card, the more it started to look like the most transparent of bluffs. On Sunday, when he played it again, it seemed more than anything an act of desperation: Mourinho holed up in his last refuge, surrounded by his memories, clutching his mementos close to him, firing wildly into the dark.
By the time he was name-checking the players he had worked with at Real Madrid — “young” versions of Cristiano Ronaldo and Angel Di Maria and Gonzalo Higuain — it had taken on the air of a LinkedIn profile. He rounded the whole thing off with a gratuitous mention of Inter, the team he turned into European champions. He was no longer talking about the merits of Jurgen Klopp’s team.
As ever with Mourinho, none of this was intended as praise for a superior opponent; there is, after all, no club Mourinho takes more joy in belittling than Liverpool. No, it was something else, the same thing it has always been: a reminder of all that he has achieved, all that he has won.
And yet, as United’s season drifted, as Mourinho has meticulously constructed a set of alternative facts in which he is not to blame for that failure but the ultimate victim of it, his interminable regurgitation of his own greatness has not served to remind anyone of the heights he once scaled, but acted as proof of how far he has fallen.
Mourinho’s calling card has always been that he is a winner. That is what separates him from those of his peers who talk sanctimoniously about philosophy or who take pleasure in the journey. He has mocked them mercilessly, from that “specialist in failure” jibe at Arsene Wenger to his barbed remarks about Klopp and Mauricio Pochettino in the last year or so.
Winning is what convinced United, at the second time of asking, to invite him in back in 2016. There were misgivings about the chaos that tends to follow in his wake, but United felt it had little choice. Manchester City had appointed Pep Guardiola, Liverpool Klopp, Chelsea Antonio Conte. It needed a guarantee of success. Enter Jose.
He did win, picking up the Europa League and the Carabao Cup in his first season, but those were not the trophies United had envisaged him delivering. Mourinho, for neither the first nor the last time, would be hung by his own words: he had previously insisted he would not celebrate winning the second-tier Europa League. It was beneath him.
How gleefully he clung on to that triumph, though, became a metaphor for his reign. Mourinho spent some $440 million on players, and complained bitterly that Manchester United — among the richest clubs in the world — did not have the finances to compete with its rivals. That may have been true of Manchester City. It was less obviously true of, say, Tottenham, three places above United in the league.
His relationships with his players, one by one, broke down. Paul Pogba was the most high profile — Mourinho would write to Woodward to tell him he had tried everything, from criticizing him privately to criticizing him publicly, but could not find a way to get the best out of the World Cup-winning France midfielder — but he was not the only one.
Luke Shaw, Anthony Martial, Eric Bailly, Marcus Rashford — pretty much everyone drew his ire sooner or later. He bemoaned how little character, how little grit, these young players had. “Spoiled brats,” he called them. He could not inspire them, motivate them, as easily as he once had.
After Anfield, the club felt enough was enough. It will appoint a manager, most likely a former player — Ole-Gunnar Solskjaer has been mentioned — to see it through to the end of the season, and then move for a permanent replacement. Pochettino has long been the primary target.
Pochettino is not a winner, of course. He has won no trophies at all as a manager, as Mourinho, outraged that Tottenham should have been attracting praise for such trifling things as smart recruitment and promotion of young players, has noted previously.
That he is so appealing nonetheless is telling. It is important that he is willing to work within a structure, rather than expecting the whole club to be overhauled in line with his whims. It is important that he sees the benefits in promoting youth, does not meet the slightest of setbacks by demanding to see the bank balance, and seems to be able to find common ground with very rich, very talented young men.
Pochettino — like Klopp, or Maurizio Sarri, or Pep Guardiola — does that. He stands for something: a way of running a club, a way of playing the game. His beliefs, sincerely held, can be packaged, presented and, ultimately, sold. Attractive soccer can be marketed across the globe; it can draw in new fans and retain the affection of old ones.
Mourinho does not offer that. By the end, his United had no discernible character, strictly limited aesthetic appeal. It was as much the approach that condemned him as the results, and it is precisely that which will make him unpalatable to those clubs that once courted him relentlessly when he decides he is ready to return to work.
The drama, the tension, the scheming might all be worth it, if the product on the field was compelling. If it is not, it is too high a price to pay. That is not to say he will not work again, or that he is finished at the elite level: Real Madrid, no less, believe for reasons best known to Florentino Perez that Mourinho can lead the rejuvenation of that club.
But it is hard to avoid the suspicion that wherever he goes next, what he provides is no longer what owners and executives want, or what clubs or players need. No matter how glittering his list of achievements, no matter how comforting his past, Jose Mourinho is almost out of time.