ELIZABETHTOWN, N.C. — North Carolina Republicans expressed mounting doubts on Thursday about a disputed congressional race that their candidate once seemed to have won, with one of the state party’s most influential figures saying a new election could be appropriate in the wake of fraud allegations.
Lawmakers and strategists, effectively abandoning days of demands that state officials swiftly certify Mark Harris as the winner of the Ninth District’s House campaign, said they worried that absentee-ballot fraud may have infected both the November election and the Republican primary, which the incumbent, Robert M. Pittenger, lost in May. Mr. Pittenger has raised concerns about voting irregularities.
In Washington, Democrats, who will control the House in January, including the likely House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, warned again that Mr. Harris might not be seated when the new Congress convenes. Some called for an immediate investigation.
The Republican recalibration came as the Ninth District’s turmoil showed no sign of abating, especially before the State Board of Elections and Ethics Enforcement holds a hearing on or before Dec. 21. That proceeding is likely to show the earliest fruits of an intensifying inquiry that has led to subpoenas and reviews of thousands of pages of records. The state board has not certified Mr. Harris as the winner and has, for now, all but set aside preliminary results that give him a 905-vote edge over his Democratic opponent, Dan McCready.
The deepening concerns about the Ninth District center on Mr. Harris’s voter turnout operation, which partly relied on L. McCrae Dowless Jr., a political operative from Bladen County with both a felony record for fraud and an extensive history of working for Democratic and Republican campaigns. Witnesses have repeatedly described an effort that involved at least one seemingly illegal tactic: collecting absentee ballots directly from voters. The approach stirred worries that ballots may have been improperly marked for Mr. Harris or discarded if they were to be cast for Mr. McCready.
Mr. Dowless declined to comment, and Mr. Harris and his supporters have denied wrongdoing.
Democrats have warned that if the allegations about Mr. Harris’s campaign are not sufficiently settled, they would be reluctant to allow him to be seated in January. Ms. Pelosi reasserted on Thursday that the House would have the final say on who was seated and whether to investigate the election itself.
Indeed, Republicans grumbled quietly among themselves after Mr. Harris defeated Mr. Pittenger this year. Mr. Harris’s 828-vote margin of victory, they suggested, may have been tainted by Mr. Dowless’s efforts in places like Bladen County, which has a notorious history of political chicanery. Mr. Pittenger said in an email on Wednesday that Mr. Dowless had offered his services when the congressman and Mr. Harris first faced off more than two years ago.
Mr. Woodhouse, the state party’s executive director, said in an interview on Thursday morning that he did not “really recall” any complaints from Mr. Pittenger’s allies, but said he did not dispute that the congressman’s supporters may have expressed concerns.
Republicans said Thursday that they were not forsaking Mr. Harris and his candidacy. Some even argued that Mr. Woodhouse, who said during a CNN segment that misconduct in the Ninth District had made him vomit late on Wednesday night, did not support a new round of voting.
In Raleigh, where the legislature on Thursday approved a new voter ID law that included new documentation requirements for absentee voting, Republicans said they were frustrated by the swirl of allegations in Bladen County. They urged Gov. Roy Cooper, a Democrat, to appoint a task force to focus on years of potential election fraud in the area.
Mr. Cooper did not embrace the suggestion, which Democrats said could undermine the work of the state elections board, which includes four Democrats, four Republicans and one unaffiliated member.
Mr. McCready on Thursday withdrew his month-old concession to Mr. Harris.
