Max Harris did chores and collected rent at the artists’ warehouse where he lived. Now he faces trial for the deaths at a concert there — including some of his close friends.
Harris has lived in this jail in Dublin, Calif., for 18 months now. Before his arrest, he lived in Oakland, in a 10,000-square-foot warehouse filled with artists. There, near his bed, in his live-work space, a spider built a nest. He named the spider Norbit, and when Norbit’s eggs hatched he named the babies Hexbit, Drillbit, Babybit and so on, and he let them stay too. In the warehouse, Harris believed that he found, for the first time, a true home for his artistic dreams, a place that sanctified creativity as he felt it should be sanctified. And he did find beauty there. But he also found a darkness blacker than anything he could ever have imagined. When I met him, last spring, his long face looked drawn, the moon tattoo on his left cheek distorted under the gravity of his sadness.  Plugs, made from the tops of hot-sauce bottles, filled the sagging, hollowed-out lobes of his ears. He is 29, but his hair, once blue, once mohawked, once dreadlocked, is streaked with gray.
The night before Harris graduated from college, in May 2012, he shaved the left side of his head and gave himself his first face tattoo: the letters M A X, extending from the crown of his head to his left eyebrow. This was a “job stopper,” he told me, a branding of sorts, a vow to remain exiled from the mundane world of workaday jobs and devoted to a life of art.
At Massachusetts College of Art and Design, he studied everything: painting, photography, sculpture, metalsmithing, video art. Outside class, he played and composed music: industrial jazz, future classical and surreal glockenspiel. Along with technique, his professors taught him what would prove to be their most indelible lesson: the value of living in collaborative, creative spaces. In a contemporary-art-history class, he studied Andy Warhol’s Factory, John Cage’s early happenings. He seized on the importance of artists inspiring one another, cross-pollinating and fueling their ideas by living under one roof.
In the summer of 2012, three “hippie-yoga-craftspeople friends” told Harris that they could all get jobs in a cafe in Golden, Colo. Harris threw a couple of duffel bags in their van to join their road trip. But when they arrived in Colorado, the guy who was supposed to employ them was not even at the cafe, which itself didn’t really exist. So they kept meandering west. Harris imagined the road trip would be easier; his co-travelers argued over things he thought should be peaceful, like arcana about the Grateful Dead. Finally, the next summer, they arrived in Humboldt County, Calif., and found work on a pot farm. After a few months, he took a bus to Oakland to visit a friend.
The day Harris arrived happened to be First Friday, Oakland’s monthly art crawl down Telegraph Avenue. Harris’s friend took him to a warehouse in West Oakland that was built out like a maze, a toy. This, he told me, was exactly the “sort of utopian artist collective dream think tank” he’d been taught was ideal. As Harris crawled through the secret passages, he thought, If my professors could see me now! In the backyard of that warehouse was the most fantastic thing Harris had ever seen: a bicycle-powered Ferris wheel, with lights up the spokes and real old carnival carriages. Harris decided he had to stay.
The author was a 44-year-old artist named Derick Ion Almena, and the place for rent turned out to be a couple of blocks away from the Fruitvale BART station in Oakland, near the corner of 31st Avenue and International Boulevard, across from a Wendy’s. Almena was the master tenant of a big unheated industrial warehouse, but the space he offered Harris was two doors down in the same building, a storage space subleased from Custom O’s auto body shop. The rent was $750 a month. Harris took it. He hung a sign on the wall that read “Call Mom ASAP” and started cleaning out the stuff that Almena was storing there: sheet metal, an old dentist’s chair, a sawed-in-half pickup truck filled with wood. Almena was a scrapper. He collected almost anything somebody else wasn’t using: bongos, plywood, fence pickets, bulletin boards, mirrors, hubcaps, plastic carousel horses.
Almena wore low-rider fedoras and spoke in a slow weed-smoker’s bedroom voice. He was handsome, a dark mustache and goatee on his butterscotch skin, lithe, even leonine, sexy in a way that makes you worry about the human race and its cross-wiring of attractiveness and danger. He had worked as a concert promoter; he had traveled the world; and his photography had hung in San Francisco’s prestigious Yerba Buena Center for the Arts.
Almena took out the lease for the warehouse in 2013 for an artist collective called Satya Yuga.  I was like the new captain, the crazy captain.” Almena subletted out spaces to artists. He intended to hold classes and art shows at the warehouse and rent it out for events.
Almena lived by what he considered to be the wisdom of the ancients: a stew of religious iconography, trance music, free love, psychedelics, archery in the Oakland hills, plus operas staged at Burning Man, an event he loved until it became, as he posted in capital letters on Facebook, a “village of hungry ghosts. The capitalistic driven over-ticketing, pompous catering of favors and privileges,” a “crotchless dot com midlife crisis.” 
The warehouse, once part of a milk-bottling plant, was later named Ghost Ship, and those words were graffitied in huge pink block letters on the building’s facade. Inside, Almena started building his dream world. He and the other artists subdivided the space with walls hodgepodged together out of amps, bits of bookcase, faded hanging rugs and carved Balinese wood panels. Almena lined a hallway on both sides with pianos facing each other, so people walking through could stretch out their arms and run their fingers over both sets of keys.
Harris had taken a seasonal job color-correcting greeting cards. Each weekday morning he put on a dorky shirt and rode BART into San Francisco where, he told me, nobody talked about anything more interesting than which food truck they would go to for lunch.
“But it’s going to cost you,” Almena said.
“Oh,” Harris replied.
He had drained almost all of his savings to pay his initial rent and “buy-in” fee to Almena, but he withdrew $500 from an A.T.M. and returned to 31st Avenue to find a giant pirate ship on a trailer, likely someone’s creation for Burning Man.
In December 2014, Harris left Custom O’s and moved into Ghost Ship. By that point, the 10,000-square-foot space had become deliriously maximalist: drums everywhere, chandeliers everywhere, vintage typewriters, Indonesian antiques, Afghan rugs, early 20th-century shipping trunks, dozens of pianos and organs. Just inside the front door was a 10-foot-tall wooden Garuda statue surrounded by a sprawling montage of flea-market paintings, hand tools like you might find in a long-lost grandfather’s workshop, parasols, fertility-goddess statues, plastic mannequins and nostalgic family photos of God knows who. The staircase leading to the second floor, set back 12 feet from the entrance on the right side of the building, was a campy surrealist take on a Louise Nevelson collage or a post-apocalyptic disaster, depending on your point of view. The bottom third of the staircase consisted of wooden palettes; the middle third was a section of a prefab staircase; the top third was a ramp, a single plank of wood, with small wooden slats nailed across it so your feet didn’t slip as you made your way up. The building had no heat. There were no fire alarms, no sprinklers, no emergency or exit lighting.
Almena, who considered himself to be the father of the space, lived upstairs with his family: his wife, Micah Allison, and three dreamy, free-range hippie kids: Bolonik, Shai and Surya, then ages 11, 5 and 3. Allison, trained in dance, was serenely beautiful: raven-haired, tawny-skinned, a true testament to fertility, pulling off the title she gave herself — Mother Superior — and tribal belly dancing to the drum beats the collective made. The family had a proper kitchen, a big family bed topped with a canopy of sequined wedding shawls and a bathtub ringed with plants. The kids rode bikes and scooters around their loftlike lounge, which doubled as an event space.
Harris had a live-work studio on the first floor, as did most of 15 or 20 other residents — the number varied over time. Many of the artists teetered on the edge of homelessness; one moved into the warehouse after living in her car. Down the hall from Harris was Peter Wadsworth, who was 36, the resident genius, a Reed College graduate who built drones and replicas of ancient Egyptian sculptures and who one member of the collective referred to as “our Dumbledore — our wise wizard.” Farther down lived Carmen Brito, then 27, a substitute teacher, poet and ceramist, into archery, survival skills and primitive arts. José Avalos, then 36, worked outside the warehouse as a carpenter and then returned to make theatrical Latin-Kabuki style masks and Polynesian-inflected papier-mâché figurines. Anthony Perrault, then 25, another resident, was a seamstress and fashion designer with dreads. He and Almena’s wife, Allison, liked to watch the documentary “Paris Is Burning” while he colored her hair. Several evenings a month, musicians from greater Oakland would show up to jam as well, bringing with them their marimbas and African clay drums. One man played a Rajasthani ravanhatta, a string instrument that was hung with sleigh bells.
After his seasonal greeting-card gig ended in early January 2015, Harris was broke but happy. He hoped to devote himself full time to his art practice. But mostly he got pulled into Almena’s vortex. Almena, so monomaniacally obsessed with his warehouse that he missed his brother’s funeral, flew into rages and ripped down people’s studio walls if they didn’t conform to his aesthetic. He held autocratic meetings of the collective, dispensing wrath and love. “There is something about him that can make you feel special,” Danielle Boudreaux, then a friend of Almena’s, said, describing his power. “You are the most important person at this party right now. You have my back. You are my right hand. All this is because of us, me and you — we did this.” Then he would yank his affections away. He broke you down and filled you up — often in public. 
The older and more stable Satya Yugans resisted Almena’s mind games. Next door to Harris lived Nikki Kelber, now 46, who made luscious feather earrings and leather jewelry and whom Harris referred to as Martha Yuga, a riff on Martha Stewart, because her space was always so nice.  She hung her pots from the wall. She also had boundaries. “I just tried to keep to myself and do my own thing,” she said.
In early 2015, Allison’s mother called the Department of Children and Family Services at the Alameda County Social Services Agency. Several months earlier, she was contacted by Boudreaux, whose son attended school with Almena’s children. Boudreaux had noticed that some days those children weren’t being picked up from school; other days they didn’t show up at all or they showed up hungry, their heads crawling with lice. That March, the agency removed Bolonik, Shai and Surya from the warehouse and sent them to live with Almena’s mother and sister, who lived in Los Angeles.
He believed this was the path of deepest compassion. Anger, destruction and addiction came from pain — a dynamic Harris understood well from his own father, who turned up with no place to go at Harris’s first college apartment.  He figured, if he just did what Almena said, maybe Almena would calm down, find his banjo, settle into one of the many threadbare couches upstairs and fall asleep for the first time in days. When Almena was really bad off, gnashing and foaming at the mouth, Harris told me, he would cook for him, bring him cigarettes and speak to him sweetly.
The next day Harris started cleaning. A few weeks earlier, a music promoter reached out to Harris to see if Ghost Ship was available to host a show on Dec. 2. The lineup would be a bunch of aggressively out-there electronic music acts, headlined by the pulsing, psychedelic synth sounds of Golden Donna. In preparation for the show, Harris scrubbed the overused bathrooms. He shoved the couches to the perimeter of Almena’s living room. He placed the cowboy hat on the Garuda’s head in the way he knew Almena liked. Then on the Friday night of the party, Harris showered, pulled on a black sweater, bought a burrito and sat on a stool inside the warehouse’s front door.
Admission was $10 before 11 p.m., $15 after, though given that this was an Oakland warehouse party, it was also Notaflof — no one turned away for lack of funds. Almena was not home. A condition of Almena’s children returning to live with the family, according to Allison, was that they not be at the warehouse during parties, so Almena, Allison and the children had decamped to a hotel. (Children and Family Services declined to comment.) Most of Harris’s fellow Satya Yugans did not attend the show, either. Many were out. Some were in their studios, making art. Others were trying to sleep or flirting with dates. By 11:15 p.m. about 100 guests had arrived and walked up the eclectic art project of a staircase. Harris’s friend Micah Danemayer, 28, an electronic musician, was D.J.-ing images that night onto a large projection screen. Danemayer was another big, tender misfit who had found what he took to calling his “mutant family” in Oakland’s underground art scene. Danemayer had a real family in Boston who loved him: a father who put money in his bank account when his son’s funds ran low, a mother who sent starving-artist care packages consisting of brownies, a grocery-store gift card and a pack of socks. Just the day before, in love for the first time, Danemayer moved in with his girlfriend, Jennifer Mendiola, who was studying for her doctorate in health psychology. His stuff sat in his new home’s hallway in plastic storage crates.
On the second floor, a woman sat at a table offering $5 bang trims. Another woman was painting people’s nails. One guest, Em B, 33, a poet who worked in a coffee shop and traded Kurt Vonnegut quotes with her father, texted her wife back home: “Oh my God, this place is a trip. I can’t wait to tell you about it.” Cash Askew, 22, a much-beloved trans femme guitarist, chatted with Feral Pines, 29, another trans musician who almost always dressed in a tank top, black leather shorts, boots and a Mercedes-Benz hood ornament necklace. Michela Gregory, 20, a San Francisco State University student, stayed close to her boyfriend, Alex Vega, then 22, who earlier that night parked his silver Mazda Miata at the San Bruno BART stop. On the way out of her parents’ house that evening, Gregory told her father, “Dad, I’m going to spend the night with Alex.” “I love you,” her father called out as she stepped through the door. “I love you, too,” Gregory said.
Around 11:20 p.m., Harris decided to leave his post at the door to go inside Ghost Ship to use the bathroom. As he entered the building, he noticed the light looked strange — a glow on the ceiling. He ran to his studio and grabbed a fire extinguisher. But by the time he returned, eight or 10 seconds later, the fire was out of control. At 11:23 p.m., Carmen Brito, the potter and substitute teacher, who lived in the back of the warehouse, woke up in a room filled with smoke and called 911. Upstairs, as fire rose through the baseboards, people started shrieking, pleading, streaming down the strange staircase.
Oakland Fire Department Station 13 was only a block away. The first firefighters arrived at 11:25, but the flames were already out of control. Firefighters crawled into the building with breathing tanks and shot water up toward the inferno on the first-floor ceiling. They hoped to keep the fire contained near its origin in the rear of the warehouse, but as they crept deeper into the building, it jumped over them. The smoke consolidated into a sludge so thick it created a total blackout. After the low-air alarms sounded on the fire crew’s tanks, the chief ordered them to evacuate. They had to follow their hoses, like cave divers with guide wires, to find their way out.
Once that staircase caught fire — it’s impossible to know the order of events with certainty, though one person who escaped reported that some who started down the stairs came back up, yelling “not good” — people wrapped themselves in rugs. The air in the warehouse grew so hot that, one survivor reported, he felt his skin peeling. Harris held the front door open, yelling: “Follow the sound of my voice! This way!” Michela Gregory and Alex Vega embraced, his body on top of hers to shield her from the flames and heat.
In the early minutes after the fire, Harris believed that everybody made it out. He saw Carmen Brito. He saw Nikki Kelber with her cat. “Please tell me you’re O.K.,” he texted Danemayer. Then, as he stood in the Wendy’s parking lot, the devastation began to snap into focus. Where were the dozens of others he greeted as they entered the warehouse for the show? The police started compiling a list of the missing. Parents started to show up. Over the next 48 hours, the death toll began to rise: Four confirmed dead. Six confirmed dead. Nine confirmed dead. Danemayer died. Danemayer’s girlfriend, Mendiola, died. Harris’s warehouse mate Peter Wadsworth died after another warehouse mate, Bob Mule, tried and failed to pull Wadsworth out. A high school student in the Pacific Boychoir Academy died. Two Cal undergraduates died. Thirty-six people died that night — the youngest 17, the oldest 61 — in the most deadly structure fire in the United States since 100 people died in the Station nightclub in Rhode Island in 2003. By the next day, news outlets across the country began reporting the same narrative: The building was a deathtrap.
Early Monday morning, he stood in the predawn darkness on the corner of 31st and International for a live interview with the “Today” show. His arty, charismatic guru aesthetic was still intact — his fedora a little too dashing on what should have been a deeply bowed head.
Matt Lauer said good morning, then dispensed with the niceties.
The city of Oakland, too, found itself in the cross hairs within a matter of days and weeks. It turned out that city officials had known for well over a year that Ghost Ship was dangerous. More than half a dozen municipal employees had been inside the warehouse, including a fire captain named George Freelen, who claimed that in 2014 he sent a report to the fire marshal’s office (which that office believes it never received), concerned about the “high fire load.” The police knew as well. Body camera footage obtained by The East Bay Times shows two officers inside Ghost Ship on Sept. 8, 2015, in response to a property dispute. One says to the other, “One spark, one spark and it would all be bad. ... It’s like a huge fireplace here. ... I would be so worried about all the electrical wires.” Child and Family Services was concerned, too, and the police went to the building after being contacted by the agency. A neighbor on 31st Avenue called the police dozens of times, according to KQED, concerned about the noise and the endless flow of old junk that arrived at the building, some of which then sat on the sidewalk.
As details began to emerge, the fire was not understood as an isolated, idiosyncratic catastrophe. It was understood as the product of civic and societal failings. In the years leading up to the fire, the Oakland Fire Department had been chronically underfunded, understaffed and mismanaged. Between 2011 and 2015, the department employed neither a fire marshal nor an assistant fire marshal — and it is the fire marshal’s job to ensure that property owners and tenants follow the city’s building code. To deal with the fallout after the tragedy, the fire chief retired. (The fire marshal hired in April 2015 eventually resigned.) The Oakland city attorney’s office signed a $90,000 contract with a San Francisco public-relations firm “for the purpose of managing and minimizing the City of Oakland’s potential exposure to liability for claims and litigation that may arise out of the Incident,” the contract read. The firm’s duties included conducting “scrimmages as needed for the City Attorney and its clients” — that is, coaching Oakland officials how to deflect blame away from themselves.
Beyond all this was the feeling that the runaway cost of living in the Bay Area — and its attendant housing crisis — was culpable as well. Artists lived and worked in unfinished, unpermitted, unmaintained warehouses because the traditional rental market had become hopelessly out of reach; squats, in one form or another, were the only places artists could afford. The Oakland mayor, Libby Schaaf, a day after the fire, proclaimed herself to be “passionate about preserving and lifting up the incredible creative community that makes this incredible city what it is.” She also talked about safety at artists’ warehouses. But when she spoke at a vigil in downtown Oakland a few days later, she was booed. The mayor then tried to mend her relationship with her more creative constituents by signing an executive order giving owners of illegally inhabited spaces up to 60 days to come up with plans to bring those properties into compliance with building regulations. But who would pay for all those upgrades: the sprinkler systems, the insulation, the fire doors? Without major subsidies or a housing-market crash, there was no math that made those underground art spaces both affordable and up to code.
After the fire, Harris stayed with friends for a while, spending whole days talking only to the cat, unsure he wanted to live. Passing the Fruitvale BART stop had become unbearable. Hearing the drum circle at Lake Merritt had become unbearable. Riding his bike across town, seeing friends of friends — it was all too hard. So in March 2017, he boarded a bus, in a rainstorm, for Los Angeles to try to start again.
In the Inglewood neighborhood of Los Angeles, Harris rented a loft in a former auto-body shop, across the street from an elementary school. The place had cement floors, a huge roll-up door and natural light, “the most honest” light, in Harris’s view. Harris tried to nest. He built a workbench and furniture out of scrap materials he found in the yard. He painted a couple of walls white and one sky blue. He bought an induction stovetop, which heated food with magnetic energy instead of a coil or open flame. He thought about holding workshops in his studio to teach people how to make their own engagement rings out of cuttlebone. But being awake was excruciating, and being asleep was excruciating.
“The undersigned, being sworn says, on information and belief, that Derick Ion Almena, Max Cardin Harris did, in the County of Alameda, State of California, on or about December 2, 2016, commit a felony, to wit: Involuntary Manslaughter, a violation of section 192(b) of the penal code of California, in that said defendant(s) did unlawfully, and without malice, kill Jason Adrian McCarty and Jason Adrian McCarty, a human being. ...
The document felt like a bludgeon, hammering home the loss, each victim’s name stated twice.
Cash Askew; Em B; Jonathan Bernbaum; Barrett Clark; David Cline; Micah Danemayer; Billy Dixon; Chelsea Dolan; Alex Ghassan; Nick Gomez-Hall; Michela Gregory; Sara Hoda; Travis Hough; Johnny Igaz; Ara Jo; Donna Kellogg; Amanda Kershaw; Edmond Lapine II; Griffin Madden; Joseph Matlock; Jason McCarty; Draven McGill; Jennifer Mendiola; Jennifer Morris; Feral Pines; Vanessa Plotkin; Wolfgang Renner; Hanna Ruax; Benjamin Runnels; Nicole Siegrist; Michele Sylvan; Jennifer Kiyomi Tanouye; Alex Vega; Peter Wadsworth; Nick Walrath; Brandon Wittenauer.
There were 36.
“What do you mean?” Harris asked.
The same day, Almena, too, was arrested at his new home in Lake County, in Northern California. Both men were moved to Santa Rita Jail. Bail for each man was initially set at $1.08 million, $30,000 for every victim — far more than either could post. The landlord, the Ng family, was not charged.
Harris spent eight months in solitary confinement — for his own protection, he says the guards told him. He tried to maintain his sanity by reading through thousands of pages of legal documents from the case, hoping to aid in his own defense. The state claimed that the warehouse was flagrantly, cavalierly dangerous. Almena was responsible as the master tenant. Harris shared culpability as second in command.
On Dec. 6, 2017, a year and four days after the deadly fire, preliminary hearings began. Testimony lasted six days, the last of which was Harris’s 28th birthday. Each morning, Almena and Harris arrived at Superior Court of Alameda County, in downtown Oakland, shackled in their striped prison jumpsuits. On the second day, a young man named Nicholas Bouchard took the stand. He testified that Almena persuaded him to co-sign the Ghost Ship lease. Bouchard said he built festival stages with Almena and lived with him on a pot farm in the Santa Cruz mountains — one of the many young men in Almena’s orbit who “had issues with our father figures or father,” Bouchard recalled.
Over the six days of hearings, the state compelled a series of Satya Yugans to testify. Many of them remained so committed to their counterculture ideals that they didn’t really believe in the court system and its method of enacting justice. A gulf in understanding opened in the courtroom. Between the outré artists and the gray-suited custodians of law, there was almost no shared language. What was a family? What was music and what was noise (and was calling your music “noise” an insult)? Was your real name the name your parents gave you or the one bestowed on you by your friends? What qualified as a home? What did it mean to say something was beautiful?
“So is it safe to say that it felt like a place that you could be yourself?” a defense lawyer asked on cross-examination.
But they were clear about Harris. “You’re going to try to make him like he’s a commander, and it’s not real,” said Swan Vega (in the transcript, she’s identified by her given name, Leah). “This is just not correct.” Yes, Harris helped get the rent money to the bank. Yes, Harris coordinated with the music promoter. Yes, Harris cleaned the warehouse for the party. But Harris had no power. Everyone who lived in Satya Yuga knew that.
For a while, each time I visited, I found Harris behind the thick glass divider in his red-and-white jail jumpsuit. To talk to me in a visiting slot in his cell block, he had to lean his lanky body over to the side of the cubicle because the cord on the phone attached to the wall was humiliatingly short. He reminded me to clean the mouthpiece of the phone on my side of the glass each time I sat down.
There was no way for Harris to process the situation, no way to assimilate the facts. He always thought that if he moved gently through the world, the world would move gently over him. He thought that if he helped others, good karma or Jesus or both would take care of him. Had he not done enough? Every time he entered the courtroom, he felt the vast weight of the community’s grief and accusation. “It’s just wrong,” he said of the whole situation into the jailhouse phone. He lost friends in the fire. He had his own trauma to work through. How had his life taken him here, with all these bodies laid at his feet?
One day in April when I visited Harris, he told me that the guards had woken him up in the middle of the night and searched his cell. They took his soap and deodorant and left another inmate standing in his boxers in the cold cement yard. The casual cruelty disoriented him. He had nightmares at night. He had nightmares during the day. He tried to get himself into a positive mind-set before calling his mother or anyone else, because he felt he shouldn’t drag others down. She hadn’t come to visit — she didn’t have money to fly to California and, anyway, Harris didn’t want to put her through seeing him in jail. Harris’s father, who remarried and had another child, had not visited either.
Almena, too, was in jail and not doing well. Shortly after his arrest, he was moved to the Glenn Dyer jail in downtown Oakland. He’d gained 60 pounds. He spoke in person to a local TV news reporter at KTVU twice, once in November 2017 and again in June 2018. He cried during the second interview when he talked about his children, then he remembered all the children who had died and that it was cosmically unseemly for him to cry in public about his own; his face collapsed as he sunk into the quicksand of his own pain. When his children visited him in jail, he told them he was now on a spaceship. He would be leaving soon, and he didn’t know when he was coming back. He hated for his children to see him locked up like this. He longed to touch their warm, soft skin. 
The judge accepted each of Harris’s no-contest pleas and found him guilty on all counts. “To have to take that and feel that judgment and have that even be uttered into the universe — that was just a hard, hard thing,” Harris said.
Late on the morning of Aug. 9, the benches of the courtroom filled up with families and friends of the victims, plus a few family and friends of the defendants. The space felt hopelessly small and wrong, but it was inevitably all going to feel small and wrong. This was a criminal-negligence case that was trying to perform the civic emotional work of a mass-murder trial. The community needed the proceedings to do much more than call two human defendants to account for negligence; the community needed catharsis. The trial needed to create monsters, then decree those monsters must be locked away so that the world could be made safe and right again.
Harris, along with Almena, entered from a side door. Harris seemed to be trying to hold on to a bit of himself, the gentle hippie artist, by wearing an undershirt he tie-dyed with jailhouse juice packets and crushed colored pencils. In the gallery, Harris locked his gaze on his mother, whom he hadn’t seen in 14 months, her long face dazed with the impossibility of her task. He mouthed, “I love you,” and he told me that he tried “to transmit as much love as I possibly can with my eyes.” She had come to California to support her son. Her presence, perhaps, would make Harris seem human to all the other parents in the courtroom, many of whom believed Harris was responsible for their children’s deaths.
The horror followed by sadness followed by horror followed by sadness flowed and overflowed and kept overflowing. There was no way to contain it, nor should it have been contained. Colleen Dolan, who lost her daughter, 33-year-old Chelsea Dolan, described standing out in front of Ghost Ship for hours on that awful night, breathing in the same awful fumes that killed her child, feeling the same awful heat.  “Days later when we finally received her body, she was like smoked meat, her skin and hair charred from the intense temperatures,” she said.
After a two-hour recess, everyone returned to the courtroom. Over the two days of hearings, the families of the victims had made it very clear in court that in addition to being wrecked by loss, they felt legally aggrieved. They were angry that the landlord had not been charged. They were angry that the city of Oakland had not been charged. They were angry that P.G.& E. had not been charged. And then there was Almena’s performance at the hearing — his apparent lack of contrition, his offer to sacrifice the lives of his own son and daughters and the thought that he would tattoo their dead children’s names on his skin.
To the great surprise of everybody present, the judge threw out the plea deal. “I am expressly rejecting the plea bargain as to Mr. Almena,” Cramer said. He added: “Mr. Harris has expressed from the outset, unconditional remorse. He was at the scene, he stayed at the scene, met with the officials, has done so from the outset.” But Harris and Almena had a package deal; either both defendants pleas were granted or neither was. So Harris’s plea, along with Almena’s, was thrown out.
“I do not know that it will do any of these victims any good,” Cramer said of forcing the case to go to trial. A trial was no guarantee of justice. A trial would certainly not bring justice with regard to the city of Oakland, P.G.& E. or the landlords. But the judge would let a jury decide the fates of Almena and Harris.
Each morning he reads the daily spiritual parable from “The Book of Awakening.” He relaxes if the guards decide to handcuff him when they take him out of his cell — “if it makes you feel more comfortable,” is how he sees it. “If there’s less of a chance that you’ll be jumpy and Tase me for scratching my nose, then great.” He has read the Bible three times since he entered Santa Rita. He studies Buddhism and looks for ways to model equanimity and grace. When a wildflower seed blows into the yard, he says, “I have to take that as pure poetry.” He tries to call his mother every day. He forgives his father for his absence and wishes he could be a better brother to his father’s other son, who is now 8.
It strains the human heart — and all the wisdom of the great books of the world — to hold all this suffering. Thirty-six families learned their children died. Each story is a complete universe of pain. In none of those stories does the child come back. Each of those children was loved.
