Europe|Poland Reverses Supreme Court Purge, Retreating From Conflict With E.U.
Poland Reverses Supreme Court Purge, Retreating From Conflict With E.U.
WARSAW — Backing down from a showdown with Brussels, Poland’s government reversed its purge of the country’s Supreme Court, as the president signed a law on Monday that will reinstate the judges who had been forced out of their jobs.
It was a remarkable turnaround after months of Poland’s top officials saying they would resist pressure to stop the overhaul of the judiciary. The ruling party, Law and Justice, had put tightening its grip on the courts at the center of its agenda, claiming that it was vital to rid the courts of corrupt judges and Communist-era vestiges.
The European Union sees the changes Poland has made to its judiciary in the last three years as a violation of the bloc’s core values, a threat to the rule of law and the end of judges acting as a check on political power. Last year, the union chastised Poland and took the first steps toward stripping the country of its voting rights in Brussels — a penalty that has never been used against a member nation.
Poland’s concession on the Supreme Court is by no means the end of that conflict between the right-wing, nationalist Polish government and Brussels, but it represented a striking change in tone.
It came ahead of a campaign season that could be a defining test for Law and Justice, with elections to the European Parliament in May, and Polish national elections expected later in the year. The party has sought time and again to appeal to voters by casting Poland’s fight as a battle between bureaucrats in Brussels and patriots at home.
The Parliament approved the bill reinstating the Supreme Court judges three weeks ago, after less than four hours of debate. But President Andrzej Duda — who had been the face and force behind the court purge — waited until the last hours before his formal deadline Monday night to sign the bill into law.
But he said many challenges remained. His organization is currently defending some 30 judges and prosecutors in Poland who have been subjected to various forms of repressions, including threats of disciplinary actions, for their involvement in protests and publicly criticizing the changes to the judiciary.
As the ruling party has asserted ever greater control over the courts, there have been growing reports of subsequent chaos, particularly on the Supreme Court, with some of the purged judges never actually conceding that they had been legally dismissed.
A law that was passed in July lowered the mandatory retirement age for Supreme Court judges, forcing out more than one-third of them, including many not beholden to the government.
The legislation that reinstates the jurists was an answer to an interim verdict issued in October by the Court of Justice of the European Union, ordering Poland to freeze its judiciary overhaul after the European Commission filed a complaint. Earlier on Monday, the European Union’s highest court confirmed that order, saying, “Poland must immediately suspend the application” of its law on the new retirement age.
Poland’s leaders had threatened to disregard the ruling, but faced with the prospect of hefty financial sanctions, they backed down. Marcin Warchol, a deputy justice minister, said that though the government disagreed with the verdict, they must respect it.
Still, speaking to lawmakers before they voted on the measure, he suggested that the European high court had been out of line.
“The tribunal is entering, as lawyers call it, an unknown territory, or even terra incognita; they are testing on our country certain ideas that are, unfortunately, connected to a superstate and creating a supranational system that the E.U. is,” he said.
Several members of the ruling party said that they hoped the concession on the Supreme Court would persuade the European Commission to drop the continuing legal case against the government, but that seems unlikely.
The Court of Justice of the European Union will still fast-track the commission’s complaint over Poland’s judicial changes, officials said, and it will most likely make its decision by April.
The bloc invoked Article 7 of its treaty, potentially revoking Poland’s voting rights, even before the attempted Supreme Court purge. The right-wing government has been steadily increasing its control over the judiciary ever since it swept into power at the end of 2015.
It first stacked the Constitutional Tribunal, a top body tasked with reviewing the constitutionality of the law, with loyal jurists. Soon after that, Minister of Justice Zbigniew Ziobro merged his post with the job of prosecutor general, which gave him authority over the country’s prosecutors.
Before the government passed the law targeting the Supreme Court, politicians took full control over the National Council of the Judiciary, which selects judges, and created a new disciplinary chamber that critics view as a tool to punish unruly judges.