Peter van Agtmael is not easily categorized as either a photojournalist or a documentarian. His images are often complicated and at times oblique, and they hew to no particular genre or aesthetic approach in photography.
Such issues were on his mind as he prepared for the Miami Street Photography Festival this weekend, where he is a featured artist. The festival coincides with Art Basel Miami Beach.
Mr. van Agtmael, who lives in Brooklyn, said he did not see himself as a street photographer, but he also rejected any labels that break down his work. “Photography is photography,” he said. But he does deeply respect the intense discipline and hard work needed to make a successful street photograph, he said, an endeavor that ends up in failure perhaps 99 percent of the time.
After making arrangements to be embedded with United States forces, he went to Iraq in January 2006 and worked there regularly through 2009, immersing himself in the wars, photographing often on assignment for The New York Times Magazine.
He was spurred on by a lifelong interest in such conflicts, an impulse that stemmed in part from his grandfather’s nostalgic stories about serving in World War II in Europe, which intrigued him from an early age. But like many male conflict photographers, he was also motivated by something primal, he said.
In truth, he knew little about his own country.
“I started discovering America while on embeds in Iraq and Afghanistan because I was suddenly seeing a cross culture of race and class in American society that I hadn’t been exposed to growing up,” he said.
At a Tea Party rally in Des Moines in 2010.
After three years of covering war, Mr. van Agtmael said, he felt burned out and set out to look at his own country through several long road trips and visits to places like Louisville, Detroit and New Orleans. His wanted to discover more about America in the shadows of the wars, focusing on class, race, identity, family and history. But it was also a journey of healing and of rediscovering photography for him.
The resulting images are collected in the 2017 book “Buzzing at the Sill.” In Miami, Mr. van Agtmael will discuss these photos as well as those from his 2014 volume, “Disco Night Sept. 11.” He will also talk about how personal narrative can connect to a broader political narrative.
In addition, he will look at the role photography has played in his own life and how he has developed his own way of seeing, unburdened by the confines of photographic genres. His visual journey has been influenced by a relentless study of images by a broad range of photographers. Of late he has been studying Dawoud Bey’s “Seeing Deeply” as well as Deana Lawson’s and Masahisa Fukase’s self-titled works.
Mr. van Agtmael’s photographs have a visual rawness that displays a lack of concern for traditional photojournalistic aesthetics. This was not entirely a conscious decision on his part. The visual language was, he said, more dictated by his experiences than the desire to make specific aesthetics statements.
