The newsletter’s countdown starts today, with #5.
Today’s newsletter starts a countdown of my choices for the five most important news stories of 2018. They’re not necessarily the ones that received the most attention this year. They are the ones likely to have long-term impact. For each one, I’ll offer a few reading suggestions that put the stories in perspective.
The countdown will run through Dec. 31 (although tomorrow I’ll pause the countdown for a bit of Christmas distraction). During this time, I’m going to take a break from writing about the latest news. I’ll be back to writing about the news on Jan. 1. In the meantime, The Times Opinion report will be full of commentary on the big stories, like the government shutdown and President Trump’s foreign policy — and, as always, you can find links to the Opinion report at the bottom of the newsletter.
I hope all of you enjoy the final days of the year, however you mark them.
When The Harris Poll ranked the American companies with the best reputations two years ago, the top three were all technology companies: Amazon, Apple and Google. Last year, those three were all still in the top 10.
In the 2018 version, though, only Amazon remained at the top. Google had fallen to #28, and Apple to #29. Facebook was down at #51 (and has never been very high).
I’m glad to see a new level of scrutiny. Digital technology obviously brings some enormous positives, and there is no reversing its spread. But we’ve been too blasé about the downsides of our new online world. A question for 2019 and beyond is what we’re going to do about those downsides.
For more: Business Insider’s “Your brain on apps” series; “How to survive the next era of tech,” by Farhad Manjoo, a recent addition to The Times Opinion section; “Introducing the internet bill of rights,” by Kara Swisher, The Times.
For more on Facebook specifically: “The cost of living in Mark Zuckerberg’s internet empire,” Brian Phillips, The Ringer; “Can Mark Zuckerberg fix Facebook before it breaks democracy?” by Evan Osnos, The New Yorker; Walt Mossberg, the veteran technology journalist, on why he’s quitting Facebook; “If Congress doesn’t understand Facebook, what hope do its users have?“ by Issie Lapowsky, Wired.
And on Amazon: “Amazon may have outsmarted itself with HQ2 tactics,” by Shira Ovide, Bloomberg Opinion.
