Hi there! Charlotte Cowles here, back from my week off and ready to regale you with the top stories in business and tech. If you’re reading this for the first time, and like your news quick and painless on Sunday mornings, you can receive With Interest in your inbox by subscribing here. Your well-informed Monday self will thank you.
Speaking of which, tomorrow is “Green Monday,” coined by retailers for all the cash that procrastinators (like yours truly) will spend when they realize it’s the second week of December and they haven’t bought any holiday presents yet. Another reason it pays to shop early: Some Walmart customers received an extra gift last week, when two wealthy elves — the filmmaker Tyler Perry and the billionaire philanthropist Gayle Benson — paid off outstanding layaway accounts at their local stores. Anonymous donors picked up the tabs for shoppers in Colorado and Vermont, too.
You might have noticed whiplash on Wall Street last week. Stocks rose on Monday on news of a trade cease-fire with China, then fell mightily late in the week, as investors reacted to the news that American officials orchestrated the arrest of Meng Wanzhou, the chief financial officer of the Chinese telecom giant Huawei (and the daughter of its founder). Ms. Meng’s detention in Canada, and possible extradition to New York, poses trouble for the United States’ relationship with China, which of course has been incredibly tense with the tariff battle that’s hurting the economies of both countries. Adding insult to injury, Ms. Meng was detained on the same night that “Tariff Man,” a.k.a. President Trump, dined with China’s president, Xi Jinping, in Argentina, where they agreed to the 90-day trade truce.
Will the rebellion continue? Members of France’s “Yellow Vest” movement have carried out violent anti-government rallies to protest economic inequality and high unemployment rates (currently 9.1 percent). Though President Emmanuel Macron has backed down from a proposed gas tax increase, the policy that set off the furor, streets across France remain full of demonstrators. Wearing brightly colored roadside hazard vests, they have burned cars, broken windows and confronted riot police, particularly in fancy neighborhoods in Paris.
Brace your stock portfolio for the possibility of more havoc, this time from Europe, as Britain’s parliament votes on the Brexit plan this Tuesday. London traders are preparing for stressful market swings and long hours by bringing sleeping bags and even mini golf sets to the office. Given the proposal’s chaotic birth and less-than-welcome reception, its passage is iffy. European Union leaders will convene in Brussels on Wednesday to commiserate (and, I assume, gossip) about the fallout.
Uber will resume tests of its self-driving cars in the coming weeks, but don’t expect an autonomous vehicle to pull up at your door anytime soon (or, for that matter, to help the company’s bottom line before it goes public). In March, Uber stopped the program after one of its driverless cars killed a pedestrian in Arizona, and the company is now proceeding more cautiously. Unlike previous trials, when 200 test cars hit the streets in multiple cities under various driving conditions, the vehicles will now be limited to a one-mile loop between two offices in Pittsburgh. The cars won’t operate at night or in wet weather, and they’ll stay under 25 miles an hour.
Michael Cohen, President Trump’s former lawyer-slash-fixer, will be sentenced on Wednesday for multiple offenses, including willful tax evasion and various illegal campaign contributions. And last week, the Senate approved Kathy Kraninger, President Trump’s nominee who has no experience in financial services, as the new head of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Meanwhile, Wells Fargo fired dozens of district managers. The dismissals were part of the bank’s ongoing efforts to show regulators (and customers) that it is serious about cleaning up its sales practices.
3.7 percent: The unemployment rate in the United States in November. Economists were expecting a slightly larger increase in new hires, but the numbers are still good.