Opinion|Forgiving All Student Loans: A Bold Idea, or Welfare for the Well-Off?
Forgiving All Student Loans: A Bold Idea, or Welfare for the Well-Off?
Readers react to David Leonhardt’s argument that it’s an alluring but misguided idea. Some offer their own stories of debt hardships.
Mr. Leonhardt writes that the idea of forgiving all student debt is not a “bold, progressive idea,” but in fact a giveaway to the well-off.
He’s right, and the same applies to other programs as well: so-called 529 college savings plans, health savings accounts, the upper limit of $18,500 ($19,000 starting in 2019) for 401(k) retirement plans.
Mr. Leonhardt’s point is also at the heart of the Richard Reeves book “The Dream Hoarders.” The real divide in America today, Mr. Reeves says, isn’t between the top 1 percent and the other 99 percent; it’s between the top 20 percent and the bottom 80.
David Leonhardt doesn’t mention an option that many of us who suffer from overwhelming college debt would like: bankruptcy protections for student loan debtors. Mr. Leonhardt says that liberal arts graduates who suffer from excessive debt are rare. That may be true, but the frustration is real for those of us who fall into this category.
I have a Ph.D. in American literature that took me seven years to finish. There are hundreds of applicants for every tenure-track job in America, so after graduation I chose to move to China, where I taught in one of the top universities, making wages that put me below the American poverty line. Eventually I was forced to switch to the more remunerative Chinese secondary-school market.
In the meantime, however, I had reached middle age — a childless widow with hardly any savings, saddled with a six-figure student debt. Any money I now have to spare from my $40,000 to $50,000 yearly income I desperately need to save to take care of myself as I age. Last year I made the difficult decision to default on the debt.
What hurts is that I have dedicated my life to teaching while many of my peers have left academia — and understandably so. Yet I have done so at the risk of my future and my current peace of mind. This should not be the case, and bankruptcy protection would be a godsend to people in situations like mine.
David Leonhardt uses his own experience attending Yale to argue that loan forgiveness for upper-middle-class students is unnecessary. In fact, Yale is now one of a small number of colleges around the country that have adopted no-loan policies, replacing loans with grants.
The reality is that student debt has major racial and gender justice ramifications. Black students, regardless of their economic background, are more than twice as likely to default on their loans as white students. While women represent 56 percent of the college population, they hold two-thirds of the total student debt load.
A truly progressive plan would not only eliminate past debt, but also decrease college costs and replace future loans with grants. The current system of taking out loans to pay for college just isn’t working anymore, and we should be willing to aim high with our solutions.
The writer is the founder of the Hildreth Institute, Inversant and La Vida Scholars, nonprofit organizations to help get low-income students to college.
I agree with David Leonhardt. I have a friend whose daughter was accepted to several prominent private colleges, as well as a top in-state public university. After careful consideration they decided that she would go to the public university instead of taking on debt so that she could go to a private college. It wasn’t easy, but my friend was able to pay for the public university without having to take out loans, and so his daughter received a high-quality education and graduated debt-free.
But if all student debt were to be canceled, it would turn out that my friend was a fool. In that case, he should have gone into debt to pay for one of the prestigious private colleges, and then waited for someone else to pay off the loans for him.
We should not punish people for being frugal and prudent, nor should we reward those who, given a choice, choose to incur debt.
To have a full — and vital — debate about how to address the $1.5 trillion student debt crisis, we need a better understanding of the problem. Our recent research shows that policymakers and experts have used faulty assumptions to assert that student debt is mostly harmless. In fact, the sharp increase in student debt has coincided with stagnant or decreasing earnings for those with college degrees. At the same time, earnings for those without a college degree have fallen even further. Borrowers find themselves squeezed: They can’t afford college, but they also can’t afford not to go.
By focusing on default as the single measure of student debt burden, David Leonhardt obscures the way student debt affects borrowers who are lucky enough to have the earnings — or the family support — to avoid default. If he dug deeper, he’d find the struggle of student debt extends to millions of borrowers who have deferred payments or enrolled in income-driven plans to avoid default, and still more who have put off homeownership, small-business formation and retirement savings. Dismissing wide swaths of debtors as “doing just fine” does a disservice to the debate — and to the borrowers themselves.
The writers are, respectively, research director and a fellow at the Roosevelt Institute. Ms. Morgan is also executive director of the Great Democracy Initiative.
David Leonhardt asserts that forgiving all student loans is a bad policy. That may be so. But we need to have a fair student loan policy.
Our daughter took out more than $100,000 in loans to get her graduate degree at Harvard. She immediately landed a prestigious position in the New York theater world. After she had made payments on it for several years, I noted that the payments got bigger each year, but the loan balance actually grew because of the outrageous interest rate the government charges.
An excellent arts job in New York still does not pay the kind of money on which one can both live and make the payments. For those not making more than $150,000 the debt becomes an albatross around the neck. Fair rates and reasonable payments I would support any time. It was so when I was in college.
But our daughter would be paying her loan off for 30 or more years at very high rates. Time to lower rates and allow students to be responsible. As it is, we were fortunate enough to be able to write a check for her loan. We know lots of similar grads who are not so lucky to have folks able to do so.
There is an arms race within various state legislatures to see who can devise the best plan for providing “free college” for low-income students. Currently there are 15 states with programs that propose to help low-income students, but very few of these programs actually help students because the money is often restricted to covering tuition, according to an analysis by the Education Trust.
The issue of access and affordability isn’t a state-by-state problem; it is a national problem and Washington has a federal program through Pell Grants that provides assistance. This year, however, Pell received a meager $100 increase.
A further expansion of Pell would allow students to use money to cover fees, apply to adult students and pay for living expenses while students are in school. If we’re serious about “free college” for low-income students, I urge lawmakers to stop playing politics with statewide programs and instead use the equitable program we already have in place.
The writer is president of Alma College.