It’s not the obvious one. It’s the one that will affect our grandkids.
A global heat wave. Extreme rainstorms. Severe droughts. Rapidly intensifying Gulf Coast storms. The deadliest wildfire in California history. And a presidential administration that’s trying to make the problem worse.
There were more obvious big news stories than climate change in 2018. But there weren’t any more important stories, in my view. That’s why it is my choice for the top story of the year. It’s the one most likely to affect the lives of future generations.
I sometimes feel guilty that I don’t write about climate change more often. From week to week, there isn’t as much new to say about it as there is about, say, President Trump. So I’ve devoted my final column of the year to the subject. I argue that, while the climate news this year was overwhelmingly grim, there were still two reasons for hope.
This concludes my countdown of the top five most significant stories of 2018. I realize I didn’t come close to covering everything important that happened this year. If I were doing a top 10 or top 20, I also would have found room for Brexit; family separations at the border; Brett Kavanaugh’s confirmation; the continuing #MeToo fallout; the increasing assertiveness of China; the departure of Trump aides who constrained the president; and the tentative signs of an economic slowdown.
Now onto 2019 — with hopes for a better year than the one that ends today.
Related. Yesterday, “Meet the Press” devoted its entire show to climate change. It was a welcome change from just a few weeks ago, when the show hosted a climate denier as an expert panelist.
For more on the climate, be sure to read Justin Gillis’s recent Op-Ed arguing that a carbon tax isn’t the most effective way to address climate change, as well as pieces by Paul Bledsoe and The Times Editorial Board. And if you’re thinking about New Year resolutions, check out this short video from Eve Andrews of Grist — about ditching her car, for the sake of both the environment and her bank account.
You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).