Politics|Pelosi and Her No. 2 Go Back 50 Years. But They’re Not Quite Friends.
Pelosi and Her No. 2 Go Back 50 Years. But They’re Not Quite Friends.
WASHINGTON — In her quest to become speaker, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California appears ready once again to sacrifice the higher ambitions of her No. 2, Representative Steny H. Hoyer, and Mr. Hoyer is not shy about expressing his objections.
“She’s not negotiating for me,” he snapped the other day, referring to Ms. Pelosi’s deal with a group of House Democratic rebels to impose term limits on the leadership — and not just herself — of four years.
As Democrats prepare to assume control of the House, the Pelosi-Hoyer frenemies dynamic, long a subject of intrigue in the Capitol, is growing ever more complex. The friction goes back decades. The last time Democrats took power from Republicans, in 2006, Ms. Pelosi backed then-Representative John P. Murtha in his effort to oust Mr. Hoyer from the majority leader’s slot.
The putsch failed spectacularly, but she’s ready to handcuff him again with a deal on term limits that, if approved, would most likely usher both lawmakers from their leadership suites by early 2023, along with the No. 3 Democrat, Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina.
All three septuagenarians could be weakened by their lame-duck status — in Washington, power is always prospective — but Mr. Hoyer, 79, of Maryland, the lone white man in the group and a symbol of the party’s dwindling centrist wing, would appear to be the most vulnerable to an even earlier challenge.
Some see Mr. Hoyer as the ultimate corporate pol, out of sync with a Democratic caucus in which women, millennials and people of color are in ascendance, with the loudest new voices on the left. His longstanding ambitions to be speaker would almost certainly be curtailed by the plan’s emphasis on generational change, though under it, he could technically serve four years as majority leader, and then, at 83, run for speaker.
But over his more than 50 years in public life, 37 of them in Congress, Mr. Hoyer has proved himself a quiet survivor. He is now the House’s longest-serving Democrat. Last month, he skated to victory to reclaim the majority leader’s post, even as some fellow Democrats pushed for Ms. Pelosi’s ouster.
“Is Tom Brady too old at 41 to be quarterback?” he asked in an interview, comparing himself to one of the best N.F.L. players in history.
His survival skills may be put to a new test as he fights back against the term limits proposal, which is subject to a vote of the entire caucus when the new Congress convenes in January. The debate will pit old-school Democrats like Mr. Hoyer, who derive their power from the seniority system, against newcomers, who want to shake things up.
Mr. Hoyer’s stock in trade is his ability to cultivate allies across the Democratic spectrum (not to mention lobbyists and donors), and he is busy making new friends on the left. Among them is Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the progressive firebrand from New York, who at 29 is half a century his junior. He dropped in to see her at a cafe in Queens on Halloween, the first time they had met.
“I remember feeling very pleasantly surprised,” Ms. Ocasio-Cortez said.
But while he may have left her with the impression that he will embrace her vow to make waves, in the interview, Mr. Hoyer was more cautious. He took a dim view of Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s decision to join environmental activists at a protest in Ms. Pelosi’s office.
Like Ms. Pelosi, Mr. Hoyer raises millions of dollars for Democrats — more than $10 million in this election cycle alone — and crisscrosses the country campaigning for them. Unlike her, he has not become the subject of Republican attack ads and is welcome in districts across the country. If Ms. Pelosi is the public face of the caucus, he is the “member’s member,” guiding younger colleagues on everything from hiring decisions to committee assignments.
Indeed, the establishment has been friendly to Mr. Hoyer, tall and silver-haired, with a toothy smile and a seemingly endless supply of conservative ties and starched white shirts. Of the more than $4 million he raised this last election cycle, more than $1 million came from large contributions, and nearly $2.5 million came from political action committees, according to Open Secrets, which tracks campaign finance.
He opposes Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s call to keep members who take industry contributions off a select committee on climate change, saying the corrupting influence of money in politics can be cured through disclosure.
Progressives were up in arms earlier this year when Levi Tillemann, a progressive energy consultant, secretly recorded Mr. Hoyer urging him to quit a House Democratic primary in Colorado to clear a path for a more moderate veteran, Jason Crow, who won the Republican-held seat. Mr. Tillemann’s grandfather was Tom Lantos, a venerated California Democrat who died in 2008 and was extremely close to Mr. Hoyer, and his uncle is Richard Swett, a former Democratic congressman from New Hampshire.
Mr. Hoyer makes no apologies. And Mr. Hoyer’s allies see his it’s-not-personal attitude as a virtue. Veronica Escobar, an incoming freshman from Texas, recalled that when Mr. Hoyer agreed to support her, he insisted on breaking the news himself to a friend who was backing her opponent.
“It showed a level of not just courage, but a level of transparency and a desire to be forthright and candid and open and honest,” she said.
Ms. Pelosi and Mr. Hoyer go back more than half a century. Having known difficult times — his biological father left him, and his stepfather was an alcoholic — Mr. Hoyer was working his way through the University of Maryland as a night file clerk for the C.I.A. when he heard a young Senator John F. Kennedy speak on campus.
Inspired, he switched his major from public relations to politics, and ditched the C.I.A. job to work part time for a Democratic senator, Daniel B. Brewster of Maryland. There, in 1963, he crossed paths with a summer intern, Nancy D’Alesandro, soon to be Nancy Pelosi, the daughter of a longtime Baltimore mayor and Maryland Democratic royalty.
Four decades later, in 2001, they ran against each other for Democratic whip. Ms. Pelosi won. In an interview, he took pains to note that she had the backing of 30 of the 32 Democrats from her home state of California, while his home state of Maryland had only four Democrats all told.
When Ms. Pelosi backed Mr. Murtha in 2006, “I wasn’t happy about it,” Mr. Hoyer said. But he won handily, which seemed to produce a détente.
Mr. Raskin said Mr. Hoyer was “very much at peace with where he is right now,” but Mr. Hoyer is not ruling anything out. Before Ms. Pelosi secured the votes to become speaker, he described himself as “one of the alternatives” should she fall short, and said that “of course” he would one day like to have the job, while adding quickly that he had a pretty amazing job right now.
