Considering that Daina Agee and Michael Mastrandrea met in Malaysia, though both were born in New York and she was living in Taiwan at the time while he was on an extended international backpacking trip, it’s probably not that surprising that a geographic misunderstanding surfaced early in their relationship.
In 2013, their paths crossed at a hostel in Kuala Lumpur that is known for its rooftop bar and party atmosphere. She was on her way to Nepal for a hiking trip, and he was headed to Bali to celebrate his birthday. He told her he was from Cincinnati. She told him that she taught English to schoolchildren in Taipei.
The two commenced a friendship through Facebook messages, and some weeks later, when she was back in Taipei, he suggested that he might visit Taiwan for a week or so.
Bethany Lowery and Joseph Zielinski met in May, 2017 through the dating app Bumble.
Mr. Zielinski was immediately attracted to a picture of Ms. Lowery standing in front of the United States Capitol at the 2017 Women’s March.
“I could tell that she was strong and independent,” he said.
On their first date, at a professional soccer game in Indianapolis, Mr. Zielinski playfully said to Ms. Lowery that if the game had been rained out, he was prepared to impress her with his knowledge of 19th-century feminists.
They began seeing each other as often as possible, and despite a stark difference in personalities — “she is outgoing and tends to be dramatic,” he said, while “he is more the quiet and analytical type,” she said — they found those differences to be complementary.
Within three weeks, they had exchanged “I love yous,” and within three months, they were so convinced they had a future together that they began shopping for wedding rings.
Dana Rachel Horowitz and Steven Brett Lang were married Dec. 1 at the Four Seasons Hotel in Miami. Rabbi Alan B. Lucas officiated.
Mrs. Lang, 29, works in New York as an event planner at the New York Stock Exchange. She organizes the opening and closing bell ceremonies, along with other events there. She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Central Florida.
She is the daughter of Marcy Lynn Horowitz of Hollywood, Fla., and Dr. Craig Alan Horowitz of Fort Lauderdale, Fla. The bride’s father is a veterinarian in Fort Lauderdale. Her mother is a social work supervisor at Joe DiMaggio Children’s Hospital in Hollywood.
Mr. Lang, also 29, is the director of strategy and development at Scout Sports and Entertainment, which is a part of Horizon Media in New York. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
He is the son of Susan B. Lang and Robert P. Lang of Linwood, N.J. The groom’s mother, a retired lawyer, is the chair of the executive committee of the Holocaust Resource Center of Stockton University. His father is a partner in Fox Rothschild, a law firm in Atlantic City.
The couple met in 2015 while both were working at Horizon Media.
Kalisha Dessources and Shomari Coleman Figures are to be married Dec. 2 at Park Chateau Estate and Gardens in East Brunswick, N.J. The Rev. Alejandro Baldwin, who was ordained through Antioch International Ministries, is to officiate, with his wife, the Rev. Ashley Lewis Baldwin, who was ordained through Walking in Deliverance Ministries, to take part.
Ms. Dessources, 28, who will be taking her husband’s name, is studying for a Ph.D. in sociology at Yale. She is also the director of the National Philanthropic Collaborative of Young Women’s Initiatives. She was formerly a policy adviser to President Obama’s White House Council on Women and Girls, directing policy work on women and girls of color. She graduated from Cornell and received a master’s degree in education from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Katlyn Fidelia Dessources and Jean Lesly Gerald Dessources of Rockland County, N.Y. The bride’s father, a mechanical engineer, is the senior director of operations at Cumberland Packaging in Brooklyn. Her mother is a lab technologist at Montefiore Nyack Hospital in Nyack, N.Y.
Mr. Figures, who is 33 and works in Washington, is a lawyer and legislative aide in the United States Senate. From 2015-17, he served as White House liaison to the Department of Justice, and previously was the White House domestic director of presidential personnel for President Obama. He graduated from the University of Alabama, from which he also received a law degree.
He is a son of Vivian Davis Figures of Mobile, Ala., and the late Michael A. Figures. The groom’s mother is a Democratic member of the Alabama Senate. His father, who was a civil rights lawyer, served as Alabama state senator from 1978-96.
The couple met in Washington in 2014 while both were working at the White House.
Justine Agresta Pentifallo and Gregory Braumann Ferraro were married Dec. 1 at St. Peter the Apostle Church in River Edge, N.J. The Rev. Michael J. Sheehan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs. Ferraro, 29, is a client services manager for Travel Tripper, a hospitality technology company in New York. She graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is a daughter of Linda A. Pentifallo and James A. Pentifallo of River Edge. The bride’s father owns Ridgefield Hobby, a hobby shop in Ridgefield, N.J. Her mother retired as an administrative assistant for J. A. Carpentry in Hackensack, N.J.
Mr. Ferraro, 32, is the manager of club initiatives for the National Hockey League at Disney Streaming Services in New York. He received an Emmy Award, as part of a team, in 2014 as a producer for the NBCOlympics.com coverage of the 2014 Winter Olympics. He graduated from the University of Massachusetts.
He is the son of Clare B. Ferraro of New York and the late John A. Ferraro. The groom’s mother retired as the president of Viking Press in New York. She now serves on the board of the Eastern Long Island Hospital Auxiliary. His father, who was a New York and Los Angeles freelance theater and television director, had been a lecturer at the School of Cinematic Arts at the University of Southern California.
The couple met in New York on a blind date in September 2013.
Judith Sandra Levine and Richard Alan Ott were married Dec. 1 at the Grand Bohemian Hotel in Asheville, N.C. The Rev. Howard Hanger, who was ordained by the Jubilee Community Church, officiated.
Mrs. Ott, 72, is an independent fiber artist based in Asheville who works with silks and wools to create wearable art. She graduated from Fordham.
She is a daughter of the late Sylvia Rutsky and the late Irving Rutsky, who lived in Flushing, Queens.
Mr. Ott, 70, retired as a mechanical engineer at General Motors in Troy, Mich. He graduated with a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from General Motors Institute in Flint, Mich., which is now called Kettering University, and received a master of science degree in management at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland.
He is the son of the late Donna J. Ott and the late Richard E. Ott of Amherst, Ohio.
The couple met online in April 2017.
The bride’s first two marriages ended in divorce, as did the groom’s first marriage.
Alexa Brette Wasserman and Joshua David Case are to be married Dec. 2. Rabbi Joshua N. Hess is to officiate at Temple Emanu-El in Closter, N.J.
The bride, 27, is a candidate for a master’s degree in school counseling at Kean University in Union, N.J. She graduated from Muhlenberg College.
She is the daughter of Risa Schiffman Wasserman and Evan H. Wasserman of South Orange, N.J. The bride’s father retired as a vice president and real estate counsel in Bridgewater, N.J., for the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation, a clothing company that owns Izod, Calvin Klein, Tommy Hilfiger and other brands. Her mother is a lawyer and mediator in private practice in Millburn, N.J.
The groom, also 27, is a special-education teacher at Columbia High School in Maplewood, N.J. He graduated from Rowan University in Glassboro, N.J., and received a master’s degree in teaching from William Paterson University in Wayne, N.J.
He is a son of Robin Lasser Case and James F. Case of Washington Township, N.J. The groom’s mother is a kitchen designer in the Wayne office of Cabinets Direct USA. His father is an architect, specializing in hospitals and health care facilities, at Cannon Design, a New York architecture firm.
The couple met in August 2017 through OkCupid and for their first date had burritos in South Orange.
Leola Westbrook and Dr. John Preston Lawrence are to be married Dec. 2 in Santa Monica, Calif. The Rev. Barbara Laughray, a minister of the Church of Religious Science, is to officiate at the Shutters on the Beach Hotel.
The bride, 49, is an executive producer and showrunner for various TV shows and networks. She most recently worked as an executive producer/showrunner for Season 6 of “Chrisley Knows Best,” a USA Network original series. She graduated from DePaul University in Chicago.
She is the daughter of Louise Dixon-Harper of Chicago and Leo Westbrook of Hazel Crest, Ill.
The groom, 64, is a pediatric surgeon at Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn. He is also the president of the board of directors for the United States section of Doctors Without Borders, an international humanitarian medical organization. He graduated and received a medical degree from Dartmouth.
He is a son of the late Jane M. McClure Lawrence, who lived in Palatine, Ill., and the late James A. Lawrence, who lived in South San Francisco, Calif.
The couple were introduced through a mutual colleague in May 2017 at an event at the Cipriani Ballroom in New York.
Dr. Hillary Ann Johnston-Cox and Dr. Robert Shoer Copeland-Halperin were married Dec. 1 at the New York Athletic Club in New York. Edward C. Wallace, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the event, officiated.
The couple met in 2014 during their residency in internal medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
Dr. Johnston-Cox, 33, is a fellow in cardiology at Penn Medicine in Philadelphia. She graduated from the University of California at San Diego and received a medical degree and a Ph.D. in vascular physiology from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Robin A. Johnston-Cox and Chris J. Cox of Bishop, Calif. The bride’s father is a maintenance supervisor for the Department of Building and Maintenance for Inyo County in Bishop. Her mother, who is retired, was a teacher at the Bishop Union High School in Bishop.
Dr. Copeland-Halperin, 35, is a fellow in cardiology at Mount Sinai Medical Center. He graduated from Hamilton College and completed his premedical study at Columbia. He received a medical degree from Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.
He is the son of Dr. Michelle Copeland and Dr. Jonathan L. Halperin of New York. The groom’s mother practices cosmetic, plastic and reconstructive surgery in private practice in New York. The groom’s father practices cardiology at Mount Sinai Hospital. The groom’s parents also are professors at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai; his mother is an assistant professor of clinical surgery and his father a professor of medicine in cardiology.
Bette Ann Schlossberg and Jason Aaron Fialkov were married Nov. 30 at the Manhattan Marriage Bureau. Huiling Zheng, a staff member of the City Clerk’s Office officiated. On Dec. 8, Rabbi Stephen Spiegel is to lead the couple in an exchange of vows at the Rosewood Mayakoba, a resort in Playa del Carmen, Mexico.
The bride, 33, is the director of influencer marketing for Lyft in New York. She is also a chair of the Joyce Theater’s Young Leaders Circle in New York. She graduated from Duke.
She is the daughter of Lana R. Schlossberg and Dr. Michael Schlossberg of Atlanta. The bride’s father, who is retired, was an obstetrician-gynecologist in private practice at the South Fulton Medical Hospital in Atlanta. He was also a major in the United States Army Medical Corps.
The groom, 32, works in New York as the senior manager of brand partnerships for SoundCloud, an audio streaming service based in Berlin. He is also a chair of the New York City chapter of Becca’s Closet, a youth charity based in South Florida. He graduated and received a master’s degree in international business from the University of Florida in Gainesville.
He is the son to Maria E. Fialkov and Harvey D. Fialkov of Plantation, Fla. The groom’s mother is a second-grade teacher at Tropical Elementary School in Plantation. His father is a sportswriter for The Sun-Sentinel, the daily newspaper of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The couple met in 2013 at a Fourth of July party at the Montauk Yacht Club in Montauk, N.Y.
Briana Charlotte Berg and Jonathan Anthony Rossi were married Dec. 1. The Rev. John D. Savard, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Loyola Alumni Memorial Chapel in Baltimore.
The bride and groom met at Loyola University Maryland, from which each graduated.
Mrs. Rossi, 29, works in Manhattan as a marketing manager at Valence Media, the parent company for Billboard, The Hollywood Reporter and other media brands.
She is the daughter of Kathleen M. Berg and Donald E. Berg of Manhattan. The bride’s father retired as a deputy fire marshal at the Long Ridge Fire Company in Stamford, Conn., and is now a fire-explosion consultant in Englewood, N.J., for the Rimkus Consulting Group, a forensic engineering consultancy. Her mother is a residential sales and rental agent in Brooklyn Heights for the Corcoran Group.
Mr. Rossi, 28, works in Manhattan as a financial adviser in a group within Morgan Stanley that provides financial services to artists, collectors, foundations, museums and arts organizations.
He is the son of Linda Duquette Rossi and John A. Rossi of North Tonawanda, N.Y. The groom’s mother is a consulting occupational therapist at Associate Physical and Occupational Therapists in Buffalo.
His father is a vice president and a relationship manager in the small business division of Evans Bank, a regional bank with headquarters in Hamburg, N.Y.