La’Roi Glover was director of player programs for the St. Louis Rams when the team drafted Aaron Donald, a defensive tackle out of Pittsburgh, in the first round of the 2014 draft. As a former interior lineman, Glover took great interest in the rookie. And Donald, it turned out, took great interest in his craft.
Man, the success he’s having today. The Rams are 12-3, and Donald has made himself a candidate for the N.F.L.’s Most Valuable Player Award. With 19.5 sacks, atop the rankings, he has already set a league record for true defensive tackles and, with a game left, has an outside chance of reaching the single-season mark for all players (22.5), set by Giants defensive end Michael Strahan in 2001. Donald is also attempting to become the first interior lineman to lead the N.F.L. in sacks since Glover did it in 2000, when he racked up 17 for the New Orleans Saints.
But Donald, the 27-year-old Rams star, is not alone this year in reasserting the pass-rush bona fides of interior linemen. The Kansas City Chiefs’ Chris Jones, boxed in by better-known outside linebackers in Justin Houston and Dee Ford, is outdoing both of them and is second in the N.F.L. with 15.5 sacks. The San Francisco 49ers’ DeForest Buckner, the Cincinnati Bengals’ Geno Atkins, the Indianapolis Colts’ Denico Autry, the Seattle Seahawks’ Jarran Reed and the New Orleans Saints’ Sheldon Rankins all rank in the top 25.
Until recently, few teams could claim a dominant pass-rushing interior defensive lineman. In 2011, not a single tackle or nose tackle appeared in the top 25 of the sack list. The next year, 2012, one defensive tackle showed up. That was Atkins, who tied for sixth with 12.5 sacks. As recently as 2016, there were no interior players in the top 17.
But this year, the N.F.L. pass rush is being turned inside out.
Kyle Shanahan, the 49ers’ head coach, has an athletic young disrupter in Buckner and a twice-a-year headache in Donald. He knows the value of inside pressure.
“You can have guys get up the field all day, and if there’s nothing in the middle, all the quarterback has to do is step up and just let those guys run around them and have a true pocket,” Shanahan said.
Before we get too settled in the pocket, though, we should probably talk about defensive line position. Between 350-pound nose tackles and fast-twitch edge rushers resides a lot of gray area. That is especially true for 3-4 defensive ends, who play a hybridized role. Official team depth charts do not always indicate where players are really lining up.
Pro Football Focus provided positions for this article, but some players are hard to pin down. Such as J. J. Watt. The website listed the Houston Texans defender as an interior lineman in 2012 and 2015; he led the N.F.L. in sacks both years.
Watt’s alignment had already begun to move outside by 2015, though, when he was frequently stationed opposite an offensive tackle but with an outside linebacker even farther afield. Pro Football Focus now considers Watt an edge rusher.
Hybrids aside, why are so many defensive tackles supplanting outside rushers on the sack charts?
Akbar Gbaja-Biamila, an outside linebacker/defensive end for three N.F.L. teams from 2004 to 2007 and now an analyst for NFL Network, said it was largely because of that wider trend everyone is talking about in 2018: the emphasis on passing.
As Gbaja-Biamila noted, the league still deploys three-technique defensive tackles who line up on the guard’s outside shoulder. But with pass rushing so much more important than gap stuffing, they are more likely to play a “loose-3” (shaded toward the gap) than a “tight-3” or “heavy-3” (shaded toward the guard, so he cannot muscle them to one side).
Suddenly, defensive tackles are finding themselves with more aggressive license.
It makes sense to get the most athletic sackers out in space, where they do not have as much traffic to work through. But if you have someone inside like Donald who can overcome the double-teams and chips, well, that carries a logic of its own.
