Many Icelanders are calling for the resignations of a group of politicians who were secretly recorded in a bar using sexist and obscene language about female colleagues, including making disparaging remarks about a disabled former member of Parliament.
The politicians — including former Prime Minister Sigmundur David Gunnlaugsson, former Foreign Minister Gunnar Bragi Sveinsson and a female member of Parliament, Anna Kolbrun Arnadottir — met at a bar called Klaustur two weeks ago in Reykjavik, Iceland’s capital, ordered beers and spent more than three hours talking.
When the group was leaving, the person told the newspaper DV, one lawmaker asked if the person had been sitting there the entire time. Another dismissed the person as a tourist.
The recording went viral after it was posted online last week, spurring nationwide outrage in a country that has a female prime minister, Katrin Jakobsdottir, and that prides itself on its gender equality record after topping the World Economic Forum’s gender gap index for several years. This year, a law was passed that requires companies and government agencies to prove they are paying men and women equally.
Some of the politicians who were recorded have apologized.
Mr. Sveinsson, the former foreign minister, who has a reputation for being a champion of women’s rights, is heard on the recording mocking a female lawmaker for coming forward as part of the “Me Too” movement and laughing at domestic violence accusations made against a former member of Parliament.
Ms. Arnadottir, the only female politician at the table, is heard at one point responding, “Can I ask you to imagine if this was a male politician you are speaking of?” On the recording, the men erupt in laughter.
Icelanders took to social media to express disgust. “My burning question is yet this,” one user tweeted. “Where on the Centrist Party hot-or-not scale do I stand?” An entertainment website, Nutiminn, created a quiz asking users to guess whether a certain quote came from a rap song or the tapes.
Many people were especially disturbed by the way some in the group referred to Freyja Haraldsdottir, a disabled former member of Parliament. One person called her “an island,” a possible reference to that fact that she uses a wheelchair that lets her lie flat.
Ms. Haraldsdottir, who received a personal apology from Mr. Gunnlaugsson, said that without any form of action such apologies were empty.
Four of the lawmakers, including Mr. Gunnlaugsson, a former chairman of the Progressive Party, apologized for their “insensitive remarks” but said the comments had been made in a private conversation.
Two of the lawmakers were removed from the People’s Party but continue to serve in Parliament. Two others have taken leave.
A survey published Monday by the pollster Maskina found that 80 percent of Icelanders thought the men on the recording should resign, and that 74 percent believed Ms. Arnadottir should do so.
Ms. Arnadottir, a member of the Centrist Party, said on Wednesday that she would not resign.
Halldora Mogensen, a lawmaker with Iceland’s Pirate Party, described the mood in Parliament after the tapes were released as “toxic” and expressed concern about how colleagues would move past the scandal.
“The targets of this awful talk, will they just have to continue to work with them like nothing happened?” she said.
Some details of the recording have been the subject of considerable speculation in the news media. One theory held that squeaky noises heard at one point could have been one of the politicians imitating a seal when talking about Ms. Haraldsdottir. But because those noises did not prompt a reaction at the table, others thought it was likelier to be the sound of a squeaky chair.
