New York Today|N.Y. Today: Are the Subways Improving? Not Enough.
N.Y. Today: Are the Subways Improving? Not Enough.
It’s Tuesday. 🤳Don’t blame the subway: Cardi B missed her court date on assault charges yesterday because of “poor communication,” her lawyer said.
Weather: Decemberish. Wind chills in the 20s and 30s, with a high of 42. Clear skies all day, though.
First look: “Has New York City’s Subway System Improved?” In short: some, but not enough.
That’s the bottom-line conclusion from a report coming today by the Manhattan Institute’s Nicole Gelinas.
Based on data from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the subways have made gains from their nadir a few years ago, but the system is hardly adequate, she writes.
Meanwhile the subways’ head, Andy Byford, proposed budget cuts yesterday that will lead trains to be more crowded, cleaned half as often, and hotter in the summer, all to stave off “doomsday” service cuts. Oh well.
Straphanger stories: After Monday's epic delay on the F and G trains, the Riders Alliance released a compilation of the Worst Commutes of 2018.
Call out: Got a commuting nightmare story, featuring a train or a bus? We want to hear it.
Send tweets, photos and videos to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Or tag @NYTMetro on Twitter. We might include them in a future story.
Did Amazon employees buy in Queens based on insider info?
Buying and selling real estate based on insider information, such as getting a tip about Amazon’s expansion into Long Island City before it was announced, would be outlawed under legislation proposed by State Senator Michael Gianaris of Queens, The Wall Street Journal reports.
Think ahead: Mr. Gianaris represents Long Island City and is a top Democrat in the State Senate. Hearings on this legislation could help critics of the deal.
While President Trump is seeking to roll back recognition of transgender people, his hometown is moving the other way.
Wednesday is the latest diversity training session for city workers. The goal is to increase respectful communication, including appropriate use of pronouns, as well as to demystify terminology.
A 2015 video profile by Cosmopolitan of Jodie Patterson, a Brooklyn mother to a young transgender boy named Penelope (now 11 years old), will be used in the session.
“The story of trans people is shaping up to be the story of black people, of women, or all marginalized people throughout history, where some folks try to rewrite the identities of others, for their own needs,” Ms. Patterson said in an interview on Monday.
Her book “The Bold World: A Memoir of Family and Transformation” lands next month.
Fired, kind of: The firing of the city’s head of emergency management after last month’s snowstorm mess turned as messy as the snowstorm itself.
Amazin’: The Mets are picking up Robinson Cano, but may be haunted by trading away Jarred Kelenic.
Getting schooled: Do children get a subpar education in yeshivas? The city says it will finally find out.
Farewell, Bleecker Bob: The man behind a storied Greenwich Village record store died at 75.
Neediest Cases Fund: Meet the single mother who makes salads in the Google employee cafeteria.
The fare-dodgers are costing the M.T.A. $215 million this year.
A few weeks ago, I finally got to do something I had been looking forward to doing since I moved to New York: seeing the city through the eyes of my aunt-in-law, a tried-and-true New Yorker who left the East Coast for the West some years back and was back for a visit.
She and I left her hotel at 103rd Street and Broadway and raced down the steps to the No. 1 station to catch an uptown train.
To our dismay, it was 10 minutes away.
“Nothing we can do but wait!” she said.
The train, unsurprisingly, was packed when it arrived. The doors opened, and my aunt-in-law hopped into what seemed to be the last open space.
“I can’t fit,” I said.
“Oh, you can fit,” a voice from inside the car said.
Suddenly, four arms were reaching toward me, grabbing me and pulling me into the car from the edge of the platform. They held onto me until the doors closed and the train began to move.
Passengers trudging through La Guardia Airport Saturday morning to catch American Airlines’ 5:59 a.m. departure to Columbus, Ohio, may have thought they were still dreaming when they saw a newly redesigned concourse.
Instead of the pinched, dingy confines that have made the airport infamous, there were glimpses of what La Guardia could be: higher ceilings, fewer blaring announcements, and restrooms designed for travelers towing carry-ons.
Using a smartphone app called AtYourGate, they could order Shake Shack breakfast sandwiches to be delivered while they waited to board. Or sipped coffee from Irving Farm while they sat under a fig tree in a mini-park within the concourse. There is both a play area for children and an F.A.O. Schwarz toy store.
The 11 new gates inside Terminal B are part of an $8 billion renovation.
It’s Tuesday — sit back and enjoy the flight.
