WASHINGTON — With a brutal finality, the extent of the Republicans’ collapse in the House came into focus last week as more races slipped away from them and their losses neared 40 seats.
House officials indicate that they will pursue an after-action report, but it is unclear how far it will go in diagnosing why they lost the popular vote by more raw votes than any time in history.
Many of the lawmakers who lost their races or did not run again say the party has a profound structural challenge that incumbents are unwilling to fully face: Mr. Trump’s deep toxicity among moderate voters, especially women.
With most of the Republicans who lost hailing from suburban seats, those who remain represent red-hued districts where the president is still well liked.
Beyond the eggshell-walking that Mr. Trump demands, the depth of the Republican defeat was initially obscured because of the late counting in some House races, and because the Republican Party gained seats in the Senate while some of the Democrats’ most-heralded statewide candidates lost.
Further, the party’s hard-line stances on immigration and health care, as well as its willingness to pass a tax bill that stung high-income districts, are as much the result of trying to assuage the far-right House Freedom Caucus as the president.
Yet there is a deep reluctance among the leaders to discuss what went wrong.
He is hardly alone in averting difficult questions — or accountability.
Mr. McCarthy faced only a nominal challenge on his right flank in a leadership election that took place before the extent of the party’s defeats in California — they lost seven House seats — became clear. And Mr. Trump has ignored the House results.
The most the president has said took place the day after the election, when he used a news conference to belittle those who did not campaign with him and lost — an extraordinary tirade that few lawmakers condemned.
What alarms Republicans even more is that the possibility that disgust with Mr. Trump will be uncurable in 2020, when he will most likely be on the ballot, no matter the party’s agenda.
“It was a personality vote on the president, not an issue vote, and that doesn’t change,” Representative Kevin Yoder of Kansas said of the affluent voters in his Kansas City-area district who voted him out.
This sort of cold-eyed assessment has Republicans already expressing concern that more of their colleagues may retire rather than run again in 2020 — and that recruiting top-flight candidates could prove even more challenging going into the next campaign.
The concomitant challenge to preventing retirements is convincing those lawmakers who lost to run for their old seats.
Asked why his prospects would be any better in 2020 if his suburban Des Moines voters are again voting on Mr. Trump’s divisive persona, Representative David Young of Iowa, who narrowly lost in part because of what he called “the Trump effect,” was blunt.
“That’s why you see a lot of people, myself included — who are asked: ‘Are you going to do it again?’ — saying: ‘I’m just going to wait and watch,’” Mr. Young said.
The midterm thrashing has emboldened some Republican lawmakers to speak out about the party’s need to be more reflective of the country, especially now that there are just 13 House Republican women.
Ms. Stefanik spoke up at a private caucus meeting, as first reported by The Washington Post, but she conceded she was not sure how much good it did.
Other House Republican women are equally frank.
But several internal moves since the election have left some of the Republican women concerned their leaders still do not fully grasp the importance of promoting diversity.
Mr. McCarthy passed over Ms. Wagner to install a male successor to Mr. Stivers at the National Republican Congressional Committee, according to multiple Republicans briefed on the decision; after dutifully serving on the less-than-desired House ethics panel, Representative Susan Brooks of Indiana lost her very-much-desired post on the steering committee, which controls committee assignments, to a male colleague.
Representative Kay Granger, a long-serving lawmaker from Texas, was nearly denied the ranking member slot on the House Appropriations Committee for a more junior male colleague, winning the post by a single vote on the third ballot, according to two lawmakers familiar with the private vote count.
Asked about the campaign committee post, Ms. Wagner would only say she is turning her attention to fashioning a suburban agenda for the party and “is not going to wait around” for leadership to do the same.
Ms. Brooks acknowledged being “disappointed” about losing her position on the coveted steering committee, but said her larger frustration was that more Republican women did not win this year. She said she would use her PAC, as she has in previous elections, to work on behalf of female candidates.
But the longest-serving Republican woman in the House, Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of Florida, who is retiring, was more skeptical about the party.
