A Brooklyn novelist’s annual trip to the Chilean countryside fuels daydreams of permanently moving. But peace and quiet can be so, well, exasperating.
Every December, while visiting my in-laws in the commune of Limache in Chile’s Aconcagua Valley, we get our eggs from a farm that sells them still warm, at 4 p.m., soon after the hens lay them. My children, confined most of the year in a small Brooklyn apartment, love to ransack the apricot trees in their cousins’ orchard, as do I. Savoring these pleasures during our first few days in rural Chile, I relish the slowness, the chance to wake to the sound of roosters instead of the wail of an ambulance.
Part of the pleasure, I suspect, of extended stays with relatives in another country is being able to slip into the rhythm of their days. Every year, plucking Mirabelle plums off the trees with my nieces, I wonder if perhaps I’m no longer the inherently urban person I’ve long considered myself to be — a possibility I mention to my spouse, and every year he agrees he may be ready for a life more like his sister’s in Limache, too.
Why neither of us ever recalls that we cycle through this same sequence of conversations each year I don’t know. It is our shared desire, perhaps, to be immersed in the alluring fantasy of being closer to a life-altering change than we actually are.
Home, according to André Aciman, author of “Out of Egypt” and “Call Me By Your Name,” is a symbolic place. In his 2000 New Yorker essay “Arbitrage,” Mr. Aciman writes of the fluctuating emotional value of a home, how it alters when you are away from it, caught up in another kind of life. When New York City feels overwhelming, I often visualize the coastal cordillera visible from the back windows of my in-laws’ house. I think of a beloved friend in Chile who took part in my wedding there two decades ago, the red sofa in her living room where we sit every December and catch up for hours.
Under the current administration in the United States, I am acutely and continually aware of how fortunate we are to have the necessary papers and the means to visit my in-laws. And what Chile symbolizes in my life is certainly not “home” in the way it is for my husband, and it is not anything like the connection Mr. Aciman describes when he speaks of the emotional “shelter” he found in recalling his childhood in Alexandria, Egypt, while living as a refugee with his mother and siblings in Rome.
I was named for a woman who, like Mr. Aciman’s mother, sought refuge on another continent — my great-grandmother Ida Novey. Having a namesake who moved as an adult to a new country and raised her children in a language other than the one she murmured to herself has played a role, perhaps, in my endless mental assembling of a move to Limache.
It would be the move of an expat, of course, not a refugee — a move made by choice rather than as a matter of survival. And for my husband, the move would be a return to the country he knows most intimately. During our first long meals catching up with everyone in Limache, I listen to my children speaking a faster, more complex Spanish with their cousins and imagine who they might become if they grew up in their father’s country instead of my own. I start to fantasize about what jobs we might be able to find in Chile now that my husband and I are further along in our careers. After college, I taught in Chile for several years at the Pontifical Catholic University of Valparaíso, and hoped life might lead me back to teach there again.
After the 2016 election, I took this fantasy so far I started translating my résumé. But then the second weekend in Limache arrived and the quiet isolation of the parcela, as rural parcels of land are called in Chile, began to feel increasingly like a compound. The drive to get the still-warm eggs felt too long, and even longer when we arrived to find the farmstand closed, as many things inexplicably close in Limache for hours at a time.
By day 10, during yet another two-hour meal with a dozen relatives, my children raced from the table without finishing anything on their plates and I didn’t stop them. In fact, I wanted to join them, or — better yet — take off alone up the dirt road beyond the parcela and keep on running until I reached the nearest bookstore many miles away and could collapse there behind a novel.
My tendency for mere speculation about living in Chile may be partly fueled by how few visitors from abroad we come across during our weeks in Limache. Unlike in other parts of Chile, it is an area without much of an established tourist culture. An hour’s drive to the coast, in the port city of Valparaíso, clots of foreign visitors form along every colorful wall mural and picturesque overlook of the ocean below.
But the lush quiet of the Aconcagua Valley isn’t a draw for international tourists. In the town square of what’s considered “new” Limache, families rent pedal cars for children to circle the sidewalks under the trees. During our afternoons escaping the heat, we often come across families from Santiago visiting relatives in the area, or former Santiaguinos who have moved there for more room and a reprieve from the traffic and air pollution in the capital.
At an hour and a half’s distance from Santiago, Limache occupies a similar option as a commute from Hudson, N.Y., might to someone with a job in New York City. As in upstate New York where people with city salaries move in and drive up costs, the rising number of Santiaguinos buying up land in Limache has created tensions. Soon enough, I start to fixate on these larger questions — how our half-Chilean, Brooklyn-raised children might be received at a local school. At what age would the insidious role their mother’s country played in the Pinochet dictatorship begin to come up with their friends? What if we went through with the move and weren’t able to find jobs, or found ones, but they didn’t last?
By the second Sunday, with the vapor of our daydreams beginning its inevitable fade, the complexity of the move is increasingly plain. It becomes obvious how doggedly our inner conflicts would accompany us here, as inner conflicts accompany a person anywhere. While we pack for our return to our one-bathroom apartment and the whirl of the spring semester about to begin, I remind myself that Rainer Maria Rilke’s injunction “you must change your life” is really about a shift in mind — not geography.
And yet, on the hectic January mornings in Brooklyn, bundling up in hats and scarves, my throat tightening at whatever news spewing from the White House I managed to read before getting my children out the door, what prevails in my thoughts of our weeks in Chile is never my increasing sense of restlessness there. It is the little stream in La Campana National Park in nearby Olmué where my spouse and I hiked in our early 20s when I was teaching in Valparaíso and he was finishing his master’s degree. To see our kids playing on the same rocks we crossed two decades ago takes my breath away though we return to the stream every year.
By February, shivering on the subway platform, I go back to imagining what job might make it possible to live near that stream again. This past March, when I came across an article about an organic farm in Limache and how it got started, I forwarded it to my husband who replied in seconds that he’d already read it.
And so it was our cycle of what Mr. Aciman calls “mnemonic arbitrage” began once more. He uses a William Wordsworth poem as his central example — how, for Wordsworth, it is not the past, “but himself in the past imagining the future” that is the irresistible source of emotional return. Knowing how absurdly we repeat the same sequence of conversations each year does not diminish the allure of speculating, yet again, about the same risks and choices we have yet to take. Two decades into adulthood, it is intoxicating to suspend recognition for a few days of how predictable even our longings have become, to stop and pick a plum in a familiar orchard and imagine what else our remaining years on this complicated planet may hold.
