U.S. investment is guiding the fight to contain the violence in El Salvador, even as President Trump hurls insults and threatens to walk away.
SAN SALVADOR — On a cloudy afternoon, Mayra Ayala shepherded her family along the winding footpaths of a hillside cemetery in Ilobasco, a town about 35 miles from the capital. The group of nine clambered over dozens of brightly painted mausoleums while descending to a purple tomb topped with three crosses.
Two years had passed since Ms. Ayala’s husband, José, and two of her sons — Vladimir, 21, and Douglas, 19 — were murdered by members of the street gang MS-13. Mr. Ayala, a community leader in one of the gang’s strongholds, had routinely spoken with Ilobasco’s mayor and police officials, who were trained by American advisers to build rapport with residents.
But to MS-13 leaders, those conversations signaled that Mr. Ayala was an informant — an allegation his family denied. One morning in March 2016, they ambushed Mr. Ayala and his sons at the family’s tile workshop.
Ms. Ayala, 45, and most of her children are now in hiding, moving between homes in their old neighborhood. They are supported by her son Alexander, who survived the slaughter and is seeking asylum in the United States. She is ambivalent about America’s involvement in her country: One of its initiatives to combat gang violence destroyed her family, yet in many ways it has made the neighborhood safer.
The United States has stepped up its engagement in the country over the last two years, dedicating hundreds of millions of dollars and dozens of law enforcement and military personnel to fighting the violent gangs that send so many Salvadorans fleeing to the American border. The goal is to create a self-sufficient Salvadoran justice system. But the consequences of the effort are difficult to assess.
American advisers are training the police officers who arrest gang members. American dollars are building the prisons that hold them. At an American facility in San Salvador, detectives are learning how to investigate crimes. It is part of a plan to send $750 million into Central America’s violent Northern Triangle — El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras — and one that, American and Salvadoran officials say privately, would be disastrous to end.
President Trump, though, has periodically threatened to walk away. He views MS-13 as a dangerous force in the United States, but has expressed skepticism about the efforts to help root it out in El Salvador. Little more than a month ago, he pledged to pull American support from the region.
Mr. Trump’s wavering commitment and fiery rhetoric — including claims that most Salvadoran immigrants are gang members in disguise — have at times endangered the fragile inroads his embassy has made in a region where American involvement, dating back decades, has historically been viewed with suspicion.
Despite the targeted American investment, the Salvadoran justice system is struggling to maintain basic security, let alone improve it.
El Salvador has one of the highest homicide rates in Latin America — 60 killings per 100,000 residents — and just one forensics lab to process evidence. The small facility holds one of the country’s two bullet-analysis systems and a collection of outdated blood-testing contraptions handed down from the Drug Enforcement Administration. 
“This is the only crime lab that receives bodily fluid from a crime scene anywhere in the country,” said Gloria del Carmen Cárcamo, the lab’s director. But without D.N.A.-testing technology, her facility can’t match the clothing to victims or suspects.
Prosecutors can request D.N.A. testing through a medical examiner, but the results aren’t stored centrally and can’t be easily searched. For a country that had nearly 4,000 homicides last year, the implications are staggering.
Ms. Cárcamo’s facility expects to get more equipment and D.N.A.-testing capabilities in the next three years, thanks to a private donor. Her lab — where an American adviser is posted full time — also received part of the $140 million the United States spent to prop up El Salvador’s justice system in 2017.
Even when evidence is processed, justice is rarely served. Often, the families of victims, like the Ayalas, don’t push for an investigation, afraid of gang retaliation. When crimes are prosecuted, fewer than 1 in 20 lead to a conviction, according to United States estimates.
Overhauling the system is a herculean effort for a country that only began rebuilding it in the early 1990s, as part of the peace accords that ended its brutal civil war. Three decades ago, the Reagan administration backed El Salvador’s military-led government in that guerrilla conflict, which killed more than 70,000. Since then, the United States has tried to position itself as more a law-enforcement partner than a military sponsor.
“The United States is the country that cooperates the most with us,” said Howard Cotto, the commissioner of El Salvador’s national police. The American interest is not just to curb the flight north by Salvadorans. MS-13, which originated in Los Angeles in the 1980s, continues to have a strong presence in some American cities. “It is hard to separate MS-13’s actions in the United States from those in El Salvador,” Mr. Cotto said.
The United States is involved in almost every layer of El Salvador’s efforts to cauterize the near-constant gang violence. It is equipping and training an elite anti-gang unit of Salvadoran police and building new prosecutors’ offices. Judges take classes at American facilities, and F.B.I. agents work alongside Salvadoran police officers.
In one training exercise this spring, a team of experienced Salvadoran crime scene investigators struggled to piece together the evidence at a mock murder scene. With a dummy victim sprawled on the floor beside a knife, investigators swiftly declared the crime solved.
It took considerable coaxing from an instructor to get them to look further. The students had not checked behind a bar, where bullet casings and fake drugs were strewn.
Even with the slow progress in El Salvador, the American assistance is vital, Mr. Cotto said. But cooperation between the two countries has been complicated by Mr. Trump’s statements about Salvadorans, gangs and immigration.
The president has claimed that he is deporting Salvadoran migrants at a record pace, that asylum-seekers are flooding American borders and that the Salvadoran government is not doing anything to help. But according to data the State Department presented this year to Salvadoran leaders, the number of citizens fleeing and the number getting deported back have decreased significantly.
Jean Elizabeth Manes, the United States ambassador to El Salvador, said American officials there aren’t distracted by Mr. Trump’s remarks. “We stay focused on what the end goal is,” she said.
Disjointed record-keeping in El Salvador and a tight-lipped State Department make it difficult to measure the impact of the United States’ efforts. American law enforcement officials in the region were not permitted to speak on the record.
The State Department believes that its assistance has contributed to drops in homicides and other crimes, while recognizing that “security and criminal justice challenges remain,” a department spokeswoman said. Asked for specifics on what equipment is being provided to law enforcement, the spokeswoman wouldn’t say. The secrecy doesn’t ease the misgivings Salvadorans historically have had about American intervention.
Compounding the distrust are allegations of misconduct by Salvadoran police, including officers trained by the United States advisers. One American-trained unit was disbanded early this year over widespread reports of extrajudicial killings and police brutality.
That group, the Special Reaction Force, or F.E.S., was replaced in January by the Jaguars, whose members are trained by Army Special Forces. Jaguars commanders said their unit focused on human rights and included only police officers. The F.E.S. drew members from both the police and the military.
The F.E.S., established in April 2016, arrested 1,810 suspected gang members before it was dissolved, according to police statistics. The Jaguars have been slower to make arrests: 249 in their first five months, a testament, Salvadoran officials said, to the group’s discretion.
Even as American and Salvadoran officials boast of that decrease, human rights advocates say the Jaguars are tainted: Many of its officers were in the F.E.S. “The institution has only changed its name,” said Celia Medrano, a Salvador-based director for Cristosal, a Central American human rights organization.
American officials have said that any former F.E.S. officers now in the Jaguars were properly vetted, and that the American role in the group is strictly advisory. Still, Salvadoran officials say the Jaguars would fall apart without American support.
In one violent weekend this summer, Jaguars units staged dozens of raids and other operations. In some moments, they appeared to be the elite police force the Americans have lauded — pinpointing targets, carrying out complex missions, making arrests. But at other times, they struggled to complete assignments and were openly skeptical of their own system.
One team, furiously pursuing an officer kidnapped by MS-13, found him dead off a rural road southwest of the capital. This is not uncommon, since many Salvadoran police have no choice but to live in the gang-controlled neighborhoods they patrol.“There are guys who know you are a policeman, and they will try to take your life,” said a Jaguars officer nicknamed Alien.
Over the same weekend, as a group of Jaguars detained an MS-13 member, officers remarked that gangs were not afraid of arrests, because they knew the courts would let them off.
In another operation, a tactical team was dispatched to arrest an elusive MS-13 leader nicknamed The Impossible. Expecting a violent confrontation, the officers scaled an exterior wall and burst into a room where the leader’s sisters and mother were sleeping.
They scoured the home, but didn’t find The Impossible — only his family, trembling and confused. He was in jail, his mother explained: The police had arrested him five months earlier.
Exasperated, the detective with the group said he had spent eight months tracking the man. With no centralized arrest records to consult, the detective didn’t realize the police had already gotten him.
Encounters like these do little to strengthen Salvadoran citizens’ faith in their justice system. The incident left the family terrified. In the poor neighborhoods that bear the brunt of police aggression, the lines between good and bad actors can blur.
“There are young people getting into gangs because the authorities killed their parents, their brother, their uncle,” said William Arnoldo Arias Mejías, a former MS-13 member who became a pastor in Distrito Italia, one of El Salvador’s most heavily controlled gang territories. He estimates that the small slum has about 700 gang members.
The neighborhood is unsafe to enter without permission from the resident MS-13 faction. Mr. Mejías says it is almost impossible to imagine police there taking a softer tack, like the community policing approach that led to Mr. Ayala’s killing.
The community-policing program, funded by the State Department in 25 Salvadoran districts, is intended as an alternative to the harsher tactics of the Jaguars. Nearly every Salvadoran police officer has been trained in community engagement, the State Department said.
Mr. Mejías said it would be wasted in districts like his: No community members would dare speak to the police.
Three thousand miles north of his father’s grave, Alexander Ayala, 28, sleeps in a small basement apartment about an hour outside New York City.
Working six days a week as a landscaper, he sends $100 a month to his mother back in El Salvador, and another $100 to his wife and young daughter there. After he pays rent, the remaining $1,000 or so goes to the coyote who helped him reach the Southwest border last October.
He vividly recalls the morning of the ambush. He heard the gunshots that killed his brothers. Douglas died instantly, but Alexander cradled Vladimir, promising to look after his son. He remembers dragging his dying father to the street, begging neighbors to take him to the hospital. Fearing revenge, no one helped.
And he remembers what a gang member promised, pointing a gun at him.
Mr. Ayala soon fled. MS-13 members were pursuing him: The first time he left the house after the killings, he narrowly avoided being shot.
The journey cost him $11,500 and came with a promise of safety, but Customs and Border Protection agents caught him not long after he entered the United States. After a monthlong detention in Miami, he put up his house in El Salvador for bail and was released. He is now seeking asylum, which the Trump administration has made more difficult to obtain for targets of gang violence.
Mr. Ayala’s next court date is scheduled for the spring. In the meantime, he lives in fear of New York’s MS-13 members, and is deeply bothered by Mr. Trump’s rhetoric painting every young male Salvadoran immigrant as one of them.
So, along with more than 14,000 Salvadorans like him, he waits. And he struggles to reconcile his feelings about the United States. Without American support, his country would crumble.
He misses his wife and daughter, but leaving his home was his only option, he said.
