Though the effort to legalize marijuana has been mired in political gridlock, the legislation does provides a road map for how legalized marijuana would be regulated and distributed.
Door-to-door marijuana delivery? Marijuana cafes?
New Jersey is inching toward becoming the 11th state to legalize marijuana for recreational use, with a vote by the legislature scheduled for March 25.
Though it was an early legislative goal of Gov. Philip D. Murphy, the marijuana legalization bill became mired in Trenton gridlock, as Mr. Murphy and Stephen M. Sweeney, the Senate president, struggled to round up enough votes to pass it. Both men have recently expressed confidence that they will be able to win approval.
The legislation now circulating among lawmakers will likely form the backbone of how New Jersey moves forward to legalize recreational marijuana.
While a groundbreaking companion bill that would clear the criminal records of many people with drug offenses has captured headlines, the rest of the over 160-page bill is a compendium of various measures from other states that have legalized the drug.
Here’s a look at some of the notable proposals in New Jersey’s bill.
What this means: Like alcohol, recreational marijuana will only be available for those 21 and older. The maximum amount that can be bought is one ounce.
The fine print: The bill legalizes one ounce or less of cannabis, or the equivalent of one ounce of cannabis-infused products such as oils and edibles. But, like alcohol, people in New Jersey will not be able to smoke marijuana wherever they want; use will largely be restricted to homes or designated cannabis consumption lounges.
Where it started: Nearly every state that has legalized marijuana has set the age for use and purchase at 21.
What this means: Door-to-door cannabis delivery, like Domino’s pizza, but with strict rules and menu items like Blueberry Kush and Sour Diesel.
The fine print: Despite the tangled and often congested mess of highways in New Jersey, not everyone owns a car.
So to make the drug available to more people, the bill would allow delivery. But ordering marijuana requires a lot more paperwork than ordering two pepperoni pies.
Customers must have documentation proving that they are 21.
To offer delivery, retailers would have to be approved by the state, vehicles would have to have working GPS systems, and every delivery would have to be tracked and meticulously logged.
Drivers could not deviate from their delivery routes except to get gas, to rest or if roads are closed. Cars could not have any markings indicating they are being used to deliver marijuana.
Where it started: California allows cannabis delivery, but it is heavily regulated. Cars must also be equipped with interior cameras to monitor deliveries.
What this means: Like marijuana cafes in Amsterdam, people would be able to buy in one room and smoke in another.
The fine print: In every state where recreational marijuana is legal, public consumption remains against the law. Instead, people are supposed to consume marijuana in their homes.
With an eye toward neighborliness, New Jersey plans to ban the use of marijuana in large multifamily homes, high-density apartment buildings and public housing.
So to make it more accessible, the bill proposes allowing marijuana dispensaries to set up sections of their business, separate from the retail area, where customers could take what they bought and enjoy it.
“We think that this should be treated equivalently to alcohol in many respects and allowing for safe and regulated public consumption is just one aspect of that,” said Morgan Fox, a spokesman for the National Cannabis Industry Association.
The bill also would allow casinos in Atlantic City, and other hotels in the state to designate up to 20 percent of their space and rooms for guests to use marijuana.
Who started it: The first state to propose consumption areas was Alaska, which is still debating the idea even though it has legalized marijuana. For now, Nevada is the only state that permits cannabis lounges statewide. Some counties and cities in California and Colorado have also begun allowing similar operations.
What this means: A way to encourage mom-and-pop shops.
The fine print: Cannabis is a multibillion dollar industry in the United States and several large corporations are eagerly anticipating the opening of the New Jersey retail market, especially because it is so close to New York City and Philadelphia.
But to promote small businesses, the bill mandates that 25 percent of licenses be given to shops that have no more than 10 workers in a space smaller than 2,500 square feet and that process less than 1,000 pounds of cannabis every month.
Where it started: A ballot initiative approved in Michigan that makes recreational marijuana legal also contains a specific carve out for small businesses.
What this means: Six months after Mr. Murphy signs a bill, dispensaries that sell marijuana for medical purposes would be able to start selling to recreational users.
The fine print: The election of Mr. Murphy, a Democrat, seemed to put the legalization of cannabis on a fast track. But progress has been sluggish.
To appease those anxious for legalization, the bill includes a provision that would turn any of the state’s six existing medical dispensaries into recreational dispensaries six months after a bill is signed. Getting a full commercial industry up and running would probably take until next January at the earliest, according to Mr. Murphy.
But it will not be a mad rush at the expense of patients — medical dispensaries would have to ensure that they have enough to serve people with medical needs before selling to the general public.
Who started it: Oregon offered a similar program, allowing medical businesses to serve the recreational market while the state developed regulations. Once those regulations kicked in, medical dispensaries had to reapply for a recreational license.
What this means: An attempt to diversify an overwhelmingly white industry.
The fine print: Though reliable national data remains scarce, numerous industry surveys have found that minorities represent a small percentage of owners of cannabis companies.
New Jersey’s proposed law seeks to address the imbalance in two ways.
First, it creates “impact zones,” defined as a city that has a population greater than 120,000 (only Newark, Elizabeth, Paterson or Jersey City meet this criteria); or a municipality with a high crime rate, an average unemployment rate of 15 percent or higher; or a town that ranks in the top third in the state for marijuana-related arrests.
These communities would be given priority for retail licenses.
The bill also sets a goal that 15 percent of the licenses and permits would be issued to minority-owned businesses and 15 percent to businesses run by women and disabled veterans.
But some in the industry said establishing percentages may not be the best way to achieve diversity.
Where it started: New Jersey would be the first state to set aside a specific number of licenses for minorities.
What this means: If you want marijuana you will have to pay for it.
The fine print: Most states that have legalized cannabis also permit residents to grow a few plants at home for personal use, much like a home vintner crushing wine grapes and aging them in their basement.
New Jersey, however, will not allow any backyard cultivation, much to the chagrin of many advocacy groups and industry watchdogs that say prohibiting homegrown marijuana makes the drug out of reach to low-income residents. It is much cheaper to grow a few plants than to buy regularly from a dispensary.
Where it started: Washington is the only other state that has legalized marijuana where home cultivation is not legal.
What this means: Rather than setting a percent, New Jersey will tax marijuana based on weight, at $42 per ounce.
The semantics: One of the biggest disagreements between Mr. Murphy and the Legislature was the tax rate. Mr. Sweeney had supported a 12 percent tax, while Mr. Murphy wanted a tax closer to 25 percent.
The two compromised on taxing by weight, which officials say will help the state guarantee a steady flow of revenue independent from price fluxuations in marijuana.
The bill also allows towns that with marijuana businesses to impose a local tax of up to 3 percent.
Where it started: Tax rates on marijuana vary greatly. Massachusetts set a 10.75 percent tax, while Washington levied a 37 percent tax. Alaska currently taxes marijuana by weight at $50 per ounce.