Lens published reports from all corners of the earth this year, often by photographers working within their own communities. We covered the effects of conflict and violence both internationally and in our own backyard, and have also shown intimate photo essays of personal love, loss and triumph.
Because photography touches most everything, our topics have been far-ranging — from the environment, cyberbullying and immigration to race, gender and class. We have written about famed photographers like Dorothea Lange, Gordon Parks and Diane Arbus as well as emerging image makers like Citlali Fabián, Fethi Sahraoui, Daniel Edwards and Mengwen Cao. And we have written about the need for more diverse storytellers to help us better understand the world we live in.
As 2018 comes to an end, we share 13 of our favorite Lens stories of the year.
For five years, Jess T. Dugan and Vanessa Fabbre traveled across the United States to photograph and interview older transgender and gender variant people, creating a road map, archive and remarkably moving body of work about people almost entirely left out of many narratives.
Sebastian Villegas trekked over 120 miles by boat, mule and foot through mountain grasslands and muddy jungles to photograph the lives of people who had been cut off from the rest of Colombia over decades of armed conflict between the Colombian government and rebel groups.
3. They Body-Shamed Her Online. Then This Photographer Struck Back.
Haley Morris-Cafiero saved more than 1,000 negative comments directed toward her online and photographed herself costumed like her cyberbullies.
Fethi Sahraoui photographed seasonal festivals that bring an annual burst of celebration and amusement to sleepy Algerian villages.
Citlali Fabián’s collaborative portraits of Oaxacan women and girls are both intimate and universal.
The story behind Ms. Lange’s photograph of Florence Owens Thompson has intrigued academics and photographers for decades. But a new book shines fresh light on the portrait’s little-explored details.
After Kate Ryan was raped, she photographed and interviewed 29 other survivors, who shared their own stories of sexual assault.
Mengwen Cao, a queer Chinese photographer, watched as her parents viewed her video letter coming out to them on FaceTime.
In the exhibit “Represent: Hip-Hop Photography” at the Smithsonian’s National Museum of African-American History and Culture, curator Rhea Combs uses diptychs to draw the connections between hip-hop and previous generations of African-American musicians and activists.
The journalist and photographer Eric Etheridge has tracked down visual and oral histories of the courageous men and women known as the Freedom Riders in the 1960s, portraying these individuals not as dehumanized icons of criminality but as exemplary citizens.
Hannah Reyes Morales photographed scenes of death in Manila during the antidrug campaign. She later returned to those sites to capture the daily lives of residents living amid violence.
Photographer Tailyr Irvine says photos of Native Americans are usually based on stereotypes that she calls the four D’s — drumming, dancing, drinking and death. But the organization Natives Photograph, which has highlighted 21 indigenous photographers, is contesting these false depictions.
In his book “46750,” João Pina captures the life of police, gang members and residents in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro, where all sides are seen as victims, in one way or another, of an untenable situation.
