Peter Hedges knew his Oscar-nominated son wouldn’t want to star in “Ben Is Back.” Then, to be supportive, Lucas read the script and everything changed.
There’s a story Peter Hedges likes to tell about the moment he knew his son Lucas would be an actor.
Young Lucas was in seventh grade, playing Smike in his school’s production of “Nicholas Nickleby” with such committed intensity that even members of the high school drama club had been assigned to study his performance. At least, that’s how Peter remembers it.
His father, meanwhile, has worked in Hollywood as a writer and director of emotional dramedies like “Pieces of April” and “Dan in Real Life.” You might think, then, that as Peter wrote his new film, “Ben Is Back,” about a recovering addict who makes a surprise Christmas Eve visit to his mother (Julia Roberts), he would have had his son in mind to play the titular role.
The reality was much more complicated, they told me during a visit to the Brooklyn brownstone where Lucas and his older brother, Simon, grew up and Peter and his wife, Susan, still live. Though Lucas moved out, his father has preserved his childhood bedroom as though in amber: The walls are covered with a teenage boy’s doodles, and glow-in-the-dark stars are still glued to the ceiling. “I won’t paint these walls until they drag us out of the house,” said Peter, his eyes welling up.
Peter Hedges narrates a scene from his film featuring Lucas Hedges and Julia Roberts.
Peter, as a parent, did you have any concerns as Lucas’s career started to take off at a young age?

Lucas, what made you so convinced early on that you didn’t want to work with your father?
LUCAS HEDGES Because I hadn’t established myself at all. I would have felt a lot better if I felt like this was my career rather than some birthday present, and I couldn’t help but feel it looked like that if I was just doing my dad’s movies. But it’s a valid thing to feel that a lot of why I did have success at a young age is because I was raised to some extent in this world. I don’t think people would give me the part if they didn’t believe in me, but at the same time, I can’t imagine there isn’t some nepotism going on. I’m in good favor because of my family, I think.
So Peter, you didn’t write “Ben Is Back” expecting Lucas to do it?
PETER HEDGES I very much believed that he would not be in a film of mine, and that he certainly didn’t need to be in a film of mine, with the way things were going. But with “Ben Is Back,” I did want to write something that both of my boys would be proud of, that they could look at and go, “That’s my dad.” I sent the script to Julia, she said yes, and when I talked with her, I came with a list of actors that could play Ben. And she didn’t ever want to see the list. She just wanted Lucas.
But you didn’t say yes right away. What was holding you back?
LUCAS HEDGES Just sheer discomfort. My dad giving me notes seemed just as uncomfortable as us talking about sex. But I sat with it longer and did the I Ching, a thing a lot of hippies did in the ’70s: You roll some dice and get your fortune told. I got really good results, and it struck me that the role was similarly special to Patrick from “Manchester by the Sea,” a part that I felt blessed to play. And I wanted to be of service to my dad in some way, during a big moment in his life. So I signed on, and it was hard and rewarding.
What was it like to be directed by your father?
LUCAS HEDGES Honestly, it was difficult at first. I was only ready to listen to him direct if he said what I wanted him to say.
What made that so fraught?
PETER HEDGES It struck me what a gift he was giving me by doing the film, because the reason it’s so important to me is that it’s about a family dealing with heroin and opioids, but in my childhood, it was alcoholism. It’s one thing to be a father directing his son, but then there’s a much deeper thing, which is that I’m Carol Hedges’s son, and I didn’t know her sober until I was 15. She’s not here to see this movie, but without her, I would never have written [“What’s Eating Gilbert Grape,” based on his novel]. I would have been an accountant living in Ames, Iowa.
LUCAS HEDGES Do you actually think you wouldn’t have gone into this line of work had it not been for your mom’s actions?
PETER HEDGES Well, it made perfect sense that I originally wanted to be an actor because every Sunday, we walked into church and we acted like we were the happiest, most together family.
LUCAS HEDGES He wanted more than anything to be an actor, and there’s an experience he had as a young actor that’s the most heartbreaking story I’ve ever heard.
PETER HEDGES And then I burst into tears. I was so humiliated that I just started weeping. If you wanted John Gielgud to cry, he could say, “Which eye?” But I trained with Sanford Meisner, and he said Gielgud was such a phony: “If crying were acting, my Aunt Martha would be the greatest actress in the world.” So it’s an interesting thing.
LUCAS HEDGES And yet everyone in high school was assigned to see me cry.
How does it feel, then, to have worked together and gotten a peek into Lucas’s process firsthand?
PETER HEDGES One of the things that I see in his work, and it’s really evident in “Ben Is Back,” is Lucas has such a rich inner life that in moments that could just be toss-offs, you watch and you go, “Oh my God, there’s so much going on here.” It’s very rare to see someone that age fill moments with so much life and complexity. Sorry, I didn’t mean to embarrass you.
LUCAS HEDGES [Joking] You’re humiliating me.
PETER HEDGES Lucas is living the life that I wanted, but I want to be clear, I don’t feel there’s been any pressure for him to live it. It’s just he is the artist, at 21, that I wanted to be. His capacity to be authentic and inhabit his truth, he can do that much earlier than I was able to.
LUCAS HEDGES I feel like I’m very much open to the emotion of the world and very empathetic. I can feel my feelings, sometimes to a fault. And I think I got that from my dad.