There are plenty of foundation shades on the market now, but women of varied skin tones often need different skin-care products, too.
In the beauty world, women of varied skin tones can now find the right foundations. But can they also find the right skin-care products?
If you were to ask some beauty experts, the answer would be yes, but not as easily.
Susan Akkad, senior vice president for local and cultural innovation for the Estée Lauder Companies, said that these concerns are the very ones the company has been hearing from its multiethnic consumers for years.
It is why this month, Estée Lauder’s Clinique brand rolled out a new moisturizer system called Clinique iD. It comes in three bases (Dramatically Different Jelly, Moisturizing Lotion+ and Oil-Control Gel) with five different “concern cartridges” that address irritation, pores and uneven texture, uneven skin tone, fatigue or lines and wrinkles ($39 each).
That said, “women of color come in all shades,” Ms. Akkad said. “So, for example, some Latina or black women with lighter skin do have concerns about wrinkles.” That’s why Clinique is marketing the line without specifically calling out products designed for darker skin tones. Rather, the focus will be on education.
“Our message is really about inclusive beauty,” Ms. Akkad said.
Dr. Barbara Sturm, an aesthetic medical doctor in Germany, is more to the point. Her namesake skin-care brand includes a parallel line of products specifically labeled Darker Skin Tones. Influencers including Hannah Bronfman have lauded the line.
Dr. Sturm worked on the Darker Skin Tones products, which is a collaboration with the actress Angela Bassett, for nearly two years. Unlike her main line, the cleanser and moisturizer formulations have “skin tone evening benefits” (courtesy of Lumicol, a micro algae extract that boosts radiance) and active ingredients like salicylic acid, which help balance the skin’s sebum production.
“From a dermatological perspective, darker skin tones present a paradox,” Dr. Sturm said. The additional melanin protects against photo-aging and cancer, and the skin generally has greater elasticity.
Services in doctors’ offices are only just becoming more attuned to the needs of different skin tones. The Manhattan dermatologist Patricia Wexler started using the Aerolase laser in her office about a year ago.
When it comes to darker skin, “burns are lethal because it creates scarring,” Dr. Wexler said. That’s why popular lasers like Fraxel and IPL have to be used with extreme care. The Aerolase is optimal because, she said, “it delivers the energy so fast it doesn’t give the skin time to maintain heat,” while also targeting brown pigment and redness (as in rosacea and acne).
For all the attention women of color are now getting for their skin care, Dr. Wexler and Dr. Downie stress that no matter the treatment plan, it’s important to consider each person individually. For one, it’s not just about the skin tone you see on the surface.
His advice is based on common sense: Assess your skin type closely and then look for nonirritating products that do the job. Mr. Puckey likes Augustinus Bader moisturizers ($80 and up) for normal to dry skin and Drunk Elephant B-Hydra serum ($52) for oilier skin.
