Yasumasa Morimura occupies the Western canon, Jane Kaplowitz finds art in a bifurcated identity, Valerie Hegarty explores the imaginative possibilities of decay, and Seth Price goes to hell.
Through Jan. 13. Japan Society, 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , japansociety.org.
In the exhibition’s nearly two dozen photographs, Mr. Morimura restages self-portraits by van Eyck, Dürer, van Gogh (a longtime fixation of the artist, thanks to the Dutchman’s Japanese influence), as well as female painters like Élisabeth-Louise Vigée le Brun and Frida Kahlo. In some he wears little makeup, while in others he appears in whiteface, which only heightens the incongruence of his own body in these historical and geographical flights.
Yet a related feature film, in which the artist walks through contemporary Japan in the guises of Vermeer, Velázquez and many other European forebears, reveals that historical imitation is hardly a goal — after all, even Snapchat lets you overlay your photos with a van Gogh filter — but a means to reckon with modern alienation. “I still don’t have any idea who I am,” he says in his van Gogh costume, agog at the lights of Shibuya Crossing in Tokyo. He walks through a pristine Japanese studio in Rembrandt’s ratty robes, lamenting “the monotony of having to paint the same face over and over.” National, racial, or gender discordances are only part of the story; just as important is a sense of existential absence that allows, or forces, the artist to slip into the lives of others.
Through Jan. 6. Fortnight Institute, 60 East Fourth Street, Manhattan; fortnight.institute.
Usually an artist makes some art, and if all goes well, that work gets shown, and the gallery (or museum) hosts a dinner celebrating the exhibition. Jane Kaplowitz reverses this process. Fancy-art-dinner invitations and lavish menus serve as subjects for paintings and drawings hung salon-style in “Jane Kaplowitz: RSVP Jane Rosenblum (1977-2018),” a sharp, funny and subversive show organized by the maverick curator Alison M. Gingeras at Fortnight Institute.
So who are Jane Kaplowitz and Jane Rosenblum? Actually, they are one and the same person. Ms. Kaplowitz is an artist; Ms. Rosenblum is the widow of the well-known art historian and curator Robert Rosenblum. These identities merge in paintings and drawings made with pencil, acrylic and marker that highlight the ups (fabulous parties) and downs (a bottle for anxiety medication prescribed for Ms. Rosenblum) of that dual identity. In addition to considering her own bifurcated self, Ms. Kaplowitz explores collapsed binaries in the form of “homosexual” animals or celebrities briefly posing as gay, like Madonna kissing Britney Spears.
Through Jan. 5. Burning in Water, 505 West 27th Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , burninginwater.net.
Everything in Valerie Hegarty’s exhibition “Bloom and Gloom,” at Burning in Water, looks as if it is broken, dead or falling apart. A ceramic relief of a rosebush is cracked all over; the sculptures are pots filled with drooping flowers; and wall works made from paper and paint (among other materials) have peeled, crumbled and dripped. In some cases, piles of scraps have pooled on the floor below, seeming evidence of the fatal conspiring of the passage of time and human neglect.
All these pieces were meticulously crafted by Ms. Hegarty, who has made an art practice of exploring the imaginative possibilities of decay. In the past, she has used her techniques to challenge the romantic legacy of whitewashed American history; here, the subject matter is more personal. The paper works represent parts of walls from her life, including one in her mother’s bedroom. The ceramic flowers are mostly tulips in reference to 17th-century Dutch vanitas paintings, but it’s easy to imagine them as houseplants that couldn’t survive the harshness of life in New York City.
Through Jan. 5. Petzel, 456 West 18th Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , petzel.com.
For his new show at Petzel, “Hell Has Everything,” Seth Price put together a couple of overlarge photo light boxes, a bank of giant screens playing an exacting survey of a blotchy dead squid, and thirteen inkjet prints of complex, smoky formations enlivened with stickers, bulging puddles of clear acrylic polymer, images of anonymous men and boys, and clods of raw earth.
A dancing reflection in the center of the video, by calling attention to the small but definite distance between the animal’s slick outermost membrane and the rosy pigment underneath, suggests a clever formal parallel with the inkjet prints: They’ve all got complicated surfaces, some virtual, some literal. The light boxes show close-up views of human skin cropped into jagged shapes that don’t quite read as either abstract or figurative, and the fact that they’re in black and white makes the skin racially unidentifiable, too. The forms in the inkjet prints could be pelvises, pools of ink or plumes of smoke.
