Alex Barker wasn’t expecting Erin Smith to smile when they met in 2015 after almost two years of getting to know each other online. He knew he wouldn’t either. Not because he wasn’t sure he would find her wonderful, but because, like her, he can’t.
Mr. Barker, 46, and Ms. Smith, 39, were born with Moebius syndrome, a rare neurological disorder that causes facial paralysis and affects fewer than 20 in a million people.
They had met only a handful of others with the disorder until Tim Smith, a man with Moebius from Remington, Va., created a Facebook community for the afflicted in 2013. But after a few Facebook Messenger exchanges neither Mr. Barker nor Ms. Smith (no relation to Tim Smith) doubted their compatibility went deeper than their condition.
That wasn’t the outcome Ms. Smith of Linwood, N.C., was necessarily looking for when she struck up a chat with Mr. Barker in 2014. “I was just going through all the different people on the group, looking around, when I found Alex. I was like, ‘Oh, wow, he lives in England,’” she said.
Ms. Smith had visited London as a recent high school graduate in 1998 and dreamed about one day returning. “I thought it would be kind of cool to have a friend there with the same condition,” she said. When she sent her first message, a simple nice-to-meet-you, she was surprised by how quickly he responded.
Ms. Smith, who worked as a medical assistant at Wake Forest Baptist Health’s urgent care facility in Clemmons, N.C., wasn’t used to making close friends outside Linwood, where she has lived on her family’s 300-acre soybean, corn and hay farm since birth. Small-town living suited her: People with Moebius attract strangers’ attention with their expressionless faces and impaired speech — another side effect of the damage to facial nerves — and there are few strangers in Linwood, a town of about 5,000.
“Obviously, growing up was sometimes difficult,” she said. In addition to her facial paralysis, Ms. Smith was born with a club foot. (Limb abnormalities are common among people with the syndrome.) “But I wasn’t really picked on at school because we all grew up together and everybody knew me and my background,” she said. The closeness of the community helped steer her past the feelings of alienation and loneliness that often set in early for children with Moebius. Her temperament helped, too.
Those closest to Ms. Smith say they can see the smile in her eyes. Both she and Mr. Barker also communicate their feelings verbally, and with affectionate hugs.
Mr. Barker, an advice and information officer at AbilityNet, a British nonprofit organization that helps people with disabilities use technology, also sensed Ms. Smith’s constant if concealed smile. After a few Skype sessions, he thought he might like to see it for himself, in person.
It did. Mr. Barker’s 2015 vacation, filled with local wine tastings and visits to the nearby Blowing Rock mountains, included a first kiss, and then a series of them. Mr. Smith had never seen his daughter so happy. And he had never seen her so unhappy about the prospect of waiting seven months for a reunion. The National Moebius Syndrome Foundation Conference in California, where the couple planned to meet next, wasn’t until July 2016. So before Mr. Barker flew back to England, Mr. Smith pulled him aside.
“He said, ‘Son, I want you to come back,’” Mr. Barker said. “And I was like, what? Then he said he would pay for me to come back and surprise Erin for Valentine’s Day.” Mr. Barker didn’t hesitate. He said yes to the offer.
A party the Smiths arranged for more than 100 guests at the Wine Sellars Wine Shop and Bistro, in Lexington, N.C., on Feb. 13, 2016, was ostensibly to raise money to help send Ms. Smith to the Moebius conference in July. But “about two hours into the fund-raiser, my dad decided to make a speech to thank everyone for coming out to support me,” Ms. Smith said. “Then he said, ‘Me and mom wanted to do something special for you, too.’” Courtney Mason, Ms. Smith’s best friend since childhood, captured what happened next on video: Mr. Barker wanders into the crowded restaurant, and Ms. Smith lets out a shriek. She runs down the hall and throws her arms around him as party guests, many who have known Ms. Smith since birth, hoot their approval.
For Mr. Barker, the Valentine’s Day trip confirmed what he already knew. He was in love with Ms. Smith, and he wanted to spend the rest of his life with her.
Mr. Barker’s physical limitations didn’t stop him from orchestrating a proposal someone without disabilities might have found daring. And stressful.
In July 2016, Mr. Barker and Ms. Smith reunited, as planned, for the Moebius Conference in Long Beach, Calif. Before the conference started, they met for some sightseeing. On July 10, after taking in a baseball game, they sauntered around the Santa Monica Pier. Mr. Barker seemed nervous. Ms. Smith couldn’t figure out why. “He wasn’t acting right. I was like, ‘Is something bothering you? What’s wrong, honey?’” Ms. Smith said.
He was on a slatted boardwalk with a diamond engagement ring in his pocket — a family heirloom given to him by his godmother in England — and he wasn’t sure how the proposal would unfold, or if he would drop the ring between the wooden planks when he got down on one knee.
The thrill of the engagement was followed by a dilemma: On which side of the Atlantic would they live as a married couple? For Ms. Smith, who spent the holidays in Coventry in 2016 and rung in 2017 there, the decision was difficult, but clear.
Mr. Smith said he worries his daughter will be homesick. But “Alex is going to take care of me and his parents are going to take care of me,” she said. Brian and Florian Barker, Mr. Barker’s parents, also live in Coventry; they welcomed her as warmly as the Smiths welcomed Mr. Barker when they first met him, and they consider her a daughter already. “Alex and Erin have this connection where they recognize each other. They see each other as complete people,” Mrs. Barker said.
On Nov. 10, Mr. Barker and Ms. Smith were married at the Smith family’s church, Second Presbyterian in Lexington, N.C., by the Rev. Brian K. Rummage, the pastor. Ms. Smith, in a white cap-sleeve ball gown with a lace train and her long brown hair piled beneath a rhinestone clip, walked down the aisle with her father. About 200 guests lined the pews and watched, smiling for her, as she carried a bouquet of roses and lilies in vivid autumn shades of red, gold and orange. Mr. Barker wore a bow tie in Ms. Smith’s favorite color, purple — also the color associated with Moebius syndrome awareness — and a charcoal suit from Marks & Spencer in London.
Ms. Mason, Ms. Smith’s lifelong best friend, shared matron of honor duties with another best friend, Holly Whitten. Both wore long violet dresses, and each fought tears as Ms. Smith approached. “I love them both to death. It’s just the most wonderful love story,” Ms. Mason said.
“I’m yours!” Mr. Barker sang out, pumping his arms as he and Ms. Smith strutted into their future.