George Bush, the 41st president of the United States, died on Friday at age 94, and the tributes and condolences quickly poured in online. From his family, including the 43rd president of the United States, to those who had disagreed with his politics, a surge of posts honored the man who served his country in more than 40 years of public service.
George P. Bush, a grandson who serves as the Texas land commissioner, lauded his grandfather for his dedication to his country and to his family.
Vice President Mike Pence described Mr. Bush as a “good and great man” whose career was characterized by modesty, integrity and patriotism.
Mr. Bush, a Republican, drew praise from both sides of the aisle, as Democrats and Republicans alike commended his commitment to service.
In a piece published in The Washington Post, former President Bill Clinton fondly recalled the letter he received from Mr. Bush, his predecessor, upon assuming office.
James A. Baker III, the former secretary of state and Mr. Bush’s closest adviser for nearly 50 years, noted the many ways his friend had served: a Navy pilot during World War II, a Texas congressman, a United Nations ambassador, director of the C.I.A., vice president — and finally, president.
Condoleezza Rice, the former secretary of state in the administration of Mr. Bush’s son President George W. Bush, said in a statement that the senior Mr. Bush was a mentor to her and a dear friend.
Mr. Bush was also honored in Texas, where he lived for decades. Sylvester Turner, the mayor of Houston, called him a “great Houstonian” and “one of our most esteemed and relatable neighbors,” and students at Texas A&M University held a candlelight vigil on campus.
Celebrities — even those who said they did not agree with Mr. Bush’s politics — were also among those who offered their condolences.
The comedian Dana Carvey frequently appeared on “Saturday Night Live” doing a signature impersonation of Mr. Bush and was invited to the White House by the president for a surprise visit. His appearance drew roars of laughter from White House staff members.
Mr. Bush died less than eight months after his wife of 73 years, Barbara Bush.
“George and Barbara Bush are together again now, two points of light that never dimmed, two points of light that ignited countless others with their example,” the Obamas said in their statement.
The daughters of former President Nixon, Tricia Nixon Cox and Julie Nixon Eisenhower, expressed a similar sentiment.
