Susan Bro spoke to reporters after a jury in Virginia recommended life in prison for James Fields Jr. for the murder of her daughter, Heather Heyer. Mr. Fields drove into a crowd of counterprotesters at last year’s white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, killing Ms. Heyer.
Once I heard what the minimum sentences were, I sort of breathed a sigh of relief. And then I — today is just — I don’t know, today is such a mix of emotions that kind of nullify each other. So, it’s almost a flat feeling. This is probably one of those things — I’ll sit at home and cry tonight because I would’ve been decorating for Christmas by now. I don’t hate him. But my God, the kid’s messed up. He needs help. Put him away. I’m sorry. He should not be out in society and I think the jury could see that. I hope his mother can find some measure of peace. The biggest thing is that hate did not win today and a message has been made loud and clear that these are our streets and you can’t bring hate here and get away with it.

The recommendation came four days after the jury convicted the man, James Fields Jr., 21, of first-degree murder in the attack, which also injured nearly 40 other people. Mr. Fields was also convicted of nine other charges, including aggravated malicious wounding and leaving the scene of a fatal accident, for which the jury recommended a sentence of hundreds more years in prison.
The jury’s action on Tuesday is not a final verdict. Under Virginia law, it serves as a recommendation to the judge, who will decide the sentence.
Judge Richard E. Moore of Charlottesville Circuit Court will sentence Mr. Fields at the end of March, said Brian Wheeler, a spokesman for the city. He can order a weaker sentence than what the jury proposed, but not a stronger one.
In August 2017, Mr. Fields traveled from Ohio to attend the Unite the Right rally, where swastika-toting white supremacists swarmed the streets and clashed with counterprotesters. In an attack that killed a 32-year-old woman, Heather Heyer, Mr. Fields sped down a narrow street packed with counterprotesters, many who were on their way home after the authorities shut down the demonstration.
The jury’s complete sentence recommendation included life in prison for first-degree murder, as well as 419 years of prison time and hundreds of thousands of dollars in fines for the lesser charges. Mr. Fields faces a second trial on federal hate crime charges, which could result in the death penalty.
“In the end, the hands of justice say that he needs to be kept away from society for a while, and I’m content with that,” Susan Bro, Ms. Heyer’s mother, told reporters at a news conference outside the court on Tuesday.
At the conference, Joseph D. Platania, the commonwealth’s attorney, praised the jury’s decision, calling it a “true act of public service.” During the trial, prosecutors had argued that Mr. Fields traveled to the rally with an intent to commit harm, citing a cartoon that he shared on Instagram months before the protests that showed a car ramming into a crowd.
Video footage from the episode showed Mr. Fields’s Dodge Challenger idling and then reversing before accelerating into the group of pedestrians.
That initial demonstration prompted hundreds of counterprotesters to converge the next day, setting up tense confrontations with the white nationalist demonstrators that culminated at the end of the day with Mr. Fields’s deadly attack.