KABUL, Afghanistan — In the most substantial formal talks so far with the Taliban, United States officials discussed the future of the American military presence in Afghanistan and an offer of a three-month cease-fire during which the insurgents and the Afghan government could have negotiations, a senior American diplomat said on Thursday.
The diplomat, Zalmay Khalilzad, the Trump administration’s special representative in charge of the talks for Afghan reconciliation to end the 17-year war, briefed Afghan leaders in Kabul on two days of talks with the Taliban this week in the United Arab Emirates.
The discussions included representatives from the U.A.E., the host country; Saudi Arabia; and Pakistan — the only three nations that recognized the Taliban regime before it was toppled by the American invasion in 2001 and that still have varying degrees of influence over the insurgent group.
Mr. Khalilzad said in interviews with the Afghan TV channels ToloNews and Ariana that progress had been made in the talks even though Taliban representatives refused to meet with a delegation sent to the U.A.E. by the Afghan government.
“Unfortunately, Taliban did not agree to meet with the Afghan delegation, and I think it was the wrong decision on their part and left a negative impression to the participating countries,” Mr. Khalilzad said.
The Taliban have adhered strictly to their position not to meet with the Afghan government until it has reached agreements with the United States, which it sees as the main force behind denying them a return to power.
For a long time, the Taliban have aimed to sort out with the Americans the future of the United States’ military presence and a timeline for its withdrawal, the fate of Taliban prisoners and the delisting of their leaders from sanctions before they agree to talks with the Afghan government.
“They told us they want to talk to us first to address the security issues and then talk to the Afghan side to address the political matters,” Mr. Khalilzad said.
The Arab participants in the talks proposed a three-month cease-fire during which all substantial issues would be discussed, Mr. Khalilzad said. The Taliban representatives said they would take the issue to their leaders as they did not have the authority to commit to such a step.
Mr. Khalilzad said the Taliban’s red line in the recent talks remained an agreement over the withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan. The United States, on the other hand, wants assurances that Afghanistan will not become a haven for terrorists who want to target the United States.
The Taliban regime had hosted members of Al Qaeda, including its leader, Osama bin Laden, who was responsible for the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States.
“I said that if the menace of terrorism is tackled, the United States is not looking for a permanent military presence in Afghanistan,” Mr. Khalilzad told ToloNews.
In recent months, American diplomats have been in a hurry to start negotiations for a political end to the Afghan war largely out of concern that President Trump, who has expressed dismay at the American presence in the country, was losing patience. On Wednesday, Mr. Trump overruled the advice of his military and civilian officials to order the withdrawal of American troops from the conflict in Syria.
The Americans’ urgency has not gone down well with the Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani, whose administration fears it is being sidelined in talks by Mr. Khalilzad. The morning after Mr. Khalilzad briefed the Afghan leader, Mr. Ghani’s national security adviser, Hamdullah Mohib, wrote a series of messages on Twitter that many read as a reflection of the government’s displeasure with the American envoy’s efforts.
“As a sovereign country, no other country or individual has the right or the authority to discuss new governance formulas or structures for Afghanistan, including political dispensations, which violate the Afghan constitution,” Mr. Mohib wrote.
“The authority to make any decision about Afghanistan’s future lies with the Afghan people and their elected leaders. There is no substitute for an elected government. There will be no deal over the sacrifices of the Afghan people,” he added.
Mr. Khalilzad, in response, said the talks in the U.A.E. had not discussed “any single thing about the future political settlement, like an interim administration in Afghanistan.” All those were issues that the Afghans needed to resolve among themselves, he said.