David M. O’Brien, a scholar and author who dissected the Supreme Court’s internal machinations and ideological dynamics, treating it as a political institution as much as a legal one, died on Dec. 20 at his home in Charlottesville, Va. He was 67.
His daughter Sara O’Brien said the cause was lung cancer.
Dr. O’Brien taught politics at the University of Virginia for almost four decades. He wrote, helped write or edited more than a dozen books, the best known of which was “Storm Center: The Supreme Court in American Politics” (1986). It received the American Bar Association’s Silver Gavel Award and is now in its 11th printing.
That dynamic intrigued Dr. O’Brien, and he examined the court through the lens of the justices’ backgrounds, personalities and behind-the-scenes interactions.
“David came to realize that behavioral science was a better window into the justices’ thinking than the cases and statutes they would cite in an opinion,” Ronald K. L. Collins, a professor at the University of Washington School of Law, said in a telephone interview.
“Storm Center: The Supreme Court in American Politics” by David M. O’Brien.
Over the years, Dr. O’Brien met and interviewed numerous justices and their colleagues and combed through their archives as well as presidential libraries for insights into their opinions.
He viewed the court as a human institution with great flexibility, changing with the times and the composition of the court. This view sprang from his time as a judicial fellow there in 1982 and 1983 and as a research associate for Chief Justice Warren Burger from 1983 to 1984.
The personalities of the justices also play a role in determining whether they can marshal support for their views, Dr. O’Brien observed.
David Michael O’Brien was born on Aug. 30, 1951, in Rock Springs, Wyo., where his father, Ralph, worked in school administration and his mother, Lucille (Resel) O’Brien, was a homemaker. As his father’s job changed, the family moved to various cities in Southern California, where David and his brother, John, grew up.
David earned his bachelor’s degree in political science and philosophy in 1973 at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and later earned his master’s and his Ph.D. there, both in political science. He met his future wife, Claudine Mendelovitz, there, and they married in 1982.
Dr. O’Brien then taught politics at the University of Puget Sound in Tacoma, Wash., and served briefly as chairman of its politics department.
He joined the faculty of the University of Virginia in 1979 and had been the Leone Reaves and George W. Spicer professor of politics there since 1996.
He also held numerous teaching positions around the world. He was a Fulbright specialist lecturer in Oxford, England; Bologna, Italy; Japan; and Brazil and a Fudan senior fellow in recent summers at Fudan University Law School in Shanghai.
In addition to his wife and his daughter Sara, he is survived by his mother and brother; his son, Benjamin; another daughter, Talia O’Brien; and one grandson.