Salt Lake City received approval Friday to bid for the Winter Olympics in an attempt to bring the Games back to the city, which hosted in 2002 and provided the backdrop for the United States winter team’s growth into an international powerhouse.
The United States Olympic Committee said Friday that it was selecting Salt Lake City, which stood out as a predictable, slam-dunk pick in a process that also included Denver and Reno, Nev.
With venues still in place — some of them upgraded — from the 2002 Games, Salt Lake says it can host again at a lower cost than other candidates, which aligns with the International Olympic Committee’s new blueprint for the Games.
It is almost a certain bet that the bid will be for 2030, though the U.S.O.C. left open the possibility of other years. There are only two bidders for the 2026 Games, from Sweden and Italy, after voters in Calgary, Alberta, rejected a proposed bid.
One key hurdle for Salt Lake City will be erasing memories of the bidding scandal that marred the buildup to 2002 and resulted in several I.O.C. members’ losing their positions for taking bribes. Mitt Romney, the former Massachusetts governor and newly elected senator from Utah, was brought in to steer the Games through the scandal.
Never having surpassed 13 medals at a Winter Games, the United States used home-turf advantage, an influx of new sports and the emotion of the then-recent Sept. 11 terrorist attacks to capture 34 medals over three weeks in Utah.
In the aftermath, Park City and other mountain towns near Salt Lake City preserved and improved upon many of the sites and continued hosting international events. The freestyle world championships will be held in Park City in February.
Utah organizers said they could host a new Games for $1.35 billion, $50 billion less than it cost in Russia for the 2014 Sochi Games, which were the most expensive Olympics ever and stood out as a blaring warning signal that the I.O.C. needed to streamline its bloated Games structure.
The exorbitant costs have changed the dynamics of Olympic bidding. In 2002, cities were trying to bribe I.O.C. officials to award them the Olympics. These days, the committee finds itself wanting for bidders.
The I.O.C. normally awards Olympics seven years before they are scheduled, though that calendar has been in flux because so many cities have dropped out in recent years.
Last year, the committee handed out the 2024 and 2028 Summer Games at the same time because there were only two cities left in what had begun as a much bigger contest for 2024. Paris will host in 2024 and Los Angeles will host in 2028; if Salt Lake wins 2030, it would be the first time since 1994, when the I.O.C. began staggering the summer and winter Games at two-year intervals, that the same country has hosted back-to-back Games.
Salt Lake could be considered a favorite in a 2030 contest that has not yet taken shape. In fact, the city could still be a favorite for 2026 had it been allowed to go that route. Recently, voters in Calgary rejected that city’s bid to host, leaving Stockholm and a joint bid from Milan and Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy, as the only two remaining candidates.
A bid from Utah was considered, but putting it in front of the Los Angeles Olympics provided too many hurdles on the marketing side.