Cruising can be a pricey way to get away, but these tips will help you book even a high-end cruise and keep enough in your wallet to enjoy your destination.
A luxury cruise usually comes with luxury pricing, but there are ways to save money on your next onboard getaway, said Judy Perl, a cruise specialist and the founder of Judy Perl Worldwide Travel. “You can get a lot more for your money if you know what to look for when picking an itinerary,” she said.
In the cruise industry, “positioning cruises” (sometimes referred to as “repositioning cruises,”) are ones where a ship relocates from one region to the next. According to Ms. Perl, these itineraries are generally lower-priced because they’re often one-way tickets from one location to another, and they often occur during the off-season or shoulder seasons.
Examples of these cruises include a trans-Atlantic crossing from Miami to Lisbon in time for the Mediterranean sailing season, a coastal cruise from Los Angeles to Vancouver in time for Alaska’s season and one from New York to St. Thomas in time for Caribbean season.
“Even the priciest cruise lines offer deals on these sailings, compared with what their other itineraries cost,” Ms. Perl said. Virtually every cruise line offers positioning cruises, and many even allow you to search specifically for them on their websites.
For example, many cruise lines offer “ship within a ship” areas with restricted access, and amenities only available to passengers staying in that part of the ship. Those amenities can include early boarding, butler or laundry services, a private restaurant, pool, or even dedicated spa access — those perks can be pricey, but if you get them on a budget-friendly ship, you can enjoy a high-end experience overall for less than if you’d booked the same cabin type on a pricier ship or cruise line.
Some cruises offer the option to book a “guarantee,” which means that you’re guaranteed to have a room in the class you select (e.g., a balcony cabin or an inside cabin) but don’t have an official cabin assignment until just before your trip.
Do your research before booking a cruise that seems more attractively priced, compared with others you’re interested in, Ms. Perl said, because that price may not include amenities you’re looking forward to. Drinks, meals in the ship’s specialty restaurants, Wi-Fi or gratuities may all be on you, when you could have saved by booking an all-inclusive package.
Booking an all-inclusive cruise which includes all these extras (and open bar, too) and sometimes, even shore excursions (especially on river cruises), will almost certainly save you money and give you flexibility, especially if you’re not the type to track every dollar you spend on vacation.
“An all-inclusive cruise may have a higher cost, but you’ll end up saving money overall and won’t be nickel-and-dimed throughout your trip,” Ms. Perl said.