The Learning Network|Do the Adults in Your Life Follow You on Social Media?
Do the Adults in Your Life Follow You on Social Media?
Do your parents and other adults keep up with you on social media? If they do follow you, do you think they do it more out of curiosity about your interests, or to monitor your actions?
That night, I got up the nerve to ask Paulina if I could follow her on Instagram. Miraculously, she said yes, shrugging as she walked up the stairs to her room. I grabbed my phone, and suddenly, there it was: Paulina’s life. In black-and-white and full color.
There were photos of her girlfriends hanging out in the bathroom at school, friends goofing around at a spot they call Venice in Gowanus, where Brooklyn teenagers go after classes, and a great shot of all the boys’ skateboards piled straight up in someone’s hallway. An artistic shot of an empty, rumpled bed in a friend’s room in Rockaway. A lonely place setting in a Japanese restaurant. Not just photos, but beautifully framed photos. Taken by my daughter.
— To what degree do you identify with Ms. Stapinski’s account of life with her daughter? Explain.
— In your family, or in your friends’ families, are there rules about social media, such as a minimum age for using it or having to let parents follow the accounts?
— What do you see as the intentions for those rules? What are the outcomes?
— Why do you think Ms. Stapinski had to find the courage to ask Paulina if she could follow her on Instagram? What did she fear may happen? Why do you think that?
— What do you think Paulina might say if she were asked to write an essay in response to her mother’s? Explain.
— It is unlikely that all teenagers and their parents have such positive experiences sharing details about their lives on social media. Why do you think it seems to work for the family you read about?
— Are there people in your life you wish would follow you on social media? If so, are any of them family members that you wish you could include more in your day-to-day life but you don’t know how to tell them that?