Weather: Fine now, with a high of 48, but rain starts around dusk as temperatures climb toward 60. Torrential tomorrow.
Alternate-side parking: in effect till Christmas.
The stock market is tanking. Washington is bananas.
A two-day rainstorm begins this evening.
Just in time for the winter solstice on Friday: the shortest day with the longest night of the year.
The sun will rise behind rain clouds at 7:16 a.m. and set at 4:31 p.m., giving us nine hours and 15 minutes of daylight and nearly 15 hours of darkness.
For some, this time of year is a real challenge, thanks to seasonal affective disorder, family stress and other triggers.
To get some timely health tips, I called a few mental health experts, who did not call back.
His advice: Eat salads, broth-based soup and ignore detox plans.
Still, the coming of darkness carries with it the temptation to stuff oneself like a bear.
Think about upcoming parties or vacations, and how you want to look and feel at them, Mr. Bardsley advised. That may curb your impulses to have extra helpings of sweets and treats.
“If you can hang on through the winter, you’re in great shape for the New Year,” he said.
Got any tips on how to get through the coming winter? Post a comment or email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| When temperatures drop, the family brings out small electric space heaters, which they purchased, and duct tapes the edges of their windows to no avail. On the chilliest nights, the parents snuggle in one bed with their 6- and 11-year-old daughters, whose asthma worsens as a result of the cold temperatures.
Read our investigation into what's happened there.
Still saying Mass, despite abuse settlements: A New York priest is still working even after the Catholic archdiocese paid settlements for substantiated allegations that he had molested teenage boys.
WNYC chief steps down: Laura Walker had been under fire after a series of #MeToo episodes engulfed the station’s male stars.
So does a deputy mayor: Alicia Glen had overseen the troubled city housing authority and the Amazon deal.
De Blasio backs legal pot, too: He wants a home-delivery option but no public smoking and an age limit of 21.
Married but separated — by the travel ban: A Yemeni-American New Yorker raises his daughter while his wife is stuck in Djibouti.
Our colleague Emily Ludolph offers a profusely photo-illustrated history of skating on the park’s lakes, ponds and rinks.
So often, around this time of year, great minds have wondered: Why do Jews eat Chinese food on Christmas?
“Chinese food on Christmas has become as American Jewish as apple pie,” National Public Radio’s Robert Siegel once said.
The Atlantic recalled how, during a 2010 Supreme Court nomination hearing, Elena Kagan was asked where she was last Christmas. “You know, like all Jews, I was probably at a Chinese restaurant,” she said.
On Friday, that connection gets explored some more.
“Did Jews discover Chinese food on Christmas, or did Chinese restaurants discover Jewish customers?” is the question behind “Chow x Judaism,” a food, alcohol and comedic conversation at the Museum of Food and Drink on Friday.
The museum’s festivities begin at 6:30 p.m.
And skyscrapered clouds.
