He was one of the most acclaimed — and confounding — architects of the 1960s; then his reputation tanked. But Rudolph’s concrete and Plexiglas buildings are winning new love.
That cycle has repeated more than once for Paul Rudolph (1918-1997), one of the most celebrated architects of the 1960s, whose reputation keeps oscillating between fame and neglect. His hulking Yale Art and Architecture Building in New Haven, Conn., completed in 1963, put Brutalism on the map in the United States; his houses, with boggling layouts, were the height of Johnson-era chic.
Then his star fell, and clients and critics dismissed his hard-edge slabs for postmodern wackiness. By this century, his buildings were most often in the news when facing the wrecking ball. But time is the best critic. Brutalism is back in vogue, and Rudolph, born a hundred years ago in October, is back in the matte Lucite frame.
A pair of exhibitions now on view in Manhattan offers a lesson in the vagaries of architectural taste and a reintroduction to a master of solid and light. The show “Paul Rudolph: The Personal Laboratory,” through Dec. 30, concentrates on the architect’s residences, which is fitting given the location: the top floors of the Modulightor Building, a townhouse he built toward the end of his life on East 58th Street, which houses a light-fixtures firm he co-founded.
Downtown at the Center for Architecture, the smaller exhibition “Paul Rudolph: The Hong Kong Journey,” through March 9, looks at the architect’s work from the 1980s, when he found new opportunities in Asia.
The Midtown show is especially illuminating. Rudolph made his name with residential architecture in Sarasota, Fla., and by the 1960s he had become the go-to builder for tony townhouses in Manhattan and the suburbs. If you only know Rudolph for his large-scale work, you might be surprised by these houses, which arrayed domestic life with a choreographer’s precision. Rudolph’s favorite trick was to use risers, stages, runways and pits to create dozens of interlocking spaces in a single interior. These fluid arrangements blurred private spaces into communal ones and mashed narrow passageways against vertiginous expanses.
These spaces, and the multilevel interior of the Modulightor penthouse, provide a corrective to the view of Rudolph as a Brutalist heavyweight, a maker of buildings as severe as his military haircut.
In his later years, the architect found a more receptive clientele in Singapore, Jakarta and Hong Kong — the last city being the focus of the current show at the Center for Architecture. Rudolph’s Bond Centre in Hong Kong, now known as the Lippo Centre, makes use of prefab glass panels rather than concrete expanses, but its multilevel lobby breaks the towers’ mass into human-scale zones for meeting and mingling. (Hong Kong Island, with its dense urban fabric punctured by outdoor elevators and elevated passageways, must have seemed a paradise to him.) The show also includes an unbuilt house on Victoria Peak whose thrusting volumes of staggered boxes are less Brutalist than Bond villain.
Indeed Rudolph’s name has been synonymous for so long with Brutalism’s solidity that we forget how camp his architecture was. At Yale, Rudolph impaled Ionic capitals on dainty little pikes, like olives on cocktail skewers. The revelers inside the fashion designer Halston’s townhouse at 101 East 63rd Street, yours today for $24 million, had to traverse one of Rudolph’s arch catwalks to reach the white leather couches fit for Studio 54. At Beekman Place, the shower had a clear glass floor — affording a sotto-in-sù titillation to the guest room below.
Rudolph’s architecture was solid and monumental on the outside, but behind closed doors it winked and ogled. He would surely be gratified by his return to prominence at age 100, but I suspect he would wonder at some of today’s Brutalist fanboys — the ones who slaver over Instagram views of past utopias and prefer their architecture crumbling and empty. Behind the thick concrete, his buildings were meant for lusting as well as looking, and make sense only when filled with bodies.
Through Dec. 30 at the Modulightor Building, 246 East 58th Street, Manhattan; paulrudolphheritagefoundation.org.
Through March 9 at the Center for Architecture, 536 LaGuardia Place, Manhattan; centerforarchitecture.org.