More than 60 years after Paul Strand’s seminal photos of Luzzara, photographer David Maialetti documented the Italian village and its residents.
It starts with the river, the River Po, whose Alpine source near the French border pushes the waters eastward across the Italian peninsula until its mouth kisses the Adriatic Sea. A balding, shirtless man sits on the bank beneath a patterned beach umbrella, a fishing pole jutting off to his side. Lush foliage surrounds both him and the river. It is like a haiku by Bashō: a respite, a moment of serenity.
This is the first image that David Maialetti, a staff photographer for The Philadelphia Inquirer, offers in his collection of black-and-white photographs “Luzzara, Another Look,” a bilingual edition published in Italy this year. His subject is Luzzara, a small town nestled along the river in the Emilia-Romagna region on the cusp of Lombardy that he visited for four years beginning in 2013.
In the world of photography, Luzzara is a known entity. In the early 1950s, Italian screenwriter and neorealist theoretician Cesare Zavattini, who was born there, introduced Paul Strand to the town, and together they produced “Un Paese,” which was published in Italy in 1955 and in the United States in 1997. Portraits of townspeople and images of their livelihoods and landscape were accompanied by oral histories recounting people’s experiences of working the land, surviving the war, and enjoying life’s mundane pleasures.
Photographs from that initial collaboration have become famous in world visual culture, perhaps none more so than the classical yet disquieting portrait of the Lusetti family — Strand’s 1953 photograph that graced the cover of both editions of “Un Paese” — in which a woman stands in a farmhouse doorway with her five adult sons who are sitting and leaning, some of them barefoot. The woman’s accompanying words recount how her husband was beaten to death in 1933, presumably by the Fascist regime.
Mr. Maialetti’s visual challenge of “returning” to the documented Luzzara is further complicated by the fact that he was preceded by such luminaries as Gianni Berengo Gardin and Stephen Shore, who also made projects of photographing the town, in 1973-74 and 1993, respectively.
How does one make sense of a place, even one as small as Luzzara, that has witnessed such intense and focused visual documentation? There is an inherent and lingering nostalgia that needs to be confronted and overcome in such an undertaking. Mr. Maialetti tips his hat, visually, to his predecessors by photographing the few remaining elderly women Strand had met six decades earlier. His portrait of four men and a bicycle placed theatrically in front of a building and staring at the viewer is a visual homage to both Strand and the Lusettis, one that asks us to consider history and change in this specific location.
As the title of his book suggests, Mr. Maialetti offers not simply “another look” but a personal take. While the collection opens with the river and Luzzara’s rural outskirts, it is Italian town life that is featured and celebrated by his sympathetic eye. In more than one of his images, arcaded porticos and building facades are graced by elongated shadows created by the storied Italian sunlight. The viewer is made privy to the quotidian spaces of the market, the cafe, the barber shop, and other locations where men, women and children participate in the cherished realm of Italian public life.
Some of the many pleasures of Mr. Maialetti’s engaging works are the various portraits of everyday townspeople photographed meeting the viewer with resolute gazes, greeting the visitor with smiles and laughter, asking us to look anew at Luzzara and its inhabitants. From youths gamboling in the streets to elders seated on benches, the photographer offers a panoply of Italian life in the 21st century.
His forthright vision embraces the realities of contemporary Italy by depicting the new immigrants and their children who make up the social fabric of today’s Luzzara. His images show Africans and South Asians in kufis, turbans, patkas and head scarves at home, at work, and at play, all as integral members of local society. The photographer’s visual acuity positions these new Italians in Luzzara at a time of heightened xenophobic and racist violence in the country.
Resistance to such hatred is suggested by the inclusion of an image making evident the local legacy of anti-Fascist battles — a man looks down at a plaque he holds that lists the names of partisans who died fighting Nazi occupiers. Perhaps the most revealing photograph of a new Italy is that of two older men — one, wearing a turban — beaming, their arms lovingly laid across each other’s shoulders. They stand before a doorway, as if they have just walked into the future.
Bicycles are everywhere in this attentive and splendid body of work. The bike is the town’s signature characteristic, an omnipresence in the everyday, a sort of ambulatory monument to daily life. Zavattini called the two-wheeler the townspeople’s “faithful companion.” Mr. Maialetti shows bikes in view of the River Po, aligned along a cafe’s outer wall, and in the marketplace. Two older women chat in the middle of the street, their bikes by their sides, in a photograph consisting of horizontal lines of shadow and light. The bicycle is a bridge of sorts, connecting today’s residents to their antecedents, the immigrants to their native-born neighbors, and Mr. Maialetti to his artistic predecessors. It is no surprise that he ends his collection with a boy astride a bike on Vicolo Paul Strand, steadfastly holding the viewer’s gaze.
