In the cover image for “When We Were Strangers,” Jake Naughton leans into his partner of nearly eight years, Juan Anibal Sosa Iglesias, his forehead resting against Juan’s cheek as they gaze in different directions. Close up to the camera the couple appears abstract and out of focus. A crystal-clear body of water that is visible between them becomes a perfect visual metaphor for the waves of intimacy and estrangement, for the tidal shifts of connection and separation that comprise loving another.
On a video call from their current home in Mexico City, Jake and Juan tell me this book really started when they did: Jake documented “just about everything” from the beginning. While Jake — a former Lens intern — is the professional photographer of the couple, Juan is never just Jake’s subject. Decisions about what to shoot, when and how are made jointly, and Juan sometimes takes the camera. They use timers and remotes, tripods and extended arms to take photos together.
“When We Were Strangers” is the subject of a Kickstarter campaign to raise funds for its 2019 publication by Red Hook Editions. The photo book is about “big picture” love explored “via the prism of our relationship,” Jake writes. Prism is an apt descriptor, too, given how often the imagery depicts light reflected and refracted. The couple laughs at their own audacity when we discuss the enormity — and impossibility — of their undertaking: to explore what it means to be in love. Could there be more well-trod, timeworn, cliché-ridden territory?
Jake and Juan emphasize that while there are countless books about straight relationships, there is “a dearth of books about queer love.”  The images invite interpretation rather than simple consumption: the hard lines and almost, but not quite, closed doors of a dark hallway, with light pushing through, hint at accessibility and lack thereof: a door ajar, an invitation to entrance at the same time that it might well close, shutting us out.
The book’s design is meant to resemble a journal in shape and size, with all the attendant connotations of privacy and vulnerability. Juan and Jake determined early on that if they were going to write about and photograph their love, they were going to expose it in every light: through connection and quotidian conflict, in epic joy and everyday boredom.
But as much as they reveal, perhaps more is concealed. Opacity is a recurring trope, underscored by blurred motion and obscured faces and body parts. The images invite us to imagine what is gained and lost when we see and when we are blinded. Love is inscrutable, and perhaps it survives, at least in part, because of this complex interplay between transparency and opacity.
Juan and Jake do not avoid love’s hardships in their photo book. As surely as it is joy and plenty, love is loss and mourning. Love is a thousand goodbyes, literal leave-takings (Jake and Juan navigated a long-distance romance for much of their relationship). Love is also the hundred-minute ways we — often unwittingly — leave, abandon and hurt each other. Given the space between us, love is always and already long-distance, even when you share a bed. Loss is not just of the other: Juan notes that we lose — and gain — ourselves in relation. Love necessarily entails a loss of self, the ways we lose ourselves in another and misidentify ourselves in the other’s gaze.
