222 pp. Grove Press. $25.
Evolution results from the tension between disruption and order, a recognition that change is part of the being and momentum of the self. In Eileen Myles’s newest book of poetry, “Evolution,” we encounter an arrival, a voice always becoming, unpinnable and queer. Myles’s new poems are transformations, and perhaps a culmination of the poet’s previous inquiries into love, gender, poetry, America and its politics.
Evolution, from the Latin evolutio, means an unfolding or opening out of a curve, emergence or release from an envelope or enclosing structure, or a transformation. The questions Myles asks — Are we capable of evolution at this point in our American lives? Can we continue to open out of this place and release ourselves from the enclosing structures used to maintain this empire? If so, what might that mean of our future? — are queer questions, questions wholly invested in what is not yet possible.
Movements like this, the flickering between what is thought to be known and what remains unknowable, are embodiments of queerness, and a facet of their power is that they cannot be dictated by the state. America cannot surveil imagination or curiosity.
Expressions of sexual autonomy and power in “Evolution” exist in a space of abjection until Myles breaks them free, partly through the use of facts.
up like memory.
Myles’s poems make us reconsider what is experience, and does it have an order or is it a simultaneity? We too often believe when we speak of the interior we speak of something singular and known; Myles upends these notions. To live, to be, to lean toward what could be, requires multiplicity. So both selves, the speaker and reader, are held in the field of unknowing, and in these moments, the poems are at their most transgressive.
One minute on the inside, the next outside watching it all happen — taking account, of dogs and women and boats and friends. Language breaks from the static page. It becomes itself again, something forward and backward, up and down, outward, into all the planes of itself. Myles guides readers toward not just holding the page but feeling the language passing through — from Myles, onto the page, into the hands, into the hour, into the day. This is part of the queer experience of this collection: It won’t let you rest in the prescribed shape of a body. Not a body of poetry on the page, not the body reading these poems, and not the body you imagine the speaker to have.
One can be lonely and surrounded by friends and fame; one can be sad and still make love. This is not the context of queerness (though it seems America is capable only of talking about the context), but these are the conditions. The context is often the only way Myles’s work is read — irreverent, restless, “without manners” — all descriptions that dismiss the conditions of the queer or trans body. Yet the conditions determine the language we use to explain the context.
It’s no great wonder that Myles has reached what some might call fame now, after grinding for so long in the world of poetry. Because we have finally arrived in a version of the future that Myles once ran for president to imagine. This future, of course, is not the one anyone envisioned. But it is still an evolution. Eileen Myles is still becoming, as a poet, as a griever, as a lover, as an American, as a body both capable and deserving of desire and pleasure.