Roland Fryer, the faculty director of EdLabs, answers allegations reported in a Times article.
I would like to elaborate on the statements I made in the story about me: “A Harvard Star, Accused” (Sunday Business, Dec. 16).
Because of the mission and work ethic of EdLabs, the Harvard-affiliated social science research lab that I founded, it has always been a collegial and at times irreverent place. Lab employees, male and female, have on occasion made off-color jokes and commented on one another’s lives outside of work, including their dating lives.
As the faculty director of the lab, I allowed, encouraged and participated in this atmosphere. In that, I was wrong.
I now realize that what I viewed as our main strengths — complete candor, no subject off limits and a refusal to be politically correct to a fault — could be viewed by others as offensive. If anyone who worked at the lab ever felt alienated, confused or offended by the environment, I sincerely apologize.
But those quoted in The Times accuse me of much more than being irreverent and making bad jokes. They say I retaliated against people who did not participate in our culture. I did not. Indeed, many past employees of the lab were highly successful without ever participating in the more social parts of lab culture.
The Times’s sources also try to portray me as “against women.” This is not true.
I am proud of the lab’s record of hiring, retaining and promoting women within our organization and our stellar history of placing women in the world’s top Ph.D. programs. Every female research assistant has been admitted into at least one top 10 graduate program upon completion of her research fellowship at EdLabs. Furthermore, the majority of lab employees and the vast majority of its managers are women.
If there is more work to be done to create equal opportunities for all, I stand at the ready. I commit to doing whatever is necessary to ensure that my employees and students feel included, safe and intellectually free.