Also: The televised showdown that offers a preview of divided government.
In late June, Walgreens made a $2,500 contribution to the campaign of Senator Cindy Hyde-Smith, the Mississippi Republican. Almost five months later, on Nov. 2., Hyde-Smith made a joke about a “public hanging” that seemed to be a reference to lynching. In the weeks after, many of Hyde-Smith’s corporate donors asked for their money back.
Walgreens has not yet been publicly identified as one of those unhappy donors, but it was. I learned that while reporting on the company for my most recent column. Walgreens’ political action committee sent a letter to Hyde-Smith’s campaign “a day or two in advance of the special runoff election” that Mississippi held on Nov. 27, Brian Faith, a Walgreens executive, told me.
I’m glad Walgreens asked that its donation be returned, even if it did so quietly. But I also think that the request to Hyde-Smith shows why the company’s response to the power grab by Wisconsin Republicans — whom the company has also supported financially — is inadequate.
Last week, I asked Walgreens what it thought about the behavior of Wisconsin state legislators whom it gave money to this year. Those legislators have since stripped powers from the incoming governor and attorney general for nakedly partisan reasons.
Walgreens would not answer the substance of my question. It neither defended the power grab nor criticized it. “Our contributions at the time did not contemplate and do not reflect the current state of affairs in Wisconsin,” Phil Caruso, a Walgreens spokesman, said.
Of course, the same is true of the company’s contribution to Hyde-Smith. When it gave her money in June, you can be sure the company “did not contemplate” that she might one day make a joke about lynching. Still, almost six months later, the company asked for its money back. It understood, correctly, that campaign donors bear some moral responsibility for the behavior of a politician they support.
If that behavior is abhorrent, a donor with clear ethical standards will speak up. I’m still hoping that Walgreens will clarify its ethical standards.
“The anti-Trump resistance,” he adds, needs “to deploy the rhetorical and organizational tools of a populist movement,” including sit-ins, demonstrations and more.
Lastly, the Oval Office showdown yesterday between President Trump and the Democratic leaders in Congress — Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer — might have been entertaining. And it was probably bad for Trump. He managed both to make a government shutdown more likely, by emboldening House members who want a border wall, and pre-emptively accepted blame for any shutdown, as Jennifer Rubin of The Washington Post writes.
But if you care about the well-being of American government — and you should — I don’t think you can be too happy about the televised confrontation. “While entertaining, this also risks taking the level of dysfunction to new depths likely to further erode public faith in government — no small feat considering that the public already holds the government in lower esteem than your average war criminal,” my colleague Michelle Cottle writes.