HIDALGO, Tex. — A man crossing the bridge from Reynosa, Mexico, to Texas lugged a merry toddler-size Santa Claus piñata that he had bought for $10. Maritza Delgado monitored her small children hanging upside down on a tree next to the sidewalk as they waited to cross back to Texas. Rene Saenz crossing toward Mexico carried Target bags full of diapers purchased at Sam’s Club to deliver to his family in Mexico.
Except for that business about the government shutting down because of places just like this, it was a pretty normal weekend at the quarter-mile bridge separating Mexico and Texas. There were long lines on Saturday, and people waited patiently for hours in the strong South Texas sun. For no apparent reason, there was hardly a wait at all on Sunday, to the delight of crossers who just wanted to spend time with family for Christmas.
What did it mean? What explained the difference in traffic on the same weekend? No one really knew, just as almost no one understood the machinations that led to the partial government shutdown. Instead, the comfortable symbiosis between the two countries played out regardless of the deadlock in Washington that threatened to keep the government shut down into the new year.
Most people on the international bridge in Hidalgo this weekend said they didn’t know about the shutdown or that the customs officers who checked their documents were working without pay.
They also said they were unaware of the funding fight to build a border wall not far from the bridge. A wall already exists in South Texas, part of it beside this bridge. There are steel beams on top of a concrete flood levee that stretches for 20 miles in Hidalgo County. Customs and Border Protection has notified landowners nearby that President Trump’s new wall will be built in most of Hidalgo County in addition to the structures that already exist.
But most crossers this weekend weren’t thinking about a wall. They were headed for holiday time with family.
“I’m just going home,” said Esau Garcia, who had spent the last few days with his parents in Reynosa. Mr. Garcia, unaware of the shutdown, lives in South Texas, but crosses monthly for family time. He would return to Reynosa on Christmas Eve to celebrate with his parents.
“I’ll come back tonight,” Mr. Saenz, the man carrying the diapers, said as he walked without having to stop and wait, as he normally does this time of year.
Customs officers and border guards may not be so fortunate to spend the holidays with their families, so long as the government isn’t open. Previously approved time off is canceled during the shutdown, according to Art Del Cueto, a Border Patrol agent in Arizona and vice president of the agency’s labor union.
One Border Patrol agent working free on Saturday escorted a big bus onto the Hidalgo-Reynosa International Bridge to deport immigrants. Many migrants who illegally cross the Rio Grande seek asylum in immigration court.
Before the shutdown, President Trump issued an executive order on Tuesday that closed the nation’s immigration courts on Dec. 24, and offices of the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services as a holiday before Christmas. Both federal agencies said that appointments — and naturalization ceremonies — would be rescheduled.
Because the Citizenship and Immigration Services agency is funded by the fees that immigrants pay, and not by congressional funding, it is scheduled to reopen on Dec. 26. But immigration courts, at least, will be closed during the length of the shutdown.
To some immigration rights advocates, this was a profound paradox: shutting down the government, which operates a backlogged but effective system to deport people, over an untested physical barrier at the border.
“If you juxtapose those two facts, one that you’re closing down the government to create a wall that won’t really do much to help deal with immigration concerns, and the same time, you’re closing down the immigration courts so that people who are alleged to be deportable can’t be deported — well, that just doesn’t make sense,” said Allan Wernick, the director of CUNY Citizenship Now, an immigration law clinic operated out of the City University of New York.
The deported immigrants at the bridge on Saturday stepped off the bus, were freed from United States custody, walked to the other side of the bridge and blended into the line of bridge crossers heading south. This deportation process plays out often. But Jim Darling, mayor of the neighboring South Texas city of McAllen, doesn’t love the attention focused on the region’s immigration issues.
Mr. Darling was also unhappy that the government was shut down over border wall funding. He said Customs and Border Protection officials said their operations were business as usual, besides the administrative people not working.
Customs and Border Protection officers this weekend joked and groaned at being on the clock but not being paid.
“Here all day,” one officer said on Saturday, smiling and shaking his head.
Meanwhile, officers continued their daily duties on Sunday. Talk about the shutdown dominated conversations within the agency, but not for bridge crossers like Mr. Garcia.
