William M. Gray at a conference on hurricanes in 2008.
William M. Gray, whose pioneering research helped him make hurricane predictions for three decades and allowed the East Coast and the Caribbean to gird for their fury, died on Saturday in Fort Collins, Colo. He was 86.
His death was announced by Colorado State University, where he was emeritus professor of atmospheric science and headed the Tropical Meteorology Project.
He asserted that the frequency of storms in the North Atlantic basin was cyclical, and that their intensity and the likelihood of their reaching the East Coast of the United States depended on six scientific factors.
These included the amount of rainfall in the African Sahel (the zone between the Sahara and the Sudanian Savanna) and the impact of El Niño (the periodic Pacific Ocean warming that produces powerful winds that could shear off the tops of storms developing in the Atlantic).
William Mason Gray was born in Detroit on Oct. 9, 1929, the son of Ulysses S. Gray and the former Beatrice Mason. He was raised in Washington and hoped to become a professional baseball pitcher, but was sidelined by a knee injury.
He received a bachelor’s degree in geography from George Washington University in 1952 before joining the Air Force, where he served as a weather forecaster. He retired from the Reserve as a lieutenant colonel.
He earned a master’s degree in meteorology and doctorate in geophysical sciences, both from the University of Chicago. His mentor there was Herbert Riehl, considered the father of tropical meteorology.
He married Nancy Price in 1954. She died in 2001. He is survived by their children, Sarah, Janet and Robert Gray, and two grandchildren.
Dr. Gray joined Colorado State University in 1961. He retired in 2005, although he remained active in research.
For the record, the 2016 hurricane prediction, issued two days before Dr. Gray’s death by Philip J. Klotzbach, his last graduate student and now lead author of the seasonal forecasts, is for “a near average probability” of major hurricanes making landfall this season in the Caribbean and the coastal United States.
