BRISBANE, Australia — Jason Day’s rise to No. 1 in the world began with a rusted golf club retrieved from a Queensland junkyard.
His mother worried that if not for golf, Day would end up like his father, Alvyn, whose potential was corroded by alcohol. Alvyn Day’s drinking left a scrap heap for Day, his mother and his sisters to sift through. It would take them years to see the beauty that can sprout from the rubble like a red poppy pointing toward the sun.
Day, the betting favorite to win this week’s Masters, won the most recent men’s major, the P.G.A. Championship last August. It was his first major victory in his 20th attempt, and he shed tears on the final green as he thought of his mother, Dening, and his two sisters back home in Australia and the sacrifices they made so that he might succeed.
“With everything that went on, for me and my sisters to come out pretty normal on the other side, I think a lot of that has to do with our mom,” Day said.
From his father, Day, 28, learned to play golf and fear failure. From his mother, he learned how to work as if failure were not an option.
On the eve of Australia Day in January, the tide of productivity had gone out in Day’s homeland, scattering workers to near and far vacation destinations. The national holiday fell on the last Tuesday of the month, and a sizable portion of the country’s work force opted to take a four-day weekend, leaving few hands on deck during Monday morning business hours at a shipping company in this port city.
But through Austral Asia Line’s locked doors, behind a vacant reception desk, barely visible over the cubicle partitions, Dening Day toiled at her desk, addressing import-export issues. She did not think twice before making the hourlong commute from home by train to sit in an office that was three-quarters empty.

She did allow herself a leisurely lunch at the sun-dappled cafe tucked between two office towers, steps from her office. She was joined by the eldest of her three children, Yanna, who lives several hundred miles away and was in town with her fiancé for the long weekend. Her other daughter, Kim, is the mother of two, including a golf-playing son.
Over a two-Coke lunch, Dening, 58, filled in the details of her journey from a trapped wife to a self-sufficient life, which was no less treacherous than her son’s 10-year rise to the top of his sport.
A letter of introduction from an Australian man seeking a wife arrived in the mail for the landlady’s sister, but she had moved to Italy. The letter fell into the hands of the landlady, who passed it on to Dening. The letter was from Alvyn Day.
On a whim, Dening penned a reply. That was how she “met” Alvyn.
Dening looked at it as if she were writing her own fairy tale, moving to a strange, new world for a more comfortable, more contented life as a wife and mother with a Prince Charming conjured by the Fates.
But her new life in Queensland, after the wedding in the Philippines, was more Brothers Grimm than Walt Disney. Alvyn, who had already fathered three daughters and a son from two earlier marriages, both of which ended in divorce, abused alcohol. He became belligerent when he drank, Dening said. When the girls were little, she said, her husband went through alcohol rehabilitation because his drinking was hindering his ability to keep a job.
“He went to a lot of rehabs,” she said.
Yanna, who is a year older than Kim and three years older than Jason, used to envy her brother because he grew up with the sober version of their father. As the baby in the family, Jason literally demanded his parents’ and sisters’ attention.
Day with his father, Alvyn, in a picture provided by his mother.
At night, Alvyn watched television and smoked while cradling Jason. He quit his two-pack-a-day cigarette habit after Jason coughed up black phlegm while seated on his lap, Dening said.
Jason was formally introduced to golf at 6, a couple of years after his father brought home the rusty 3-wood from the junkyard, where the family found many of their household items. Soon father and son were spending every weekend at the golf course.
Yanna said she resented the attention lavished on Jason by their father. Only as an adult did it dawn on her that she and Kim were in some ways the lucky ones. The flip side of not feeling a father’s embrace was not having to live up to his rigid expectations.
“What we lost in some aspect we gained in independence,” she said.
When Jason was 12, he lost his father to stomach cancer. Jason said he was in the hospital room when Alvyn died.
Afterward, he and his siblings scattered like birds freed from their cages. Jason began abusing alcohol and getting into fights in school. His mother, fearful of losing him to the streets, sold their home and borrowed money from relatives to send him to Kooralbyn International School, eight hours south of Rockhampton, the Queensland city where the Days were living at the time.
At the boarding school, which was known for its sports programs, Day came under the tutelage of Colin Swatton. He became the most influential male in Day’s life: coach, caddie, confidant and corrective influence for his abusive, controlling father.
When Swatton left for another school nearby, Day followed. Swatton accompanied Day to the United States after he turned pro at 18 to help him get settled and never left his side. He will be caddying for Day at Augusta National Golf Club this week when they make their sixth Masters appearance together.
Yanna said their father’s death made possible her brother’s championship career. Had Alvyn lived, she explained, he would not have given up control of Jason’s golf.
Day with his coach, Colin Swatton, in a 2004 picture provided by Day’s mother, Dening. Swatton remains Day’s coach and caddie.
“He wouldn’t have let him go to the boarding school,” she said.
“When I see Bernard Tomic, his dad’s the same way,” Yanna added, referring to the Australian tennis player whose father, John, has been accused of physical violence and intimidation and barred from tournaments.
In a Golf magazine interview in October, Day said his father meted out physical punishment if he fell short of a score that his father set as a goal.
In March, Day said that his father began striking him with closed fists when he was 10 or 11. If his father believed Day was capable of breaking 50 for nine holes and he did not, he would beat Day in the car on the way home.
Dening remembered the first time she saw the evidence.
She said she confronted her husband. “From now on, don’t you ever touch our children again, and from now on if you want to take him to golf, I’ll be going with you,” she said she told him.
Dening started going to the golf course. Sometimes she dragged Day’s pull cart. She said she believed the abuse happened only once, but Day disputed that.
Dening and Yanna bore the brunt of Alvyn’s verbal abuse. Yanna said she understood her father better after he shared a story from his childhood of a goat that he treated like a pet that his parents slaughtered without telling him. Her father, she said, was a product of a “circle of violence,” one that she and her siblings have broken.
Day with his mother, Dening, in their home in Rockhampton, Australia.
So was Dening, who worked as an administrative assistant in the same meatpacking plant that employed her husband. Her nights were spent bent over a sewing machine, making her children clothes and completing upholstery projects to sell for extra cash.
“I’d work until 4 o’clock in the morning and then wake up at 5 to watch the kids,” she said.
She maintained a stoic front for the sake of the children. “I had to be tough,” she said.
Dening shared her sad straits with no one.
Yanna said she was constantly on the lookout for pieces of discarded furniture that she could reupholster or paint and repurpose. She retrieved several photographs from her smartphone of her own craftwork, including a curio cabinet that she salvaged from junkyards and restored.
She held back tears as she thought of the biggest reclamation project that she and her siblings undertook: their lives.
She summoned another image that is seared into her mind: her brother’s show of tears on the end of the P.G.A. Championship.
As his mother and sister reminisced over lunch, Day was 17 time zones away in San Diego for the Farmers Insurance Open, trying to defend one of his five 2015 titles. Weakened by influenza, he missed a cut for the first time in seven months.
A few days earlier, his mother sent him a text message to see how he was feeling.
Day redoubled his commitment to the mental, physical, tactical and technical aspects of golf after a subpar 2012 season. His struggles coincided with the birth of his first child, Dash, now 3. In November, Day’s wife, Ellie, gave birth to a daughter, Lucy.
Between 2006 and 2013, Day won once on the PGA Tour. Since the start of 2014, he has eight victories, including in his last two tournaments leading to the Masters.
The downside of Day’s adopting his mother’s workaholic ways is he is too busy to visit Australia.
Since leaving home as a teenager, Day has returned roughly every other year to play in one or two tournaments. His main motivation is the chance to reconnect with his mother and sisters.
He said he had no contact with the relatives on his father’s side, including his four half-siblings.
Day and his wife, who met in Ohio, her home state, married in 2009, and live outside of Columbus. They last visited Australia in 2013, when Day played the World Cup with Adam Scott at Royal Melbourne shortly after eight members of Dening’s family, including her mother and brother, were killed in Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines.
“I miss my mom,” said Day, who tried to set his mother up in a house near his in Ohio, but she had no interest in moving.
“I don’t like to go anywhere,” said Dening, who treasures her hard-earned self-sufficiency.
And so mother and son keep in touch mostly through text messages and Skype.
He said he could keep in touch with family much easier now than when he was at boarding school and had to wait in line behind other students — “like in jail,” he said with a laugh — to use a hall phone for a conversation that offered less privacy than a party line.
Dening visited Day last August and watched him play in the World Golf Championships event in Akron, not far from his home. A week later, she was back in Australia, following the P.G.A. Championship on the Internet from her desk at the office. She will follow this week’s Masters the same way.
She would have liked to to see more of her son in the last decade and a half.
