The novels of John le Carré are steeped in shadows and ambiguity. So it’s a little disconcerting that “The Night Manager,” the first television adaptation of a le Carré novel in 25 years, is so bright and straightforward and that, despite a few nasty but necessary killings, it’s so clear who we’re supposed to root for. If TV shows had jaws, this one’s would be square.
Mr. le Carré has been promoting this six-episode British-American mini-series, shown last month on BBC and here beginning on Tuesday on AMC, and he is an executive producer along with two of his sons. But the screenwriter David Farr and the director Susanne Bier (“In a Better World”) were licensed to change the period (from the first gulf war to the present) and the locations (an evil arms dealer’s yacht becomes a fantastical Spanish villa; Central America becomes the Middle East) and to soften the ending in ways that le Carré aficionados will probably abhor.
Despite the updating, the production feels thoroughly old-fashioned. The opening episodes, when the amorality of the arms dealer Richard Roper (Hugh Laurie) is being linked, with the filmmaking equivalent of heavy chalk outlines, to his extravagant lifestyle, feel like a Bond movie without the humor. The middle stages, when the revenge-minded hotel manager Jonathan Pine (Tom Hiddleston) infiltrates Roper’s organization and sets eyes on Roper’s young girlfriend, Jed Marshall (Elizabeth Debicki), play like a stiff British take on a glossy ’80s or ’90s American melodrama — “Against All Odds” or “Revenge,” with Mr. Hiddleston doing a very reserved version of a Jeff Bridges or Kevin Costner romantic lead.
The natural tendency is to compare Mr. Hiddleston’s performance to that of Alec Guinness as George Smiley in the defining le Carré adaptation, “Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy,” in 1979. But that would be unfair, and not just because Mr. Guinness was one of the great actors of his or any time. Pine in “The Night Manager” is a different and less interesting variety of hero than the tortured bureaucrat Smiley. A former soldier recruited by British intelligence because of a coincidental connection to Roper, he’s a man of action whose primary story arc is that in trying to avenge the death of one woman, he puts the life of another in danger.
Nothing very ambiguous there. And Mr. Farr and Ms. Bier, who make the story’s chronology linear and emphasize its scenic and suspenseful elements, haven’t found a way to reproduce the inner life that Mr. le Carré gives Pine, largely through the filigree of his writing. Mr. Hiddleston, whose style doesn’t tend toward leading-man swagger, relays Pine’s ambivalence over the violence he has to commit but doesn’t have much else to play.
The Smiley role in “The Night Manager” is that of Burr, the London-based agent who recruits Pine and tries, not always successfully, to monitor and assist him. The mini-series switches the gender of the character, making him female (and casting a very pregnant Olivia Colman from “Broadchurch”), but de-emphasizes the role, preferring to stay in more exotic Middle Eastern and Continental locations. The one performer who makes an impression is Mr. Laurie, whose ability to mix charm, menace and deadpan humor is well suited for Roper.
Published in 1993, “The Night Manager” was Mr. le Carré’s first post-Cold War novel, and you could see him working to fit new sorts of heroes and villains into his framework of murky loyalties and moral uncertainty. Two decades later, the replacements he found already feel quaint (in a world where suicide bombs speak more loudly than spycraft), and the same can be said of this glossy, generic adaptation.