San Francisco police officers sent dozens of racist and homophobic text messages in the past several months, even as another group of officers was being investigated by prosecutors for having traded similar messages, the city’s district attorney said Thursday.
The disclosure of the new round of text messages, which includes derogatory references to blacks, Asians, lesbians, gays and transgender people, comes as the Police Department is under federal investigation after complaints that some officers routinely behave in a racially biased manner.
Along with dozens of other police departments around the nation, the San Francisco police — who work in one of the nation’s most culturally diverse cities — have come under scrutiny during the past year.
Officers have been accused of using unnecessary deadly force and brutality, and of focusing enforcement efforts on black neighborhoods while ignoring similar infractions elsewhere. Police critics, including many among the city’s dwindling black population, have held protests and called for the resignation of the police chief, Gregory P. Suhr.
On Thursday, George Gascón, the city’s district attorney, said that the text messages were a worrying sign that the department had a problem with racism and homophobia that was more ingrained than investigators had anticipated.
Especially concerning, Mr. Gascón said, was that the officers involved in the new case were sending offensive texts even as the city investigated 14 of their colleagues last year for sending and receiving similar messages.
Mr. Gascón said the officers recently found to have sent or received the messages were probably involved in at least several hundred criminal cases that would need to be reviewed for signs of bias. He said his office was beginning to examine those cases.
“We know that there will be cases that will be in jeopardy,” Mr. Gascón said.
Chief Suhr said Thursday that the department turned over the text messages to the district attorney’s office in October as part of a sexual assault investigation of an officer. As part of that inquiry, the cellphones of several officers were examined, he said.
Chief Suhr said that his department had no tolerance for the derogatory language contained in the texts and that he had quickly moved to discipline the officers implicated.
He said that of the seven officers involved in the new case, four had been suspended and three others who had received a single text but had not responded inappropriately had not been punished.
Two of the four suspended officers subsequently left the department, and the other two are facing departmental discipline, he said.
“Certainly to have officers like this among the fine men and women in the department is disconcerting, but we will root them out,” Chief Suhr said.
In January, the Justice Department announced that it would review the San Francisco Police Department after the Dec. 2 shooting death of a black man, Mario Woods, 26, on a city street.
The episode, in which at least 15 shots were fired at Mr. Woods by at least five officers, was captured on a cellphone video, prompting protests in the city. The police said Mr. Woods had had a knife and had refused to obey police orders.
The federal review, requested by Mayor Edwin M. Lee, will examine a variety of aspects of the Police Department, including officers’ stops of civilians, use of force and training protocol.
The district attorney’s office is also continuing to review criminal cases related to the officers involved in the initial text messaging case. Those texts disparaged gays, women, Mexicans and Filipinos, and proposed lynching blacks.
A review by prosecutors of some 4,000 cases handled by those 14 officers — including 1,600 convictions — is continuing, to determine if the arrests or prosecutions were corrupted by the officers’ beliefs. So far, 13 cases have been dismissed, according to the district attorney’s office.
The Police Department’s effort to dismiss some of those officers was later overturned by a Superior Court judge, who said the department had failed to act within a one-year statute of limitations.