Voters in South Korea shared their priorities for the parliamentary elections on Wednesday.
SEOUL, South Korea — South Korean voters handed President Park Geun-hye’s party a surprising setback on Wednesday, stripping it of a majority in Parliament as her government faces a sluggish economy and a growing nuclear threat from North Korea.
Ms. Park’s conservative Saenuri Party won only 122 seats in elections for the 300-member National Assembly. It became the first South Korean governing party in 16 years without a parliamentary majority, leaving Ms. Park to face the prospect of being an early lame duck. The main opposition Minjoo Party won 123 seats, replacing Saenuri as the top political group in Parliament even though it, too, lacks a majority.
The vote has been widely billed as a referendum on Ms. Park and a bellwether for the presidential election in late 2017. Pollsters had predicted an easy majority for her party. “We failed to read the minds of the people, even when they were disappointed and reproached us,” said An Kyeong-hwan, a spokesman for the governing party.
On Thursday, Kim Moo-sung, the head of the party, resigned, taking responsibility for the debacle. Jung Youn-kuk, a spokesman for President Park, said the election outcome meant that the new Parliament must work for the “livelihood of the people.” In the last election, four years ago, Ms. Park’s party won a parliamentary majority with 152 seats.
The centrist People’s Party, a group recently spun off from the opposition Minjoo Party, won 38 on Wednesday. The rest of the seats were taken by a small progressive party and independent candidates.
With political power and policy-making authority concentrated in the presidency, no immediate change in the nation’s foreign policy was expected. But the progressive opposition will now be more likely to press Ms. Park to amend her hard-line North Korea policy, which is focused on enforcing sanctions, in favor of more dialogue with the North.
Ms. Park, a daughter of Park Chung-hee, South Korea’s military dictator from 1961 to 1979, has emerged as a highly divisive leader. The vote’s outcome appeared to be a rejection of her style of governance, analysts said. Since taking office in early 2013, she has branded herself a tough-minded leader dedicated to national security. Her approval ratings hovered above 40 percent.
They hailed her uncompromising stance against North Korea’s nuclear weapons development, exemplified by her recent decision to shut down a factory park the South had jointly run with the North. But many South Koreans also view her as a leader who suppresses freedom of speech and dissent within her government.
Ms. Park had appealed for a decisive majority in Parliament to help her deal with challenges like rising household debt, high youth unemployment and soaring welfare costs for a rapidly aging population.
She has blamed gridlock in Parliament for her failure to spur economic growth and create jobs by introducing deregulation, labor and other reform bills before her five-year term ends in early 2018.
Tension with North Korea at election time usually helps the conservative party during elections. The North’s recent nuclear test and long-range rocket launching have dominated headlines, dwarfing criticism of Ms. Park’s other policies. But South Koreans watched her party with a cold eye as it slid into internal squabbling ahead of the elections.
The results appeared to revive the presidential ambitions of Moon Jae-in, a Minjoo Party leader who had lost the 2012 presidential election to Ms. Park. Another winner was Ahn Cheol-soo, who quit the Minjoo Party in December to found the People’s Party. Mr. Ahn, a former technology entrepreneur who is expected to run for president, seeks to woo voters disenchanted with the political establishment.