ELKHART, Ind. — Seven years ago President Obama came to this northern Indiana city, where unemployment was heading past 20 percent, for his first trip as president. Ed Neufeldt, the jobless man picked to introduce him, afterward donned three green rubber bracelets, each to be removed in turn as joblessness fell to 5 percent in the county, the state and the nation.
It took years — in 2012, Mr. Neufeldt lamented to a local reporter that he might wear his wristbands “to my casket” — but by last year they had all come off. Elkhart’s unemployment rate, at 3.8 percent, is among the country’s lowest, so low that employers here in the self-described R.V. capital of the world are advertising elsewhere for workers, offering sign-up bonuses, even hiring from a local homeless shelter.
Mr. Obama, whose four trips here during 2008 and 2009 tracked the area’s decline, is expected to return for the first time in coming weeks, both to showcase its recovery and to warn against going back to Republican economic policies. Yet where is Mr. Neufeldt leaning in this presidential election year? He may keep a photograph of himself and Mr. Obama on a desk at the medical office he cleans nightly, but he is considering Donald J. Trump.
Billboards proclaim, “Hiring: Welders. Up to $23/hour,” but for all the progress, many people here — like Americans elsewhere — harbor unshakable anxiety about stagnant wages, their economic future and the erosion of the middle class generally. Antigovernment resentments over past bank bailouts linger, stoked by candidates in both parties (though taxpayers got their money back, with dividends). And social issues such as abortion, gun rights, same-sex marriage, the Affordable Care Act and immigration loom larger than any other for some voters.
The enduring wounds of the Great Recession, together with discouraging economic trends that long predated it, have fueled anger on the left but especially on the right, thanks to Mr. Trump, the maverick Republican front-runner. Mr. Obama is not getting the recognition historically accorded a president who presides over economic revival, but then again, neither are divided Republicans seen as offering a positive alternative.
“Whether he gets the credit or not, people’s home equity has gone back up, fuel prices are the best we’ve had in a long time, there’s a lot of things that make this all go,” Larry Thompson, a former longtime mayor of nearby Nappanee and a Republican, said as he showed off an expanding cabinetry factory, Kountry Wood Products.
“But I think that maybe it’s just some of the other things he’s been involved with that people in our area” — Mr. Thompson stopped, shaking his head in unspoken reference to various social issues.
Few people here are thanking him for their recovery, despite benefits from the administration’s $800 billion stimulus package — Mr. Obama came here in August 2009 to personally announce one grant — and from the rescues of the auto and financial industries.
Instead, it is Mr. Trump who is making the impression. The New York billionaire routinely attacks Carrier Corporation since it announced in February that it would close two Indiana factories and shift about 2,000 heating and air-conditioning jobs to Mexico. Recently a high school basketball game west of here drew national attention after students hoisted Trump signs and taunted “Build that wall!” at fans from the rival, heavily Latino school.
In 2008 Mr. Obama won Indiana, the first Democratic presidential candidate to do so since 1964. In 2012 he did not even contest the state. Among those who opposed him was Mr. Neufeldt. Now 69, he holds four part-time jobs, but boasts that a daughter and three sons-in-law again have good jobs in Elkhart’s boom-and-bust recreational vehicle industry where he worked 32 years. His problem with the president is over abortion.
Senator Joe Donnelly, a Democrat who represented this area in the House until his election to the Senate in 2012, likewise praised the administration’s auto and financial rescues for averting disaster. “President Obama had about half the people on his own team telling him to let Chrysler go,” he recalled.
Now, Mr. Donnelly noted, Chrysler plants employ more than 5,000 people to the south in Kokomo, up from 100 at their nadir, and 7,000 statewide. Yet autoworkers are more apt to complain about the president’s gun proposals than to acknowledge the auto turnaround.
While Indiana’s presidential primaries are relatively late in the race — May 3 — and polls are lacking, Mr. Howey predicted that Mr. Trump would do well.
Nearly half of Elkhart County’s jobs are in manufacturing, a higher proportion than in all but 13 of the 3,140 counties nationwide, according to Jerry Conover, director of the Indiana Business Research Center at Indiana University. With so many skilled factory workers, he said, local wages are above national averages though education levels are relatively modest.
For 2014, economic growth was up 48 percent from 2001, double the nation’s growth rate. Yet the area’s reliance on a narrow range of manufacturing, mostly R.V.-related, makes it “quite vulnerable,” Mr. Conover said. Locals’ awareness of that possibility explains some of their economic insecurity.
Additional stimulus money went to improve the municipal airport and local highways, buy law enforcement equipment, remove lead and weatherize buildings — purposes that did not create many jobs but helped avoid layoffs, said Kyle Hannon, the president of the Greater Elkhart Chamber of Commerce.
“We knew we would be back,” Mr. Hannon said, reflecting locals’ sense of their resilience and self-sufficiency, regardless of government’s hand.
Now, with unemployment so low, local leaders say the challenge is finding workers who can pass employers’ drug tests.
“Everybody is back to work,” Mr. Neufeldt said recently, driving past once-closed plants lining county roads, their lots full of employees’ vehicles and, in many, newly manufactured R.V.s.
Mark Dobson, the president of the Economic Development Corporation of Elkhart County, said his group was using social media to advertise widely that Elkhart offers “head-of-household opportunities” — industrial jobs that pay perhaps $75,000, enough for a single wage earner to sustain a family.
“Anytime we see a mention of a plant closure and some significant number of people who have been laid off” — like from Carrier — “we’re making sure they know there are jobs in Elkhart County,” Mr. Dobson said.
Busy employers also are turning to Faith Mission, the homeless shelter. Dan Browning, its programming director, said he gets dozens of calls monthly — the previous day a boat maker sought 75 workers — and no longer deals with companies that will not pay more than minimum wage.
