 You’ve said that you celebrated the O.J. verdict back in 1995: “I cheered for Emmett Till. I cheered for all the strange fruit that had hung on the trees for three centuries.” Do you think O.J. deserved to benefit from all of those tragedies? Whether or not he deserved to benefit from it, I don’t know. I mean, is any of us deserving of grace?
Recently, you told ABC News, “I think he did it.” Why do you think that he did it? It doesn’t matter what I said. How I feel about it, how you feel, or how Johnnie Cochran felt, it doesn’t matter. What matters is what we’re going to do now.
Were you at all tempted to say, “Do you know who I am, I’m the Harvard-educated, Yale-educated — ” No. The same thing happened to Skip Gates at Harvard.
You have said that the problem with the O.J. trial is that we didn’t resolve enough back then, and it’s coming back to haunt us. What do you think we could have resolved? The resolution wasn’t the issue, it was the discussion. When you talk things through, you end up coming closer together, because when you sit down at the table, you’re actually near each other.
Well, both the defense and the prosecution were mixed-race teams. Maybe, on a very small level, there was some working out of racial prejudices? Absolutely not.
But if you’re saying that problems of institutional racism can be solved by people sitting down and talking, why not? That was work. That was image, that was playing for the camera. And if it hadn’t been on television, I doubt Chris Darden would have been there; Darden coming on the prosecution team was a reaction to O.J. hiring Johnnie Cochran. What I mean is that we never talked about it as a nation.
The TV show highlights Cochran’s efforts to make O.J. more “black” — decorating his home with African art just before jurors visit, for example. It seems he was engaging in a sort of third-party code-switching. You grew up in Detroit and went to Ivy League schools. Are there times that you code-switch? Absolutely.  Then, all of a sudden, all the white people left the neighborhood and the school. Overnight, our parents pulled us out and sent us to an all-white school in an all-white neighborhood. We had to fit into that environment, and we had to know how to exist, how to do it. There was no class for it.
So you had to figure it out on your own. Yes. Cochran’s mother did a similar thing to him. She put him in an all-white school.
Your performance as Cochran is pretty uncanny. But you’ve said that you didn’t watch video or listen to interviews. Was this your key insight, that the two of you had this same formative experience? Yes. When I read that, I thought: I’m just like Johnnie. I know exactly who he is, I know exactly the flip he made. I made it, too.