It was a Thursday evening on the Columbia University campus, and a group from the Kappa Alpha Theta sorority was wedged onto couches eating takeout, some seated cross-legged on the floor. Two discussed an introductory Chinese language class. One thanked a sister for passing along her résumé for an internship. And then there were a few talking about spring break.
They had gone to Cabo, that cliché of a college pilgrimage in which a once-sleepy Mexican village becomes a hormone-fueled frat row, and you never, ever let your drink out of your sight (and if you do, you dump it). Except the women weren’t recounting drunken hookups or how many shots they’d taken on the beach. They were discussing “toxic masculinity,” the “privilege” that allowed them to be there and the “risk team” they put in place to look out for one another if anybody got too drunk or separated from their group.
When, at a beachside bar, a drunken bachelor tried to playfully bite — yes, bite — one of the women’s arms (“Who does that?” she asked), they staged an intervention. “What makes you think she wants to be touched?” her friend said, girl posse in tow, lecturing him on respectful personal space.
Later, when they stumbled upon a twerking contest on the beach (women twerking, the crowd judging), one in the group couldn’t help herself. “Don’t you find it problematic that there are no men up there?” she said to any stranger who would listen. “I think we felt empowered to speak up because we knew we had each other’s backs,” she recalled, seated on a sorority house sofa.
She later posted photos from the trip to Facebook: girlfriends with bronzed shoulders, guacamole and a casual shot of her beach read: “The Grounding of Modern Feminism,” by the Harvard historian Nancy F. Cott.
That was certainly my stance back in 2002, as a sophomore at the University of Southern California. I transferred colleges, in large part because I so detested that school’s suffocating Greek life — giving up a scholarship, taking out a loan and moving to a city I’d never visited to try to find friends (and a social life) I didn’t have to “pay” for. Sororities, at least the traditional ones, were precisely the kind of classist, exclusionary groups that feminists fought against. Right?
It is puzzling, then, to discover that even amid the debate about campus sexual assault, and the role that Greek life plays in it, sorority enrollment is at a record high.
At the 26 historically white sororities that make up the century-old National Panhellenic Conference — and to be clear, this group does not include academic or multicultural sororities, like the popular African-American or Latino groups, which have their own governing bodies — enrollment has increased more than 50 percent over the last decade, outpacing the growth in college enrollment. And not just on the campuses you’d expect. At the Ivies — those institutions that long considered themselves just a hair too progressive for the pomp and ritual of sorority life; where women rushed to “The Vagina Monologues,” not the local frat mixer.
Harvard doesn’t even recognize Greek life on campus, yet this is the third year in a row that sorority enrollment has peaked, with 280 women seeking entrance to one of the college’s four chapters this year. Of those who rushed, 193 were offered bids, “a significant increase from the 150 women that constituted the average rush class size before 2011,” The Harvard Crimson wrote.
Except that actually you probably would go to a frat party (see No. 27: “Sorry, how did you end up at Beta house?”) because sorority enrollment is unprecedented at Columbia, too — more than tripling over the last decade, “a growth unmatched by fraternities or multicultural groups,” according to The Columbia Spectator. At Barnard — which allows students to pledge at neighboring Columbia — 20 percent of the student body is Greek, according to the Columbia Panhellenic Council, which monitors sorority life on campus.
It has left many people baffled. “Honestly, when she first brought it up, my interior reaction was, ‘Over my dead body!’ That’s how strongly I felt that Greek life was an abomination,” said Susan Ruderman, a 1984 graduate of Harvard College, whose 18-year-old daughter — in the midst of the college application process — informed her that she was considering rushing. Ms. Ruderman, who works in philanthropy in Newton, Mass., said her first thought was: “Where did I go wrong?” — though she has slowly come around. “Funny how much principles ‘evolve’ when it comes to the happiness of one’s daughter,” she said.
When Amulya Kandikonda, a Barnard sophomore, told her friends back home in Illinois that she was pledging, “They were like, ‘You’re not white, you’re not tall and blond,’ ” she said. Which was not dissimilar from the experience of her sorority sister, Jennifer Egbebike, whose parents are Nigerian, but who grew up in Miami. “I was very hesitant to join, because I’m not a ‘typical’ sorority girl,” she said.
On some campuses, anyway, that may be true. Words like “safe space,” “hegemonic masculinity” and “intersectionality” roll off these women’s tongues. Gone are the campy sorority jobs of yore — replaced by titles like “C.E.O.,” “C.O.O.” and “Chief Marketing Officer” to look better on a résumé. They read each other’s cover letters and tell each other to “send me your résumé, I’ll pass it along,’” said Oladunni Ogundipe, a Columbia senior. They are also in the midst of a robust debate about transgender inclusion.
At Theta at Columbia, “sisterhood events” — monthly camaraderie-building gatherings that are typical of sororities — take the form of presidential debate watching parties and a recent alumni networking brunch. There is no “pomping” — a ritual that involves weaving tissue paper to create elaborate floats and displays. But there are mandatory workshops on sexual consent and bystander intervention.
Last year, as Columbia erupted in debate over Emma Sulkowicz — the young woman who carried a mattress around campus to protest the university’s handling of her sexual assault complaint — members of the chapter signed their names to a donated mattress and carried it to a rally in support.
Sororities did in fact begin as feminist organizations – a way for women, in the early days of coeducation, to band together inside hostile institutions. As the historian Diana Turk has chronicled in her book, “Bound by a Mighty Vow: Sisterhood and Women’s Fraternities, 1870-1920,” the first known Greek letter sorority — or “women’s fraternity,” as it was known — was formed in 1870. The early organizations were not overtly political, but their members often were: active in the suffrage movement, determined, as Ms. Turk put it, to prove themselves intellectual equals to men.
It was later, in the early 1900s, that the social aspect (parties, mixers) and outwardly exclusionary policies of these groups began to make it on the books, said Ms. Turk — a result of education access expanding beyond the white upper class (and, thus, a need to keep those other women out). These policies would give rise to the first African-American and Jewish sororities — founded at Howard University and Barnard — which remain vibrant today.
But among the traditionally white groups, residuals of that history, and modern twists to it, remain: As recently as three years ago, two black women were denied sorority entry at the University of Alabama; at my alma mater, a recruitment email was recently leaked, containing a PowerPoint of 25 different shades of turquoise and the nine that members were allowed to wear (yes to “bezique,” no to “aqueduct”). Tales of binge drinking, bullying, hazing … the list goes on.
Even at progressive campuses, tradition remains: fines for missing meetings; elaborate rituals; bans on serving alcohol at parties — putting fraternities in control of social life. And, of course, the barrier to entry: the class issues, the cost; being chosen, or cut, based on no formal criteria.
The setup of Panhellenic sororities is complicated, but it’s not unlike Ms. Flanagan’s analogy — involving multiple governing bodies, bylaws and constitutions that sometimes haven’t been updated in a century. So while Columbia women can, for instance, individually reach out in support of Ms. Bhattacharya, who wrote about deactivating, they will also tell her they’ve been advised not to share the article on Facebook. The women of Brown may decide, as part of a student vote, to open up its system to transgender women, but the national chapters of the sororities could institute their own policies at any point. These groups can work to diversify their membership — and in many cases, they have — but most are still governed by a majority of white women more than twice their age.
For generations past, perhaps the only way to reconcile that gap would have been to reject the system. To opt out. “To us, it just seemed like one more way of the white male establishment consolidating its power, and we were having none of it,” said Ms. Houser, the Yale graduate.
Yet nearly every American president has been involved in Greek life. Fraternity alumni make up a large chunk of Fortune 500 C.E.O.s. Tales of frat-house-startups-turned-Silicon-Valley-successes (think Snapchat, Facebook, Instagram), as well as secret Wall Street handshakes, are simply par for the course.
Other groups have said they’ve removed portions of their rituals — say, a reading from the New Testament — in an effort to be more inclusive. When, at one sorority, an invite to a “crush event” indicated that members needed to bring a male date, members pushed back — and the policy was changed to allow a date of any gender (or no gender, or date, at all).
When the women of Columbia’s Theta chapter decided to decorate that mattress, standing front and center at a rally on campus, they made the conscious choice to use the sorority’s motto — “Leading Women” — rather than their Greek letters, so as not to cause a stir within their national office.
