Mr. Trump is so negatively viewed, polls suggest, that he could turn otherwise safe Republican states, usually political afterthoughts because of their strong conservative tilt, into tight contests. In Utah, his deep unpopularity with Mormon voters suggests that a state that has gone Republican every election for a half-century could wind up in play. Republicans there pointed to a much-discussed Deseret News poll last month, showing Mrs. Clinton with a narrow lead over Mr. Trump, to argue that the state would be difficult for him.
Horse-race polls this early are poor predictors of election results, and candidates have turned around public opinion before. And the country’s politics have become so sharply polarized that no major-party contender is likely to come near the 49-state defeats suffered by Democrats in 1972 and 1984.
But without an extraordinary reversal — or the total collapse of whoever becomes his general-election opponent — Mr. Trump could be hard-pressed to win more than 200 of the 270 electoral votes required to win.
Stan Greenberg, the longtime Democratic pollster, released a survey Friday summing up Mr. Trump’s vulnerabilities under the headline, “Earthquake?” Mr. Trump trails Mrs. Clinton by 23 points among women in Mr. Greenberg’s poll, suggesting the possibility of a gender gap of historic proportions. (The Times survey last month had Mrs. Clinton leading by 20 points among women.) The largest gender gap in the last 36 years was Bob Dole’s 11-point loss among women against Bill Clinton in 1996.
Nationally, Mrs. Clinton leads Mr. Trump by about 10 percentage points in most head-to-head polls — the widest margin at this point in a presidential campaign in 16 years.
If Mrs. Clinton somehow loses the Democratic race — unlikely given her delegate advantage — Mr. Trump could fare even worse in a general election against Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who has higher margins than Mrs. Clinton in head-to-head polling against Mr. Trump in most swing states.
Even among the working-class whites, who have been the foundation of his success in the Republican primaries, Mr. Trump would enter the general election with substantial difficulties. He is viewed unfavorably by a majority of whites without college degrees, according to an ABC News/Washington Post poll early last month.
It is possible that Mr. Trump could improve his standing with blue-collar voters who are crucial in Rust Belt states like Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, where polls now show him faring worse than Mr. Romney did in 2012. But doing so would not be cost-free.
This losing trade-off has been largely overlooked because of Mr. Trump’s success so far and the failure of more affluent Republican primary voters to unite behind any of his rivals.
But the general-election universe is vastly larger and more diverse than the Republican primary electorate. There are likely to be around 30 million votes in this year’s Republican primary once all 56 states and territories finish voting in June. In the 2012 contest between Mr. Obama and Mr. Romney, about 129 million voters cast ballots.
Mr. Trump’s hopes rest largely on his energizing a coalition of the disaffected: millions of people who have not voted in recent elections but who have found in Mr. Trump someone giving voice to their anger. High primary turnouts have fed speculation that Mr. Trump could lure back the so-called missing white voters — populist-minded Americans thought to have skipped the 2012 presidential election, and who, depending on their numbers, offer a glimmer of hope for many conservatives in an era of unfavorable demographic shifts.
But Mr. Trump cannot count on such a surge. The actual number of missing white voters is quite low in the closely contested states, where turnout remained high or even rose in 2012.
Moreover, there is scant evidence that white voters who did stay home would be inclined to support Mr. Trump. In fact, they were far younger and much more likely to be registered Democrats than the white voters who did turn out, according to the census and data from L2, a nonpartisan voter file vendor.