JERUSALEM — The Israeli military said on Monday that it had discovered and “neutralized” a tunnel running from the Gaza Strip into Israeli territory for the first time since a cease-fire ended 50 days of fighting in the Palestinian coastal territory in the summer of 2014.
Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, a spokesman for the Israeli military, refused to elaborate on the technological means but said that the incomplete tunnel that was recently discovered did not have an exit coming up to the surface, suggesting that it was detected deep underground.
Colonel Lerner said that the tunnel was new, had been built by Hamas, the Islamic militant group that controls Gaza, and could have been used for terrorist attacks against Israeli border communities.
He added that it was 100 to 130 feet underground, equipped with electricity, communications lines and a rail line to allow its builders to clear rubble. Its discovery, he said, resulted from technology, intelligence, engineering and troops on the ground.
Israeli forces “neutralized the tunnel in Israeli territory, decommissioning it and rendering it unusable,” he said.
Israel said it had destroyed 32 tunnels by the end of the 2014 war, which left more than 2,100 Palestinians and 70 Israelis dead. Those tunnels included nearly a dozen that ran beneath its border, some of which were used to carry out ambushes against Israeli forces. Locating them was a painstaking process that relied on finding entry and exit points.
Israel’s decision to send ground forces into Gaza during the 2014 conflict came after 13 Hamas gunmen were intercepted as they emerged from the mouth of a tunnel in Israeli territory about a mile away from Sufa, a small kibbutz near the border with southern Gaza.
Military officials did not provide the exact location of this latest tunnel but said that it was found close to the border fence and ran from southern Gaza into southern Israel.
Israeli officials have said in recent months that Hamas has most likely rebuilt much of the tunnel network that was damaged during the war. The officials also said Hamas was trying to restock its rocket supplies.
The threat of the tunnels continues to sow fear in Israeli communities along the border. Some residents have reported hearing the sounds of digging underground. About a dozen Palestinians have been killed in recent months, Israeli officials have said, after several tunnels collapsed.
Israeli officials have accused Hamas of spending millions of dollars to rebuild the tunnels, diverting building materials and money from reconstructing Gaza after the devastation caused by the 50-day war.
Since 2008, Israel has carried out three offensives against Gaza, all after rocket attacks by militants. Although the border has remained relatively quiet recently, many Israelis and Palestinians consider the next round of violence to be only a matter of time.
“Hamas is in operational distress; but for some reason it’s actually here in Israel that a panic about war has commenced,” Alex Fishman, a military affairs analyst, wrote in Sunday’s edition of the Yediot Aharonot newspaper.
“It is true that while the Palestinian media have been reporting for several days about the I.D.F.’s use of heavy equipment within Palestinian territory in the southern Gaza Strip, not a single shot has been fired in that sector,” he added, referring to the Israeli military.
Also on Monday, Israeli military prosecutors filed a manslaughter charge against a soldier who fatally shot a Palestinian assailant in the West Bank city of Hebron last month as he lay on the ground, wounded and subdued. The military court lifted an order banning the publication of the name of the soldier, Sgt. Elor Azaria, from Ramle, in central Israel, and said his trial in a military court would begin on May 9.