Eight months after a documentary about the diver Greg Louganis inspired an online petition asking that he be belatedly featured on the cover of a Wheaties box, the cereal’s maker is announcing that it will do just that.
The image of Louganis, 56, a four-time Olympic gold medalist, will begin appearing on Wheaties boxes next month; the hurdler Edwin Moses and the swimmer Janet Evans, two other previously overlooked Olympic champions, will appear on boxes separately, too. General Mills, the maker of Wheaties, planned to unveil the boxes Tuesday, calling it the legends series.
The boxes will be in stores from May through at least the summer. All three athletes will be paid to let Wheaties use their names and images.
Much of the focus has been on Louganis, who will be depicted dramatically in a dive known as an inward pike, his body folded nearly in half as his hands touch his toes.
The campaign to put him on the Wheaties box, a symbol of sports achievement for 80 years, began last August with the release of a documentary, “Back on Board: Greg Louganis,” on HBO. The sympathetic portrayal of Louganis prompted Julie Sondgerath, an information technology manager in Chicago, to start a petition on Change.org.
“From the moment I hit send on the petition, I knew this was possible,” she said. A month later, she presented a box of 41,000 printed petitions to General Mills officials in Minneapolis. “Having an authentic conversation with them was helpful and was potentially a catalyst to genuinely think about it,” she said.
Will Sweeney, a writer and producer of “Back on Board,” said the film and petition had clearly provided the impetus for Louganis’s Wheaties box.
“Is there any other way to interpret it?” he said.
But two General Mills marketing executives played down the impact of the petition and focused Monday on how Louganis, Evans and Moses all deserved to be on the box. They would not discuss the deliberations of the company’s Wheaties selection committee or whether fans of Moses and Evans had also lobbied.
“We look at a wide array of what they accomplished on the field of play and what they do in their communities,” he added.
Louganis has said that homophobia was most likely the reason that Wheaties did not put him on its box after the 1984 and 1988 Summer Olympics.  In his autobiography the next year, he revealed that he had tested positive for H.I.V. before the 1988 Summer Games. Out of fear, Louganis did not tell the doctor about his condition after he bloodied his head on the springboard during the Games.
Louganis said that he had no hard feelings about General Mills from the 1980s and praised its diversity program and its support of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.
“The times have changed so drastically and so fast,” he said during a telephone conversation last week. “When I came out to my mom, she feared I’d always be a second-class citizen and never have a chance to be married. But Johnny and I are married, and we’re making a life together.” Louganis married Johnny Chaillot in 2013.
Louganis said he did not mind that his box would be one of a series with other Olympians.
Getting on the Wheaties box can seem as much an achievement as the athletic prowess that leads to it.
Many great athletes have been ignored, including Olympic gold medalists, most valuable players and Hall of Famers.
Others received the honor after controversies around them had cooled. Muhammad Ali’s embrace of the Nation of Islam and his refusal to be inducted into the United States Army in the 1960s probably ended any chance of his being on a Wheaties box during his boxing career. But he got his box in 1999, well after his boxing career had ended — and as his status swelled as an inspirational world figure hobbled by Parkinson’s disease.
Jim Thorpe, who won the decathlon and the pentathlon at the 1912 Summer Olympics, got a Wheaties box in 2001. But that was 18 years after the medals that had been revoked for his being a professional were reinstated. Thorpe died in 1953.
And the news that he would be on the cover of a Wheaties box — however belatedly — was followed last week by the nomination of “Back on Board” for a Sports Emmy Award for outstanding long sports documentary.
