“One tough Brooklyn priest” was the subject of the day’s Mass, the Rev. Brian Jordan said, as he started his homily in the chapel of St. Francis College in Downtown Brooklyn, where he is the chaplain.
While the term could also be applied to Father Jordan himself, the tough Brooklyn priest being honored on a recent weekday was the Rev. William B. Farrell, who was the pastor of a Williamsburg church a century ago when his battle with New York City officials over reforming the city’s welfare system led to hearings, and headlines, that exposed a widespread pattern of wiretapping by the New York Police Department dating back to at least 1895.
He told congregants about Father Farrell’s public war with city leaders at a time when they were seeking to diminish Catholic Charities’ role in caring for widows and orphans, and how it led to a Police Department wiretapping scandal.
After Father Farrell bristled publicly at the city’s actions, he was questioned by city officials at a government hearing and charged with libel. The Police Department had a sergeant tap the priest’s phones and testify against him. The sergeant, a Catholic, tried to kill himself after testifying.
And so the burning issue of social service reform — it would ultimately result in the city’s taking over orphan care from private agencies, and the beginnings of the modern foster home system — helped lead to statewide judicial reform, and the requirement of a court order to wiretap phones.
But at the time, a tough stance by a local pastor did not sit well with city officials, Father Jordan said.
“They said, ‘Who is this rebellious priest, this feisty priest?’” said Father Jordan, who became curious about Father Farrell last summer when he visited SS. Peter and Paul parish in Williamsburg, to retrieve a copy of the marriage certificate for his maternal grandparents, Paul Murphy and Catherine Farrell. They were married there in 1915, and the marriage document listed the officiating priest as the church pastor, W. B. Farrell.
With some help from the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn’s archive, Father Jordan found that Father Farrell saw a threat when city and state officials started examining the use of public funds by Christian charity groups to run programs for orphans and widows.
Father Farrell said the city’s investigations were an effort to discredit Catholic oversight of charities. He called city officials corrupt, blasted the investigations and hearings as anti-Catholic, and criticized the city’s attempt to put children into “a baby-farming system” of foster care.
In 1916, Father Farrell began writing a series of scathing screeds against city leaders in pamphlets distributed at Sunday Mass “in every parish in the city,” Father Jordan said.
City officials fired back with their own pamphlets and subpoenaed Father Farrell to be questioned by a state commission investigating public funding for private charity groups.
In March 1916, the Police Department conducted wiretaps to eavesdrop on Father Farrell and other Catholic leaders, according to various news accounts from those days. The authorities claimed that Father Farrell called a witness set to testify in the hearings, and offered him money to leave town. In the end, the libel and other charges against Father Farrell were dropped after the wiretap testimony proved flawed.
Sgt. John Kennel, who conducted the wiretaps by listening in and writing out the conversations in longhand, admitted that he transcribed them imperfectly. He was also vilified by fellow Catholic officers for obeying the order to tap a priest’s phone in the first place.
Sergeant Kennel was so distraught that he shot himself in the chest with his service revolver inside the office at 50 Church Street, where he had tapped the calls.
The officials who ordered the tapping were indicted, but charges were later dropped.
Father Jordan, a Franciscan friar, grew up in Cypress Hills, Brooklyn, where, he said, “you became either a policeman, priest or perpetrator.” After the terrorist attack on Sept. 11, 2001, he spent months at ground zero and became the unofficial guardian of the large, cross-shaped steel beam salvaged from the ruins.
He is also known as the Hard Hat Priest, for his ministry to construction workers, and on Thursday he celebrated an annual Mass for their fallen at St. Patrick’s Cathedral in Manhattan.
Father Jordan was fascinated to find that Father Farrell intervened as a peacemaker when union employees became engaged in violent labor riots at the American Sugar Company plant, blocks from his Williamsburg church.
Father Jordan noted that the case gave a historical perspective to contemporary controversies arising from the Police Department’s surveillance of political protesters and Muslim New Yorkers. The case resulted in further inquiries into the department’s wiretapping squad and, ultimately, to a state law requiring court orders for wiretaps.
As part of the inquiries, New York Telephone Company admitted that police wiretapping in the city dated back to at least 1895, providing a list of about 350 Police Department wiretaps over a two-year period. Phone company officials said that all the company required in order to agree to tap a phone line was a signed request from the police commissioner.
Thomas Reppetto, an author and expert on police history, said the department had been using wiretaps “since the device was invented” to carry them out, and that wiretaps had been especially effective over the decades in fighting organized crime.
Bo Dietl, a former New York City detective who now owns a private investigation firm, said modern-day police wiretapping was relatively rare, partly because it is “a big deal” to gather enough evidence to justify a court order.
At the Mass for Father Farrell, Father Jordan finished his story of the tough priest, who died of a heart attack in 1930.
