It is not surprising that the victim of a brutal beating by a group of men is now the main witness against them in their trial.
But in this case, the supposed victim was an inmate at the Rikers Island jail complex who, nearly two years before his assault at the hands of correction officers, committed his own act of violence.
In September 2010, Jahmal Lightfoot ran up behind a woman on a sidewalk in the Morris Park neighborhood of the Bronx, according to court records.  As she fell to the ground holding her purse, he yanked it from her hands and ran down the street, she said.
“You were waiting for an unsuspecting victim,” Renee Hill, a defense lawyer, said during her recent cross-examination of Mr. Lightfoot in State Supreme Court in the Bronx.
Mr. Lightfoot, 31, is the star witness in the criminal trial of nine current and former correction officers who have been charged in connection with what Bronx prosecutors describe as an orchestrated beating of Mr. Lightfoot to teach him a lesson, and a subsequent effort to cover up their actions.
But now it is Mr. Lightfoot who has come under scrutiny in the courtroom as defense lawyers have sought to undermine his credibility — and likability — with the judge and jury. They have depicted him as a career criminal who swung a weapon at the officers during a search, was injured while being restrained and now hopes to cash in with a pending lawsuit against the city.
The case highlights the risks of relying on witnesses with checkered pasts, and points to the hurdles ahead for prosecutors and others trying to change what many have portrayed as a culture of violence and abuse at Rikers and in the New York State prison system. By their nature, investigations of brutality at prisons — whether among inmates, or between inmates and correction officers — have a limited pool of witnesses to draw from.
While there is no doubt that Mr. Lightfoot had been injured — medical records showed fractures on both his eye sockets — the beating took place inside a cell that did not have a camera and was covered by a sheet. Mr. Lightfoot has repeatedly denied that he had a weapon or that he had failed to comply with orders from the officers.
The most serious charge against the officers is attempted gang assault in the first degree, which carries a sentence of up to 15 years in prison. Other charges include attempted assault, tampering with physical evidence, falsifying business records and official misconduct.
Prosecutors, defense lawyers and a lawyer for Mr. Lightfoot have all declined to comment on the case. They have cited a gag order that was issued at the request of one defense lawyer by Justice Steven Barrett, who is presiding over the trial. Mr. Lightfoot has also declined to comment.
During jury selection in March, Lawrence Piergrossi, a prosecutor, asked potential jurors if an inmate could be a victim of a crime. Because the crime happened in a jail, he told them, he would have to call inmates as witnesses. “Can you give them a fair shot and listen to what they have to say?” he asked. The potential jurors had answered yes.
But Murray Richman, a longtime defense lawyer who has no relation to Daniel Richman, said that in his experience, jurors tended to be more skeptical of witnesses with a long criminal history. Mr. Richman, who is a mentor to Ms. Hill, a lawyer for one of the correction officers, said jurors might question Mr. Lightfoot’s motive for testifying.
Mr. Lightfoot has acknowledged in court that he once ran with the Bloods street gang and had numerous arrests for possession of marijuana and crack cocaine, criminal trespass and other minor offenses before he snatched the woman’s purse.
Ms. Hill, in her cross-examination of Mr. Lightfoot, pointed out that he singled out a woman in her early 40s who was much smaller than him. The woman, who was wearing flip flops, ran after Mr. Lightfoot, but he got away.
He was caught a month later and sent to Rikers to await his trial. After pleading guilty to robbery, he was sentenced to four years in prison and released on parole in 2014. He said he has a 7-month-old daughter whom he takes care of while looking for work in construction.
Defense lawyers have hammered Mr. Lightfoot for his infractions at Rikers and his involvement with the Bloods, and have also raised questions about his mental state while in jail. In court this week, Mr. Lightfoot admitted that he had recently been arrested and issued tickets for loitering and disorderly conduct.
At one point, when the jury was not in the courtroom, Justice Barrett told defense lawyers that low-level, noncriminal charges were not important factors in evaluating Mr. Lightfoot’s credibility or character. “You can’t simply throw mud and see if it sticks,” he said.
Mr. Lightfoot’s mother, Margaret Burton, said she was furious that her son’s criminal history had become a subject in a case where he was the victim. “They beat on him, and then they bring up all this mess because they have nothing else to work with,” Ms. Burton said.
But Louis C. La Pietra, a defense lawyer who has represented police officers in criminal and disciplinary proceedings, said it was unavoidable. “In a case like this, the credibility of a witness is everything because it comes down to the proverbial your word or mine,” he said.
And Mr. La Pietra believes the correction officers have the advantage.
