The Democratic debate on Thursday night played out as a magnified version of the primary race. The personal clashes between Hillary Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont were harsher. Their policy differences gaped wider. And the stakes, for both candidates, were as high as they have ever been.
The debate unfolded in an atmosphere of obvious tension, as the candidates’ policy disputes and personal resentments flared and the raucous New York crowd goaded them on.
Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders displayed new flashes of impatience and even contempt toward each other. They raised their voices early and often, talking over and past each other.
Mr. Sanders, especially, turned sarcastic. When Mrs. Clinton boasted of having stood up to Wall Street banks, he noted that the banks subsequently paid her handsomely for speaking engagements. “They must have been very, very upset by what you did,” he said mockingly.
Both candidates say they are committed to party unity in a general election, but they are not doing anything to make an eventual healing easier.
Perhaps the most striking exchange of the night came on the issue of Israel, when Mr. Sanders repeatedly challenged Mrs. Clinton to be more critical of Israel’s past military actions in Gaza and insistently argued that the United States must take a more “evenhanded” approach to Israel and the Palestinians.
The last time New York had a competitive Democratic primary, in 1992, this kind of message might have been suicidal. Jewish voters play an influential role in New York primaries, and top-to-bottom support for Israel has long been considered essential here. Mrs. Clinton took such a conventional position on Thursday night, declining to deliver any specific critique of Israel’s conduct.
Mrs. Clinton’s position is probably the safer one. But Democrats — including many Jewish Democrats — have moved left on Middle East policy in recent years. And with Mr. Sanders’s core admirers, his unapologetic opposition may draw an enthusiastic response.
Even this late in the race, Mrs. Clinton has not figured out how to address Mr. Sanders’s most familiar lines of attack — and the moderators’ most predictable angles of scrutiny.
On the minimum wage, Mrs. Clinton walked an exceedingly careful line, saying that, as president, she would sign a federal law setting a $15 threshold, even though she has endorsed a lower wage level on the campaign trail.
Mrs. Clinton used Mr. Sanders’s record on the Second Amendment forcefully against him, detailing his support for giving gun makers immunity from lawsuits and highlighting his sometimes-friendly relationship with the National Rifle Association in Vermont.
For Mr. Sanders, the subject is a political cul-de-sac. He sought to explain his gun liability vote as a measure to protect rural firearms merchants. But even that position places him at odds with Mrs. Clinton, and with the majority of New York Democrats who support the most restrictive forms of gun control.
The overarching split between the candidates was — and has long been — about their theories of political action. Mr. Sanders is promising a root-and-branch overhaul of the American political system. Mrs. Clinton is promising a dogged pursuit of mainstream liberal goals.
This philosophical rift among the Democrats has rarely been stated more clearly.