This article is part of our spring gallery guide.
Not long ago New York’s art galleries followed a certain geographic logic: Chelsea was for the big players, downtown was for the young guns, and uptown was a place for galleries of a more genteel, more historically minded sort. But with rents in High Line-inflamed Chelsea approaching tropospheric heights, and with even the Lower East Side beyond the reach of many, dealers are rediscovering the leafy appeal of New York’s oldest art district. Recently a clutch of fledgling, experimental spaces has opened on the Upper East Side — some have even traversed the cordon sanitaire of Lexington Avenue — while several newly arrived European dealers have foregone the power play of a Chelsea address for a 10021 ZIP code. Two of New York’s major operators, Barbara Gladstone and Friedrich Petzel, have also established new uptown branches of greater architectural interest than Chelsea’s converted garages.
All of which has conspired to remake the Upper East Side, long seen as dowdy, into the most diverse of all of New York’s gallery neighborhoods. Best of all: whereas at the end of a downtown or Brooklyn tour you may have to endure the indignities of cocktail hipsterdom, up here you can always swan into the Surrey or the Carlyle and get a proper martini.
This tour omits the many galleries along 57th Street, which deserve a visit of their own. And later this year the art world continues its northern campaign, with three significant galleries — Elizabeth Dee (aiming for later this spring), Broadway 1602 (on May 6) and Gavin Brown’s Enterprise (opening date still to be announced) — set to open in Harlem. Here are a few of the most interesting shows open now.
Galerie Buchholz The most significant opening uptown of the last 12 months is this Met-adjacent outpost (17 East 82nd Street) of one of Germany’s best galleries, currently hosting a brainy banger of a show by Lucy McKenzie. The Scottish artist, based in Brussels, revives a long tradition of trompe-l’oeil painting through exacting depictions of bureaucratic safety regulations on billboards, and the trickery continues in nonfunctional painted “furniture” — a bed, a vanity, a grand desk — whose faux-marble surfaces seem to support illusory objects. Ms. McKenzie enrolled at Brussels’s old-school École Van Der Kelen to master these decorative skills, and her art is a marvel of both conceptual sophistication and painterly execution. The show is only on view through Saturday; next up is the wily Welsh conceptualist Cerith Wyn Evans.
Ubu Hard by the Queensboro Bridge (and across from a tragically shuttered, Guastavino-tiled Food Emporium) is this quietly estimable two-decades-old gallery, which concentrates on Dada and Surrealist works on paper. Its current exhibition features 30 drawings by Hans Bellmer, an influential but still underappreciated Surrealist; if you know him, it’s surely for his photographs of sutured doll parts. The drawings — whose whispering, densely packed lines cohere into ectoplasmic spills or brittle, invertebrate humanoids — have all the psychological disquiet of Bellmer’s photos, but their delicacy rewards the kind of up-close viewing that a small gallery like this permits.
Czech Center/Bohemian National Hall Of the many national cultural institutes uptown, this may be the most unsung one, anchored at 321 East 73rd Street with a year-round contemporary art agenda as well as film, dance and music programs. (And there’s a bar on the roof!) “BEGO,” the third in an interlocking series of exhibitions, includes both Czech artists and others who gravitate to spare, low-finish sculpture and video. Best in show is the young Canadian artist Ben Schumacher, whose provisional, somehow sorrowing arrangement of prefab metal parts recalls his training as an architect.
This early sculpture, preceding Mr. Morris’s better-known hangings and heaps of felt, is a rare thing to see, though it’s so serene that it may be hard to discern what all the fuss was about.
The Artist’s Institute This innovative nonprofit devotes “seasons” to a single artist — recent participants have included Pierre Huyghe, Carolee Schneemann and Ms. McKenzie — that can include any variety of exhibitions, talks and publications. For five years they made do on tumbledown Eldridge Street, but they’ve now migrated to 132 East 65th Street. The current show has been organized by the critic and occasional artist Hilton Als, and like many Artist’s Institute programs it’s a plural affair. Mr. Als evokes the lives and memories of transgender performers not only through his own screen projections, but through lent photographs by Richard Avedon and Diane Arbus.
Dominique Lévy The Swiss powerhouse is the bluest of blue-chip dealers, but since opening her new gallery in 2012 Ms. Lévy has discreetly made room for young artists too. On the top floor of this sturdy townhouse on Madison at East 73rd Street (which she shares with another dealer, the puckish Frenchman Emmanuel Perrotin) is an exhibition by the young German artist Hans-Christian Lotz. It’s a nature versus culture duel, in which wall-mounted vitrines stuffed with wood shavings face off with a low-fi computer hookup, which the artist has programmed to scrape headlines and transcripts from National Public Radio. A ponderous handout essay — yes, philosophy hipsters, “object-oriented ontology” has made it to Madison Avenue — contrasts sharply with the straight talk of the NPR feed: airstrikes, hurricanes, protest, disease, Trump.
Meyohas The young artist Sarah Meyohas has brought the venerable tradition of the apartment gallery up to Carnegie Hill, and created a project space in her Philip Johnson condo at 181 East 90th Street. For “Future Remnants of a Missing Word,” two recent grads from Yale’s MFA program — Constanza Alarcón Tennen of Chile and Shahrzad Changalvaee of Iran — have strung Ms. Meyohas’s living room with black netting, and the art underneath mines the upheavals of both their native countries in the 1970s, before they were born. One video, an alternate history of music and resistance, muses that a Chilean protest singer’s voice could seep into the ground, waft through the earth, and erupt through a Persian volcano.
Blum & Poe Two years ago these Los Angeles machers opened a New York outpost at 19 East 66th Street, which has hosted several important shows of postwar Japanese art. (They’ve also got a spot in Tokyo.) Lately Blum & Poe has taken a shine to Korea, and the exhibition “Dansaekhwa and Minimalism” presents the hushed, spectral paintings of Lee Ufan, Park Seo-bo and others alongside similarly terse art by Agnes Martin and Robert Ryman. It’s not a very scholarly exercise — the galleries are curated by color, with white works downstairs and black ones above — but the show offers a welcome reintroduction to Korea’s own minimal art, above all the thickly striped monochromes of Ha Chonghyun.
Acquavella Galleries “Jean Dubuffet: Anticultural Positions,” on display at 18 East 79th Street, is a show devoted to the early work of the French artist who coined the term “art brut,” is the sort of in-depth, big-ticket exhibition that only a few galleries can pull off, and even fewer are inclined to mount. In the years after World War II, before turning to his graffiti-like “hourloupes,” Dubuffet produced anxious, bracing paintings of demented personages, which he further defiled by scoring their surfaces and embedding the impastoed pigment with sand and pebbles. Especially important are Dubuffet’s underappreciated early sculptures: men of sorrows crafted from driftwood.
Higher Pictures 980 Madison is the heart of the Gagosian imperium — always worth a check — but the building also houses some fine smaller galleries. This thoughtful photography gallery is showing Aspen Mays, an artist based in Oakland, Calif., whose astral compositions of dots and diamonds are in fact photograms: pictures produced without a camera on light-sensitive paper. Their patterns derive from bandannas — one belonged to Ms. Mays’s great-grandmother, another to Georgia O’Keeffe — whose decorative forms are reproduced via pinpricks in the obscurity of the darkroom.
On 60th Street and Fifth Avenue, standing behind Saint-Gaudens’s gilded statue of General Sherman, are two towering but seemingly fragile orchids, the taller reaching 34 feet. Made of stainless steel, they are by the German sculptor Isa Genzken, who was invited by the Public Art Fund to install these false, beautiful flowers at the entrance to our false, beautiful park. Ms. Genzken titled one of her books “I Love New York, Crazy City,” and her soaring, scale-scrambling blossoms may have you saying the same.
Paris Theater After a gallery trek, the Metropolitan Museum of Art might be the last place you’d want to end up. No walking is required for “The First Monday in May,” a documentary about the Met’s Costume Institute benefit and its hit 2015 show “China: Through the Looking Glass.” Just steps from the Plaza Hotel and Central Park, this cinema is the only single-screen theater in Manhattan. 4 West 58th Street, Manhattan, |||PHONE_NUMBER||| .
