DENVER — Maria Cruz stays away from the tap. So does Monserrat Trejo. And then there is Lucero González — also an immigrant from Mexico — who, on a recent afternoon, shoved a shopping cart across the parking lot at Mi Pueblo Market. Inside: Nothing but water. Ninety-six bottles of it.
“I only drink from the tap when I have no money,” said Ms. González, 45, a petite nurse’s assistant, as she hefted giant pallets of plastic into her sport utility vehicle. She arrived in the United States in 1988, but said she was still unsure whether the nation’s water was healthy.
At a time when water crises in communities like Flint, Mich., and Newark, have eroded confidence in public water systems — particularly those in poor and minority communities — a health outreach initiative in Colorado is trying to dispel the notion that all tap water is harmful. The initiative, mainly aimed at Latino immigrants, delivers the message that Denver’s fluoride-enhanced water is actually healthier than bottled water, which typically lacks the ingredient that can prevent cavities, particularly in children.
The campaign, sponsored primarily by the health insurer Delta Dental of Colorado, began before the lead contamination in Flint and elsewhere spread fear across the country. But the crises have highlighted the obstacles in persuading Latino immigrants that American tap water is usually safe: Images of brown, poisoned water flash on television screens in living rooms and laundries here, reinforcing the preconceptions imported from places where bottled beverages are culturally ingrained.
Ms. Medina, 47, who came to the United States from Mexico in 2003, said that people from her country — as well as from other places where water was not always safe — have been conditioned by heavy marketing from soft-drink companies like Coca-Cola. “It’s not in our culture to drink water,” she said.
In Westwood, a Denver neighborhood that is 71 percent Hispanic, many children are overweight. Seeing a 6-year-old with silver replacement teeth is a common sight. Almost 30 percent of residents live in poverty, and many people are undocumented.
On a recent weekday, about a dozen mothers crowded into a classroom at Barnum Elementary School in Westwood for a dental seminar delivered in Spanish by Ms. Medina.
 She lectured on the pernicious effects of soda and juices — lost days of school, lost days of work and tooth decay in a nation where white teeth are a sign of affluence. And she carted out impressive statistics: Residents of Mexico drink 665 Coca-Colas a year, a higher number than any other country, according to company figures from 2009. They also drink the most bottled wate r, according to the International Bottled Water Association.
Finally, she turned to tap water. “Who drinks from the tap?” Ms. Medina asked. Half the hands went up.
In Colorado, 55 percent of Hispanic children have cavities by age 5, compared with 32 percent of white children, mirroring a national trend.
One study, published in 2011 by JAMA Pediatrics, surveyed 632 parents in the United States and found that Latino and African-American children were exclusively given bottled water three times as often as non-Hispanic white children.
Denver, like many communities, began adding fluoride to its water system in the 1950s, a move the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has hailed as one of the top public health achievements of the 20th century. Fluoride strengthens the teeth of babies in a mother’s womb, hardens the teeth of children and reduces the risk of tooth decay as gums recede in aging adults.
But the water crisis in Flint — where a switch to a new drinking source exposed as many as 8,000 children to unsafe lead levels — has helped uncover pockets of contamination elsewhere. Even in Denver, where the water comes from mountain runoff that the city says is safe, the water company suggests that people in older homes, which often have lead pipes, flush their water each day to avoid contamination.
The problem of lead in water is complex enough that some doctors caution against scaling the Denver program to a national level.
In Denver, a city of shiny new high-rises and fitness-obsessed millennials, Westwood is a swath of paint-peeled homes with pickup trucks in the driveways and thickets of toys in the yards.
People like Ms. González spend $10, $20 or $30 a week on a beverage that generally does not have the recommended amount of fluoride. Others boil their water. And a good number reach for soda or the juices provided by the federal Women, Infants and Children nutrition program.
One of the educators for the Denver campaign, Gloria Sanchéz, 39, grew up in a Texas border town where her family purchased water and then boiled it. When she moved to Denver and became a mother herself, she continued the practice, well into her daughter Kayla’s first year.
