In 1965, the year I first ran the Boston Marathon, there were no women in the field of about 400 participants. On Monday morning, more than 13,000 women will start the 120th Boston Marathon.
The women’s running boom is one of the most revolutionary stories in sports, yet it is underchronicled. Running serves as the foundation for many other sports, and women began running before they poured into tennis, soccer and basketball. They also learned many profound lessons from their successes in running.
The Boston Marathon gender barrier fell 50 years ago, on April 19, 1966. That’s when Roberta Gibb, 23, crossed the finish line in 3 hours 21 minutes 40 seconds — in front of more than two-thirds of the male runners that day. To honor her breakthrough, Boston Marathon organizers have named Gibb, who is known as Bobbi, grand marshal of this year’s race.
Two months before the 1966 marathon, Gibb had written race officials to request an entry form.
Gibb was stunned. Shy and artistic, she had no interest in sports per se, no athletic heroes and no penchant for protest. She knew only that she loved running for hours at a time.
And that she had been handed an unusual opportunity. “It dawned on me that if I could run Boston, I could erase other false beliefs about women’s limitations,” she said.
On marathon day, Gibb disguised herself in a large blue hoodie and hid behind the forsythia bushes near the start line, concerned that the police might arrest any female runner they spotted.
After creeping into the race, she feared that male runners would bulldoze her off the road.
To the contrary, they were pleased to see her. When she told them she was worried that spectators and race security might interfere, the men responded that she shouldn’t worry. That they would take care of her and that she had as much right to run on a public road as they did.
At the finish, Gibb was escorted to a brief but raucous news conference. The news media tried to goad her into saying she was a man-hater, but she refused to take the bait. “I said simply that I loved running, loved men, and believed in men and women doing things together,” she said.
Gibb returned to Boston the next two Aprils, and was the first female finisher both years. Boston didn’t allow women to run officially until 1972, when Long Island’s Nina Kuscsik became the first official women’s champion. It was in 1967 that the marathon’s race director, Jock Semple, body-blocked Kathrine Switzer while the cameras clicked, producing one of running’s most famous, and harrowing, photo sequences.
For the last three years, I have been researching and writing about the pioneers of women’s running, profiling 22 women from the late 1950s to the early ’90s. I call them the first ladies of running. The situations they faced — often laughable, sometimes infuriating, always daunting — today seem hard to believe.
A good example: In the mid-1960s, the Indianapolis board of education ruled that a high school student, Cheryl Pedlow, shouldn’t run anywhere within sight of the boys and their teams. She might prove too great a “distraction” to them.
Fortunately, Pedlow stuck with it, and in 1971 she set a marathon world record — 2:49:40. In mid-February, her daughter Shalane Flanagan qualified for her fourth consecutive United States Olympic team. Shalane’s mother never had a shot at the Olympics; she was too far ahead of her time, as there were no Olympic distance events for women.
Like Butcher, other first ladies of running did many things well. Gibb is an accomplished painter and sculptor who also worked in the lab of the famed M.I.T. neuroscientist Jerome Lettvin. Julia Chase, the first woman to run a road race in the United States, in 1961, received a Ph.D. in zoology, studying bats and chimpanzees in the field. A quarter-century later, she earned a medical degree at 53 and switched to psychiatry.
Switzer turned her attack by Semple into a personal drive to promote women’s running. It was her work with the Avon International Running Circuit that helped persuade the International Olympic Committee to hold the first Olympic marathon for women in 1984. Joan Benoit won that long-awaited race.
The pioneer women’s runners were remarkably diverse — a fact worth celebrating. They included an 88-pound Japanese-American (Miki Gorman), a firebrand American (Mary Decker), a Southern belle (Gayle Barron) and a Norwegian legend (Grete Waitz).
And yet they shared certain core traits. Most ran to affirm themselves and to explore their talents, not to protest rules or regulators. They simply wanted more and better chances to test their limits.
All loved exercise, independence and nature. Long before studies linked fitness to cognitive health, they intuitively understood that running helped them feel and perform better.
Oprah Winfrey set a standard, not for speed but for willpower. In 1994, more or less by happenstance, I ran the 1994 Marine Corps Marathon several yards behind Winfrey. Her effort was among the bravest I have ever witnessed in a marathon. In addition to the endless backslapping from thousands of fellow marathoners, she bore the burden of her personal weight struggles and a nonathletic history. Yet she trudged on. Determined. Oh, so determined.
When we finally reached the last half-mile, with its steep climb to the finish line at the Iwo Jima Memorial, Winfrey actually picked up the pace. She chugged smoothly past other fatigued runners and finished in 4:29:20.
“Life is a lot like a marathon,” she said later. “If you can finish a marathon, you can do anything you want.” Her example and her quotation launched the current and still-expanding boom in women’s running — a movement that was begun by Bobbi Gibb and the other first ladies of running.