Samuel Beckett and Buster Keaton surely possess two of the most photogenic faces of the 20th century, contrasting images of haplessness and stoicism. Beckett’s deeply lined visage, surmounted by a sweep of silver hair, is an emblem of late modernism, a quietly charismatic mask of weary resolve in the face of existential absurdity. Keaton’s smooth brow and melancholy deadpan, customarily shadowed by a porkpie hat, express an ingenious, innocent determination to surmount whatever obstacles the universe imposes.
Mr. Lipman’s title has several connotations. It’s a declaration of modest intentions, for one thing. It also evokes “Not I,” the fevered monologue — delivered by a disembodied mouth — that is numbered among Beckett’s theatrical masterpieces. And there is more than a hint of Beckettian self-reference, since Mr. Lipman’s project, motivated partly by his work as a preservationist, is very much an artifact of the digital age. A charming, earnest, sometimes ungainly mixture of history, criticism and high-minded gossip, “Notfilm” testifies to an almost inexhaustible fascination with the pleasures and paradoxes of cinema.
While “Film” was to be Beckett’s only foray into the medium — and not, it must be said, an entirely successful one — his collaborators were prominent figures in movie history. In addition to Keaton, there was Boris Kaufman, an important cinematographer and the younger brother of the great Soviet director and documentarian Dziga Vertov. Mr. Lipman makes much of that connection, and threads “Notfilm” with lovely clips from Vertov’s films and other silent treasures.
These are accompanied by voice-over narration that is witty and meditative, and that pushes against the constraints of the “making of” documentary template. Mr. Lipman has much to say about the making and transmission of moving images, about the role of the movie camera in modern life and about the philosophical underpinnings of Beckett’s literary and theatrical vision. At times you may wish he had absorbed some of Beckett’s — or Keaton’s — ferocious discipline. Both of them were masters of pared-down precision and elegant understatement. Mr. Lipman’s sensibility, by contrast, is expansive and digressive, attracted to loftiness and sweep.
But that is, in the end, a good thing. The work of Beckett is an invitation to think, and it’s an invitation Mr. Lipman accepts with alacrity. Happily, “Notfilm” does not neglect behind-the-scenes anecdotes. Though many of the participants are no longer living, there are illuminating interviews with Jean Schneider, the widow of the director of “Film,” and with James Karen, a familiar character actor and close friend of Keaton’s who had a role in “Film.” These conversations are supplemented with other reminiscences and ruminations, by archival stills and clips, and by extraordinary audio recordings of script readings.
Beckett was fascinated and troubled by the mechanical reproduction, by the ways various recording machines both assuage and intensify the alienation of modern life. Extracts from Keaton’s work, in particular “The Cameraman,” suggest that he had similar interests, though he was always more concerned with technique than theory, and did not think much of Beckett or “Film.” All the same, Keaton’s performance in it is full of pathos and professionalism, as is “Notfilm,” which in exploring the intersection between the Beckettian and the Keatonesque finds a hitherto uncharted dimension of human and cinematic experience.
“Notfilm” is not rated. Running time: 2 hours 8 minutes.