Washington — IS it really possible that Alexander Hamilton, of all people, is about to relegate a woman to the back of the $10 bill, just 10 months after the Treasury Department promised to feature a woman on the new version of the note?
With Hamilton, a philandering liar who was the first secretary of the Treasury, having a star turn on Broadway, his successor Jacob J. Lew has apparently decided to keep him on the front of the bill. According to reports, Secretary Lew will place a woman (or perhaps several women) on the back.
It’s yet another “wait your turn” moment for American women. When formerly enslaved men got the right to vote in 1870, women demanding their own suffrage were told to wait; their turn would come. It took a half-century, and a heroic struggle, before they achieved the vote in 1920.
The updated $10 bill, scheduled to enter circulation in 2020, was supposed to celebrate the centennial of that achievement. Now it will be more like a footnote. That is more than a broken promise; it’s a blatant and insulting statement of women’s second-class status.
After the decision to change the bill was announced last June, newly minted Hamilton supporters emerged in force, insisting that they didn’t object to having a woman on the currency but just didn’t want to see their man replaced. Put a woman on the new $20, they argued — get rid of that bully Andrew Jackson!
Fine. I’ll be happy to see a woman on that bill, too, when it comes off the printing press — in 2030, if we’re lucky. But if we wait until then, another cohort of girls will grow up with the clear message that they belong in back.
It’s curious that Alexander Hamilton, who so aspired to join the establishment, is arousing such a passionate defense in these populist times. All he ever wanted was to be “in.” And he found the perfect way — through his wife. He joined two of the most revered families of Dutch New York when he wed Elizabeth Schuyler, whose mother was a Van Rensselaer.
And it was Elizabeth who saved Hamilton’s political career after he admitted to his two-year affair with Maria Reynolds. Reynolds’s husband had been blackmailing Hamilton to keep the affair secret. When word got out that the Treasury secretary was paying hush money, his political opponents accused him of covering up corrupt financial dealings. In Hamilton’s rebuttal, he sheepishly admitted (“this confession is not made without a blush”) that the blackmail was of a personal nature. Elizabeth stood behind him, as have so many political wives since, vouching for his character. Without her, he wouldn’t have survived politically.
But Hamilton’s infidelity pales in comparison to his other great sin: leaving his wife and seven surviving children penniless. He knew what he was risking by going into that duel with Aaron Burr. He knew that if he died, he was leaving his family with nothing. He knew that his daughter Angelica had lost her mind as a result of her brother Philip’s death in a duel, and that Elizabeth would have to care for her forever. Yet he dueled anyway, and was killed. This is the money manager people want to keep front and center as the champion of American finance?
Hamilton’s farewell letter to his wife said that if he told her in advance what he was about to do, it would “unman” him. But what about her?
After Hamilton’s death, Elizabeth’s friends tried to raise money to support her, even as she toiled for the rest of her life to burnish her husband’s reputation, including buying up reprints of his confession of his affair with Maria Reynolds (unscrupulous publishers printed more copies just so she would buy them). At the same time, Elizabeth continued to serve her community, even in her poverty, helping establish an orphanage that in its modern incarnation still benefits the children of New York as the welfare organization Graham Windham.
If any Hamilton should be on the $10, my vote is for Elizabeth. But if the (male) powers that be insist on honoring Alexander, put him on the back of the bill. Let a woman take her proper place — front and center.