BRASÍLIA — The silver-haired senator from Brazil’s western frontier was still in his pajamas when federal police agents banged on the door of his suite at the Royal Tulip, the futuristic luxury hotel that serves as a bastion for much of Brazil’s political elite. It was 6 a.m.
The agents were armed with a secret recording that sounded like the plot for a Hollywood thriller. The senator, Delcídio do Amaral, had been caught detailing an elaborate plan for an oilman ensnared in Brazil’s spiraling graft scandal to flee the country on a private plane.
Mr. Amaral, 61, was until his arrest in Brasília that morning in late November the governing party’s most powerful leader in the Senate. He quickly sought a plea agreement, but prosecutors let him fester in prison for weeks, making a deal only after the disgraced senator provided one stunning disclosure after another that betrayed his former comrades and brought the government of President Dilma Rousseff ever closer to collapse.
Seeking to turn Mr. Amaral definitively against Ms. Rousseff and their Workers’ Party, investigators toyed with code-naming their operation Catiline, after the renegade patrician whose conspiracies roiled the Roman Senate in the first century B.C.
The senator’s accounts of colossal bribes, back-room oil deals and desperate cover-ups — pieced together from interviews, leaked intercepts of telephone conversations and court filings — offer a rare glimpse into how a leftist party that rose to power vowing to stamp out the corruption of a privileged political elite ended up embracing its predecessors’ practices. His testimony has accelerated Brazil’s political crisis, in which fearful rulers are masterminding power grabs, secretly recording each other and preparing for the day that they, too, might find themselves on the wrong side of an early-morning police raid.
Even the judge who at first was heralded for fearlessly pursuing the powerful now stands accused of breaking the law for releasing evidence from the investigation.
The upheaval began two years ago when prosecutors discovered a scheme inside the national oil company, Petrobras: Contractors had paid nearly $3 billion in bribes to executives who in turn channeled money into the campaigns of parties in Brazil’s governing coalition. Nearly 40 politicians, business moguls and black-market money dealers have been jailed since, and the list is expected to grow, with prosecutors investigating suspects including the leaders of both chambers of Congress.
Scholars say the corruption scandal ranks among the most far-reaching in the developing world, likening it to an earthquake hitting the nation’s privileged elite. It has unspooled alongside crushing economic challenges, as falling commodities prices have sent unemployment soaring to 9.5 percent from 6.8 percent a year ago. In 2015 alone, Brazil lost 1.5 million jobs, a stunning turnabout from the nation’s 7.6 percent economic growth in 2010.
The double whammy of political and economic meltdown has devastated the global ambitions of Latin America’s largest nation at the worst possible time: Brazil is simultaneously grappling with an epidemic of birth defects linked to the mosquito-borne Zika virus and preparing to host the Olympic Games this summer.
That the heart of the scandal is Petrobras, founded in 1953 and surrounded by a mythical nationalist aura, has only multiplied its ripple effect. The company is the centerpiece of a web of state-controlled energy companies and banks that form the cornerstone of Brazil’s economy, projecting power across the nation and abroad. It also financed an array of arts programs including a symphony orchestra, modern dance troupes and painting exhibitions, activities the company has slashed along with its own jobs.
Brazilians often joke about corruption’s deep roots here, tracing it back to when the Portuguese navigator Pedro Álvares Cabral arrived in 1500, bearing gifts as a strategy to lay claim to lands inhabited by indigenous peoples. It was only a quarter-century ago that another president, Fernando Collor, was forced to resign over an influence-peddling scandal, lapses that seem bush league in light of what is happening today.
It was when Senator Amaral began wrecking the government he once loyally supported that many Brazilians began to grasp how pervasive the skulduggery had become.
He testified that Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the former president and founder of the Workers’ Party, had arranged to purchase the silence of a businessman convicted of running a vote-buying scheme.
Before Mr. Amaral’s revelations, Ms. Rousseff had largely managed to stay above the fray, in part by boasting of bolstering judicial independence by allowing prosecutors to pursue graft in her own party. Then the senator claimed that the president had instructed him to sabotage the investigation into Petrobras by persuading a high-ranking judge to seek the release of construction tycoons charged with corruption.
Both Ms. Rousseff and Mr. da Silva say Mr. Amaral is lying. More broadly, Ms. Rousseff said in a recent interview that she had not known about the corruption at Petrobras, despite serving as its chairwoman from 2003 until 2010, when she was elected president, a period when graft was thriving. She also insists that her campaigns got no illegal financing.
Mr. Amaral, assailed by leaders across the spectrum as a fabulist, smiled through interviews like a Cheshire cat. A gifted orator, he intersperses his accounts with sayings from the Pantanal, the vast wetlands where his family owns cattle ranches. Reaching for ways to explain the political maelstrom, he at one point recited a verse from an old Brazilian song.
“I’m just doing my part to help the republic,” the senator said.
In hindsight, Mr. Amaral said, he recognizes that he never should have trusted Bernardo Cerveró, a struggling young actor from Rio de Janeiro.
The senator, who had been director of gas and energy at Petrobras in 2000 and 2001, said he had agreed to meet with Mr. Cerveró, 34, in November because of his friendship with the actor’s father, Nestor, who was sentenced to prison on corruption charges stemming from his own tenure at the oil company. The younger Mr. Cerveró, an actor in an experimental theater troupe, surreptitiously recorded on his phone their conversation at the Royal Tulip, the horseshoe-shaped hotel where the senator lives in Brasília, a short drive from the presidential palace.
Mr. Amaral first assured Mr. Cerveró that he would persuade justices on Brazil’s highest court to release his old friend on house arrest. Then he explained how he would arrange to pay the Cerveró family $1 million plus a stipend of about $13,000 a month, which prosecutors suspect was to ensure the family did not inform on his own dealings at Petrobras.
That was enough for obstruction charges against both Mr. Amaral and André Esteves, the billionaire banker the senator said would finance the journey.
Before his arrest, Mr. Amaral was known in Brasília as a skilled behind-the-scenes negotiator, drawing from his long experience in the oil business.
Schooled by Jesuits and trained as an engineer, he worked in the Netherlands for the energy giant Royal Dutch Shell in the early 1990s. Back home, he climbed the bureaucracy of Brazil’s government-controlled energy industry.
It was while serving in the Energy Ministry in 1993 that he got to know Ms. Rousseff, an obscure functionary in charge of energy policy in the southern state of Rio Grande do Sul.
Mr. Amaral joined the Workers’ Party in 2001 and won a Senate seat the next year, when Mr. da Silva ran successfully for president.
As Brazil grew richer with the discovery of deep-sea oil fields, so did Mr. Amaral.
Some colleagues in the Workers’ Party still recoil at the quinceañera that Mr. Amaral and his wife hosted in 2011 for their daughter’s 15th birthday. Comparing the event, in the western city of Campo Grande, to the balls organized by European nobility, society columnists fawned over every lavish stroke: 240 bottles of Veuve Clicquot Champagne, and a gown made from Givenchy crystals for the birthday girl.
In December, while the senator languished in prison, his old friend from Petrobras, Nestor Cerveró, told investigators that Mr. Amaral had pocketed a $10 million bribe back in 2001, during a deal to buy turbines from Alstom, the French power company.
Mr. Amaral was the first sitting senator to be arrested since Brazil re-established democracy in the 1980s, and his jailing spawned panic and outrage in the Workers’ Party, which Mr. da Silva and other union leaders founded in 1980 in resistance to Brazil’s military dictatorship.
The senator’s readiness to double-cross his colleagues made one thing certain: More secret recordings were about to enrich the saga of Brazil’s political impasse.
Shortly after the arrest at the Royal Tulip, Education Minister Aloizio Mercadante, one of Ms. Rousseff’s top aides, contacted Eduardo Marzagão, a confidant of Mr. Amaral’s, offering to help defray his family’s legal expenses.
He was unaware, of course, that Mr. Marzagão was recording the call; prosecutors now have Mr. Mercadante on their target list, too.
The education minister maintains that he was acting on his own. But other powerful people in the Workers’ Party were also scrambling.
Jaques Wagner, Ms. Rousseff’s former chief of staff, was recorded discussing the situation with Mr. da Silva. He expressed alarm at Mr. Amaral’s testimony that Ms. Rousseff was aware of graft involved in the 2006 acquisition of a Houston oil refinery by Petrobras.
“I never imagined he was such a scrotum,” Mr. Wagner said, using a popular slang term of disgust to describe Mr. Amaral.
For more than a year, Sergio Moro, a crusading judge in southern Brazil, had overseen the Petrobras inquiry. He seized on new anticorruption legislation allowing defendants to reduce their jail sentences in exchange for information, helping prosecutors jail one powerful figure after another.
The labyrinthine inquiry eventually led to Mr. da Silva, universally known as Lula. It was clear that the former president had profited from connections to magnates at the helm of construction companies, which paid him millions of dollars for speeches.
At the country house, police agents found a mug with the logo of Corinthians, Mr. da Silva’s favorite São Paulo soccer club, engraved with the words “to the illustrious President Lula.” The wine cellar had bottles dedicated to the former president. Docked at a wharf in the lake, pedal boats were inscribed with the names of his grandchildren, Pedro and Arthur.
As the investigators encircled him, Mr. da Silva grew increasingly alarmed, according to intercepts of his phone calls obtained in the inquiry. He disparaged the Supreme Federal Tribunal, used vulgar epithets to describe the heads of both houses of Congress and called on his comrades in the Workers’ Party to ratchet up pressure on prosecutors.
In another conversation with a union leader, Mr. da Silva, like the prosecutors chasing him, also drew on ancient history, specifically the emperor accused of starting the Great Fire of Rome in 64 A.D. to rebuild the capital to his liking.
As the pressure mounted, Mr. Amaral’s 255-page plea deal was leaked into the news media in early March, provoking a round of angry denials and desperate moves. Ms. Rousseff nominated Mr. da Silva, her predecessor and patron, to be her chief of staff, which would give him broad legal protections.
For a few hours on March 16, the audacious plan seemed to work.
That same day, Judge Moro released recordings of Mr. da Silva’s phone calls with Ms. Rousseff and an array of other politicians. The calls depicted a former president seeking to salvage his heroic narrative alongside a sitting leader trying to stave off impeachment proceedings she has likened to a slow-motion coup.
Justices on the Supreme Federal Tribunal suspended Mr. da Silva’s nomination. But the soft-spoken judge also faced recriminations, for revealing conversations of the nation’s leader without the authorization of its highest court, leading to accusations that his once-admired inquiry had become a partisan witch hunt.
As the legal case grinds on, more allies are abandoning Ms. Rousseff with an eye on seizing power for themselves. They say she should be impeached for violating fiscal laws by using funds from state banks to cover budget gaps.
Led by Vice President Temer, whose cryptic, closemouthed demeanor has his rivals comparing him to a butler in a horror movie, the centrists anchoring Ms. Rousseff’s coalition broke away last week.
In Congress, lawmakers accused of immense personal corruption are speeding up the impeachment process of the president, who has not been tainted with claims of illicit personal enrichment.
Mr. Amaral, whom the Senate ethics committee is trying to expel from his seat, has not watched this spectacle from the sidelines. On March 13, he revved up a Harley-Davidson motorcycle and joined hundreds of thousands of antigovernment protesters in São Paulo. But he did not remove his helmet, wary of how the angry crowd might react.
Days later, during an interview in the comfortable villa in São Paulo where he is now under house arrest, Mr. Amaral turned to song to try to capture the political upheaval that he helped create.
Specifically, he invoked the 1978 song “Fortune Teller,” by Ivan Lins, about the targeting of dissidents by Brazil’s military dictatorship. Only instead of dissidents tumbling from the perch, today it is leaders of nearly every ideological stripe.
