One morning in early March, Kyli Ledesma, a 20-year-old barista from San Diego, woke up at 3:30 so she could drive to Los Angeles to secure a copy of Cassandra Clare’s newest book, “Lady Midnight,” which would be for sale at Barnes & Noble at the Grove, a high-end mall, when it opened at 9. Yet she was not the first at the door.
Nor was Lydia Whitman, 15, who pulled in at 5 a.m., driven from Agoura Hills, Calif., by her mother to earn the 12th place in line.
Sales of the book were capped at 400, but the urgency propelling Ms. Ledesma, Ms. Whitman and the rest of Ms. Clare’s fans was that the first 100 purchasers would get a seat that evening at a question-and-answer session with Ms. Clare and the actors from “Shadowhunters,” the television show that has been made from her series.
A tour for Ms. Clare has more in common with that of a country music star than an author. She travels on a bus emblazoned with her name, and hundreds, even thousands, of fans may show up at her events.
She writes fantasy for the young-adult market, which means she’s an alternate-world builder, like J. K. Rowling and Stephenie Meyer, who sets her supernatural plots (Shadowhunters are humans, teenagers mostly, who are descended from angels and fight demons and such) in urban settings like New York City and Los Angeles.
Ms. Clare’s characters are tougher and wittier than the lugubrious Bella and Edward of “Twilight” fame, and her female protagonists are smart and sassy. Their appeal, besides the innate tension of teenagers on the verge, is their contemporary milieus and sharp dialogue.
The 300 fans who didn’t score a seat at the talk waited patiently until Ms. Clare began signing books at 8 p.m. She would remain there until after midnight, when the last book wore her signature and she headed back to her tour bus to ice her hand and sleep while the bus drove all night to Salt Lake City, where the same scene would play out in a high school auditorium at an event sponsored by an independent bookstore.
This is the upside of Ms. Clare’s fandom. But there’s a darker, more complicated byproduct of her success. Twitter, Tumblr, Facebook and all manner of fan sites (as well as antifan sites or hate blogs — yes, that’s a thing) are sometimes fractious communities whose members she may engage with daily, and not always happily.
Ms. Clare’s Internet buffeting is intense and rampant. There are numerous blogs devoted to pillorying her. Some of this emotion has its roots in her own start as a fan fiction author; 16 years ago, she wrote some Harry Potter fan fiction called “The Draco Trilogy.” There were charges she lifted passages from the published, though out of print, work of a fantasy author named Pamela Dean without proper acknowledgment.
Fan fiction is a boisterous community of online writers, many of them women, who reimagine existing stories and characters, often in the fantasy realm, and often with erotic overtones: Spock paired with Uhura, say, or Spock with Captain Kirk are popular imaginings.
Some work, like Ms. Clare’s, is embedded with references, direct quotes and even whole passages drawn from the fantasy canon, like in-jokes for the initiated. Some fans think this is part of the game, but others see it as a violation of the rules.
Cassandra Clare is the pen name of Judith Lewis, though most people in her circle, except her parents, call her Cassie. In person, Ms. Clare, 42, is more of a Hermione than a Bella.
On any given day, her hair might be blue or pink, and she’ll be wearing a dress she designed herself from vintage patterns and in Liberty prints because as a plus-size woman she is often challenged to find clothing that matches her sensibility.
Nearly a decade and a half later, Ms. Clare wrote her first piece of fan fiction. She was 25 and an assistant editor at The Hollywood Reporter, putting together a special section on “The X-Files” when she discovered the genre and tumbled down its rabbit hole (perhaps unsurprisingly, “The X-Files” have been catnip to fanfic folks).
“I printed it all out, and read it one night at the gym,” she said. “I almost fell off the NordicTrack.” That was when Ms. Clare created her “Draco Trilogy,” which begins with Harry Potter and Draco Malfoy switching identities and unspools toward a battle for Hermione’s affections.
In her book, Dr. Jamison devotes a chapter to the Clare brouhaha as a case study of Internet flaming and conflict. This particular one, she said, keeps getting rechurned. “Fan fiction looks like it’s a collaborative community playing by the same rules, but it turns out that it isn’t,” Dr. Jamison said.
Sarah Rees Brennan, an Irish young-adult fantasy writer who also came up from fan fiction, has had her own online snipers charging her with plagiarism and for being a friend of Ms. Clare. Ms. Miller of Slate, who said she was baffled by the depth of the animosity toward Ms. Clare, said she wondered if it had to do with her being one of the first writers to leave the “bubble” of fan fiction to become a published author, as if the leaving were a betrayal.
Ms. Clare would add one more variable: gender.
As rowdy as the fan fiction arena is, there is just as much passion directed at Ms. Clare’s published work. There were fans who were angry that the television cast was not in the 2013 Shadowhunters movie, and Ms. Clare was vilified for not advocating for them.
These emotions have spilled out offline, too. Bookstores have received death threats against her; at a signing for “Clockwork Princess,” the final book of her second trilogy, set in Victorian England, a fan smashed a book down on her hand because the fan was enraged, Ms. Clare said, that a character had died.
“People are deeply uncomfortable with the idea that the characters they love and regard as people, real people, were made up by someone, especially if that someone is a woman,” she said.
And then there are the legal disputes.
Young-adult and fantasy authors can earn millions, even if they are not household names like Ms. Rowling or Ms. Meyer.
“Lady Midnight” is Ms. Clare’s 10th book, and the first in a trilogy for which Simon & Schuster, her longtime publisher, paid her in the high seven figures. There are 36 million Shadowhunter books in print (as compared to Ms. Meyer’s 100 million for her “Twilight” books, and Ms. Rowling’s 450 plus million for her Harry Potter books), published in 35 languages.
“Lady Midnight,” out since March 8, is already in its second printing, with 600,000 copies, and it has landed at No. 1, as her books tend to do, on the New York Times best-seller list for her category.
“What you find with urban fantasy authors is the loyalty levels are intensely high compared to just about any other fiction category,” said Peter Hildick-Smith, chief executive of the Codex Group, which analyzes the book industry.
These high stakes may be why so many young-adult and fantasy authors find themselves ensnared by lawsuits.
But the dispute puts Ms. Clare in good company: Ms. Meyer; Rick Riordan, another successful author who drew from Greek mythology when he created his young-adult series; and Ms. Rowling have all been sued for plagiarism, often more than once.
“Fantasy is a genre of tropes, and I think a lot of people don’t understand that,” Ms. Clare said of the lawsuit. Fantasy is also an enormously profitable publishing space, and franchises can extend indefinitely. Ms. Clare is on her third trilogy, and as John Sellers, the children’s reviews editor at Publishers Weekly pointed out, she has said she already has two more trilogies mapped out.
On a recent Thursday, Ms. Clare was briefly at home in Amherst, Mass., on the site of the new house the Shadowhunters books have bought for her and her husband, Joshua Lewis.
For the last two years, she and Mr. Lewis have been renovating a mid-19th-century former warehouse set beside a crashing waterfall. They bought it for about $400,000 and have put as much as $2 million into the renovation, Ms. Clare said. “We took everything apart and put it back together,” she said.
It’s now an Arts and Crafts showpiece. Stairs are painted to look like bookshelves; bathroom tiles are printed with quotes from their favorite authors, like J. M. Barrie and Oscar Wilde. Their bed is hand-painted with quotes from Verlaine and Rimbaud, and there’s even a hidden passage. “That’s for Josh,” Ms. Clare said.
The two met online over a decade ago, in a group for would-be children’s book authors, where they bonded over literary arcana. Mr. Lewis, now 37, was at the time working on a Ph.D. in computer science at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst. Ms. Clare was living in Brooklyn, working nights as a freelance copy editor for American Media, which publishes National Enquirer and Star, and writing “City of Bones” during the day.
Collaborating with a mechanical engineer, the Rosenbaums turned all the modern appliances into fantastical contraptions. A tiny steam engine has been electrified and fashioned to look as if it’s powering the ceiling fan.
“Actually, it’s from Virgil,” Ms. Clare said. Mr. Lewis beamed at her.
