Arthur Anderson, who performed on radio as a teenager with Orson Welles’s Mercury Theater and appeared on Broadway, in films and on television, but whose most enduring role was as the voice of Lucky Charms cereal’s leprechaun, died on Saturday in Manhattan. He was 93.
A friend, Craig Wichman, confirmed the death.
The versatility of his voice — his Irish brogue was bogus; he was the Staten Island-born son of immigrants from Denmark and England — had been paying off since his first professional radio role, as a ukulele-playing orphan on a show called “Tony and Gus” on NBC in 1935 when he was only 12.
After acting in “The Mercury Theater on the Air,” Mr. Anderson was cast in 1937 as Lucius, the herald to the 22-year-old Welles’s Brutus, in a Broadway production of “Julius Caesar” set in Fascist Italy. Arthur sang, accompanying himself on a ukulele camouflaged as a lute.
His most memorable moment during the show occurred offstage. After heeding an order to stop hurling light bulbs at a brick wall, he decided to light matches to test the melting point of the sprinkler heads. Besides setting off a fire alarm, he triggered a deluge just as Brutus ascended the pulpit above the body of Caesar on the stage below.
Arthur John Miles Anderson was born on Aug. 29, 1922, the son of George Christian Anderson (his name had been changed from Andersen when he immigrated to the United States), an electrical engineer, and the former Violet Brookfield.
He attended the Professional Children’s School in Manhattan and was heard on “Uncle Nick Kenny’s Radio Kindergarten” and on “Let’s Pretend,” a radio show that re-enacted fairy tales, from 1936 to 1954.
In 1963, Mr. Anderson successfully auditioned for the Dancer-Fitzgerald-Sample advertising agency, which was seeking a voice for an animated leprechaun to promote the toasted oats and marshmallow bits — pink hearts, yellow moons, orange stars and green clovers — that General Mills sold collectively as Lucky Charms.
He considered the part a wedding present. He married Alice Middleton, a casting director, who died last year. He is survived by their daughter, Amy Anderson.
Mr. Anderson also appeared in the Woody Allen film “Zelig” (1983) and John Schlesinger’s “Midnight Cowboy” (1969) and on television in “Car 54, Where Are You?” and “Law & Order.” He was the voice of Ducky Drake, the mascot for the Drake’s Cakes brand; appeared in performances at the Metropolitan Opera; filled in for the puppeteer on “The Rootie Kazootie Club”; published two memoirs; and was a regular at annual conventions of the organization Friends of Old Time Radio.
