Name your price. That’s the proposition that fans of The Walking Dead comic book were facing on Wednesday as a new digital-only issue of the series was released. Visitors to Panel Syndicate will be able to decide how much, if anything, they want to spend on the comic, The Walking Dead: The Alien.
Influencing their decision may be that the regular team of Robert Kirkman, who began the series in 2003, and Charlie Adlard, who has drawn it since 2004, has been replaced. But they may be assuaged by who has taken over. The Walking Dead: The Alien is by Brian K. Vaughan and Marcos Martin, the critically acclaimed team behind Panel Syndicate, the pay-what-you-will site that offers digital comics directly to readers.
But let’s cut to the (relatively) spoiler-free chase: The 28-page story does not disappoint. While the regular comic has explored life in a world where zombies have overrun the United States, The Alien is more global. The story begins in Barcelona, Spain, where Mr. Martin, the artist, was born and raised, which gives his detailed cityscapes added authenticity. He decided to work in black and white to complement the format of the continuing The Walking Dead series, and makes bold use of light and shadow, along with unexpectedly powerful splashes of color.
Speaking of Mr. Vaughan, The Alien has his signature style: snappy dialogue, excellent pacing and a confounding of readers’ expectations. “I’m a Walking Dead fan boy,” he said. (He bought his local comics store’s last copy of issue No. 1 back in 2003.) “I knew there were some deep questions that Robert has hinted at over the course of the years,” he added, and this was his chance to explore one.
This idea for the comic started as a lark last year, when Mr. Vaughan took over Panel Syndicate’s Twitter account and encouraged questions. Mr. Kirkman and Eric Stephenson, the publisher of Image Comics, had already been after him and Mr. Martin to consider a print edition of The Private Eye, the syndicate’s first project.
Eventually, all the creators involved realized that no one was joking. Mr. Vaughan and Mr. Martin allowed a hardcover edition of The Private Eye, which was published by Image in December, and they were given the green light to produce a Walking Dead story.
There was some red tape, but it was relatively painless: While Mr. Vaughan and Mr. Martin will enjoy the proceeds from the digital sales of The Alien, Mr. Kirkman will have the right to print the issue and will own the characters. “I may do an action figure at some point, and you have to be O.K. with that,” he said.
