LOS ANGELES — Kevin Nealon appeared to be fighting back genuine tears as he delivered one of the biggest laugh lines at a memorial service Sunday night for the comedian Garry Shandling.
Mr. Nealon was keeping it authentic — one of Mr. Shandling’s oft-repeated entreaties — but he also understood the importance of landing that punch line.
Such was the balancing act at the program dedicated to Mr. Shandling, who died on March 24 at age 66 after a heart attack in his Los Angeles home. The filmmaker Judd Apatow produced and hosted the memorial, which ran more than two and a half hours.
Mr. Shandling had no children and never married, but his friends discussed how he had created extended families through his weekly Sunday basketball games and his work.
Blurring fiction and reality even more provocatively than Mr. Shandling’s fourth-wall-breaking sitcom “It’s Garry Shandling’s Show,” “The Larry Sanders Show” had Mr. Shandling playing the late-night talk show host Larry Sanders who interviewed actual celebrities in between backstage battles of ego, insecurity and network politics.
Jeffrey Tambor, who played Larry’s indelibly thick sidekick Hank Kingsley, and Penny Johnson Jerald, who had the role of Larry’s loyal assistant Beverly, reprised these characters to start the memorial. But as the sketch ended — with Beverly consoling a sobbing Hank, who declared, “He was irreplaceable” — reality eclipsed the gag.
Sarah Silverman, who played a writer in “Larry Sanders,” called him “The Giving Tree” before an audience that also included the “Sanders” alumni Bob Odenkirk and Rip Torn, as well as comedy figures like Billy Crystal, Conan O’Brien, Tim Allen, Ray Romano, Vince Vaughn, Albert Brooks, Norman Lear, Robert Wuhl, Henry Winkler, Pauly Shore and Carrot Top.
“ ‘It’s Garry Shandling’s Show,’ was his ‘Dirty Mind,’ ” Mr. Apatow added.
Jokes from Mr. Shandling — some never before unveiled — were shared and devoured. But time was devoted to less funny matters, too: his older brother’s death from cystic fibrosis; his $100 million lawsuit (eventually settled) against Brad Grey, his former manager and the executive producer of “Larry Sanders”; his testimony in the Anthony Pellicano wiretapping trial; his recent health problems, including diagnoses of hyperthyroidism and pancreatitis and major surgery; and his immersion into Zen Buddhism.
Stories abounded of Mr. Shandling’s generosity and mentorship, whether to Brooke Shields when she was acting onstage or to many others whose projects he would nurture after he had largely faded from public view.
“He went past laughter to humanity,” Mr. Tambor said.
Many in the audience lingered at a cocktail party after the memorial, exchanging hugs and tales. Mr. O’Brien, the comedian and television host, chatted with Senator Al Franken. The actor David Arquette showed off a marionette of Mr. Shandling that he had made. The comedian and actor Demetri Martin said he had been working with Mr. Shandling on a new HBO series.
