THREE years ago, Walgreens (b. 1901) arrived in Silicon Valley for the same reason many old economy companies do: to hurry and join the digital vanguard before it was left behind. Walgreens quickly made a deal with Theranos (b. 2004), the medical diagnostics company and media darling that promised a revolutionary approach to blood tests.
That hopeful beginning seems so long ago. Last fall, a series of investigative articles in The Wall Street Journal cast suspicion on Theranos’s methods, a devastating federal report found serious deficiencies in the company’s quality control, and Theranos is now under investigation by federal prosecutors and by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
It is tempting to see Theranos as another example of Silicon Valley hype — a company based on a wisp of an unproven idea becomes a multibillion-dollar phenomenon with the backing of pump-and-dump venture capitalists.
In fact, however, Silicon Valley’s most experienced investors in start-ups saw red flags at Theranos before anyone else. The Theranos saga shows just how well Silicon Valley does its homework, especially when considering medical technology, in which the risks of doing real harm to people are higher than those posed by the next photo-sharing app.
Walgreens made a rookie mistake when it looked at Theranos’s GPS coordinates. Silicon Valley actually consists of two very separate places. The first is the start-up ecosystem built around the 15 or 20 venture capital firms in the tech sector and a similar number in life sciences that account for almost all of the successful companies.
The second place is the surrounding fringe, occupied by small companies in perpetual search of well-connected investors, and investors in perpetual search of novel start-ups. Their desperation for partners resembles that of bar patrons who are unattached at last call.
Both groups of Silicon Valley players are similar in appearance, but they couldn’t be more different in status or access to critical networks and knowledge. Historically, the top 10 percent of venture-capital firms produce returns almost 10 times greater than the average of the remaining 90 percent.
Theranos did make presentations to many, if not most, of the top life sciences firms. Part of the company’s appeal was the familiar origin myth of Theranos’s founder, Elizabeth Holmes, who, like Bill Gates and Mark Zuckerberg before her, dropped out of college in order to found her company.
That might impress some social media investors, but in life sciences, everyone puts in years of formal study just to earn a seat at the table. For example, at MPM Capital, a venture firm that invests in life sciences, almost every one of its 20 investing directors and partners has either a Ph.D. or M.D., and one has both. Even the general counsel has a Ph.D. in cell, molecular and developmental biology.
GV, formerly Google Ventures, has a five-person investment team for Life Science & Health that includes two members with Ph.D.s in bioengineering; another with both an M.D. and a Ph.D. in biophysics; and a partner who, unlike Ms. Holmes, finished at Stanford, then went on to earn an M.D. and M.B.A. at Harvard.
Theranos approached GV twice and was turned down twice because of what one partner called “so much hand-waving.” People I have talked to at other investment firms said they turned down Theranos for similar reasons, unsatisfied with Theranos’s attempt to substitute its intangible “coolness” in place of technical details needed to validate its diagnostic technology.
Experience in health care is critical for a company like Theranos, which has to comply with government regulations. Instead, even the board of directors was weighted during most of the company’s life with older political figures like George P. Shultz and Henry A. Kissinger.
The first million dollars that the company received was from Tim Draper, a venture capitalist who became a venture capitalist through a very un-Silicon Valley-like route: His father was one (as was his grandfather). Mr. Draper had known Ms. Holmes as a childhood neighbor and playmate. The investors that followed Mr. Draper are a motley group, at least the ones visible in S.E.C. filings: a tiny firm named ATA Ventures; Continental Properties, a real estate company; and Donald L. Lucas, whose claim to fame was having invested in Oracle Corporation early.
No, they needed results. Theranos might still prove viable. But if Walgreens ends up with swampland, it’s not Silicon Valley’s fault.