In the wake of a shocking video that showed a black teenager shot 16 times by a police officer, the city is rocked by revelations of police brutality and misconduct — and by activists determined to upend the political order.
On St. Patrick’s Day in Chicago, in the auditorium of the city’s public-safety headquarters, the members of the Police Board sat at tables at the front of the room, beneath a framed genealogy: “Chicago Police Generations — a Proud Family Tradition.” Officers lined the perimeter of the hall, two dozen of them, bulked up in body armor. All eyes were trained on the young black protesters filling the room’s center, who had commandeered the board’s monthly meeting just 10 minutes after the call to order.
The activists weren’t the only ones declaring a crisis of confidence in Chicago. In November, the city released a video that showed Laquan McDonald, a black teenager, being shot 16 times by Jason Van Dyke, a white cop. The footage was gruesome. But the routine way in which the October 2014 killing was covered up for more than a year exposed a deeper culture of secrecy and impunity in Chicago that implicated the entire police force and much of the city’s government.
Mayor Rahm Emanuel reacted by firing his police superintendent, Garry McCarthy, last December. In quick succession, other officials stepped down, and Emanuel promised an overhaul of his Police Department. But much of the outrage in Chicago has remained concentrated on him. People marching in the streets hoist “Fire Rahm” signs. In polls, nearly two-thirds of African-American voters in the city said they didn’t trust him, and half of all likely voters thought the mayor should resign.
Most of the young people disrupting the meeting wore yellow T-shirts emblazoned with the name Rekia Boyd. In 2012, an off-duty Chicago cop named Dante Servin shot Boyd, 22, in the back of the head from the seat of his car, after arguing with her and her friends for making too much noise. Her family filed a wrongful-death lawsuit, eventually accepting a $4.5 million settlement. But the activists were still waiting for the Police Board, which rules on disciplinary decisions, to take any punitive action against Servin.  When the interim police superintendent told everyone to clear the room, the throng of activists closed ranks in an instant, like fingers curling into a fist. Protesters and police officers in Chicago had clashed on several recent occasions, and the department had been using plainclothes officers to monitor the groups’ events. But tonight officers stalked the borders of this knot of bodies, then gave up.
“We are abolitionist in our politics,” Page May, a 27-year-old founder of the activist group Assata’s Daughters, told me. “We are fighting for a world in which the police are obsolete.” Violent crime is again soaring in Chicago, with 151 homicides and 774 shootings over the first three months of 2016 alone, nearly twice as many as in the same period last year. Yet the very communities most in need of public safety have come to see the criminal-justice system as another deadly threat. A scathing report issued on April 13 by a task force the mayor appointed confirmed that their distrust of the police was warranted — “C.P.D.’s own data gives validity to the widely held belief the police have no regard for the sanctity of life when it comes to people of color,” the task force found.
With Chicago in this state of upheaval and reckoning, it feels as if much has already changed, but also very little. That same week in March, Veronica Morris-Moore, 23, spoke at a small news conference outside the Cook County Criminal Courthouse, on the city’s West Side. She seemed to be grieving the city’s larger problems, even as she celebrated the organizing that helped oust from office Anita Alvarez, the Cook County state’s attorney. Alvarez didn’t charge Van Dyke until a judge, nearly 400 days after the shooting, forced the city to make the McDonald video public. Alvarez had led in polls three weeks earlier, but demonstrators shut down her public talks, rallied at her fund-raisers and started a social-media campaign — #ByeAnita — that laid out how she had failed in her duties as a prosecutor. Alvarez lost by 30 percentage points to a political novice. But Morris-Moore had little faith in whoever was state’s attorney — or in any public official. “The system as it exists is never going to give justice to young people like Laquan McDonald,” she said. “Ultimately, we are out to destroy that system.” She and the five other activists standing beside her began to recite a litany of those killed in Chicago by the police, pausing after each name to say that the cop had gone unpunished.
That McDonald’s death shocked the city into action was a result in part of the video itself. You can count in the footage, recorded from a patrol car’s dashboard camera, exactly how long it takes Van Dyke to jump out of another cruiser, gun already fully extended, and open fire: six seconds. The first shots send the 17-year-old spinning, his arms airplaning out, nearly a complete 360, as he topples. Then Van Dyke continues shooting into McDonald’s inert body. Thousands of pages of police reports and emails about the case slowly came to light, document after damning document, detailing the extent and everyday nature of the cover-up. “It was like a biopsy of an entire institution revealing a consistent ugly thing,” said Jamie Kalven, who runs the Invisible Institute, a local independent news organization.
Whatever apparatus is supposed to exist in the city to police the police has also operated in a way that insulates them from accountability. Jamie Kalven and Craig Futterman, the director of a civil rights and police misconduct legal-aid clinic at the University of Chicago, were instrumental in the release of the McDonald video; they recently started a searchable online database of every citizen complaint against the police investigated by IPRA and the police’s internal-affairs division between 2011 and 2015. Of the 28,588 cases documented there, covering 7,758 officers, only 755 complaints had been sustained.
On the night of Oct. 20, 2014, two officers responding to reports of a break-in at a parking lot came upon Laquan McDonald — black male, six feet, dark hoodie. “This guy, uh, kind of walking away,” one of them radioed calmly at 9:53 p.m. “He has a knife in his hand.” They were eight miles southwest of downtown, on what was little more than an industrial service road, bordered by the Stevenson Expressway and beyond that the valley of a rail yard. The cops treated the situation like the routine encounter that it was. For a quarter mile, they trailed McDonald, one in a squad car and the other on foot, giving the suspect a wide berth so as not to provoke him. Even after the teenager spiked one of the patrol car’s front tires with his three-inch blade, the officers did not fire their guns. Four additional cruisers arrived, three of them hemming in McDonald on his left and one from behind. That’s when Jason Van Dyke emerged from one of these cars and shot McDonald dead.
Futterman couldn’t go public with news of the video: That would compromise the identity of the caller. But the whistle-blower also told Futterman about a man who had been driving his adult son to the hospital when the police cars swarming around McDonald brought him to a halt. Before he could give a statement to a cop directing traffic, the officer shooed him off with the wave of a flashlight. Jamie Kalven tracked the driver down. He told Kalven that Van Dyke had fired not once or twice to the chest, as the police reports suggested, but until he was out of bullets, at least a dozen times, most of them as the teenager lay helpless on the ground. Van Dyke, the driver told Kalven, had paused to appraise the situation after the first shots whirled McDonald to the ground, and then he continued firing on the prone and lifeless teenager.
That disturbing detail was something that the whistle-blower looking at the soundless dashcam video couldn’t have known. Chicago police cruisers are equipped with cameras and microphones. But a police spokesman told the press in December that more than 80 percent of them don’t record audio because of “operator error or in some cases intentional destruction.” Carol Marin and Don Moseley, of NBC5 in Chicago, found that in the car that captured the video of the shooting, the microphones were in the glove compartment with the batteries installed upside down.
Three weeks after the shooting, McDonald’s mother, Tina Hunter, asked a pair of attorneys, Jeff Neslund and Michael Robbins, to help her look into the circumstances of her son’s death. The lawyers, who would eventually pursue a case, put Kalven in touch with a trucker they found who had been filling out paperwork in a nearby Burger King parking lot when the incident unfolded before him. He told officers that he had just watched what he called “an execution.” According to Kalven and Hunter’s lawyers, the police responded by taking the trucker and two other witnesses distressed by what they’d seen to a station house, interrogating them for hours. Again and again, the increasingly hostile officers responded that video evidence refuted what they claimed to have seen.
“Three current witnesses to a fatal shooting, not one is recorded, video­taped or even asked to sign a written statement,” Robbins told me. “It was a patently fraudulent investigation. It was a calculated effort to avoid documenting what people saw and finding out what happened. And that’s not uncommon in Chicago.” The full police report of the shooting completed months later would state that of the five witnesses who heard gunshots, only one saw the shooting. The report also included statements from Van Dyke and the nine other officers on the scene. Van Dyke told a sergeant that McDonald “was swinging the knife in an aggressive, exaggerated manner,” that the teenager “continued to advance” on him. These statements were untrue. In defense of his life, Van Dyke said, he backpedaled and fired his Smith & Wesson. Five of the other cops there claimed they saw the exact same thing. The other four — including the two responding officers, who had dutifully followed their training, doing everything they could not to escalate tensions — said they didn’t have their eyes on McDonald in those vital moments.
The dashcam footage from the patrol cars was uploaded and reviewed soon after the shooting. But the report stated that the video showed the shooting in detail and supported the accounts of all the witnesses. The report was signed off on by supervisors all the way up to a lieutenant.
Employees at the Burger King told Hunter’s lawyers that the police also entered the restaurant shortly after the shooting and demanded access to the surveillance-video system. A manager asleep at home had to provide a password. Internal cameras show officers typing away on the system’s keyboard. Eighty-six minutes of video, covering the time of the shooting, went missing.
In January 2015, Kalven obtained McDonald’s autopsy with a Freedom of Information request. The autopsy, performed with a representative from the Independent Police Review Authority present, inventoried McDonald’s tattoos: “Good Son” on his right hand and “YOLO,” for “You only live once,” on his left. The report documented the 16 times he was shot, bullets striking his left scalp and right chest, his left elbow, his right upper leg and his right lower back. Fragments were lodged in his teeth. Ten of the 16 shots struck him from behind or the sides. “It was knowing absolutely, definitively, demonstrably that the city was lying,” Kalven said.
Over the past 15 years, Futterman and Kalven have worked with hundreds of people who were mistreated by the police in Chicago’s high-rise public housing. They saw firsthand what “law enforcement” can mean in marginalized, high-crime sections of the city. “There was nothing in terms of call-911 public safety,” Kalven told me. “It was detainment and day-to-day patterns of police abuse — police teams taking drugs and guns and money and not making arrests.” Through lawsuits brought against the city, the two of them forced the release of tens of thousands of records of citizen complaints against the Chicago police, which formed the basis of their online database. The city released the most recent trove of documents after fighting them for 10 years, across two mayoral administrations, contending that officer personnel information was not part of the public record, even though cops were for many the primary face — and powerful arm — of government. Documents Futterman acquired in 2006 showed that a relatively small number of officers in Chicago were responsible for most of the misdeeds. Chicago’s police force then had 13,500 members (it now has 12,500), and only 662 cops racked up more than 10 citizen complaints; most officers finished their careers with just a handful. Yet the department rarely disciplined or retrained even its 662 most-maligned cops.
“I have a deep admiration for officers who serve us and do it for the right reasons,” Futterman told me. “As a kid, I wanted to be a cop. But I’ve also seen how much harm abusive and racist policing can do to individuals and families and entire communities.” What he and Kalven have demonstrated through their work is how easy it could be to identify the bad actors before the greater harm is done. “This information about problem officers is so knowable, so predictable, so clear,” Futterman said. Before Jason Van Dyke opened fire on Laquan McDonald, at least 19 complaints had been logged against him, 11 of them for excessive force.  He faced no consequences.
Brandon Smith, a 29-year-old freelance writer on Chicago’s North Side, was a student at the city’s Columbia College when he heard Kalven speak about his work and decided that he, too, wanted to be a journalist-activist. “Stories of the man picking on the little guy,” he told me. Last year, Smith learned about the existence of the Laquan McDonald video from a 27-year-old South Sider named William Calloway, who took to activism after he happened to hear Rekia Boyd’s brother speak about his frustrated quest to bring the officer who shot Boyd to justice.  “I decided I’d do whatever was in my power to help.” Smith filed a Freedom of Information request for the McDonald video in May 2015; the police denied his petition outright that August, claiming that public dissemination of the footage would harm a continuing investigation.
“The police are ready and happy to furnish bits and pieces that support the official narrative,” Futterman told me. “But they suppress anything that contradicts or shows it not to be true.” The public was told about McDonald’s arrest history and gang affiliation, that he had PCP in his system and lunged at an officer with a knife. While the privacy of the police is shielded at all costs, the same is rarely afforded to their victims.
Several local and national media outlets also sent in requests for the dashcam video and received the same answer. But only Smith followed up by suing for its release. He did so by turning to a lawyer he met named Matt Topic. In 2014, Topic joined Loevy & Loevy, one of the city’s leading civil rights firms, and started a practice there dedicated solely to FOIA litigation. In Chicago, he didn’t lack for work. “If you care about democracy, you need to know what government is up to,” Topic said. “It made me mad to see government routinely deny people information.” Topic, with Futterman as his partner, won Brandon Smith’s case on Nov. 19, 2015, persuading the judge to deny the city’s motion to stay the ruling.
When I asked Malcolm London, a 23-year-old spoken-word poet and an organizer with Black Youth Project 100, why Laquan McDonald shook up the city while so many other incidents failed to seize the public imagination, he first wanted to set me straight. “For us, the video didn’t change what was already happening in Chicago,” he said. “We were on the ground long before the cameras came.” London is right, of course. Alongside the city’s culture of police misconduct, there has grown a counteracting network of activists, attorneys, community organizers, journalists and retired black cops.
Last year, Emanuel announced that the city would offer reparations to those harmed by the worst case of police misconduct in Chicago’s history. From 1972 to 1991, officers tortured at least 125 African-American suspects in station-house interrogation rooms. The assaults were carried out or supervised by Jon Burge, who was promoted from detective to commander during the years that his “midnight crew” coerced false confessions from men by beating them with phone books, suffocating them and shocking them with electrical devices on their genitals or in their rectums. In 1989, a cop sent the civil rights attorney Flint Taylor a tip about an imprisoned Burge victim, writing that he would remain anonymous so as not to be “shunned” like Officer Frank Laverty.
Laverty had revealed a few years earlier that it was common practice for the Chicago police to withhold from defense attorneys what they called a “street file,” a raft of evidence that all too often refuted whatever official account of events had been concocted. Laverty ended his career taking urine samples from recruits. Burge once demonstrated for a group of officers how the department dealt with snitches: As Laverty left the room they were in, Burge unholstered his gun, pointed it toward the back of Laverty’s head and said “bang.” In 2010, Burge was convicted of perjury and obstruction of justice, and was imprisoned; he was released less than four years later and is now living in Florida with a full police pension. The revelations eroded much of whatever trust black communities still had in the police force and even prompted a Republican governor to effectively end the death penalty in Illinois.
“Burge happened 30 years prior to me being mayor,” Emanuel told me. “I wanted to close the chapter on this and bring the city whole.” But the mayor introduced the reparations agreement in the City Council on April 15, 2015 — the same day aldermen voted to pay $5 million to the family of Laquan McDonald. Emanuel would soon be forced to admit that the same patterns of perjury and abuse had continued under his watch without any real impediments. “We cannot ask citizens in crime-ravaged neighborhoods to break the code of silence if we continue to let a code of silence exist in our own Police Department,” the mayor said in a speech two weeks after the McDonald video went viral. Lawyers suing the city had exhausted countless hours over decades trying to get a finding by a court just to admit that this code existed. And here a sitting Chicago mayor was stating it as fact.
The furor over the McDonald revelations led Emanuel to usher in a change in leadership: the removal of Superintendent McCarthy, and the swift departures of the chief of detectives and the head and his deputy at IPRA. It also heralded a flurry of police reforms. The city would now add to the number of officers carrying Tasers and other alternatives to guns; it would expand the use of wearable body cameras. The police would start to look at patterns in complaints against officers to pick out cops in need of retraining. New mandates on when and how officers should use force read as if they could have been written by reformer activists: “There need to be fundamental changes, because even when force may be legally justified, it doesn’t mean it’s necessary.” Last December, the Justice Department announced that its civil rights division would conduct a wide-ranging pattern-and-practice investigation of the Chicago police. Emanuel at first opposed the probe. Although he now supports it, he hoped the police-accountability task force he created would come up with homegrown solutions ahead of any federal mandates.
Craig Futterman, one of the 50 experts who served on the task force’s working groups, was relieved that the report released on April 13 confronted the hard realities of racism, abuse and lack of oversight in the Chicago Police Department. “It dealt in real truth-telling,” he said. “The first step in fixing a problem is acknowledging it and getting the diagnosis right.” Yet he also said there are reasons to remain skeptical that real change will come to a troubled police force and a city with enduring structures of racism and inequality. He pointed to a report put together in 1972 by Ralph Metcalfe, the Olympic sprinter and former United States congressman from Chicago, that also demanded reforms of a racist and abusive police force. “We had this same conversation over 40 years ago,” Futterman said.
As the city suffers through one of its deadliest starts to a year, black residents continue to feel as if they are under assault from both too much policing and too little. Last December, an officer shot a mentally ill 19-year-old wielding a bat, also killing a downstairs neighbor, a 55-year-old mother of five; the officer soon filed a $10 million lawsuit against the estate of the deceased young man, claiming he deserved whatever wrongful-death settlement the city paid out because he now suffered trauma from shooting them. In March, the Fraternal Order of Police made sure Jason Van Dyke was still taken care of, hiring him as a janitor as he awaited trial.
With Chicago spending nearly 40 percent of its operating budget on policing, activists are demanding that the force be defunded, that resources go instead to rebuilding the neighborhoods depleted by crime and record unemployment and failing and shuttered schools. This month, teachers staged a one-day strike, a week after the first of three unpaid school furlough days meant to dent the school system’s $1.1 billion deficit. Protesters against police brutality joined teachers in demonstrations on the streets. On April 12, the night before the executive summary of the accountability task force report was released, 100 demonstrators also gathered on Chicago’s West Side, alongside the fence where Pierre Loury, 16, was shot less than 24 hours earlier by a police officer. The police said Loury was in a car suspected of being connected to an earlier shooting. They claimed he ran and that an “armed confrontation” ensued. Witnesses said Loury was trying to climb the fence when he was killed. The incident is under investigation.
Johnson, a 27-year African-American veteran of the force, hadn’t applied for the superintendent’s job. So he wasn’t interviewed or vetted by the Police Board, which, as mandated by city law, had conducted an extensive search and sent its shortlist of candidates to the mayor for his final selection. But Emanuel rejected the finalists, picking Johnson instead, in effect reiterating the assertion made by protesters that the board was illegitimate. A Police Board member told me that the emperor had made his declaration.
In one of his first public statements as chief, Johnson said that in his three decades on the force, “I’ve actually never encountered police misconduct,” because officers would know better than to commit an offense in front of someone who would “hold them accountable.” The statement raised the question of whether a leader steeped in the culture could even see the ingrained institutional problems he was supposed to change.
The mayor told me that the new body cameras were arriving that week. He touted the technology as a way to empower citizens and liberate conscientious police officers — a cop’s word would no longer stand alone as the arbiter of truth. Emanuel said that Johnson had volunteered to wear a body camera himself when in the field, and he was requiring the same of his entire command staff.
The graduating recruits looked impossibly young, all of them no doubt filled on this day with pride for the work to come. They would report to their jobs on Monday, joining a force in which it has been customary for veterans to lie, suppress evidence and silence witnesses. Could they also join other young Chicagoans in demanding that the system they were now a part of provide justice for all in the city? “I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of police officer, according to the best of my abilities,” the cadets recited together, echoing the phrases spoken by the department’s first deputy superintendent, as they took their oath of office.