It takes confidence — some might even say hubris — to rewrite one of the most beloved novels in the English canon.
So Curtis Sittenfeld was prepared for a backlash when word got out that she was writing a modern-day version of Jane Austen’s classic “Pride and Prejudice.” The response from some die-hard Austen fans was swift and predictably brutal.
Ms. Sittenfeld, author of the best-selling novels “Prep” and “American Wife,” seems almost sheepish when discussing the daunting task she had set for herself. Her novel “Eligible,” which Random House will release on Tuesday, is the latest book in the Austen Project, a series that pairs contemporary novelists with Austen’s six works. So far, there have been versions of “Emma,” by Alexander McCall Smith; “Northanger Abbey,” by the Scottish crime novelist Val McDermid; and “Sense & Sensibility,” by Joanna Trollope.
But updating “Pride and Prejudice” poses a unique challenge. Of all of Austen’s works, it is far and away the most popular. It has been adapted into dozens of spinoff books, including murder mysteries (P. D. James’s lurid “Death Comes to Pemberley”), soft-core romance novels (the unabashedly raunchy “Mr. Darcy Takes a Wife,” by Linda Berdoll) and horror stories (Seth Grahame-Smith’s blood-soaked parody “Pride and Prejudice and Zombies”). There are “Pride and Prejudice”-theme books for every age group and demographic, including cookbooks, coloring books, young adult novels, board books for toddlers and comic books.
So what led Ms. Sittenfeld, 40, an acclaimed writer who has published four earlier novels, to enter the hypersaturated market for Jane Austen fan fiction?
Like millions of other readers, she happens to be a huge Austen fan. And while she knew that rewriting “Pride and Prejudice” was professionally risky, she was driven partly by the same impulse that compelled devoted Austenphiles to reread the novel dozens of times: She wanted to spend more time with the characters.
There were no emergencies. But it quickly became evident that Ms. Sittenfeld could probably handle any urgent “Pride and Prejudice” questions without consulting the source. She more or less committed the plot to memory when she carefully mapped out the novel’s 61 chapters, in an effort to create a blueprint of sorts for her own version.
Like the 1813 original, Ms. Sittenfeld’s novel features a headstrong heroine named Elizabeth Bennet, whose nervous, overbearing mother is obsessed with marrying off her and her sisters. Lizzy’s vapid, flirtatious younger siblings, Kitty and Lydia, are an embarrassment to the family, while her older sister, Jane, is approaching spinsterhood. A rich single man, Bingley, comes to town and takes a liking to Jane, while Lizzy takes an instant dislike to Bingley’s even richer friend, the aloof Fitzwilliam Darcy. Of course, Lizzy and Darcy eventually realize that they are perfect for each other.
“Eligible” unfolds in 2013 in Cincinnati, where Liz, a journalist for a women’s magazine, and Jane, a yoga instructor, have returned home after their father has suffered a heart attack. Bingley, the handsome scion of a wealthy local family, is in town licking his wounds after a humiliating appearance on “Eligible,” a “Bachelor”-like reality dating show. Darcy is a taciturn neurosurgeon, who strikes Liz as unbearably condescending.
But others have praised Ms. Sittenfeld for channeling Austen’s biting wit and razor-sharp observations about gender, class and money, and for putting her own satirical spin on the timeless plot.
“Reboots are tremendously tricky, and almost the only thing that would induce me to read a reboot of ‘Pride and Prejudice’ is Curtis Sittenfeld’s name on the cover,” Rebecca Mead, a writer for The New Yorker, said in an email.
Initially, when an editor from Borough Press, an imprint of HarperCollins U.K., approached Ms. Sittenfeld in 2011 about rewriting the novel as part of the Austen Project, she was skeptical.
At first, she tried to write a scene-for-scene re-creation of Austen’s novel but found the process too constricting. She realized that it would be unrealistic for Darcy to propose to Liz before they had even dated, so she has them engage in no-strings-attached “hate sex.” She makes Liz 38, rather than 20, an absurdly young age for a contemporary woman to worry about her marital status. And she split one of Austen’s original characters, the charming but deceitful Wickham, into two characters: Jasper Wick, a married rogue who has been stringing Liz along, and Ham, a transgender man who is Lydia’s boyfriend.
While Ms. Sittenfeld risks rankling Austen purists — the casual sex has already caused a small uproar — her looser approach also separates “Eligible” from other, less successful Austen updates that were unswervingly loyal to the original stories.
Lately, there have been scattered signs of Austen fatigue. Sales for some recent Austen updates have been tepid. Ms. Trollope’s modern-day “Sense & Sensibility,” which was published in 2013, has sold just 5,100 copies in the United States, while Ms. McDermid’s contemporary take on “Northanger Abbey” sold just 2,800 copies here, according to Nielsen, which tracks around 85 percent of print book sales.
But the Jane Austen Industrial Complex still seems pretty robust. Next year is the 200th anniversary of Austen’s death, and scholars and writers are commemorating the occasion with a blizzard of academic books, conferences and exhibitions, and a handful of new Austen-derived novels.
Writers and filmmakers are digging deeper into Austen’s body of work to find “fresh” material among her early novellas, unfinished stories and juvenilia. Next month, Little, Brown and Company will publish Whit Stillman’s novel “Love & Friendship,” which is based on “Lady Susan,” Austen’s little-known epistolary novella. Mr. Stillman, who has also adapted the book into a forthcoming feature film, said he chose “Lady Susan” because it felt fresh and relatively untapped.
