TOKYO — A powerful earthquake struck the southwestern Japanese island of Kyushu on Thursday, killing nine people, collapsing roads and buildings, and knocking out power, officials said.
According to the government, some 1,000 people had been treated for injuries caused by the magnitude 6.2 quake, which struck just before 9:30 p.m. and was followed by a series of powerful aftershocks. About 40,000 people spent the night outdoors or in temporary shelters.
Japan’s chief cabinet secretary said a magnitude 6.4 earthquake struck the island of Kyushu, leveling buildings, but the nuclear reactors there are safe.
Television footage showed firefighters battling flames in the most seriously affected area, in the town of Mashiki in rural Kumamoto Prefecture. The fires had been extinguished by Friday morning, as residents began to assess the extent of the damage. Some homes had collapsed into rubble, with tiles from broken roofs spilling onto narrow streets.
The authorities in Kumamoto said they had pulled several people from under collapsed buildings, according to NHK, the national broadcast network. Television reports showed the rescue of an infant, alive and apparently uninjured.
The earthquake knocked an out-of-service Shinkansen bullet train off its rails, JR Kyushu Railway reported. No one was hurt, the railway said. Television images also showed cracked and buckled roadways.
The Japan Meteorological Agency had reported the quake’s preliminary magnitude at 6.5, strong but not at the top of the range for seismically unstable Japan. The earthquake that struck northeastern Japan in 2011, unleashing a powerful tsunami, measured 9.0. That disaster led to reactor meltdowns at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant.
The earthquake on Thursday was centered on land, unlike the offshore quake five years ago, and its origin point was a relatively shallow six miles below the surface. As a result, there was no tsunami, but the shaking near the epicenter was especially strong.
In Mashiki, groups of people gathered in parking lots, parks and other open spaces after fleeing their homes. At a community center where some spent the night, workers dispensed blankets and emergency food rations.
In Kumamoto, a city of about 700,000 that is just a few miles to the west of Mashiki, damage to buildings and other infrastructure appeared to be comparatively light. Parts of the stone wall surrounding the city’s black castle, whose fortifications date from the 15th century, were damaged.
Kyushu is home to the only Japanese nuclear power that remained in operation following the mass shutdown of the atomic-power industry in the wake of the Fukushima disaster.
The Kyushu Electric Power Company reported no problems at the two reactors at the facility, the Sendai Nuclear Power Plant, which is about 75 miles southwest of Mashiki.