Bill Clinton Is Wrong About His Crime Bill. So Are the Protesters He Lectured.
The protesters were basically wrong.
So was Clinton.
There is a lot to criticize about the 1994 act. Many of its harsh provisions were known to be ineffective, or even counterproductive, at the time it was passed. It emphasized punishment over treatment, and the rhetoric used to defend it — like Hillary Clinton’s “super-predators” speech — was often deeply disturbing.
Despite all that, its actual impact on prison populations was slight — and so was its impact on crime. Understanding this isn’t just about making sure the historical record is correct, or refereeing a fight between the Clinton campaign and Black Lives Matter protesters. It has important implications for reform today.
Start with mass incarceration. We know the act didn’t cause mass incarceration: Prison populations started rising around 1974, and by 1994 they had roughly tripled, from 300,000 to over one million. It’s almost surely the case that America was the world’s largest jailer well before the act was passed. So if the act didn’t cause mass incarceration, the question becomes: Did it help continue to drive it? The answer, by and large, is no.
For one thing, most of the act’s provisions applied only to federal crimes. The tough new anti-gang laws, the expanded death-penalty provisions, the three-strikes laws: All applied only to those tried in federal court. And those, over all, are fairly minor players, with the federal prison system holding about only 13 percent of all prisoners. The other 87 percent of inmates are in state systems — and none of the act’s new criminal laws affected what happened in state systems.
Granted, there were some provisions of the act aimed at influencing state law. The most important was the Violent Offender Incarceration/Truth-in-Sentencing (VOI/TIS) Incentive Grant Program, which set aside about $10 billion to encourage states to make parole much rarer for people convicted of violent crimes, through what are called “truth in sentencing” laws. The grants even included funds for building out prison capacity, to deal with any resulting rise in inmate populations. If there was any part of the 1994 act that should have driven incarceration, it was this one.
And yet it didn’t. In a General Accounting Office study, only four states said the grants strongly influenced their decisions to adopt TIS laws. One of those four, New York, received more grant money than any other state, and its prison populations began a 15-year decline before the six-year program was even over. Almost half of the 27 states with TIS laws said the grants were irrelevant, and 23 states opted not to adopt the laws at all. All told, about 70 to 80 percent of all prisoners were held in states where the grants made no real impact. And there’s no evidence that prison populations grew any faster in states with TIS laws than in states without them.
The grants could have mattered. Other federal grants certainly have an impact on how states behave. It just so happened that these didn’t. One reason is surely the amount of money involved. VOI/TIS offered $10 billion over six years, but only about $3 billion was ever awarded — during which time states spent about $215 billion on prisons alone. The volume of state and local spending on criminal justice is often so breathtaking that it’s hard for federal grants to have much effect.
What about the rhetoric? Even if provisions like the act’s three-strikes law applied only to the federal system, is it possible they encouraged states to adopt similar rules (as many did), or to enact TIS laws (ditto), or to just remain tough on crime (as states generally were at the time)? Maybe; it’s plausible. But here’s the challenge. Many states adopted three-strikes and TIS laws after the act was passed, but in most cases the legislative work had started before the act became law. When it comes to criminal-justice issues, the federal system consistently lags the states. In other words, federal punitiveness was probably echoed local harshness more than it caused it.
Besides, shortly before the act was adopted, the rate of prison growth started to decline nationwide. It continued to decline for the six years after the act, with no sign that the law slowed that path. This may be a somewhat casual way to look at the issue, but it at least suggests that any rhetorical impact was slight.
Which brings us to the other half of the debate — Bill Clinton’s claim that the act contributed significantly to the sustained drop in crime over the last 25 years. You can probably guess the truth here: Its role was at best minor, and perhaps even less than that.
The most obvious thing to consider is that rates of violent crimes and property crime began to decline in 1992, three years before the law’s various provisions started going into effect. There’s no real perceptible change in the rate of that decline after the act. If you want to claim that the law did much to stop crime, this alone is a pretty significant problem. It’s not the only one, either.
For one thing, if the law had very little impact on prison populations (despite all the claims to the contrary), then it can’t take credit for however much crime was reduced by rising incarceration. And while the act authorized almost $10 billion over six years to hire up to 100,000 additional police officers — a provision that could have reduced crime — the data suggest any impact was fairly slight. (Once again, $10 billion seems like a lot, but local governments spent over $250 billion on policing during the six years the program was in effect.) All told, the policing program seems to have pushed crime rates down by perhaps an additional 1 percent. And a government review of the included assault-weapons ban found that its effect was minimal, if only because people shifted to non-assault weapons with large-capacity magazines.
It’s strange how often the act comes up these days. Its effect on crime was consistently hampered by the sheer size of state and local justice systems, diminishing any impact it might have made for good or for ill. And in many ways, the debates over it are largely symbolic. Almost all of its provisions are now defunct: the TIS grants, the police grants, the assault-weapons ban, even the ban on Pell grants for inmates. All of these have either run their course or are being reversed.
Meanwhile, as the vestigial Violent Crime Act gets all this attention, no one is debating two worrisome Clinton-era criminal-justice laws that remain on the books. The Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (A.E.D.P.A.) continues to make it hard for capital and noncapital inmates alike to raise habeas corpus claims and challenge wrongful incarcerations. And the Prison Litigation Reform Act (P.L.R.A.) still makes it much harder for inmates to challenge intolerable prison conditions in federal court. These laws’ impact on the narrow issue of mass incarceration is unclear, but they matter — and they remain relatively invisible. If we want to debate the Clinton legacy, we should at least debate the parts of it that are still in effect today.
More important, the debate over the Violent Crime Act sends a deeply problematic message: If people believe that the federal Violent Crime Act caused or accelerated mass incarceration, then they may believe that some other federal law should be able to stop or reverse it.
The problem is: No federal law can.
Sure, there are some things the federal government can do — even vital things. But they are narrow and targeted, and the debates over the Violent Crime Act haven’t really touched on any of them. By and large, mass incarceration has been driven by state and local officials, and by county prosecutors in particular. As the 1994 act makes clear, federal efforts to influence those officials can be ineffective. It’s likely that federal efforts to reduce state prison populations would be similarly disappointing. Federal carrots and sticks have little impact on state and local officials, if only because the sizes of the carrots and sticks are fairly small compared to the vast amounts already being spent. And even if state legislators are tempted by federal funds, the local prosecutors who actually enforce the laws can always circumvent the changes — which is likely one reason why New York’s prison population dropped even as the state received over $100 million in TIS grants.
The federal government cannot end mass incarceration. Ending it will require state-by-state, even county-by-county fights. It will involve state-level sentencing-reform bills (like the one passed by Mississippi in 2014) and efforts to vote out hyperaggressive prosecutors (as in Chicago or in Mississippi’s 16th District). Federal officials are by no means innocent of causing mass incarceration, nor are they useless when it comes to reversing it. But they are relatively minor players.
The debate over the 1994 Violent Crime Act only distracts us from this point, and from focusing on what really matters.