GENEVA — The United Nations special envoy for Syria closed two weeks of talks with warring parties on Thursday without setting a date for the next round, and he urged Russia and the United States to “revitalize” a collapsing cease-fire.
After briefing the United Nations Security Council by video link from Geneva late Wednesday night, the envoy, Staffan de Mistura, told reporters that he hoped to reconvene the indirect negotiations he has been mediating in Geneva sometime in May. But he made it clear that global powers first needed to revive the cessation of hostilities they negotiated at the end of February.
Much the same could be said of the indirect talks he conducted in an effort to broker a political solution to Syria’s five-year-old civil war. Mr. de Mistura opened a third round of discussions with government and opposition negotiators two weeks ago, stating his intention to focus on the terms of a political transition.
The Syrian opposition’s negotiations committee submitted a series of papers laying out proposals for a transitional government that would exclude President Bashar al-Assad, but opposition members walked out of formal talks last week to protest mounting cease-fire violations in Syria and stalled aid deliveries.
Government negotiators stayed on in Geneva and continued what they described as “useful and productive” meetings with Mr. de Mistura until Wednesday, but they showed no sign of engaging in substantive talks about a political transition.
The discussions limping on in Geneva this week have been overshadowed by reports of airstrikes, rocket attacks and artillery exchanges that have caused a steadily rising number of civilian casualties around the northern city of Aleppo.
“How can you have substantial talks when you have only news about bombing and shelling?” Mr. de Mistura said Thursday.
There was no reason Russia and the United States could not revitalize the cease-fire and the peace process in which they had invested “so much political capital,” Mr. de Mistura said after briefing the Security Council. He urged them to convene a meeting of the International Syria Support Group, which they lead.
High-level contacts between Washington and Moscow over the past week have yet to produce a date for that meeting or any sign of convergence on ways to reinvigorate the peace process.
Russia has defended attacks by Syrian government forces around Aleppo as a response to provocations by rebel groups that are not party to the cease-fire, and on Wednesday it called on the United Nations to blacklist as terrorists two groups that are partners in the main opposition coalition.