CHICAGO — Whether there was a mime leading warm-ups, a 1970s van blasting disco music or Chicago Cubs mingling with real cubs this spring, Cubs Manager Joe Maddon was in top form long before the season’s first pitch.
If everything falls into place, Maddon, who brought a magician to the clubhouse last year, just might pull off the ultimate trick.
Manage the Cubs to a championship? It is not a long shot.
Maddon’s second season began with huge expectations after 97 wins in 2015 and a march to the National League Championship Series, fueling hopes among fans that a championship drought dating to 1908 is in its final stages. It figures to be a charged atmosphere at Wrigley Field on Monday when the Cubs host Cincinnati in their home opener. And it could be that way all season for the Cubs.
While Maddon and the Cubs looked forward, his childhood friend Willie Forte could not help looking back.
Long before Maddon turned Wrigley Field into a miniature zoo with animals or had his team wear onesies on a trip home last season, long before the mime and the real cubs and the retro van, there was a Dodge. An eight-track. And, for Forte, a life-changing moment.
It was “The Wild, the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle,” and yes, Bruce Springsteen did rather well for himself. Forte, a keyboardist, started the B Street Band, a successful cover act.
Maddon did all right, too. He spent over three decades in the Angels’ organization as a player, coach and scout. He was on Manager Mike Scioscia’s staff during the 2002 championship season before leaving to manage Tampa Bay after the 2005 season.
Forte saw the leadership and vision, not to mention a strong arm, when he and Maddon were growing up in Hazelton, Pa., a onetime mining town built by immigrants.
He remembers Maddon throwing a football 40 yards and blowing everyone else away at a punt, pass and kick competition when they were 9 years old. The two struck a friendship not long after that while playing for the State Trooper Eagles youth team.
When Maddon and Forte were about 12 or 13, they got caught with their hands in the cookie jar by their coaches during a trip to Pittsburgh. The team was staying at a school cafeteria, and the orders were clear: Do not raid the kitchen. That was all the incentive Forte, Maddon and another teammate needed to chow down.
They stuffed themselves on the next day’s meals, then tried to run away when the coaches returned. The three were forced to eat the leftovers, and while Forte and the other player became ill, Maddon — calm as always — quietly consumed the equivalent of another lunch or dinner.
That is how Maddon was, rarely rattled, even in high school, when he was the quarterback and captain of the offense.
About the only thing he questioned back then was his friend’s taste in music, which was why he was skeptical when Maddon popped in that Springsteen tape. While Forte listened to Jimi Hendrix, he said, Maddon was into the Carpenters.
“Joe springing that Springsteen thing on me really shaped the rest of my life,” Forte said.
Forte has performed all over the country, even at Rays exhibition games when Maddon was the manager. He has formed friendships with members of the E Street Band and would love to introduce his friend to Springsteen.
Maddon made a big impression on Lopez when they met at a Rays-Yankees game in Tampa Bay not long after the E Street Band’s induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2014. And it was not just because Maddon had “Greetings From Asbury Park, New Jersey” and “The Wild, the Innocent and & the E Street Shuffle” — the two albums Lopez played on — hanging on the wall in his office.
Forte reflected on how far he and his friend had come, from a childhood with little money and a love of sports, and he remembered the shock when Maddon — then a catcher in the Angels’ system — told him his career plan.
Forte said he had been on tour in the Midwest and they had been dining in the Quad Cities area.
