Updated, 11:13 a.m.
Good morning on this runny Friday.
Welcome back your itchy eyes, your drippy nose, that endless need for tissues and a sneeze that can range from charming squeak to violent roll of thunder.
Allergy season is upon us.
Dr. William Reisacher, an ear, nose and throat specialist at Weill Cornell Medicine and NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, kindly answered a few of our questions about New Yorkers and allergies.
First, he offered some background. For instance: Sneeze particles can fly over 30 feet in the air, at a velocity of up to 200 miles per hour.
Lovely. And what’s actually happening when we sneeze?
“The body is overprotective, just like our parents,” he said.
To elaborate: The inside of your nose is coated with mucus, and when you inhale, pollutants and allergens enter the nostrils and get stuck to it, he explained.
Underneath the mucus are cells and nerve endings that detect these allergens as well as potentially dangerous particles, and when those nerves become irritated, they set off a reflex, he said.
We live in the concrete jungle. Can we escape pollen if we avoid the suburbs?
“We get most of our pollen from New Jersey, because of the winds moving west to east, but the wind moves quickly past our buildings, creating a wind tunnel effect,” he said.
Sometimes we may feel even worse in the city, he says, because a person standing in the middle of an avenue can get exposed to a tremendous amount of pollen.
Then what’s making us sneeze here?
Tree pollen — most notably from oak, maple and birch trees, he said.
Like a nose in spring, it’s going to be drippy.
The city is most likely to be flushed out with showers in the evening. Until then, expect watery skies, with light sprinklings — cloud sneezes.
Today’s high: 55.
Our gray, overcast day does have a bright side: The pollen count is low today.
• New York Red Bulls host FC Dallas, 7 p.m. (MLS LIVE). Yankees at Red Sox, 7:10 p.m. (YES). Mets host Giants, 7:10 p.m. (SNY).
• Islanders at Lightning, 3 p.m. (NBC). New York City FC hosts Vancouver Whitecaps FC, 4 p.m. (YES). Mets host Giants, 4:05 p.m. (SNY). Yankees at Red Sox, 7:10 p.m. (MLBN).
• Watch “The New York Times Close Up,” featuring The Times’s Adam Ellick and other guests. Saturday at 10 p.m. and Sunday at 10 a.m. on NY1.
• Cheer on 32,000 cyclists in the 40-mile TD Five Boro Bike Tour. Registration is full, but you can plan to watch for free along the route. Wave 1 departs at 7:30 a.m.
• Visitors ages 65 and older can enjoy free admission to the Museum of Modern Art in Manhattan. 10:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.
• Mets host Giants, 1:10 p.m. (SNY). Yankees at Red Sox, 8:05 p.m. (ESPN).
• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide. And if you seek things to do outside the city, The Times’s Metropolitan section has suggestions. See this weekend’s listings for Hudson Valley, Long Island, New Jersey and Connecticut.
R and M trains are running with delays.
• Alternate-side parking: suspended until Sunday.
But we want to enjoy the outdoors!
Especially with the mild spring weather, and Arbor Day today and a cherry blossom festival this weekend.
Dr. Reisacher offers tips to battle the boogers.
First, try to avoid the allergens. Pollen levels are highest from 5 to 10 a.m., he said, so keep your windows closed then.
Shower when you head inside, and use over-the-counter saline gels and antihistamines. They work nicely.
And finally, let it rip.
“I’ve seen a few instances of people with dizziness and hearing loss after holding in a forceful sneeze,” he said.
