Few teams in the N.H.L. have had a more dominant regular season than the 2015-16 Washington Capitals. They were a juggernaut, posting 120 points and losing only 18 games in regulation. Braden Holtby tied Martin Brodeur’s N.H.L. single-season record for wins (48), and Washington’s lead atop the Metropolitan Division did not dip below 10 points after Dec. 26.
Led by Holtby, the 50-goal scorer Alex Ovechkin and a roster of talented and experienced players, the Capitals are the clear favorites to claim their first Stanley Cup.
But this time of year, the team with the best regular-season record rarely wins it all; only twice since the 2005-6 season has the Presidents’ Trophy-winning team also won the Cup. And the Capitals have failed to reach even the Eastern Conference finals since 1998, falling tantalizingly short last season when they blew a 3-1 series lead in a seven-game loss to the Rangers.
The last time Washington won the Presidents’ Trophy was 2009-10, when the Capitals set a single-season franchise record for points, with 121. That season they flamed out in the first round against Jaroslav Halak and the Montreal Canadiens, opening the door for Philadelphia to reach the Stanley Cup finals.
The Flyers and the Capitals have not met in postseason since 2008, when Philadelphia won in seven games. This season, Washington has a 2-0-2 record against Philadelphia.
The Flyers surprised many by reaching postseason in Dave Hakstol’s first season behind the bench. The emergence of the rookie defenseman Shayne Gostisbehere aided Philadelphia’s offense, and the Flyers went 36-19-11 after he was called up Nov. 14. The Flyers have added motivation after the death of their longtime owner Ed Snider on Monday.
The Rangers have eliminated the Penguins in each of the last two seasons, and for the second straight year, Pittsburgh enters the playoffs hampered by injuries. Center Evgeni Malkin will not play the first round, and goalies Marc-Andre Fleury (concussion) and Matt Murray (head) are injured and may not be able to face the Rangers.
Yet Pittsburgh is one of the East’s scariest teams. Led by Sidney Crosby, who enters the series with an eight-game point streak, the Penguins have won 14 of their last 16 games and took three of four games against the Rangers during the season. All three victories came last month.
But with Pittsburgh’s goaltending uncertainty, Rangers goalie Henrik Lundqvist is going to be an X-factor again, particularly since the top defenseman Ryan McDonagh will not be ready for the series opener Wednesday. Lundqvist was pulled in three of his final nine starts, but he boasts a .923 career save percentage in the playoffs, and a .929 percentage in 17 playoff games against the Penguins.
The Islanders’ fan base and the Panthers owner Doug Cifu got what they wanted in their first-round matchups. 
Thanks to the Isles’ loss to Philadelphia on Sunday, they will get Jaromir Jagr and Florida in the first round and play in the Atlantic Division bracket if they advance. Jagr, 44, became the oldest player in N.H.L. history to post a 60-point season. His 27 goals were second behind his linemate Aleksander Barkov, and he helped carry Florida to the postseason for the first time since 2012.
The injured goalie Jaroslav Halak will miss the first round for the Islanders, who have not won a playoff series since 1993 — when they beat Jagr’s Penguins on David Volek’s Game 7 goal in overtime. Florida has not won a playoff round since a run to the Stanley Cup finals in 1996 — nicknamed the Year of the Rat in South Florida. Something will have to give.
The Lightning will start their path against the same squad they played in the first round a year ago when Tampa Bay reached the Cup finals. But the Lightning will be without their star center Steven Stamkos, who recently had surgery for a blood clot, and defenseman Anton Stralman also could miss the first round with a broken leg. Forward Tyler Johnson, a postseason hero in 2015, sustained an upper-body injury in the regular season finale and his status is uncertain for Game 1 on Wednesday.
The Red Wings reached playoffs for the 25th consecutive season. But amid a cloud of uncertainty about the future of captain Pavel Datsyuk and some inconsistent goaltending, Detroit looks vulnerable.
Minnesota’s old team faces Minnesota’s new team in the playoffs for the first time since the Wild entered the league in 2000. The Wild endured a roller-coaster campaign in which it won 20 of its first 36 games, then fired Coach Mike Yeo, and ultimately rose to the postseason for the fourth straight year.
The Stars hope to have their star forward Tyler Seguin, who has been out with a cut Achilles’, back in time for Game 1 on Thursday in Dallas. The Stars won four of five games against Minnesota this season, three in overtime.
Chicago, the defending Stanley Cup champion, loaded up again at the trade deadline, but has lost 10 of its last 17 games and fell out of contention for home-ice advantage and the division title. Goalie Corey Crawford missed four weeks with an injury before returning for the regular season finale.
St. Louis won three of five head-to-head matchups against Chicago this season. The Blues and the Blackhawks met in the first round in 2014, when St. Louis also had home-ice advantage. Chicago spotted St. Louis a 2-0 series lead before winning the next four games. Chicago will be without defenseman Duncan Keith, last year’s Conn Smythe Trophy winner as the postseason’s most valuable player, for Game 1 Wednesday as he finishes serving a six-game suspension.
In last place before Christmas, the Ducks have excelled the last four months of the season. Anaheim Coach Bruce Boudreau did the unthinkable, splitting up Corey Perry and Ryan Getzlaf, but the move lifted the Ducks’ offense, as they have scored 149 goals in their final 45 games after averaging just 1.86 per game through 37 contests.
The Predators have endured a down year from goalie Pekka Rinne, but led by a 33-goal season from Filip Forsberg and a breakout year from defenseman Roman Josi, the Predators finished their season 17-7-6 to reach postseason for the second straight year under Coach Peter Laviolette.
After one-year absences, the Kings and Sharks are back in the playoffs. San Jose blew a 3-0 series lead to Los Angeles in 2014, as the Kings rallied en route to the Stanley Cup.
Los Angeles defenseman Drew Doughty had an exceptional season, and the standout center Anze Kopitar led the Kings with 74 points. They have reached the Western Conference finals in their last three postseason appearances, winning the Cup twice.
Guided by the first-year coach Peter DeBoer, the Sharks rebounded after a rocky 2014-15 season. San Jose went 3-1-1 in five games against the Kings this season, winning both games in Los Angeles. The Sharks were the N.H.L.’s best road team this season, claiming 28 of their 41 games away from S.A.P. Center.