DENVER — When the aerospace company Sierra Nevada Corporation moved into the Colorado Technology Center about eight years ago, employees on their lunch break could stroll by the alpaca farm next door.
At campaign rallies throughout the South and Midwest, economic frustration and sluggish wage growth are dominant themes. States like Alaska and Oklahoma, faced with low oil prices, are grappling with bankruptcies and layoffs. And overall growth in the United States economy remains disappointing.
But this thriving industrial park is just one sign of the many metropolises and smaller cities across the nation that have not only regained their footing since the recession, but are on the upswing. Here in the Mountain West — but also in places as varied as Seattle and Portland, Ore., in the Northwest, and Atlanta and Orlando, Fla., in the Southeast — employers are hiring at a steady clip, housing prices are up and consumers are spending more freely.
The Denver metropolitan area has become a showcase of the sunnier side of the American economy. While the region has some inherent advantages, like a spectacular landscape that beguiles outdoor enthusiasts, Colorado had long been held back by a dependence on natural resources as its economic base.
Cities like Denver; San Jose, Calif.; and Austin, Tex., are now among those with the best-performing labor markets, while places like Las Vegas, Chicago and Detroit remain laggards.
Its transformation into one of the most dynamic economies in the country was led by local business leaders and government officials, who took advantage of existing assets while also raising taxes at times to invest in critical transportation links, development-friendly policies and a network of colleges and universities.
With a history of boom-and-bust commodity cycles, Colorado hit bottom in the mid-’80s, when energy prices collapsed. Nearly a third of the office space in downtown Denver, the state’s oil-and-gas headquarters, sat empty. Many of the city’s cultural institutions teetered, and a cloud of brown smog smeared the horizon.
Now the brilliant blue skyline is punctuated with red cranes, and Denver’s soundtrack includes the steady thrum of power drills operated by hard-hatted construction workers who are putting up office buildings and housing at a feverish pace.
Technology start-ups, including Ibotta, Craftsy, Home Advisor and Gnip (bought by Twitter in 2014), found a footing in Colorado. Financial services firms like Charles Schwab, TIAA and Fidelity Investments expanded their operations.
A raft of smaller aerospace and commercial satellite companies like Sierra Nevada, which just won a NASA contract to build the mini-space shuttle Dream Chaser, have elbowed in beside giants like Boeing and Lockheed Martin. Colorado led the country last year in new health care jobs.
What Denver and its surrounding cities share with other boomtowns is an appealing environment for a skilled work force, which has increasingly meant the difference between prosperity and stagnation.
Such places have become business incubators and magnets for educated millennials. The lifestyles that 20- and 30-somethings often seek depend on a medley of urban living, public transit and lots of entertainment options (which in Colorado includes marijuana, legalized for recreational use since 2014).
A recent report by the Leeds School of Business, at the main Boulder campus of the University of Colorado, predicted that the state would gain more than 65,000 jobs in 2016, or about 2.5 percent above last year’s level.
Take Charles Schwab, which has its headquarters in San Francisco and is expanding in a handful of cities, including Phoenix, Orlando, Indianapolis and Austin, Tex. At its new campus in Lone Tree, outside Denver, hiring is enough of a main activity that a dedicated “talent acquisition suite” was installed off a lobby, a stylish space with gray suede couches, a kitchen and cozy private rooms where prospective employees can be comfortably courted.
This year, Schwab plans to add 1,360 people to its staff in Colorado.
Other businesses have taken advantage of opportunities for collaboration with universities and government laboratories.
Sierra Nevada’s plant, for example, features a thermal vacuum chamber that simulates the cold void of space and a pint-size mission control to track its commercial satellite launches.
But when it needed to recreate the intense vibration of a space launch, it trucked the Dream Chaser prototype to the earthquake simulator at the University of Colorado campus 20 minutes away.
Erik Mitisek, the state’s chief innovation officer, said the region’s economic diversity was building on itself. Many people don’t want to relocate for a single job opportunity, he said. They want to know they have other options.
Bryan Leach, a former lawyer who founded Ibotta (pronounced “I bought a”), a mobile shopping app, has seen that evolution firsthand. After starting his career in the District of Columbia, he tested several western states in the early 2000s. Arizona had too many rattlesnakes, he said half jokingly. Wyoming was too small. California was too expensive.
Then he and his wife visited Denver. They could manage to buy a new five-bedroom house and have the occasional dinner out without borrowing from their in-laws, he said. But at first he couldn’t find the right job.
No more. In Mr. Leach’s view, Denver has reached a “critical mass” of new business ventures. People who love Colorado’s lifestyle no longer “feel like they have to sacrifice the quality of career opportunities,” he said.
Mr. Leach’s own company has undergone extraordinary growth. In 2012 he ditched his lawyerly dark suits and now wears a tech entrepreneur’s uniform of orange sneakers and a purple shirt. He started Ibotta in the windowless basement of a fire station, paying $8 a square foot to house himself and one other employee.
In March, the company moved more than 200 full- and part-time employees into a new 40,000-square-foot office in Denver’s tallest tower.
The relative lack of racial and cultural diversity (the state is 87 percent white) can deter some people from relocating, Mr. Leach conceded, but he thinks that is changing with an increasingly cosmopolitan mix of people, arts, restaurants and shops. His own weekend ritual includes dim sum and rock climbing.
The dynamism reminds him of his youth in Atlanta in the 1980s and ’90s, when the Southern hub was growing at a phenomenal pace.
“Now I get to be part of the generation that is building the new economy,” he said.