The research seems to suggest that living in proximity to the preferences — and tax base — of wealthy neighbors may help improve well-being. New York is not just a city of rich and poor, but also one of walkable sidewalks, a trans-fat ban and one of the most aggressive anti-tobacco agendas of any place in the United States.
The findings underscore public health research showing that healthy habits matter. The JAMA paper found that several measures of access to medical care had no clear relationship with longevity among the poor. But there were correlations with smoking, exercise and obesity.
In New York, public health officials have taken that notion to heart. During the period of the study, New York made health a centerpiece of public policy. Though the Bloomberg administration often faced criticism for “nanny state” programs, it pursued policies to reduce smoking and obesity — crucial risk factors for disease.
State and city laws combine to give the city the second-highest tobacco taxes in the country, after Chicago; a single pack of cigarettes often costs more than $12. And New York became one of the first major cities to ban smoking in offices and bars. That change affected the daily lives of the city’s rich professionals, but also of their pinched support staffs. The city’s smoking rate plummeted during the 2000s, as its residents’ life expectancy rose.
The city also imposed novel regulations on restaurants and food, banning trans fats that are associated with heart disease, and requiring chain restaurants to post calorie counts on menus. Efforts to tax or limit soda sales were unsuccessful, but public campaigns to discourage unhealthy eating were widespread.
Earlier research looked more closely at New York’s life expectancy gains and identified similar sources for the good news. A study by city health officials in 2013 credited much of the improvement to reductions in smoking and related heart disease. A study from researchers at the University of Pennsylvania found similar factors but also noted that the city’s high share of immigrants played a role in the city’s wellness.
New York may not be the best place for impoverished children to climb the economic ladder, but it is a place where lower-income residents generally enjoy at least one crucial benefit of wealth — a longer life.
