International Business|In Brexit Debate, English Fishermen Eye Waters Free of E.U.
In Brexit Debate, English Fishermen Eye Waters Free of E.U.
BRIXHAM, England — Mike Walker, a retired fisherman here, sums up what many in this southern English port town think of the European Union.
Britain’s membership in the 28-nation union has encouraged France, Spain, the Netherlands and “the rest of them lot” to “come rape our waters,” Mr. Walker said.
Others here might use less extreme language. But Mr. Walker’s opinion resonates in this town of 17,000. And it signals a wider British discomfort with the European Union before the country votes in a June 23 referendum on whether to quit the union.
Whether their grievances involve fish, immigrants or meddlesome rules, many Britons resent what they view as interference by European institutions and bureaucrats based in Brussels.
In the case of Brixham, England’s largest commercial fishing port, many here want Britain to regain control of the waters within 200 miles of shore. Those fishing grounds are now managed by Brussels and packed with European vessels that trawl with nets and sometimes scrape the seabed.
Worldwide, most sovereign countries, including the United States and Canada, have dominion over fishing rights within the 200-mile limit. Brixham’s fishermen argue that a Britain free of the European Union’s oversight could banish foreign vessels and give jobs back to the British.
Nationwide, public opinion polls indicate the vote on a British exit, Brexit, as it is known, will be too close to call. And even in the fishing industry, Brixham’s view on Brexit is not shared in all British seaports.
A strong pro-European Union sentiment persists, for example, in some of Scotland’s ports, which sell lucrative catches of salmon, shellfish and lobster to other parts of Europe. If Britain leaves the union, Scottish fishermen might be hit by large tariffs on those exports.
Brixham’s fishermen, on the other hand, have few international-trade incentives because they sell mainly to the domestic market. As they see it, Brexit would mean fewer foreign competitors. Less competition might also help stoke local fishermen’s incomes, which now range from 30,000 pounds to 70,000 pounds a year, or about $43,000 to $99,700.
Brixham’s economic motives merge almost seamlessly with cultural tradition on this side of the English Channel, embracing a historical narrative of a Britain perpetually under siege by the rest of Europe.
The walls of a nearby 15th-century fort are still embedded with French cannonballs.
In 1588, Sir Francis Drake fought off the Spanish Armada in these waters.
A century later, William of Orange, the Protestant Dutch prince, landed in Brixham with 14,000 troops to help overthrow King James II of England, a Catholic. It was a rare case in which the locals welcomed foreign intervention, as commemorated by a statue in town that still honors Prince William.
Now, for many in Brixham, the enemy is not a single invader but the assembled multitude of the European Union.
Locals particularly resent Brussels for its Common Fisheries Policy, which for decades has given all European fishing fleets equal access to the region’s waters. The policy has proved disastrous because it set allowable-catch levels too high, according to Robin Churchill, a professor of international law at the University of Dundee in Scotland, who noted that the cod population collapsed in the early 2000s.
Other specialists argue that British waters were overfished long before the fisheries policy took effect in 1983. And they cite some success at rebuilding fish populations since 2003, when the European Union required fishermen to reduce fleet sizes and set limits on the number of fishing days each year. Scientists say the North Sea cod is now recovering strongly and is likely to be certified as sustainable next year.
That would not have happened without European Union pressure on the British government, which was too close to the fishing industry, said Howard Wood, chairman of the Community of Arran Seabed Trust. The group aims to protect marine habitats around the Isle of Arran, off western Scotland.
If Brexit happens, Mr. Howard said, “We just have to hope that we don’t go back to our old bad habit” of flouting rules and overfishing.
Even the supposed Britishness of Brixham’s industry is not all that it might seem. Many of the port’s fishermen, including Mr. Sharp, employ Filipinos, who help fill out crews because too many local residents shun the work.
Fishermen from elsewhere in Europe covet British waters because of their relatively large supply and diversity of fish species. The British Isles sit on a huge continental shelf that allows sea life to thrive in the shallow waters where most fish are caught. The Atlantic Ocean off Spain and Portugal, by contrast, is poorly stocked because the seabed drops off sharply.
Under the existing European Union regulations, British boats have a higher catch quota in the country’s waters than foreigners do. But many fishermen from other parts of Europe have taken advantage of European Union law to set up companies in Britain. This enables them to buy British vessels, which are used to fish under Britain’s quota. A British government effort to fight this practice, known as quota hopping, was blocked in 1992 by the European Court of Justice.
More than a third of the fleets operating off England’s southwest coast are owned by foreigners, said Jim Portus, a former British fisheries regulator who is now chief executive of the South Western Fish Producer, a trade group.
British fishermen, of course, are entitled to fish in seas off other European Union countries. But “they don’t have anything we want,’’ said Ian Perkes, a buyer who haggles every morning in Brixham’s fish market wearing a bowler hat.
Richard Barnes, a University of Hull Law School professor who specializes in marine environmental law, notes that if Britain left the European Union, the country would still need to cooperate with individual members of the bloc on managing populations of fish, which cross national boundaries.
And if Britain wants to maintain a free trade relationship with the bloc, Mr. Barnes said, it would still need to give European nations access to British waters.
Mr. Walker, the Brixham retiree, referred to the long-running cod wars that ended in 1976 only after Britain agreed not to fish within 200 miles of Iceland, which is not a member of the European Union.
