Ben Platt is bent at the waist, his face reddening as his head nears his white Converse All-Stars, while his voice teacher thumps him on the back with a squishy blue ball.
It’s nearly noon, but Mr. Platt, the 22-year-old star of the new musical “Dear Evan Hansen,” hasn’t used his voice much yet (did that bit of singing in the shower count?), and his vocal coach, Liz Caplan, is worried that the scrunched-up posture of his high-anxiety character is tempering his tenor.
So he’s opening everything up: inhaling peppermint oil, making a wing formation with his hands around his larynx, working his tongue around his teeth. He drinks water, bites down on his pinkie, makes a snoring sound, swivels his hips. He drinks more water. And, puh-kee, ee, ee, ooh, wah, he works his voice up the musical scale, until, ultimately, he finds his lost falsetto.
Mr. Platt has already done enough musicals to make a revue. He started at 6, as the prince in an amateur “Cinderella,” and has not stopped — Winthrop in “The Music Man,” Patrick in “Mame,” the Baker in “Into the Woods,” Stine in “City of Angels,” Pippin in, well, “Pippin.” He has starred in “Guys and Dolls” four times, three as Sky Masterson (once in Hebrew) and one as Nathan Detroit.
Now Mr. Platt is poised for a different kind of breakthrough. For the first time, he is originating a stage role, as the title character in “Dear Evan Hansen,” a darkly poignant show about an awkward high school student whose social standing is transformed by a mushrooming lie. The musical is in previews Off Broadway, at Second Stage, where it is scheduled to open May 1; its backers hope that next season it will make the leap to Broadway.
The show has a promising creative team: The director is Michael Greif, who directed “Rent” and “Next to Normal” on Broadway, and the music and lyrics are by Benj Pasek and Justin Paul, a young, already Tony-nominated songwriting pair. But the story deals with themes that could make it a tough sell in the commercial marketplace: bullying, teenage suicide and the perils of social media.
In the show, Mr. Platt delivers a master class in the physicalization of adolescent discomfort. He twitches his eyes and his mouth, tugs on his sleeve, scratches a wrist, picks at a nail, grabs his back pockets, fidgets with a pencil. His voice is halting and soft, punctuated with doubt.
His character was developed through trial and error — many of the verbal tics were scripted by the book writer, Steven Levenson, while the physical gestures were honed by Mr. Platt in rehearsal.
He has transformed his physique for the role, dropping 35 pounds from his Elder Cunningham body by eliminating dairy and gluten from his diet. “I’d never want to make myself unhealthy in any way for a role, but I also felt like he’s not a kid that can stand to eat very much,” he said.
Mr. Platt has been with the show since its first reading, nearly two years ago, and he has shaped the character, and it has shaped him, in ways that are now difficult to disentangle. Even out of character, he tugs on his sleeves and toys with a jacket zipper.
“At first I felt very separate from most of the things I endowed Evan with, but now that I’ve lived with him for so long, it’s kind of bled through,” Mr. Platt said.
But he says Evan’s social anxiety is significantly more pronounced than his own.
Growing up as Marc Platt’s son provided Ben with obvious advantages (as well as intimate knowledge of “Wicked” — he’s seen the musical 27 times, and can sing every track; his brother, Jonah, is now playing Fiyero in the show’s Broadway cast). But it has also given Ben something to prove.
He was deemed too young for either part, but the director of “Normal,” Mr. Greif, and the writers of “Dogfight,” Mr. Pasek and Mr. Paul, were impressed by Mr. Platt’s combination of strong voice, comic timing and emotional intelligence.
In the meantime, Mr. Platt had finished high school (Harvard-Westlake, a prep school in Los Angeles) and had been admitted to college (Columbia University). But a few weeks before the start of his freshman year, he was offered the role in “Pitch Perfect.” (“I’d never really played the nerdier, outcastier, marginalized guy before, but I really liked the character and I wanted to try my hand at it.”) Instead of moving to New York, he headed to Baton Rouge, La., where the film, a comedy about college a cappella competitions, was shot.
In the fall of 2012, Mr. Platt began his studies at Columbia. But he only lasted six weeks before being cast in the Chicago company of “Mormon.” That was the end of his college career (at least for now — his parents, while fully supportive of his acting career, also still hope he’ll find a way to pursue an education).
Then came Evan Hansen. Inspired in part by the death of a student at Mr. Pasek’s high school, the composers had been exploring the idea of a musical about how collective grief plays out in the era of social media. A producer, Stacey Mindich, introduced them to Mr. Levenson, who wrote the musical’s book. And in 2014 they called Mr. Platt for a reading; he has been bound up with the character since, so much that dialogue and songs have been written for his voice.
By now, actor and character are almost like friends.
