The United States women’s national team sued U.S. Soccer for gender discrimination in federal court on March 8. Among the players’ complaints is that members of the team are still paid less than members of the men’s national team even though both do the same work under the same working conditions and expectations. This primer, from 2016, explains in broad terms (and using numbers from that time) the differing pay structures under which the teams are paid by U.S. Soccer.
The core fact is not in dispute: The players on the World Cup-winning United States women’s national soccer team earn less money than their counterparts on the men’s national team. After that truth, things are muddier. How much less? How can that be fair? And most important: What is being done about it?
U.S. Soccer and the union representing the players on the women’s team have traded court filings and accusations — in a lawsuit filed by U.S. Soccer over the validity of the team’s collective bargaining agreement and in a wage-discrimination complaint filed by five top players last month. Amid all of this, we gave both sides the opportunity to make their case using U.S. Soccer’s public (and private) financial data. What we found suggests a complicated battlefield.
In a wage-discrimination complaint filed with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in March, five top players on the women’s team accused U.S. Soccer of paying them and their teammates about a quarter of what their counterparts on the men’s national team receive. Wielding the federation’s own financial reports as evidence, the women excoriated a compensation and bonus structure that they said tilted heavily in favor of the men and pointed out that their team’s on-field success had produced millions of dollars in revenue for U.S. Soccer in 2015 and was projected to do the same this year.
But in 2015, the women’s team won the World Cup and then embarked on a scheduled 10-city victory tour that yielded an eight-figure bump to U.S. Soccer’s bottom line.
As a result, the women brought in more than $23 million in game revenue, about $16 million more than the federation had projected. An anomaly? Yes. And a welcome one if you are U.S. Soccer.
After expenses, the women turned a profit of $6.6 million last year. The men? Their profit was just under $2 million. Looking ahead, U.S. Soccer’s 2017 budget predicts that trend will be repeated: Expecting another Olympic gold medal, and another victory tour, the federation has forecast a profit of more than $5 million for the women’s team in the next fiscal year (on $17.5 million in revenue).
The men? U.S. Soccer figures they will lose about $1 million this year (on only $9 million in revenue).
The Women Make a Quarter as Much? Really?
Yes and no. According to figures provided by U.S. Soccer, since 2008 it has paid 12 players at least $1 million. Six of those players were men, and six were women. And the women hold their own near the top of the pay scale; the best-paid woman made about $1.2 million from 2008 to 2015, while the top man made $1.4 million in the same period. Some women in the top 10 even made more than their male counterparts over those years. But the numbers diverge down the list. At No. 25, the female player made just under $341,000, and the corresponding male player supplemented his salary by about $580,000. At No. 50, the male player made 10 times as much as his female counterpart.
Part of that is structural; a bigger player pool, a more fluid roster and higher game bonuses have given more men a chance to take money out of U.S. Soccer’s cash drawer. But there is also another important distinction about the women’s pay, said Rich Nichols, the general counsel for the United States Women’s National Soccer Team Players Association. “Seventy-five percent of that compensation, both last year and over those eight years, is directly related to winning championships,” he said. In other words, Nichols said, the women have to perform at a world-beating level just to keep pace financially. And that victory tour money? The women had to play the extra games to get it. “The men,” Nichols said, “get paid just for showing up.” What he and his players want, they say, is equal pay for equal work.
But Is It Equal Work?
Not exactly. To qualify for the Women’s World Cup, for example, the United States women’s team plays five games in a single two-week tournament.
The men’s qualifying road is a two-year, 16-game slog across North and Central America and the Caribbean. U.S. Soccer argues that the roster bonuses for successful qualification — $15,000 for the women in 2015, $55,000 for the men in 2014 — reflect that.
And while U.S. Soccer also counts the women’s biweekly salaries (compensation that the male players do not receive) as a mitigating factor in its favor in the pay-equity dispute, the women play more games on a year-to-year basis and must win them to claim their bonuses, effectively requiring them to work harder and perform better just to keep pace.
How Are the Players Paid?
The pay plans differ for the men’s and women’s national teams, who have their own players’ associations and negotiate their own collective bargaining agreements. The women’s team’s pay is a mix of a base salary — $72,000 for the majority of players on the regular roster — plus a modest game bonus ($1,350) for each game won. (The women do not receive game bonuses if they tie or lose matches.) U.S. Soccer also pays the salaries of the national team players who compete in the N.W.S.L., the nascent American women’s professional league, as well as providing some health insurance benefits, severance pay for players cut from the team and maternity leave at half pay if they become pregnant.
The men, meanwhile, operate on a pay-for-play system: Those players who are called in for matches are eligible for roster and game bonuses considerably higher than those paid to the women, but a player must be called into camp to receive anything. So when Tim Howard took a year off after the 2014 World Cup, he earned no pay from U.S. Soccer for the games he missed. Any player who is injured, or one who is on the fringes of the national team player pool and is not called in for months or years, receives nothing until he returns to camp. The security net is that every male player in the pool, unlike the women, has the advantage of falling back on a lucrative salary from his professional club.
Why Is This Coming Up Now?
It is important to view the dispute between U.S. Soccer and the women’s national team in a larger context. In the wake of its Women’s World Cup triumph, the popularity and profitability of the team are at record levels. At the same time, the women’s national team players’ association is in the middle of negotiations for a new collective bargaining agreement with U.S. Soccer — one that is likely to determine the players’ pay and working conditions through the next World Cup or two. (The battle over artificial turf lurks right behind the pay fight.) The players contend that their big year in 2015 is a sign of a bright future and that their visibility and on-field success have made them the driving economic force of U.S. Soccer. The federation counters, using figures like those in the charts above, that the women have received comparable pay and that men’s team still consistently produces a larger share of U.S. Soccer’s revenue year to year.
Should Revenue Matter When It Comes to Pay?
Sunil Gulati, U.S. Soccer’s president and a lecturer in economics at Columbia University, contends that revenue has to be a big part of any discussion about compensation. “A lot of different things go into the compensation for the women’s players,” he said last month, citing revenue and performance as the most prominent examples. “We want to compensate them fairly.” Gulati also said that television ratings were another factor; while the women’s team broke viewing records during the Women’s World Cup, ratings for men’s games have been more than double those for women’s games, on average, since 2012, according to Nielsen calculations. Excluding World Cup games, the men’s team’s ratings are almost four times as high.
The new FIFA president, Gianni Infantino, seems to agree with Gulati’s point of view. He told Sports Illustrated last week that “the prize money today is linked with the revenues that are generated.” But Infantino has also expressed a desire to create a new women’s division in FIFA, focused solely on promoting women’s soccer globally. And everyone can agree that FIFA’s putting its shoulder behind improving opportunity and compensation in women’s soccer, which remains an afterthought — or nonexistent — in many countries, would be a huge step forward.
What About Those Per Diems and Sponsor Payments?
The ones in which U.S. Soccer pays the women $60 a day for expenses and the men $75? Or $3,000 for a sponsor appearance while the men receive $3,750? These are probably the most embarrassing numbers in the pay-equity debate for U.S. Soccer, because they are indefensible. (Carli Lloyd mocked them acidly in her recent New York Times essay, writing that “maybe they think women are smaller and thus eat less.”) In truth, those payments were equal before 2015, when an adjustment negotiated into the men’s C.B.A. increased them for the men. The problem was that there was no clause in the women’s C.B.A. that would ensure that the payments remained equal in the event that the men — whose C.B.A. comes up for renewal in different years — received a bump.
Can’t U.S. Soccer Address That?
What About Those Vastly Different World Cup Bonuses?
U.S. Soccer received $9 million when the men’s team advanced to the second round of the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, but only about $2 million when the women won the 2015 World Cup in Canada. That is because FIFA pays out far more to participants in the men’s World Cup, a financial juggernaut, than it does to Women’s World Cup teams. Could U.S. Soccer choose to allocate that revenue differently, or to pool it to ensure that it was at least equal? Yes. But the men’s team would surely object.
How Much Less Are Female Soccer Players Paid?
Members of the United States women’s national soccer team includes several examples of wage discrimination in their complaint to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
The E.E.O.C. complaint will take a minimum of six months to investigate, according to labor experts familiar with the process, meaning that its resolution might not come until after a new collective bargaining agreement is in place. The sides continue to trade filings in U.S. Soccer’s suit over the validity of the current C.B.A. in federal court in Chicago. A decision is not expected until early June. If the court rules for the players, and throws out the C.B.A., they will have enormous leverage on the eve of the Olympics, including the ability to strike. If U.S. Soccer wins, there will be little to do but continue negotiations on a new agreement before the existing one expires on Dec. 31. In either case, the players will probably emerge with an improved deal — but only if serious discussions resume.
The sides, who last met face to face in March, agreed on Wednesday to sit down again — in mid-May.