When Juwan Stallings visited the Brooklyn Museum last weekend, he wanted more information about the subject of an oil portrait by Henri Fantin-Latour in the museum’s newly refurbished European galleries.
Mr. Stallings, 19, looked intently, snapped a photo and then typed rapidly on his phone. Within seconds, he had an answer in the form of a text message.
Mr. Stallings wasn’t texting with a friend. The answer came from a museum employee two floors down, one of six full-time staff members dedicated to engaging with visitors through the museum’s smartphone app, ASK Brooklyn Museum.
First released for iPhone last year, with an Android version made available this month, ASK is startlingly different from most museum apps. There is no audio guide, no map and no store. You can’t search the collection. Nor can you use it to share your experience on social media.
What you can do with it is chat with a member of the ASK staff, which is trained to help visitors engage more deeply and make personal connections with what’s on display. It’s like having a curator in your pocket: When you send a question or a comment, a team member can immediately see where in the museum you are and what artworks are nearby. After providing an answer, the staff member often follows up with a personal observation or a question to prompt closer examination.
Asked if he visited the museum often, Mr. Stallings said he had not in the past. “But now I’m starting to, because the questions that I have can be answered,” he said.
Visitors may be tentative at first. But once they try it, they tend to keep going: The average user sends 13 messages during a visit, said Shelley Bernstein, the museum’s vice director for digital engagement and technology. And there’s more going on behind the scenes.
All of the user chats are retained for future conversations in the app and as a resource for curators. This month the museum reopened three of its permanent-collection galleries after reinstalling them, one of the first visible shifts since Anne Pasternak became the museum’s director last year. Curators consulted ASK data before making their changes.
This emphasis on studying visitors’ reactions reflects a significant philosophical shift.
Each member of the audience engagement team has a major and a minor specialty area, and a rich library of reference material at hand. They are encouraged to use a casual tone and to share their own opinions freely.
Personalized communication is important for younger visitors, said Matthew Fisher, a principal at Night Kitchen Interactive, a Philadelphia firm that has designed apps and interactive elements for dozens of museums, but was not involved with ASK. “Digital natives are more interested in actively synthesizing than in passively receiving information,” he said.
The ASK app is free and does not require any registration or login. It works only inside the museum, which does not collect personal data from users, although the ASK team can gain access to a user’s previous chats.
That approach is unusual among museum apps, which are often larded with images and text.
When ASK was in the early stages of development in 2013, it became clear that visitors craved personalized information, Ms. Bernstein said. They wanted to talk about what they saw but were reluctant to approach docents or ASK employees who were assigned to the galleries.
The messaging interface mimics familiar chatting applications and is simple by design.
But a significant hurdle remains: In the first year of iPhone-only testing, about 10,000 people downloaded it. But only 1 percent of museum visitors were using it.
The museum hopes to raise that figure to 5 to 7 percent through its new Android phone capability, with a brand-new desk for the ASK team in a high-traffic area right off the lobby and by stationing employees in the lobby to talk up the app.
The project is supported by funding from Bloomberg Connects, which has pledged more than $80 million to 15 cultural institutions to improve the visitor experience through technology. Among the other grantees are the Guggenheim Museum, the Museum of Modern Art and the Tate Modern in London.
The chats invite users to share their own opinions. Some people viewing Judy Chicago’s pioneering feminist art installation, “The Dinner Party” (1974-79), on the museum’s third floor, have criticized the work’s exclusion of women who are transgender members of ethnic minorities. Responding was tricky; curators and the ASK team worked together to develop answers that would respect visitors’ opinions but also offer the work’s larger context. Those replies are now visible in the museum’s online page for the work, turning something that began as a personal conversation into part of the museum’s public face.
For a museum with origins deep in the late 19th century, it’s a major turnaround.
