It was an odd pilgrimage on Friday afternoon.
Several brown-robed Franciscan friars showed up on a small bridge in Brooklyn that crosses the Gowanus Canal, just as the late afternoon rush was kicking into gear on the nearby Gowanus Expressway.
They were followed by a group of blue-robed nuns, and then by students and faculty members of St. Francis College in Brooklyn Heights, as well as longtime local residents.
They gathered on Friday — Earth Day — at what is widely considered the country’s dirtiest waterway and perhaps the most toxic spot in New York City, for what they called the annual Blessing of the Gowanus.
Peering down from the Carroll Street Bridge at the putrid waters of the Gowanus, they offered words of devotion for a miracle.
The friars, from a nearby Roman Catholic church, Our Lady of Peace, asked for God’s help in cleaning up the canal and took a dig or two at the government officials in charge of the cleanup.
Father Boyle said that blessing the canal sounded like as good an idea as any to solve a century’s worth of toxic sludge.
“People around here have been talking about the pollution in this canal as long as I can remember, so we said: ‘Can it hurt to pray? Who knows what can happen?’” he said.
The nuns, who are also based at Our Lady of Peace, led the group in song. Neighbors watched the blessing with a mixture of hope and skepticism, noting the slow pace of the cleanup being undertaken by New York City agencies and overseen by the federal Environmental Protection Agency.
“They say they’re cleaning it up now, but not in our lifetime — I’m never going to see it,” Rose Castellvetre, 80, said.
In 2010, the government designated the 1.8-mile canal, which juts into northwest Brooklyn from New York Harbor, a federal Superfund site, paving the way for a $500 million cleanup project that would include dredging the contaminated sludge that has accumulated at the bottom of the canal, from years of industrial and sewer discharges.
The cleanup has been recently complicated by controversy over where to build the larger of two sewage retention tanks, to reduce the amount of raw sewage flow from local neighborhoods into the canal.
For the larger tank, an eight-million-gallon sewage retention chamber, the E.P.A. had favored a location under Thomas Greene Playground, a block from the canal, calling it the least expensive and quickest option since the city already owns the property.
But city officials preferred a nearby property, which might involve a lengthy eminent domain acquisition of property. The agency announced this month that the city could proceed with the purchase.
Katia Kelly, a longtime Carroll Gardens resident and a member of the Gowanus Superfund Community Advisory Group, said her group was “at a loss for words” upon hearing the decision because the acquisition could probably delay the cleanup further.
From the bridge, bottles of holy water were poured down into the decidedly unholy waters of the Gowanus. Some of the drops splattered onto its filmy surface and clumps of trash floating in the canal.
Despite the unpleasant backdrop, parts of the neighborhood are rapidly gentrifying, and the din of construction from nearby luxury buildings being erected could be heard as the blessings were offered.
