If Paul Ryan really meant what he said, the Republican Party has lost its best chance to take the White House and maintain control of the Senate.
“Let me be clear: I do not want nor will I accept the nomination for our party,” Ryan told reporters on Tuesday afternoon at a news conference held in the Republican National Committee’s headquarters on Capitol Hill.
Even after Ryan’s declaration, there were some political figures who still consider Ryan a possible nominee. Harold Ickes, a top adviser to Priorities USA, the super PAC supporting Clinton, envisaged a scenario in which Ryan would find himself having difficulty turning down the nomination.
If it gets down to a deadlocked convention, and party leaders come to him and say, “Paul, we are going to go down in flames, we are going to lose the Senate and lose ground in the House. Only you can help redeem the party,” it would be pretty hard for him to say no.
Without Ryan at the top of the ticket, the Republican Party faces the likelihood of disaster on Nov. 8, assuming that either Donald Trump or Ted Cruz is the nominee.
What makes Ryan’s statement painful to Republican leaders and a welcome relief to Democrats is that there is a consensus in both parties that Ryan is far better equipped to capitalize on Hillary Clinton’s vulnerabilities than either Trump or Cruz — both of whom have negative ratings that come close to or exceed Clinton’s.
Since late December 2010, when Clinton’s favorable rating reached a high point of 61.8 percent, with a negative rating of 32.4 percent, public opinion has shifted radically.
The most recent data shows her unfavorable rating at 55 percent and her positive rating at 40 percent.
Clinton’s negatives are exceeded only by those of Donald Trump, who now holds the record for the highest negatives of a presidential candidate at 64 unfavorable to 30 positive.
Ted Cruz’s negatives are only slightly lower than Clinton’s at 53.4.
The exceptionally hostile views of all three leading candidates gave momentum — at least until Tuesday afternoon — to speculation among Republican leaders about a Ryan nomination. They do not want to blow the opportunity of a winnable contest. That their speculation can no longer focus on Ryan does not mean that their speculation will end.
At the same time, all the talk split members of the Republican establishment into two camps: those who hoped to see Ryan or some other noncandidate nominated and those who see any attempt to nominate Ryan or another noncandidate as a rejection of the 14.6 million votes cast for Trump and Cruz so far. Between them, Trump and Cruz have won 55 percent of the votes in Republican primaries and caucuses.
Karl Rove, who ran both of George W. Bush’s successful presidential campaigns, would clearly like his party to pick someone other than Trump or Cruz at the Republican convention in Cleveland in July.
Without naming anyone, Rove described such a candidate as someone who “has been battle tested, and has strong conservative principles and the ability to articulate them.” If the party picks a nominee who “has those convictions that they can express in a compelling way, we could come out of the convention in relatively strong position.” It certainly sounded as though Rove had Ryan in mind.
I think it’s just natural that that speculation would happen because he is one of the great leaders here on Capitol Hill and one of the people who bring both sides, all sides together.
The Ryan news conference Tuesday provided some vindication to critics of Rove and Hatch and their desire for the Republican nominee to emerge not from the original batch of candidates but from elsewhere.
People inside the beltway are dreaming. It’s going to be either Trump or Cruz. We are in a populist moment in this country. Unless Trump completely collapses in the next couple of months, he will be the nominee. Ryan doesn’t want the nomination under these circumstances.
Rich Lowry, editor of the anti-Trump National Review, believes it would be politically suicidal, given the level of support the two have received in the primaries and caucuses thus far, for the Republican Party to nominate anyone other than Trump or Cruz.
I think a Trump nomination would be disastrous. With that being said, you can’t disenfranchise people. If Trump wins the 1,237 or wins in the first, second, third ballot, it must go to him. 
In order for any white knight to have a chance of ending up with a draft nomination, the first ballot at the Republican convention in Cleveland would have to be inconclusive — with neither Trump nor Cruz winning a majority of the 2,472 delegates.
In subsequent balloting, in order to get another candidate’s name placed in nomination under current party rule 40b — “Each candidate for nomination for President of the United States and Vice President of the United States shall demonstrate the support of a majority of the delegates from each of eight (8) or more states, severally, before the presentation of the name of that candidate for nomination” — supporters of a player to be named later would need signed petitions from a majority of delegates in eight states, which is no easy task because many (although not all) delegates are committed to one of the candidates who ran in the primaries.
As recently as April 7, Ryan had fueled discussion that he was interested in a presidential bid by posting a video that for all intents and purposes looks like a presidential campaign commercial. The video shows Ryan speaking to House interns, with musical crescendos and shots taken from at least six different camera angles.
What really bothers me the most about politics these days is this notion of identity politics: that we’re going to win an election by dividing people, rather than inspiring people on our common humanity and our common ideals and our common culture on the things that should unify us. We all want to be prosperous. We all want to be healthy. We want everybody to succeed. We want people to reach their potential in their lives.
Now, liberals and conservatives are going to disagree with one another on that. No problem. That’s what this is all about. So let’s have a battle of ideas. Let’s have a contest of whose ideas are better and why our ideas are better.
Speculation about a Ryan candidacy had been intensely worrisome to Democrats, which is why his disavowal on Tuesday was such welcome news in Democratic precincts.
Republicans continue to exhibit extraordinary division over who their best nominee might be, particularly for April of a presidential election year. This conflict plays out across intraparty boundaries but often occurs within individuals, too. No one illustrates these internal contradictions more colorfully than Alex Castellanos, a media consultant. Castellanos worked on behalf of such candidates as Bob Dole, George W. Bush, Jeb Bush and Mitt Romney. Most famously (or notoriously), he produced the “white hands” ad for Senator Jesse Helms in 1990, when Helms was running for re-election against Harvey Gantt, the black mayor of Charlotte.
Trump has earned the nomination. He won it, fair and square, and we should respect that. Donald Trump whipped the establishment and it is too late for the limp G.O.P. establishment to ask their mommy to step in and rewrite the rules because they were humiliated for their impotence.
If Mr. Trump is one hundred or more votes away from the nomination, it is unlikely he can find the delegates to get the ball in the end zone on the first ballot. He will turn the ball over on downs though nearly at the goal line. On the second ballot, he drops 200 or 300 votes or more and starts bleeding. Ultimately, he bleeds to death on the convention floor — which you think would be good news for the candidate in second place, Senator Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) unless, of course, you’ve met Senator Ted Cruz.
Senator Cruz has no value beyond being an alternative to Donald Trump. If Trump collapses, the need for Ted Cruz evaporates, so Cruz is at risk of collapsing, too. Senator Cruz is the unpleasant medicine the Republican Party is willing to swallow when it is sick, but not when it is feeling healthier. As Donald Trump backs out of the convention hall, Cruz is likely to get a run but then fall short, which gives John Kasich his moment.
Then Castellanos wound things up with a pitch for an alternative to those currently running: “Why not wipe the slate clean and go for what delegates really want,” someone who comes in unsullied by the primary battle.
If no dark horse Republican candidate emerges and if Bernie Sanders does not catch up to Hillary Clinton, the election will feature either Clinton vs. Trump or Clinton vs. Cruz. In that case, the next president is likely to win not because he or she is the most loved, but because he or she is the least hated.