Arthur: Hi, Gail. I hope you enjoyed our week off. Although American politics almost ground to a halt last week because we didn’t do The Conversation.
Gail: I hate when that happens.
A friend of mine remarked that Ryan has exactly the two characteristics we most need in a president today — he is amply qualified and has no desire to run.
Gail: You’re making the Republican Party sound like — a guy. Nothing more desirable than the person who doesn’t want to go out with you.
Arthur: We’re giving dating advice now. Readers come for political insight and end up learning how to find love.
Arthur: Hey, that just adds two more admirable traits: He places a premium on family values but is willing to sacrifice for his country.
But I sense you were dubious of Ryan’s reluctance to become speaker. I actually think he was in earnest. He knew the job would be immensely challenging given the polarization within the Republican conference. And he had the foresight to see that he would actually be more effective if the job didn’t eliminate his time with his kids.
Gail: I am sure he had those thoughts. Just wish to point out that if it was a woman in that situation, the fact that she had even mentioned considerations of children would have sparked a trillion blog posts about How Women Don’t Really Want to Have It All.
Arthur: Maybe so — but in any case, I think he set a good example. He also assured his party members that he could fund-raise and provide intellectual leadership without hitting the road every single weekend. So far, it’s worked out, and he’s positioning himself not only as the leader of the House Republicans but effectively of the whole Republican Party.
Gail: Except that nobody has voted for him.
Arthur: Nobody besides his constituents who elected him nine times, the strong House majority that selected him as speaker, and the 61 million Americans who voted for him to be vice president. I think Ryan might actually be the most popularly vetted Republican in America today.
Gail: I don’t actually believe there is a Republican Party anymore, Arthur. There are two groups, one of them white, working class populists who are desperately unhappy about feeling that America no longer belongs to them. And the other, economic conservatives who want to — reduce entitlements.
I am sort of feeling No. 2 are your guys.
Arthur: We’re seeing that both parties are deeply fragmented. These days the Democratic Party can be split up in a similar way, with old-school centrists on one side and a utopian progressive wing on the other. Populists are making up about the same percentage on each side at this moment. Almost every primary election brings grand theories about permanent fractures, but each side usually winds up coming together — though not always too comfortably.
If we had a parliamentary system, we would most likely wind up with four big groupings: Hard leftists and right-wing nationalists would each win about 15-20 percent, and then social democrats and the center-right would claim 30-35 percent each.
Gail: You may be right but I do feel discussions about how much better things would work if we had a parliamentary system are not fruitful.
Here’s the part about Ryan that interests me. He’s part of the Kasich syndrome. Very conservative guy whose tax plan doesn’t add up, suddenly looking extremely reasonable because he’s not a maniac on issues like immigration and he can occasionally work with the other side. Or even work with his own side, which is more than you can say for the two leading Republican nominees for president.
Arthur: This is the core reason why I think Ryan will be a big part of the Republican reconstruction: He is unquestionably a true conservative, but hates the ideological holy war and believes that debates can be civil, respectful competitions of ideas leading to some areas of agreement. I recognize all this sounds sort of avant garde these days, but I predict a growing appetite for unifying leadership in the coming year.
Gail: We’ll see how that goes. Meanwhile, Speaker Ryan, the former chairman of the House Budget Committee, seems to be having a little trouble getting his people to pass a budget. As far as I can tell, the House hasn’t even got its act together to follow the Senate lead and make the bison the national mammal. If you can’t occasionally come up with a new Official Thing, you are not really living in the world of consensus.
Arthur: I’m optimistic that consensus can be found, both on bison and budget. Speaking of official state-sanctioned symbols, you had a nice column on this the other day. I was not aware that there are some official state guns.
Gail: My favorite topic. By the way, the governor of Tennessee just vetoed a bill to make the Bible the official state book. Beware of a legislative override.
Arthur: Do you see someone like Paul Ryan in the Democrats? That is: young, smart, really liberal, but keen to work with others?
Gail: This is a painful subject.
Arthur: It’s O.K., it will stay just between you and me.
Gail: The Democratic Party’s upper reaches are practically youth-free, and that’s a real problem. Partly it has to do with the party’s failure to take and keep control of state governments. Partly it’s the seniority system in Congress that leaves the leadership looking very — senior. There are five Democratic senators, by my count, in their 40s and the only ones with anything approaching national recognition would be Kirsten Gillibrand from New York, Cory Booker from New Jersey and maybe Chris Murphy of Connecticut, who’s done a lot of work on gun control. Plus, Martin Heinrich of New Mexico once had a reality TV show with the Republican senator Jeff Flake that asked whether senators of the opposite party could get along if they were stranded on a desert island.
The twin Castro brothers from Texas are other much-mentioned names, particularly Secretary of Housing Julian Castro, but so far I can’t say he’s exactly been a cabinet superstar.
Arthur: It’s reassuring to learn that when liberals speak admiringly about the Castro brothers, they aren’t talking about Fidel and Raúl.
Gail: Knew that one was coming.
All right, I’ve vented. At least nobody calls any of these people exceptionally reasonable and bipartisan just because they haven’t had a tantrum on national television.
Arthur: I like some of the people you mentioned quite a lot, especially Cory Booker. He’s an original thinker and a nice person (and no tantrums).
The G.O.P. is enjoying a bit of a youth movement in the Senate right now. Two-thirds of the 15 senators age 50 or younger are Republicans, and this group is notably focused on creative policy making. That ascendant leadership offers a bright spot for depressed conservatives.
Gail: I was impressed by the Republicans’ youth movement this presidential year until I realized all the youths were terrible. And politically very, very old.
On the other side of the coin — did you see the Democratic debate in Brooklyn? Two people, both eligible for Social Security, yelling at each other for two hours. Marco Rubio could never have held up under that.
Arthur: For Marco, it might have been like watching his parents yell at each other. Who could stand that?
Right afterward, Bernie Sanders flew off to the Vatican, where he was very publicly trying to get in to see the pope. The Holy Father’s spokesman put the kibosh on an official meeting, but the pope met him anyway — a big political win for Sanders.
So I know you’re excited to vote in your primary today. Are you willing to say who is getting your vote? If not, how about a prediction on how it will come out?
Gail: It is interesting that the humble guy from Burlington was visiting with the pope while his international celebrity opponent was playing dominoes at an East Harlem senior center. As for the primary on Tuesday, even opinion journalists generally don’t reveal who we voted for. This is a rule that’s not hard to follow in New York, since until this season nobody ever cared.
Arthur: I’m going to go out on a limb and guess you’re not going for Trump?
Gail: Well, I do have that angry letter from him saying I look like a dog, which would probably be worth some money if he became president. Although people have pointed out to me that there are probably thousands of women with similar missives filed away.
I’m presuming New York will vote for Trump and Clinton. Even if Ted Cruz hadn’t made the crack about New York values, New Yorkers would never find him their kinda guy.
On the other hand, I am sorry to say that Donald Trump is somebody that many New Yorkers can relate to. It’s terrible — I’m always making fun of Texas for the politicians they’ve foisted on us, and now look what we’ve gone and done.
Arthur: I lived in Syracuse for seven years. Up there, all four of the front-runners — even the three New Yorkers — seem pretty exotic, actually. But I get your point.
Gail: On the Democratic side, my only two conclusions are 1) Bernie Sanders is not really constituted to be a president and 2) I can totally understand why anybody under 30 would ignore point one.
Gail: Trade is an issue that really deserves a national conversation. A sane national conversation. Our trade agreement with China has certainly led to some manufacturing job loss. But is there a scenario in which those jobs would still be in the United States? And if we built a wall against China, how much difference would that make in the price of a typical shopping cart of stuff from Walmart? Unfortunately, a presidential election tends not to be a great place for specifics.
Arthur: Let’s make a note to come back to this topic. It’s near and dear to my heart because trade has so much impact on global poverty.
Gail: But back to wading in the shallows — what’s your prediction for New York? Which way will Syracuse go? My minor experience with Syracuse is that the residents are so happy to be out of snow season they can live with anybody.
Arthur: I am an unalloyed fan of both the town and the university. I love Syracuse. But holy cow, it does snow a lot.
At present, prediction markets give Trump roughly 99 percent odds of winning New York (but a 55 percent chance of winning the G.O.P. nomination, and 15 percent of winning the White House). Clinton has about an 89 percent chance of winning New York.
Hey, then next week we vote in Maryland. By “we” I mean “not me,” because independents don’t get a vote in our primary. So I’m happy to report that no matter what happens, it’s not my fault.
Gail: Are you planning a “Don’t Blame Me — I’m an Independent from Maryland” bumper sticker? I can foresee a real market there. Even for people who actually live in Syracuse.
Arthur: We’ve tried original bumper stickers in my family before. My wife, Ester, had one made in 2012 that said “Vegans for Romney.” It confused pretty much everybody.
See you next week, Gail.