SEATTLE — Inside the factory buildings at Cascade Designs, just south of downtown Seattle, camping and hiking gear for the rugged outdoor life of the Pacific Northwest has been manufactured since the early 1970s. But turn a corner and something new is coming off the shop floor: a compact, no-frills water purifier designed to bring clean water to struggling populations in rural Africa.
“It’s a new frontier for us,” said David Burroughs, the vice chairman of Cascade Designs, which was co-founded by his father, a former engineer at Boeing. Though the company’s old style lives on — buildings are named for well-known mountains, employees show up for work in hiking boots — 20 percent of the research and development budget, thanks to the grants, is now going to global health-related products.
A study sponsored last year by the Washington Global Health Alliance said that global health — a mix of research, logistics and manufacturing — now accounts for more than 12,000 jobs in Washington state and nearly $6 billion in economic activity. And from 2009 to 2013, the recession barely made a dent, the report said, as the number of jobs in that category grew almost four times faster than in the state as a whole. At Cascade Designs, company officials said that global health products could account for 10 percent of sales within the next five years.
In addition, there are growing networks of second-generation, nonprofit leaders who were schooled at the Gates Foundation or Allen Institute, and have now filtered out to form a kind of self-reinforcing army. Seattle is first in the nation in private foundation revenue per capita, according to the Urban Institute, with two and a half times the amount of the No. 2 city, San Francisco, where philanthropic technology wealth has also soared.
This is just a small part of the wave of money that is washing through Seattle and other tech cities these days, as companies like Amazon, the online retail giant, expand with new facilities and armies of engineers, software composers and deal makers.
But money is only part of the story. For example, a group called World Vision is a 65-year-old Seattle-based nonprofit that many Americans are probably unfamiliar with. But in the last five years, with help from Mr. Gates and other partnerships, World Vision, with 800 employees, has become one of the largest private-sector providers of clean water in the developing world, helping an estimated two million people.
“It’s in large part due to these partnerships,” said Greg Allgood, the group’s vice president for water.
Another group called PATH, started in Seattle in the mid-1970s to work on family planning, has become — with the Gates Foundation providing half its budget — one of the world’s biggest nonprofit developers of vaccines, medical devices and treatments. The company has 450 employees in Seattle, including 100 hired in the last year.
Part of the reason the nonprofit sector is thriving here is that so much of it evolved from the corporate culture of one company, Microsoft. Beyond Mr. Gates and Mr. Allen, Microsoft workers were integral to other nonprofits here too, like Social Venture Partners, which was founded in the 1990s. With about 80 percent of its core composed of current or former Microsoft workers, the group blends financial and volunteer-time contributions into each member’s commitment, and has branches in more than 40 cities around the world.
And the reach of these post-Microsoft ambitions is still growing. Mr. Allen has charged his Allen Institute for Cell Science with creating an animated virtual model of human cells which would then be donated to the scientific community. Last month, Mr. Allen announced a global initiative called Frontiers Group to search for breakthrough ideas in bioscience – and then committed $100 million to support the best ideas.
An important part of how nonprofit science works here, Mr. Allen said, is its concentration in the South Lake Union area, where The Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, the Center for Infectious Disease Research and the neighboring University of Washington have provided a foundation in health science expertise that Mr. Gates and Mr. Allen later built on.
Time has also multiplied those effects, through a second generation of nonprofit workers who were trained at places like the Gates Foundation, which has more than 1,100 employees in Seattle.
“These big philanthropies are changing the city and the region by bringing people in, and so being another magnet for talent,” said Margaret O’Mara, an associate professor of history at the University of Washington who studies modern capitalism and urban affairs.
Philanthropies of Seattle’s stripe also need different skills, Ms. O’Mara said, in science, medicine and international affairs — not just tech workers and engineers. The third factor, she added, is that people move here and stay, further pushing out the wave of ripples. “When Seattle gets people, it tends to keep them,” she said.
Still, there has at times been a steep learning curve for players in this new philanthropic arena.
When a prototype for Cascade Designs’s water purifier was sent to Kenya a few years ago for testing, for example, designers built the units in black. For the U.S. military and outdoor community the company served, black was “sexy and sleek,” said Martin Maisonpierre, Cascade’s communication director. The Kenyans, however, from a different cultural perspective, reacted badly.
“‘Why is it the color of death?’” Mr. Maisonpierre said, quoting the testers.
So after a gasp at the misunderstanding and trip back to the drawing board, the next generation of water purifiers became cool and culturally neutral blue.