What makes a successful album in 2016? A No. 1 debut on the Billboard chart? Steady play across streaming services? A hit radio single or a viral music video?
For more than six weeks, Kanye West’s “The Life of Pablo” (Def Jam) has managed to achieve a level of online and cultural ubiquity, despite having none of the above.
The music and method got fans and industry watchers listening and talking. But even in this age of big data, the project — which Mr. West has called “a living breathing changing creative expression #contemporaryart” and vowed “will never be for sale” — did not have its popularity ranked or tallied at all in an official, public capacity.
Now, however, as Mr. West begins to loosen his grip on the music, releasing a traditional single (“Famous”) to radio this week and, starting on Friday, selling the album as a download and sharing it with competing streaming services, Tidal is pulling back the curtain on his experiment: Songs from “The Life of Pablo” were streamed 400 million times, globally, through Monday, according to data provided to The New York Times by the company. Of those streams, Tidal said 250 million came in the first 10 days.
The evolving album also made Tidal — which does not have an unpaid tier for listeners but has offered free trials of up to 90 days — a destination, building on its promise of exclusive content by artists like Beyoncé and Rihanna.
But by not selling “The Life of Pablo,” or reporting its streaming numbers to Nielsen, whose data fuels the Billboard charts, Mr. West and Tidal have, until now, effectively kept the album out of competition with recent releases by fellow pop heavyweights like Justin Bieber, the Weeknd, Rihanna and Adele, despite its impressive numbers.
Other top albums on Spotify have included Rihanna’s “Anti,” which had 309 million streams around the world in its first six weeks on the service after debuting exclusively on Tidal for a week. (A corporate sponsor also offered one million free downloads.) “Beauty Behind the Madness,” by the Weeknd, earned 311 million streams in its first six weeks, Spotify said.
Yet even in an industry intent on exploring corporate partnerships and selective streaming as alternative business plans while sales plummet, the more established channels eventually require attention.
Having given a free rein to Mr. West’s creative whims for more than a month, wider distribution by Universal proved inevitable. On Monday Def Jam began promoting the song “Famous,” featuring Rihanna, as a radio single, while also making it available to stream on Spotify, Apple Music, Google Play, SoundCloud Go and more.
On Thursday Def Jam said that “a newly updated, remixed and remastered version” of “The Life of Pablo” would be streaming on all major services by midnight on Friday, despite Mr. West’s earlier promise to keep it a Tidal exclusive. (“My album will never never never be on Apple. And it will never be for sale … You can only get it on Tidal,” he tweeted in February.) And with those services reporting plays to Nielsen, the album could make its Billboard chart debut two months after it was first heard.
Mr. West and his label also began offering listeners a chance to own the album — as it exists for now — legally, selling a download at kanyewest.com for $20 (more than most digital albums).
Which is not to say that Mr. West is reverting entirely to old-fashioned tactics: A physical version of “The Life of Pablo” is still nowhere in sight.