BEVERLY HILLS, CALIF. — Like many successful actors, Iwan Rheon, better known as the blithely malicious Ramsay Bolton on “Game of Thrones,” arguably the most hated man on television, admits he’s concerned about being narrowly defined by an indelible character. But ask a logical follow-up question — what else are you working on? — and the scale of his challenge becomes clear.
Such is life for the man behind a character who, over three seasons on “Game of Thrones,” returning Sunday on HBO, has become the emblem of a disquieting show’s darkest impulses. Since arriving as a one-note sadist in Season 3, this striving, legitimized former bastard has expanded to both embody the story’s dynastic obsession and inflict some of its most flagrant abuses. That list includes the flaying and gelding of rivals, the recreational hunting of a girl and, most controversial, last season’s wedding-night rape of his hostage bride, Sansa Stark (Sophie Turner).
That he does it all with schoolboy glee makes him that much more viscerally loathsome — Mr. Rheon conceived Ramsay as a mash-up of Heath Ledger’s unhinged Joker and Dennis the Menace, he said, and added a bit of the swagger of Liam Gallagher, the dyspeptic former Oasis singer. The resulting confection has landed on many “most-hated” lists online. In December, readers of The Atlantic voted Ramsay “the actual worst character on television” over the likes of Hannibal Lecter and Walter White, as well as Joffrey Baratheon, the sneering boy-king Ramsay replaced as the signature “Game of Thrones” villain.
In the new season, the show’s sixth, Ramsay deepens further, Mr. Rheon suggested, even approaching something like human emotion in mourning a girlfriend killed in the Season 5 finale. “That surprised even me,” he said. Of course, it also finds him seething over last season’s escape of his captives Sansa and Theon (Alfie Allen) — the young nobleman he castrated, forced into servitude and renamed Reek — and sets up who may be his most appalling victim yet: an as-yet-unborn half-sibling who could be a competing heir.
Mr. Rheon, 30, wears the most-hated mantle easily. By all accounts a charming young Welshman — his name is pronounced OO-wan re-OHN, and he grew up in Cardiff and now lives in London — he is amused by the notoriety and claims it is “an honor” to be considered the most despicable thing on a show full of despicable things. “Apparently I’m scarier than a White Walker. And a giant. And a dragon,” he said.
In general, fans don’t hold Ramsay’s actions against him, and the technical realities of production keep the vile deeds from weighing too heavily on his soul. Flayings, for example, involve a piece of rubber and a prop knife he has to hold just so for the light to catch its malevolent angles, making it hard to obsess over the moral dimensions.
In person, removed from the dank interiors he typically haunts on “Game of Thrones,” Mr. Rheon’s face is more cherubic than demonic, with a rakish scruff and artfully tousled hair that gets more so as he runs his hands through it in conversation. 
“He has this stare, this wide-eyed smiling gaze that pierces right through you,” Ms. Turner said.
Ramsay’s season-long torture of Theon tested viewers’ patience, but he acquired texture as it became clear that he’s fueled by a toxic cocktail of adoration and resentment toward his father, Roose Bolton (Michael McElhatton). The combination of “the little boy and the psychopath” makes Ramsay “more than a cardboard cutout evil baddie,” Mr. McElhatton said. It also situates him firmly within the brutal, multigenerational cycle of legacy and revenge that makes “Game of Thrones” go — even if the actor still isn’t sure why he fits in so well.
