ARLINGTON, Va. — Next to Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport and directly across the Potomac River from Washington, the Crystal City neighborhood, which because of federal cuts had become a virtual ghost town, is quietly and persistently reinventing itself.
At first glance, there appears to be nothing new among the high-rise offices and apartments lining Crystal Drive and its bisecting streets in this Arlington County enclave. In fact, there is little new construction. Instead, buildings from the 1960s to 1980s are being retrofitted, some converted from offices to apartments, others welcoming new commercial tenants, including tech start-ups, co-working spaces and restaurants.
The area, which suffered with the departure of military agencies and contractors under the federal Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission process, is attracting residents and younger workers with competitive rents and convenient transportation options as well as with its proximity to the Pentagon, a fashion mall in neighboring Pentagon City and, of course, the nation’s capital.
The seed fund incubator 1776 is among those that have returned the embrace, occupying 27,000 square feet since October in a building on Crystal Drive built in 1990. One of the firm’s 130 members is Hans Miller, chief executive of Airside Mobile, which developed the Mobile Passport app to speed up the customs process. He and a partner each live nearby, and had formerly worked out of Mr. Miller’s attic.
Once composed of junkyards, budget motels and industrial sites, Crystal City — named for an elaborate crystal chandelier in a still-standing 1965 apartment building — was Washington’s prototypical suburban office center, housing agencies like the federal Patent and Trademark Office and the Navy. A local developer, Charles E. Smith, made Crystal City the linchpin of his real estate empire.
But the Naval Air Systems Command left in 2000, and the patent office in 2002. The base realignment announcement came in 2005. Over all, Crystal City lost 17,000 jobs; the move of the Office of the Inspector General of the Army alone amounted to 6,400 jobs lost. In total, 4.2 million square feet of office space became vacant.
Yet, Angela Fox, president and chief executive of the Crystal City Business Improvement District, said the foundation was sound. “Nobody’s moving the Pentagon,” she said.
With each project, the neighborhood improves, she added. “Now I hear millennials and people of all ages saying Crystal City is so cool,” Ms. Fox said.
Even when the offices were full, the Crystal City Shops, a mall that opened in 1976 that allows patrons to move among its buildings without going outside, gave the “misperception by the outside market that no one was there,” said Harmar Thompson, senior vice president for LCOR, a real estate investment and development company.
LCOR is demolishing a 230,000-square-foot building that formerly held the Army inspector general’s office and in its place is building two 20-story towers to total 500,000 square feet of 450 residential rental units, to be called the Altaire.
Vornado hoped to create a sense of place in Crystal City — formerly seen as just a daytime destination for government workers — in conjunction with the county and the newly formed business improvement district, which is a loose association of Crystal City business owners that aims to build the community and create excitement through year-round events.
“This is not the Crystal City people once knew,” said Mr. Schear of Vornado.
Bringing in new restaurants that appeal to millennials is part of the Vornado strategy. Concentrated along Crystal Drive are restaurants like Highline RxR, which has a long list of draft beers, and the Spanish tapas restaurant Jaleo, led by the chef José Andrés. There is also Good Stuff Eatery, a chain focused on fresh ingredients. Surprisingly, said David Greenberg, an owner, dinner now draws more customers than lunch, a testament to Crystal City’s after-work life.
The company TechShop, which caters to entrepreneurs interested in building marketable prototypes, moved into a ground-floor, 22,000-square-foot space in June 2014. Members pay a monthly fee of $150 for access to its equipment and software, said Stephen Lee, who works with prospective members. The outlet in Crystal City, one of nine nationwide, has more than $1 million worth of equipment and technology, including industrial sewing machines, a T-shirt printing press and 3-D printers.
Ms. Fox lived in a Charles E. Smith apartment near Crystal City when she first came to Washington in 1991 after college. Over the years, she has moved around Arlington but recently moved to Crystal City. Her new residence is one of the 216 WeLive furnished apartments above WeWork, two floors of co-working spaces in a retrofitted building.
WeWork has 92 locations worldwide, 71 in the United States, and is expanding into housing with WeLive. The first WeLive location, in Lower Manhattan, opened in January and has 45 apartments above four co-working floors. Crystal City is its second location, providing residents with flexible leases, communal areas for cooking and yoga, and housewares like bed linens and televisions.
Across Jefferson Davis Highway, near a Crystal City border, development edges closer from the Pentagon City mall. Eventually, planners say, the two markets will merge. On the Pentagon City side, a Whole Foods, a short walk from Crystal City, is scheduled to open in July on the ground floor of the Bartlett, a 23-story, 699-unit apartment building constructed by Vornado.
“Those businesses are like a magnet for millennials and also stimulate activity all around them,” Mr. Hoskins said.
From 2010 until recently, vacancy rates were higher than in surrounding markets. While the rates still hover around 20 percent, economists predict robust leasing of vacant space in the combined Crystal City-Pentagon City market this year than leaving, a better absorption rate than in other Northern Virginia submarkets. With a total inventory of 12.6 million square feet — about 90 percent in Crystal City, absorption rates have steadily climbed since 2013.
In the first quarter of 2016, 122,952 square feet had been filled, compared with 194,638 in all of 2015, according to Newmark Grubb Knight Frank, a real estate services firm.
But challenges remain. “You can’t transform a city overnight,” Mr. Schear said, “though we’d like to.” Arlington County’s decision in 2014 to kill a long-planned streetcar line to Crystal City eliminated one hoped-for attraction. More venture capital firms and educational institutions are on Mr. Schear’s wish list.
