Surprisingly, for such an odd and difficult man, Thorstein Veblen represented a high point in American optimism. Veblen was trained in economics but spent much of his career in the margins of the field, preferring instead to look at society more broadly, through the lens of anthropology and Darwinism. Social institutions, he argued, were like species; they evolved, following paths set down by previous generations. The economists of his day, like those of today, argued that wages and prices were determined by the corresponding desires of buyers and sellers to trade. Veblen largely rejected this idea, arguing instead that modern people still carried with them their barbarian past, in which violent warrior kings subjugated peasants. The warrior kings had become aristocrats and businesspeople, while the peasants were, of course, the workers.
As articulated in his 1899 book, “The Theory of the Leisure Class,” Veblen’s is probably still the second-­most-­influential critique of capitalism, after Marx. But Veblen accompanied his diagnosis with a less violent vision of a cure — a hopeful way of thinking that is still surprisingly relevant today, as we see among the supporters of Senator Bernie Sanders in his presidential bid. The prevailing neoclassical economics of Veblen’s time held that growth and wages were limited by economic rules and that no manner of societal re-­engineering would be able to fundamentally change those rules. But Veblen believed that once we recognized how trapped we were by these ancient institutions, we could be set free. The world could become a place of shared prosperity and general equality if only we changed our formal institutions and the often unspoken social norms that constrain us.
For a few decades at the beginning of the 20th century, Veblen’s ideas were prominent within the American economic debate, and his followers were major figures in economics. Known as the institutionalists, they believed that institutions, more than market forces, determined the distribution of goods in a society. As a group, they were more united by what they disliked in conventional economics than by what they agreed on. But they agreed that there was huge opportunity to improve the human condition by transforming the institutions that made up our society. They generally wanted stronger labor unions and weaker corporations. They wanted the government to play a continuously active role in regulating what they saw as the predatory practices of business.
Most institutionalists remained outsiders, focusing attention on failings in the American economy rather than offering an alternate prescription. But some became the architects of government policy. Rexford Tugwell, part of the strong institutionalist presence at Columbia University at the time, was a crucial member of Franklin Roosevelt’s brain trust, helping to design the New Deal. Others played significant roles in government and academia into the 1950s. John Kenneth Galbraith was one of the most (and last) prominent members of the school.
By then, economics had been entirely transformed by the work of John Maynard Keynes and his 1936 masterwork, “The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.” The book more or less invented the field of macroeconomics — the study of how an economy works in the aggregate. And in the decades since, most academic economics and nearly all of government economic policy has revolved around Keynes’s insights.
Economics is not a natural science like physics, where questions can be definitively settled. But the so-­called mainstream of economic thought, based on Keynesian models, is supported by decades of data, peer review and argument. Many non­economists think of the fundamental economic divide between Democrats and Republicans as being between government-­loving Keynesian Democrats on the one hand and, on the other, Republicans who extol the free-­market principles of the University of Chicago and the Austrians (Milton Friedman, Ludwig von Mises, Friedrich Hayek, et al.). But the Chicago and Austrian schools have for the most part played outsider roles, assessing policies of Democrats and Republicans without creating their own tools of government policy. Over the last 75 years, the actual people designing Republican economic policies — figures like Martin Feldstein, Gregory Mankiw, Glenn Hubbard — have nearly all relied on Keynesian principles and models of the economy. Even Milton Friedman, the most effective critic from the Chicago school, experimented with Keynesian ideas early in his career, and his proposals that actually affected government policy (the Federal Reserve’s approach to inflation, the earned-­income tax credit, automatic tax deduction from payrolls) fit neatly into a Keynesian mode of thinking.
There is plenty of scope for disagreement among those descendants of Keynes — more government or less, higher taxes or lower — but when they make their arguments, these economists are using similar models built around the same sets of empirical data. And one common assumption of those models is that government intervention in the market tends to come at some cost. Offering free health care and college to everybody will cost money that needs to be raised in other parts of the economy. Some might embrace those trade-­offs, others might reject them, but economists agree that there are trade-­offs, that the realistic possibilities of our economy have constraints.
Many of Sanders’s proposals are supported by the far-­left flank of the Keynesian consensus: raising the minimum wage, setting higher taxes on wealthy estates, supporting unions, strengthening Social Security, imposing a financial-­transactions tax. But on this most fundamental question — about the potential to transform the economy, to blow past trade-­offs and constraints — the economics profession can’t follow him to the promised land. Gunnels told me to consult the work of Gerald Friedman, a professor of economics at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and a proud, self-­described institutionalist. Friedman wrote a highly criticized paper that argued that Sanders’s policies would lead to an unprecedented 5.3 percent growth rate in the American gross domestic product. Friedman himself acknowledges it is a fringe view that, he guesses, fewer than 4 percent of economists would share. And incidentally, Friedman says he’s voting for Hillary Clinton.
Of course, for many people who support Sanders, the fact that his ideas run counter to decades of established economics is exactly the point. Some economists, like Dean Baker and Robert Reich, told me they like Sanders not because of his take on any technical debate but because he has forced the profession — and everybody else — to take his issues seriously. No matter what happens in this election, Sanders’s idealism has sent a clear message to traditional economists on the left: They are taking too long to develop answers to the problems of inequality and the corrosive effects of concentrated wealth. It’s a message that institutionalists have been screaming for more than a century. Now, it seems, they are being heard.