Sports|Aging Runners Find Help for a Question: How Slow Will I Get?
Not long ago, a group of aging elite distance runners got together, and as they reminisced about old times, a familiar topic arose: No matter how much they train, no matter how much they push themselves, their best times are behind them.
Howard Nippert broached it first. He was running the other day, he told his friends, and feeling as if he was in the groove, feeling great, just flying along as he did in the old days. Then he made the mistake of looking at his watch. It was telling him something a lot different than what he was feeling.
No one can point to exactly why performance starts to decline with age. Is it that muscles weaken? But why would they when they are being used regularly in a sport? Is it that the heart can no longer pump as much blood? But why does that happen? Whatever the reason, the result is a trade-off between speed and endurance. If you want to go fast, you can’t keep up the pace the way you used to. If you want to go far, you can’t do it fast, says Hirofumi Tanaka, director of the Cardiovascular Aging Research Laboratory at the University of Texas at Austin.
The aging effect is inevitable, and now runners can even track what to expect. It is as if there was a time clock for aging, and unlike nonrunners — who have only things like wrinkles and gray hair to go by — runners have an exact schedule that will predict how their performance will decline.
That schedule is on the website of Ray Fair, a professor in the economics department at Yale, who was inspired to find the patterns of slowdowns when his own running performance began to decline. The result is a table. You can put in your best time ever for an event, say a 10-kilometer race, and how old you were when you ran it. The table then shows how fast you could have run it when you were younger and how fast you should be able to run it now and as you grow even older.
As for Fair, he’s not as happy.
But even being on the line means not being what you were before, and that can be a hard adjustment for many former elite runners.
Sometimes, as with Mary Decker Slaney and Doriane Coleman, elite middle distance runners, the end of a career starts insidiously with an injury from which their aging bodies just cannot recover.
Slaney, who is 57, ruptured her posterior tibial tendon in 1997. She had surgery to have it reconstructed and then tried to train, telling herself she could get back to the point where she had been.
Slaney still dreams of running, and she often dreams she is back on the starting line. Her dreams even include training again. “There is nothing to replicate the feeling of running,” she said.
Her friend Coleman, a law professor at Duke University, understands all too well. For her, the career-ending injury was a ruptured Achilles’ tendon.
But she also has a strategy that has changed her life. She leaves her watch behind. Before she sets out on a run, Coleman looks at the clock. When she gets back, she glances at it again.
