Meanwhile, Madonna’s troupe of dancers, cast as co-stars on that era-defining tour, underscore her words by flashing expressions of strength and defiance. Yet, according to a new documentary, “Strike a Pose,” those expressions hid very different emotions.
Mr. Gauwloos isn’t the only dancer who held a secret on a tour preserved for history in the smash hit documentary “Truth or Dare.” In large part, the 1991 film was about revealing truths to erase shame — specifically about being gay or H.I.V.-positive at a time when AIDS paranoia ran rampant. But, at the time, two of Madonna’s other dancers were also secretly H.I.V.-positive. One of them didn’t even want “Truth or Dare” to mention his identity as a gay man.
The opposite feeling entranced Mr. Zwaan when he first saw “Truth or Dare” in his native Amsterdam at the age of 11. His family took him to check out what was then the highest-grossing documentary in history. “Everyone had to see it,” Mr. Zwaan said.
Years after Mr. Zwaan himself came out and became a journalist for Dutch television, he started to wonder what had happened to these early role models of fearless selfhood. Teaming with the filmmaker Ester Gould, he set out to persuade the original dancers to participate in a film that would go behind the scenes of a movie that was itself about going behind the scenes.
First, the filmmakers learned that one of the original seven dancers — Gabriel Trupin — had died from complications of AIDS in 1995. Then, Mr. Zwaan said, they sent the other dancers “long, carefully written letters” making clear that their film wouldn’t be about bashing Madonna or trolling for gossip. Some of the dancers, like Luis Camacho, still put the filmmakers off. “How many times can you answer the question ‘why, in ‘Truth or Dare,’ does Madonna eat salad with her fingers?’” Mr. Camacho said.
Eventually, though, the directors convinced the dancers that they were interested in their lives, not that of the singer. “I felt like Reijer was my first psychiatrist,” Mr. Gauwloos said.
In “Truth or Dare,” the dancers inverted whatever shamed feelings they had and instead displayed the most brazen behavior they could devise. The most talked-about result came when they and Madonna played an especially provocative game of “Truth or Dare.” Mr. Camacho dared Mr. Gauwloos to French-kiss Mr. Trupin, an extremely rare sight for a mainstream movie at the time. For a generation of gay people, it was a transformative moment.
Two other dancers sued for financial compensation and also settled outside of the public eye.
The suits spoiled those dancers’ relationship with Madonna, but the other four soon lost her support as well. They say that’s mainly their fault. Fame went to their heads, and they all struggled with drug and alcohol problems. After many lost years, all of them cleaned up. Today, the men each teach dance and choreograph, some in New York, some in Los Angeles, buoyed by their status as members of the only dance troupe on a pop tour ever to achieve a fame of their own.
