Kara Lacey, 33, does it after a long day of work, sometimes accompanied by a glass of wine. “It’s super-relaxing, fun and nostalgic,” said Ms. Lacey, a publicist who lives in Hoboken, N.J.
Alex Bender, 29, a real estate executive in SoHo, did it during a recent jaunt to Montauk, N.Y. “It’s nice to concentrate on something that’s lighthearted, fun and simple, which I don’t often get to do,” he said.
Nikki Marsh, 35, a stay-at-home mother in Woodcliff Lake, N.J., does it with fellow moms when they need to relax. “It’s a special time when we’re not allowed to talk about school or kids,” Ms. Marsh said.
The newest device to promote mindfulness and inspire 20- and 30-somethings to put down their phones for hours? It isn’t a new swipe-left app and doesn’t involve overpriced stretchy pants.
It’s coloring books for adults, which have been gaining traction, booksellers say. Enthusiasts claim that coloring is therapeutic, fosters creativity and reaps benefits associated with meditation.
Celebrities have also gotten into the craze. Victoria Beckham recently posted a photograph of herself on Instagram with a copy of the “Vogue Colouring Book” peeking out of her handbag.
The book, released in November, features designs inspired by the fashion pages of the British edition of the magazine during the 1950s, including ready-to-wear by Christian Dior, Givenchy and Chanel.
Kate Hudson posted a Snapchat video of her coloring aboard a plane en route to a “Kung Fu Panda 3” premiere.
The trend is having an impact in stores as much as on social media. At Words, a popular bookstore in Maplewood, N.J., coloring took off after a group of monks visited the town last summer and taught residents how to create Mandala drawings with rice.
Words is now stocked with an array of adult coloring books and accouterments like colored pencils and markers. The most popular books, Ms. Matalon said, are “Enchanted Forest” and “Secret Garden,” both by Johanna Basford, who is considered the godmother of the movement with her best-selling coloring books.
Ms. Lacey said she discovered adult coloring last October when one of her clients, the Australian apparel label Cotton On, hosted a party for its new lifestyle brand, Typo, and featured a crafts table with coloring books.
Now back on her feet, Ms. Lacey continues to color at home after work.
Melissa Rappaport, the founder of the public relations firm RappAround in Los Angeles, received a coloring book in December as a gift from an employee. Over the holidays, she and her husband drank wine and sat around coloring.
