298 pp. St. Martin’s Press. $26.99.
I wonder if that may be directed at all of us, his fans, who have followed the benighted Mr. Burroughs through America’s most awful, ludicrous childhood in “Running With Scissors,” published in 2002, and the sere obligations of rehab in the 2003 follow-up, “Dry.” Burroughs’s wit isn’t just the stoic, serviceable humor required of miserable-life memoirs. He has given us the gold standard of snark, rants and monologues a stand-up comic could envy. And the more awful were his travails, the more we voyeurs plopped down our money for a ticket.
Burroughs has written continuously — a self-help book called “This Is How” (not a satire); the ghastly “A Wolf at the Table,” about his inexcusable father; and a few essay collections that swept up some other memories (“Magical Thinking,” “Possible Side Effects”) — but there is a sense that the first two monumental performances were in need of a third showstopper to crown the unofficial ­trilogy. Augusten Burroughs completists are in luck. “Lust and Wonder” picks up the tale of Burroughs’s post-rehab, 1990s love life in New York City, where his self-­sabotaged, romantic belly flops prompt the vinegar-dipped pen to flow again — a welcome return to form.
He emerges from rehab still thirsty for drink, wielding a mop of long hair, sunglasses whatever the weather and a pirate earring. He finds a home in the only world that will have him — advertising. This begins Burroughs’s comeback on the functionality trail that inspires his first novel, “Sellevision,” a home-shopping network satire, which leads to his securing the services of his literary agent . . . with whom he falls in love.
But true love’s course takes a few detours. The book settles on the challenges of two previous relationships: Mitch, then Dennis. There’s infidelity (Burroughs isn’t motivated by lust, but he wishes to see if his parts actually still work), tracking one’s boyfriend in chat rooms surreptitiously, Internet dating (“My feeling was, if you’re in the same ZIP code, you and I have enough in common”) and contemplating affairs with one’s lover’s more famous literary buddies. And, this being Manhattan, analysts.
One of the magic tricks of Burroughs’s work is that while he is confessing all, heaping up details humiliating and cruel to everyone concerned, there is nonetheless an “it’s probably all my fault” sweetness with a flicker of romantic hope he can’t quite extinguish. These doomed relationships dragged on for years because Burroughs really loved these men and wanted to make things right.
Once he lets himself pursue his original love and lets himself be loved in return, the book changes its tone. Is ­Contented Augusten as entertaining as Miserable Augusten? Um, no.  The last chapters are the book version of that.
But hey, I’m happy to see Augusten Burroughs happy. It took 40-some years for him to finally catch a break. And his fans will cheer this, too.