Comedy clubs have long been packed with head-shakers airing grievances and heatedly picking apart nonsense. But Ms. Long is part of a new breed of young performers more likely to begin a joke with affection than annoyance and to end with ridiculousness, not ridicule. This sunnier stand-up is in part a function of the times, when social media keeps count of likes and favorites, and late-night television is a chummy safe space for celebrities. But the hopefulness is also a refreshing artistic change of pace, a backlash against generations of smug finger-pointing and knowing raised eyebrows.
When irritation becomes so common, good cheer can be novel, if not downright irreverent.
Ms. Long, 34, is one of those disarmingly eloquent, verbally dexterous comics who seem to regularly emerge from England. But whereas British comedy has a reputation for being bleaker and more cynical than our own (a comparison of each country’s version of “The Office” is the most famous example), Ms. Long delivers her windy monologues without a drop of bile. She’s a relentless optimist, alert to the pleasures of life. Her solo shows, which have a cult following in London and Edinburgh, have names like “Kindness and Exuberance” and “Be Honorable,” and her detour-filled bits are about how she’s too earnest to pull off pranks or compare her love of social justice to a fan’s passion for Nicki Minaj.
On her BBC radio series, “Romance and Adventure,” which finished a four-episode run last week, she plays a newcomer to Glasgow who finds nothing but delight in cultural difference. When she meets a handsome American, she lavishes attention on the glee of having a crush while only briefly dealing with the sadness of it not working out. Her political material is wry and pointed, and her personal jokes can achieve the poignancy of a slice-of-life scene from one of Alan Bennett’s delicately observed plays.
“Cara Josephine,” an introspective hit show at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe that ran at SoHo Playhouse last fall, was an unexpectedly hopeful examination of a breakup. While countless comics traffic in jokes about sex and dating, she has the rare stand-up show to find laughs not only in heartbreak but also in love.
Pete Holmes and Ron Funches are skilled comics from the West Coast whose jokes share Ms. Long’s childlike exuberance, a quality that is even more common in alt comedy. The most distinctive experimentalist in New York right now is Jo Firestone, who brings a radiant, big-hearted spirit to deeply committed stunts like hosting an Inner Beauty Pageant. But sweet-tempered stand-up has increasingly been popping up in unlikely places, like the traditional New York club, home base for scabrous humor.
One of the most reliably funny regulars at the Comedy Cellar is Ryan Hamilton, an observational comic who often riffs on the absurdity of his own wholesomeness. “I’m from Idaho and, um, I look like where I’m from,” he said Monday.
 Yet times have changed. Mr. Hamilton’s clean act might be a better fit for theaters on the road (where family-friendly comics like Jim Gaffigan and Brian Regan are big draws) than for a show on Comedy Central.
Mr. Hamilton uses his persona as a foil for his material, but the cheerful sensibility of Josh Gondelman, 31, runs deeper. Mr. Gondelman is a writer for “Last Week Tonight” with John Oliver, but his endearing stand-up is nothing like the scathing jeremiads of that weekly show. He is cerebral and soft-spoken, and his jokes don’t forcefully build momentum so much as gracefully waltz from setup to punch line, each move subtle and carefully designed. A short, bespectacled comic with a nasal snap in his voice, he gesticulates little and smiles warmly. When he performed at the club Stand Up New York last week, he wore a cardigan and told affectionate jokes about his grandmother. It surprised no one in the room when he said that he worked as a preschool teacher.
In a scene filled with guys who swagger or rant or flamboyantly display their anxiety, Mr. Gondelman is the model of niceness and sanity. It’s just crazy enough to work.
It might be easy to dismiss him as a safe comic, less provocative than those who court gasps with material on race, sex and gender. But when transgression is the norm, it loses some of its comic punch. If you listen closely to Mr. Gondelman’s intricate jokes, what becomes clear is that he uses his benign affect as a cover for some combative ideas.
The first laugh this joke gets is from the incongruity between his mild-mannered persona and the description of his own confidence, but as the bit emerges, its aim expands. Mr. Gondelman is pushing back on the caricature of the millennial generation as coddled narcissists — besides defending participation trophies, he also stands up for selfies — while lampooning those who suggest that the problem with the way we raise kids is an abundance of sensitivity and generosity. He’s killing, with kindness.