This article is part of our spring gallery guide.
SOHO and TriBeCa are among contemporary art’s storied neighborhoods, but their recent histories are full of microshifts, if not seismic disruptions. The nonprofit Artists Space was forced to close for several months this past year because of construction in its building, while Jeffrey Deitch, the gallery impresario and former director of the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art, has announced he’s returning to the SoHo space where he mounted some epic events, displacing the Swiss Institute at 18 Wooster Street at the end of the summer. (Mr. Deitch will mount a survey of Tom Sachs’s work on May 5 in his gallery at 76 Grand Street.) SoHo remains a shopping mecca. Nestled among the flagship stores and designer boutiques, however, are fantastic opportunities for viewing art in little museums, alternative spaces and galleries — or touring the only single-occupancy building left in SoHo, the Judd Foundation.
Swiss Institute The Swiss Institute has accomplished extraordinary programming during its run at 18 Wooster Street. The current exhibition — its penultimate one before handing the space back over to Mr. Deitch — is “Fade In: Int. Art Gallery — Day.” The exhibition includes works by Amie Siegel, Christian Marclay, Carissa Rodriguez, Allan McCollum and others who make connections between art and film and show how the two worlds depict — and often comically misrepresent — each other.
Drawing Center Artists often make the best collectors (and gallerists) and Sol LeWitt was no exception. “Drawing Dialogues: Selections From the Sol LeWitt Collection” reveals that artist’s restless eye, with drawings ranging from a “Devil Man” from around 1980 by Old Tutuma Tjapangati, an Aboriginal artist, to more predictable but engrossing works by peers like Lawrence Weiner, Alice Aycock, William Anastasi, Charles Gaines, Lee Lozano and Nancy Graves.
Team The gallery will vacate 47 Wooster Street at the end of this month for the usual reason — an exorbitant rent increase. However, Cory Arcangel has a project up in the Wooster Street space — an audio work that recreates and revises RUN-D.M.C.’s “Sucker MCs,” using the Oberheim DMX drum machine. Team will continue to mount shows at its 83 Grand Street address, where Ross Knight’s new sculptures, through Sunday, combine mundane industrial materials to create objects that look like uncanny fetishes.
PostmastersFor more than three decades Postmasters has championed new-media art. The two shows at the gallery’s TriBeCa location include Zach Gage’s custom-made digital clocks, along with a poem generated by a Google search query, and Jen Catron and Paul Outlaw’s delirious exhibition of interactive works. As part of the installation, they included a chairlift up to an immersive HD video presentation; another video accessible via a boat in a tunnel created with fake foliage; and a giant canvas with a tanning bed and “relaxation chair” attached to its surface.
Peter FreemanSince opening its ground-floor space at 140 Grand Street in 2012, Freeman has continued to mount a mix of historical and contemporary shows. The current two include a presentation of the Italian modernist Medardo Rosso’s expressive sculptures — focusing on his bronzes — and an excellent small survey of Mangelos, the pseudonym of the Croatian artist Dimitrije Basicevic (1921-1987), whose funny, philosophical work is like a Balkan version of Marcel Broodthaers’s conceptual, institutional critique.
Leslie-Lohman Museum of Gay and Lesbian ArtDrawn entirely from the museum’s collection, “The 1970s: The Blossoming of a Queer Enlightenment,” looks at the decade between the Stonewall riots in 1969 to the emergence of AIDS in 1980. A ’70s pastel study by Paul Cadmus, an early touchstone of gay art, hangs alongside photographs documenting groups dedicated to women’s consciousness-raising, sex on the New York’s piers and political activism.
New Release In Chinatown, just on the edge of TriBeCa, this new gallery is showcasing Duncan Hannah’s retro-inspired paintings of emerging midcentury movie starlets (some made it; some didn’t), next to vintage radios restored by the gallery owner’s uncle.
Clifton Benevento Occupying an old-school, sixth-floor loft-gallery space, Clifton Benevento offers a show of Zarouhie Abdalian. That artist’s first solo venture in New York is a bit hit-or-miss. Some of the sculptures, like a large chunk of lava from California or a tarp suspended from the ceiling, grasp for significance. Better is a photograph of a view out the gallery window, printed on a screen and hung in the same window.
Queer Thoughts A new gallery transplanted from Chicago, Queer Thoughts aims, according its website, to “promote a post-identity agenda within artistic practice.” Work that explores the world of strippers, by Chelsea Culprit, a young Chicagoan, is on view. Among the works are a painting, with a concrete frame, of a serpent-wielding dancer and a greenish glass slipper cast in lead crystal.
The nonprofit Apex Art mounts shows proposed by young and emerging curators. The current one, “Space Between the Skies: A Virtual Reality Experience,” lives up to its title. Oculus headsets hanging from the ceiling offer an opportunity to experience the technology and consider representations of space and landscape created especially for video or virtual reality. On the western edge of SoHo, Kate Werble will open a show on Saturday of Lui Shtini’s paintings, which merge vague, surrealist shapes with the idea of painting as a skin.
