The artist’s new photographs are more explicitly autobiographical than ever. But a move toward film may be next.
“Tell me what to do,” Cindy Sherman said, asking the photographer for guidance as she sat for her portrait. Her words seem almost comic, since she is posing in her own New York studio, staring out at her camera and the mirror she keeps perched beside it, and the one thing she has proved, across a career that turned 40 this year, is that she has known what to “do” in this setting.
Ms. Sherman’s virtuosic acts of self-presentation have won her nearly every reward an artist could want, from a MacArthur Fellowship to shows at MoMA, Documenta and the Venice Biennale, and her work has sold at auction for more than $6 million. In addition to the show in May that inaugurates a remodeled Metro Pictures, in June the new Broad museum in Los Angeles will feature her lifetime’s work as its first special exhibition. Eli Broad, its founder, speaking from Los Angeles, said he is especially excited to present his deep Sherman holdings to the local audience, because of her photos’ strong roots in Hollywood.
Those roots are especially clear in her latest images, where she’s dolled-up in Jazz Age furs and pearls. And now, as Ms. Sherman revealed, her love affair with Hollywood looks set to deepen.
“I want to start playing with moving images, and we’ll see where I go,” she said, jauntily dressed in plaid Prada trousers and a blue short-sleeve sweater, with her hair in a ponytail. So far, she has no idea if that means directing feature films or coming up with video versions of her still photos.
She simply knows that she’s grown tired of the stills she’s been making for so long: “When I first started this series, I thought ‘God, this is the last time I do this.’  The big surprise in her recent work is that she has made less of an effort to do so.
Ms. Sherman said that when she began this series she was afraid that “people would say, ‘Oh, she’s just gone back to the whole idea of the “Film Stills” again, only these women are older, and in color.’” Those “Untitled Film Stills” were the 69 black-and-white photos, seemingly of actresses in B movies, that shot Ms. Sherman to fame in the early 1980s — and that started out selling for all of $200. A risk of repetition has obviously been there with each series of images in which she has posed as other women. With the latest photos, however, she’s closer to representing something fresh: Other women standing in for her.
With her pictures of women her own age, Ms. Sherman seems to have returned to a tenderness that hasn’t been seen in her work for the last several decades. She describes the images as “the most sincere things that I’ve done — that aren’t full of irony, or caricature, or cartooniness — since the ‘Film Stills.’” It could even be that her mature leading ladies should be thought of as the aspiring starlets of those “Film Stills” 40 years on, after they’ve achieved success and come out the other side.
Taken one by one, the “Film Stills” confirm the reading that has made them famous: that a woman’s identity is formed, and limited, by the images she’s seen of other women. That is, a woman learned how to be a secretary from movies as much as from business school. Not many images could teach her about being a C.E.O.
That’s what attracted Eli and Edythe Broad to Ms. Sherman’s “Film Stills” back in October of 1982, when they came across them at Metro Pictures, which has represented Ms. Sherman for 36 years. “We were not photography collectors, but we saw something there that went well beyond photography,” Mr. Broad recalled.
Taken as a whole, the shifting identity that runs across all 69 women in the “Film Stills” may also reflect the real predicament of a single person: A youngest daughter trying to find her place in the world, and then in an art world that didn’t have an obvious role for her. Helene Winer, a founder of Metro Pictures, said the artist has lost the shyness and hesitation that was once so clear. Ms. Sherman, whose new photos sell for as much as $500,000, is now established (or ensnared) in her role as Star. Some of her images have become just about as iconic as the Hollywood ones she once riffed on, forming a new view of femininity in a postmodern age. The deliberate shape-shifting that goes on in an Instagram selfie stream has roots in the infiltration of Shermanalia into our culture.
Although Ms. Sherman expresses contempt for the superficialities of social media (“it seems so vulgar to me”) her new images of old-time film stars also hint at our digitized present. Ms. Sherman shot herself against a green screen, then used a computer to insert the landscapes behind her, many of which show off their digital origins. In one image, the branches of a tree reach out from the center in perfect symmetry, as though tweaked with some Photoshop mirror function; in another, clouds look like they’ve been carved into relief with a chisel — or an Instagram filter.
Ms. Sherman named her Broad survey “The Imitation of Life,” after a 1959 melodrama by the director Douglas Sirk. In the show’s catalog, Ms. Sherman includes a conversation with the director Sofia Coppola in which she admits that she might even star in whatever movie she goes on to make next.
Streamed today, individual scenes come off as promisingly Shermanesque, but the whole gets bogged down in wooden acting and camp that feels dated. Ms. Sherman isn’t ashamed of the effort — she still gets a kick out of its gore — but she recognizes that 20 years of working alone in the studio may not have been the best preparation for a movie’s team effort.
