After Matt Harvey completed his warm-up throws, he nodded toward catcher Kevin Plawecki, signaling that he was ready to go.
Harvey had won his most recent start, on Friday at Atlanta, for his first victory of the season. But his outings have been less than stellar — he sported a 5.24 E.R.A. and had not lasted more than six innings in any of his four starts.
The players the Cincinnati Reds trotted out on Wednesday presented a prime opportunity for Harvey to regain his form. But against the first batter of the game, Zack Cozart, Harvey gave up a home run. Next up, Ivan De Jesus Jr. lined a single off Harvey’s backside.
Harvey escaped the first inning without further damage by striking out the next three batters, setting the cadence for his night.
Like a ship wading through rough waters, Harvey encountered his share of whitecaps, but he finished in good condition, striking out seven in six innings while allowing two runs and seven hits, as the Mets defeated the Reds, 5-2, at Citi Field.
Neil Walker drove in two runs to support Harvey, with one of the R.B.I. coming in the third on his ninth home run, which tied him for the franchise record for April. Last season with the Pittsburgh Pirates, Walker did not hit his ninth homer until July 26.
Michael Conforto left six runners on base in his first three at-bats but compensated with a two-run double in the sixth inning.
Yoenis Cespedes did not start for the fifth straight game but said he expected to be back in the lineup Friday against the San Francisco Giants. Without Cespedes, the Mets have leaned heavily on Conforto and Walker to produce runs.
The Mets promptly gave Harvey a lead after Cozart’s homer, scoring two unearned runs in the first with help from Walker.
With two outs, Lucas Duda hit a fly ball that hit off the side of the glove of left fielder Scott Schebler, allowing Alejandro De Aza to scurry home from second base. Walker then drove in Duda with a hard-hit single to right field.
Harvey pitched a clean second, striking out two, before loading the bases in the third with only one out. Harvey struck out Eugenio Suarez, though, and evaded more damage when Walker dived up the middle to snag a soft liner off the bat of Devin Mesoraco.
After Harvey gave up another run in the fifth, Mesoraco grounded into a double play to end the inning.
Harvey pitched one more inning. After striking out Jordan Pacheco on a 97-mile-per-hour fastball, his 102nd pitch of the evening, Harvey (2-3) walked to the dugout, where Collins greeted him with a proud, hearty handshake.
After Harvey departed, the Mets’ bullpen retired all nine batters it faced, with five strikeouts. Since Jeurys Familia had pitched in the last three games, Addison Reed pitched the ninth inning for the save.
The outing was arguably Harvey’s best of the season despite his missing the dominating control that has defined much of his career.
When accurate, Harvey mixed an array of breaking pitches and was able to cruise through the Reds’ lineup like a clipper ship.
The Mets committed two errors with Harvey on the mound in a sloppy game featuring a combined five errors before the end of the fourth inning. From then on, the Mets played solidly enough on defense to pick up their 11th win in 13 games and their sixth consecutive victory.