In April 1977, the conservative activist Phyllis Schlafly was about to be honored by the Women’s National Republican Club at the Waldorf Astoria hotel in Manhattan when she was hit by a well-aimed apple pie.
The caller’s name might not have been familiar to the Times reporter, but to New Yorkers south of 14th Street, Coca Crystal was a countercultural celebrity, a Holly Golightly for the Aquarian age.
A onetime fixture at the alternative newspaper The East Village Other and a Yippie provocateur, Ms. Crystal, with members of the militantly feminist Emma Goldman Brigade (named after one of America’s most storied anarchists), also infiltrated the Waldorf to disrupt a Republican luncheon honoring Pat Nixon, the wife of President Richard M. Nixon. On cue, two of Ms. Crystal’s associates released white lab rats that had been concealed in their handbags, touching off pandemonium.
She died of respiratory failure, her sister, Jill Diamond, said. Ms. Crystal had received treatment for lung cancer for several years.
Ms. Crystal was born Jacqueline Diamond on Dec. 21, 1947, in Manhattan and grew up in Mamaroneck, N.Y. Her father, Jack, owned J. Diamond Furs. Her mother, the former Rita Dunn, was a fur model who, after marrying, stayed home to raise her children.
Jackie, as she was known, attended private grade schools before graduating from the West Nottingham Academy in Colora, Md.
She first gained public notice in 1966, when, as a film student at Fairleigh Dickinson University in New Jersey, she was arrested for marijuana possession and then spied on by a police informer masquerading as a student.
Soured on higher education, Ms. Diamond headed to Greenwich Village, found work as a waitress at the Cafe Figaro and dived headfirst into the turbulent cultural and political waters of the 1960s.
The plane landed in Havana, and after a few hours, the Cuban authorities sent the passengers on to their destination. The hijackers stayed behind.
Around this time, Ms. Diamond visited the offices of The East Village Other. After acknowledging that she knew how to type, she was asked to type up classified ads — “Dominant iguana seeks submissive zebra” was one — while sitting on the lap of the publisher, Allen Katzman.
Hired at a salary of $35 a week, she assumed multiple roles. Seated at the front desk, she was part gatekeeper, part concierge and part social director, responsible for entertaining rock stars passing by from the Fillmore East, which was downstairs, and an honor roll of political luminaries.
After The East Village Other ceased publication in 1972, Ms. Crystal wrote briefly for its successor, The Ace. Her future, however, lay in television.
In 1977 she reserved a one-hour slot each Wednesday night at 10:30 on Channel D to present “If I Can’t Dance, You Can Keep Your Revolution,” a mix of politics, culture, music, audience call-ins and spontaneous nonsense. She often described the show as a visual version of The East Village Other.
Ms. Crystal, who in addition to her sister is survived by her son, Gustav Che Finkelstein, had an unflappable, slightly spacey demeanor and an incongruous la-di-da accent that added an extra layer of ineffability to an already bizarre persona.
She opened each show by reaching for a marijuana cigarette. After lighting it and inhaling deeply, she held forth on various topics before welcoming guests to her spartan set. Over the years, she assembled an eclectic lineup that included the composer Philip Glass, Debbie Harry and Chris Stein of Blondie, Tuli Kupferberg of the Fugs and Ponderosa Pine, the bark-clad animating spirit behind the All-Species Day Parade. At the end of the show, she danced with her guests.
It all made for a beguiling blend — she once called the show “an hour of talk, telephone and technical failure” — that lasted until 1995, when it lost its time slot.
By then, in any case, times had changed, and cable television was mainstream. Ms. Crystal was not.
