Cornelia Parker’s “Transitional Object (PsychoBarn),” which opens Tuesday on the roof garden of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, proves that this British sculptor best known for squashing and exploding things is much better at building them.
“PsychoBarn” is easily the best work Ms. Parker has shown in New York. It is also among the better presentations in the Met’s roof-garden series, which started 19 years ago and has moved increasingly toward site-specific installations while also achieving more misses than hits or even near-hits. The piece doesn’t come close to the gold standard in the series — Mike and Doug Starn’s magnificent “Big Bambú” of 2010 — but it’s possible that nothing will. “PsychoBarn” has been organized by Beatrice Galilee, associate curator of architecture and design in the Met’s modern and contemporary art department.
Ms. Parker is a material-obsessed descendant of Conceptual art. Born in 1956, she emerged in the early 1990s alongside the Young British Artists then being led to international fame by Damien Hirst, nine years her junior. Her work has often been seen as an alternative to that movement, but she shares with it the British penchant for a slightly surreal realism and, more particularly, a taste for visual razzle-dazzle and showmanship.
Ms. Parker first became known for installation pieces that mixed surprise, familiarity and nostalgia with a surefire gimmick: They seemed to float magically on air. Working with old metal serving vessels that she had squashed by a steamroller and then suspended on fishing wire, she made levitating flotillas of damaged goods redolent of more genteel times. Other works were clouds of suspended fragments — freeze-frame explosions. One was made from the remains of a wooden garden shed and its contents that the artist had had blown up. Two others comprised bits of charcoal freighted with heavy but invisible back stories — each used the burned remains of a Baptist church in the American South. One had a white congregation and was destroyed by lighting. The other, with a black congregation, was brought down by arson.
“Transitional Object (PsychoBarn)” is more forthright, and accepts gravity. It is a classic haunted house known not only from “Psycho” but from American horror movies in general, as well as the deliciously macabre Charles Addams cartoons. It can startle, whether you see it on the Met’s roof or spy it from a Central Park walkway. The park view may be the more disturbing. Instead of simple Surrealist displacement, the structure seems more truly like an apparition, a ghostly reminder of 19th-century America’s once-thriving towns and small cities.
Seeing the piece from the museum’s roof against Manhattan’s stone and steel skyline, I first thought of a larger horror: the quantity of great or at least good architecture heedlessly razed to make way for mostly awful, soul-killing buildings. The piece also evokes another kind of excess, resembling a lavish playhouse that a Gilded Age millionaire with a Fifth Avenue mansion might have had built on a country estate for his children.
But mainly its physical nature fascinates. The closer you get, the stranger it looks: The roughness of its red, worn, workaday surface is at odds with its Victorian pedigree. The wall text and a brisk video reveal that the facades were built from the salvage — and nothing else — of a red barn in Schoharie, N.Y.
Showman Fabricators in Long Island City, Queens, which produces sets for Broadway theaters, accepted this challenge. Its workers cut the house’s hexagonal shingles from the corrugated tin of the barn’s roof and fashioned white window frames and a porch from its interior, which was painted with a seemingly plasterlike gruel of lime and milk. This required crafty thinking as well as slicing and cutting. Much about the porch is slightly too thin (the railing’s spindles) or too thick (the woven lattice below). Cut down from the barn’s big beams, the porch’s columns are pieced together, with a seam at each corner. The sections of bare wood dotting the porch recall where different parts of the barn’s stalls and feeding troughs crossed one another.
Like Ms. Parker’s charred church fragments, this work delves into American history, but more legibly and resonantly. The first part of its title, “Transitional Object,” was a phrase used by the pediatrician and psychoanalyst D. W. Winnicott to refer to the toys, stuffed animals or blankets that toddlers become attached to as they start becoming independent of their mothers.
The Victorian mansion in “Psycho” was home to Norman Bates, who never found a transitional object, who instead assumed the identity of his murderously jealous mother and killed anyone he felt attracted to — like Janet Leigh’s Marion Crane character.
Annexing Dr. Winnicott’s phrase to “Psycho” is a kind of awful micro-joke. But on the macro level, “PsychoBarn” is a transitional object itself. Fusing a structure essential to rural life with a symbol of prosperous existence in village, town and even city, it manifests one of the greatest of all American transitions.