William L. O’Neill, an admired and provocative 20th-century historian who examined America’s political radicals and its not always wise behavior in war, died on March 29 in New Brunswick, N.J. He was 80.
His death was announced by Rutgers University, where he began teaching in 1971 and from which he retired as a professor emeritus in 2006. The cause was septic shock and pneumonia, his daughter Catherine O’Neill said.
If one book embodied Professor O’Neill’s range of interests, it may well have been “The Last Romantic: A Life of Max Eastman” (1978). In chronicling Eastman (1883-1969), a son of Congregationalist ministers who gained prominence as a writer, editor, philosopher and political activist, Professor O’Neill charts an Odyssean intellectual transformation in which his subject embraced free love, feminism and socialism, then defected from Bolshevism and defended Senator Joseph R. McCarthy’s hunt for Communists; he later became an outspoken foe of the war in Vietnam.
Professor Oshinsky described Professor O’Neill’s book “Coming Apart: An Informal History of America in the 1960’s” (1971) as “the first full-scale history” of that period. In the book, Professor O’Neill “fretted over the excesses of the radicals, predicting, correctly, the long-term damage they would do,” Professor Oshinsky said.
Reviewing that book in The New York Times, Walter Goodman wrote: “Those who called themselves ‘anti-Stalinists’ tried to dissociate American radicalism and liberalism from Communist Russia. Their question, which Mr. O’Neill echoes, was ‘whether a cause that could not face the truth was worth defending.’ Our author leaves no doubt about whose side he is on” — in favor of those who eviscerated both the vigilante right and the duplicitous left, as Mr. Goodman put it.
Professor O’Neill was an admired and provocative 20th-century historian who examined America’s political radicals.
William Lawrence O’Neill was born in Big Rapids, Mich., a small city north of Grand Rapids, on April 18, 1935. His father, John, was an oil wildcatter. His mother, the former Helen Marsh, was a teacher.
After graduating from the University of Michigan, he earned a doctorate in history at the University of California, Berkeley. He taught at the universities of Pittsburgh, Colorado and Wisconsin before joining Rutgers.
In addition to his daughter Catherine, he is survived by his wife, the former Elizabeth Carol late; another daughter, Cassandra O’Neill; two grandchildren; and a brother, Dan.
Professor O’Neill’s dozen books include the late ’80s “American High: The Years of Confidence 1945-1960,” in which he presented an unvarnished view that neither spared President Dwight D. Eisenhower, whom he portrayed as indifferent to the civil rights movement, nor assumed that everyone whom Senator McCarthy vilified was unblemished.
In “A Democracy at War: America’s Fight at Home and Abroad in World War II” (1993), Professor O’Neill warned that public opinion polls could hold government hostage to “shallowly rooted opinions” in matters of vital national interest.
While defending the American decision to use nuclear weapons in Japan, Professor O’Neill was critical of what he characterized as a congressional-military-industrial complex, a concept originally popularized by Eisenhower. American heavy bombers in World War II, he wrote, hit only 3 percent of their European targets effectively, while tens of thousands of servicemen died in Army aircraft accidents.
At home, he wrote, the United States had been handicapped by elected officials who feared they would be defeated if they broadened the military draft or asked the public to make more sacrifices. And prejudice against blacks, Japanese-Americans and women, he argued, proved self-defeating, serving only to deny the country needed sources of strength.
