Bernie Sanders spoke to a spirited crowd in Laramie after his victory in Wisconsin.
Senator Bernie Sanders defeated Hillary Clinton in the Wisconsin primary on Tuesday, his sixth straight victory in the Democratic nominating contest and the latest in a string of setbacks for Mrs. Clinton as she seeks to put an end to a prolonged race against an unexpectedly deft and well-funded competitor.
Mrs. Clinton’s defeat does not significantly dent her comfortable lead in the race for the 2,383 delegates needed to secure the Democratic nomination. But the loss underscores her problems connecting with young and white working-class voters who have gravitated to Mr. Sanders’s economic message — a message he will now take to economically depressed parts of New York State ahead of the April 19 primary there.
Mr. Sanders’s victory came after he had hardly left Wisconsin in recent days, pouring his energy and resources into securing a win that would help him put to rest any doubts that he could capture a major primary state, and providing his campaign with renewed focus as he strives for an upset in New York, Mrs. Clinton’s adopted home state.
He used his victory speech to remind voters of how far his long-shot candidacy had come, defining the word "momentum" as exceeding the expectations set by a skeptical news media and establishment political class.
His victory signaled vulnerabilities that have trailed Mrs. Clinton’s candidacy amid persistent criticism of her paid speeches to Wall Street banks and her email practices while serving as secretary of state. In Wisconsin, Mr. Sanders held a significant edge among voters who said they wanted a candidate who cares about people like them. Nine in 10 voters said the Vermont senator was honest and trustworthy, compared with six in 10 who said the same about Mrs. Clinton, according to exit polls of voters from Edison Research.
Wisconsin provided a friendly setting for Mr. Sanders’s brand of economic populism. Liberals made up two-thirds of the overwhelmingly white Democratic primary voters, and the economy, followed by income inequality, topped the list of voters’ concerns, according to exit polls.
As Mrs. Clinton shifted focus to New York, Mr. Sanders embarked on a week of campaigning through Wisconsin, speaking to crowds of thousands in Madison, Milwaukee, Green Bay and La Crosse and visiting more sparsely populated or rural areas like Eau Claire, Onalaska and Wausau.
Mrs. Clinton spent most of her time in the state in Milwaukee, where she held a discussion about gun violence at Tabernacle Community Baptist Church alongside black mothers who had lost children to gun violence or clashes with the police.
About seven in 10 black voters in Wisconsin, mostly concentrated in Milwaukee, supported Mrs. Clinton. She also outpolled Mr. Sanders among voters over 45. Mr. Sanders won among men, younger voters, independents and white voters.
Mr. Sanders also captured a majority of voters who said the economy was the most important issue, and about two-thirds of those who cited income inequality. The more than four in 10 voters who said trade with other countries took away from American jobs favored Mr. Sanders by a large margin, exit polls showed.
Mr. Sanders’s aides said his victory in Wisconsin signaled that his anti-trade message would appeal in areas of upstate New York that have been eviscerated by companies’ moving jobs overseas. “There are parts of western New York that have been severely hurt by these bad trade deals that the secretary has consistently supported,” said Jeff Weaver, Mr. Sanders’s campaign manager.
The victory on Tuesday, like most of Mr. Sanders’s recent wins, was expected to bring a deluge of online donations to his campaign, allowing it to buy television ads in expensive media markets in New York and in Pennsylvania, which votes on April 26.
In March, Mr. Sanders raised $44 million mostly from small-dollar Internet donations, compared with $29.5 million raised by Mrs. Clinton, who has frequently left the campaign trail to attend fund-raising events, including one on Tuesday night in the Bronx, asking donors for the maximum of $2,700 per person.
The Sanders campaign spent more than $3.3 million on ads in Wisconsin, roughly $1 million more than the Clinton campaign, according to Kantar Media.
But Wisconsin, with a population that is 88 percent white, does not reflect the larger and more diverse populations of New York and Pennsylvania, more comfortable terrain for Mrs. Clinton. In 2008, Barack Obama defeated Mrs. Clinton in Wisconsin by 17 percentage points.
As Mr. Sanders focused on winning Wisconsin, Mrs. Clinton courted African-Americans in New York on Sunday by visiting black churches.
Mr. Weaver rejected the notion that Mr. Sanders performed well only in overwhelmingly white states, pointing to victories in Michigan and Hawaii.
Robby Mook, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign manager, said on Monday that Mr. Sanders’s unlikely path to the nomination would amount to “overturning the will of the voters” by trying to flip pledged delegates at state and party conventions, as was done in Nevada.
Even with his recent resounding wins in Washington, Alaska, Idaho, Utah, Hawaii and Wisconsin, Mr. Sanders would need an estimated 56 percent of the remaining pledged delegates to overtake Mrs. Clinton. The preliminary Wisconsin results gave 45 pledged delegates to Mr. Sanders and 31 to Mrs. Clinton, who maintains a lead of roughly 250 delegates.
The contest in New York is expected to be a rough-and-tumble one. After weeks of bickering, the Sanders and Clinton campaigns agreed to hold a debate in Brooklyn on April 14, less than a week before New Yorkers head to the polls. Mr. Sanders is planning a rally in Washington Square Park in Manhattan the day before.
And while Mrs. Clinton is a battle-tested veteran of New York’s voracious news media, Mr. Sanders is not, and only recently has he gotten a taste of how tough it can be.
In an interview with the editorial board of The Daily News last week, he struggled to provide the specifics of his plan to break up the Wall Street banks. He was even stumped about how to ride the New York City subway. “You get a token and you get in,” he said, even though tokens were long ago replaced by MetroCards.
