Richard Lyons, a founding member of the subversive media-hacking, collage-minded band Negativland, died on April 19 in Seattle. He turned 57 that day.
The cause was complications of nodular melanoma, said Mark Hosler, another founding member of the band.
Those activities have included records, performances and a radio show, “Over the Edge,” which has run continuously since 1981 on KPFA in Berkeley, Calif., produced for nearly all of that time by the band member Don Joyce. On the show, Mr. Lyons used his mellifluous voice to develop several alter egos that ran through Negativland’s work, including the preacher Pastor Dick, the washed-up radio personality Dick Vaughn and the used-car salesman Dick Goodbody. Since the mid-’80s, he rarely spoke to the news media out of character.
Two other early members of Negativland died last year: Mr. Joyce, at 71, and Ian Allen, at 56.
Richard Duaine Lyons was born in Castro Valley, Calif., on April 19, 1959, and grew up in Concord, Calif. Negativland was largely centered in the San Francisco Bay Area through the mid-1990s, at which point Mr. Lyons moved to Seattle; outside of his work with the group, he made a living partly by buying, reconditioning and selling used cars.
In the late 1970s, while still in high school and working at a local call center, Mr. Lyons befriended two co-workers, Mr. Hosler and David Wills. The three made their first sound collages in their bedrooms, recording improvisations and found sounds, including a teach-your-parakeet-to-speak record and a conversation between Mr. Wills’s parents. The first Negativland album, which was relatively apolitical, was released in 1980 in a pressing of 500.
The group’s later recordings, including “Escape From Noise” (1987) and “Dispepsi” (1997), are built from old pop records, phone calls, news broadcasts, advertisements, electronic instrumental interludes and dialogues performed by the band. In 1984, on its recording “JamCon ’84,” the band used the term “culture jamming” to describe its process of scrambling and interfering with various media to produce, as Mr. Hosler put it, “media about media about media.” The term has been used in media studies ever since.
Mr. Lyons is survived by his mother, Evelyn Best, and his sister, Marilyn Lyons.
When the group got in trouble for its actions, the members were undeterred. Its 1991 single “U2” — a withering parody of the U2 song “I Still Haven’t Found What I’m Looking For” mixed with the radio host Casey Kasem’s profane off-air explosions — drew a lawsuit by U2’s record label and publisher in which the plaintiffs prevailed. But the group fought back with two book-and-CD packages about the case, which provoked more legal trouble: Negativland was sued by the head of its own label, and the group countersued before reaching a settlement.
The U2 case was the most widely recognized of Negativland’s activities, but others drew attention as well. One was the hoax the group perpetrated around David Brom, a Minnesota teenager who killed four family members with an ax in 1988.
Having read about the killings, Mr. Lyons conceived and wrote a news release claiming that the Negativland song “Christianity Is Stupid” was implicated in them, and declaring that the group was being investigated by the federal authorities. The release was false, but news outlets nationwide treated it as truth before Negativland revealed the hoax months later in an interview on NPR.
The core members of Negativland have always made collective decisions, preferring not to specify individual roles within the band’s ideas or music. But Mr. Hosler made clear that the original idea for the David Brom hoax was Mr. Lyons’s.
“Only Richard would have come up with something that dark,” he said.