MESA, ARIZ. — In the third grade, a music teacher inspired Katie Ledecky to take piano lessons. She showed an innate talent for the chords, picking them up quickly. Her formal lessons were phased out in the eighth grade as her swimming took off. Roughly five years later, no one is questioning Ledecky’s harmony with the water. She has developed into the best female distance freestyler in history and a legitimate quadruple Olympic gold medal threat this summer in Rio de Janeiro.
As a swimmer, Ledecky faces financial restrictions that would not have existed had she stuck with the piano. In the fall, she will enroll at Stanford on a swimming scholarship after deferring her entrance a year to train for the Summer Games. The arrangement she agreed to when she signed a letter of intent to swim for the Cardinal in exchange for tuition, books and housing precludes her from a potential seven-figure financial payoff through endorsements and paid appearances.
But why does accepting endorsement money and racing in college have to be an either-or proposition? The rules of amateurism that severely curb the earning potential of college student-athletes do not apply to college student musicians. If Ledecky had applied herself to the piano instead of swimming and earned a music scholarship to Arizona State, she would have been free to test her value in the open market while working toward her degree.
David Hickman, a trumpet virtuoso and professor at Arizona State, said his students were generally permitted to perform off campus “for as much money as they can make.” In some instances, the person offering employment has ties to the university, an arrangement, he said, that is viewed as widely acceptable. In an email exchange, Hickman said that some of his graduate students earned as much as $20,000 a year performing freelance engagements, or with area orchestras and chamber ensembles, or both. The exception, he added, is foreign-born students who do not have green cards.
If artists aren’t expected to starve for their craft, why are the highest-profile athletes?
The N.C.A.A. is facing a class-action suit, brought by the former U.C.L.A. basketball player Ed O’Bannon, over the commercial exploitation of college athletes. It could have ripple effects that reshape the college landscape — and not just for the athletes in the revenue-producing sports. The core question is whether the N.C.A.A.’s amateurism rules, which currently restrict compensation for college athletes to a scholarship and a few thousand dollars to cover the full cost of attendance, are a necessary component of college sports to help ensure competitive balance, or are unreasonable and, perhaps, illegally restrictive.
Bowman watched the 22-time Olympic medalist Michael Phelps, whom he has coached since he was 11, forgo college swimming to turn pro as a teenager. Imagine, he said, the exposure swimming would have received on the N.C.A.A. level if Phelps had not been forced to choose between making money and making college memories in the pool. More than a decade later, Bowman can’t come up with a compelling argument for why Ledecky should have to make the same choice.
The five-time Olympic medalist Missy Franklin, another competitor in the Pro Swim Series event, competed in college, at California, as a freshman and a sophomore before turning pro last year.
The Golden Bears don’t charge attendance at their meets, so Franklin’s presence didn’t help improve the swim team’s fortunes directly. But she did attend fund-raising events for a donor-financed on-campus aquatics facility that is in the works, including one appearance that kept her from attending an Association of National Olympic Committees gala in Thailand in which she was to be honored for her performance at the 2012 London Games.
Franklin, who stepped away from her classes at Cal to begin her pro career and prepare for the United States Olympic trials at the end of June, said she was not sure she would have been able to juggle school, sponsors and collegiate swimming, even if all had been in play.
“It sounds kind of silly when you talk about it, but photo shoots and commercials — those days are actually really, really taxing, more mentally than anything,” she said.
In a joking aside, her father, Dick, recently asked Franklin to imagine carving out time in her schedule to study for finals.
The day is dawning when the best student-athletes — even those in the Olympic sports that don’t make money for the athletic departments — will be able to decide how thin they want to spread themselves instead of operating within the narrow confines established by the N.C.A.A.
David Grenardo, an assistant professor of law at St. Mary’s University in San Antonio and a former football player at Rice, argues that the N.C.A.A. cannot continue to deny athletes the same free-market rights that allow a music major to make money playing music, a business major to make millions creating a tech company, or a coach to make a small fortune endorsing the apparel that his athletes wear free.
“Ledecky should not lose the opportunity to compete in college athletics simply because her unique skills, abilities and world-renowned physical feats merit compensation through endorsements,” Grenardo said in an email.
Grenardo noted that the athletes’ shelf life as product endorsers could be shorter than an Olympic cycle.
