Cynthia Erivo, center, in the “The Color Purple” at the Bernard B. Jacobs Theater.
In this era of #OscarsSoWhite, the Tonys are looking pretty good.
On Tuesday morning, this year’s Tony Award nominees are to be announced, and it seems clear, based on the diversity of the Broadway season and the acclaim for its performers, that the slate will be far more diverse than the list of Oscar nominees put forward this year by the movie industry.
But what does that mean? Is Broadway fundamentally more diverse, in casting, employment and programming, than Hollywood? Or did the theater industry just get lucky that Broadway was having its most diverse season ever while Hollywood was having a meltdown?
The answers are up for debate, but two things are obvious: The season now ending reflects a series of coinciding bets, by multiple producers unaffiliated with one another, that a diverse array of stories and performers can succeed artistically or commercially, and the system of choosing Tony nominees is far different from the Oscars’, in ways that seem to affect the mix of honorees.
The 2015-16 Broadway season, which ends next month and features 36 new plays and musicals, has been dominated by a single smash hit, “Hamilton,” in which diversity is a central theme, intended to suggest connections between today’s America, politically and demographically, with that of the revolutionary era. The show, written by Lin-Manuel Miranda, whose parents were born in Puerto Rico, uses Hispanic and black actors to portray the founding fathers and, pointedly, a white actor to portray the oppressive King George III.
The season has also featured a much-praised revival of “The Color Purple,” adapted from the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel about black women in early-20th-century Georgia; “Shuffle Along, or the Making of the Musical Sensation of 1921 and All That Followed,” a new exploration of a long-forgotten all-black jazz musical; “Eclipsed,” about captive women in Liberia; “On Your Feet!,” about the rise of the Cuban-American pop stars Gloria and Emilio Estefan; “Spring Awakening,” a revival using deaf actors as well as an actress in a wheelchair; “Allegiance,” about the internment of Japanese-Americans in the United States during World War II; and “Amazing Grace,” about a British slave trader-turned-abolitionist.
Black actors won major dramatic roles previously played by white performers in revivals of three classic American plays: “The Gin Game” (James Earl Jones and Cicely Tyson), “Hughie” (Forest Whitaker) and “The Crucible” (Sophie Okonedo).
But Mr. Bandhu said Broadway still tended to underrepresent Hispanic and Asian performers. And, he said, economic concerns limit progress. “Broadway, like Hollywood, is a commercial endeavor, and it’s very star-driven, and when you have so few actors of color who are stars, you’re not going to get a particularly diverse season,” he said.
Theater industry leaders have been watching the controversy in the film industry with a mixture of relief and trepidation — proud about the theater season now ending but also aware that next season is not shaping up to be anywhere near as diverse, and that while diverse casting has become increasingly common, the theater business has changed much less offstage. And some of the shows have struggled to find audiences — “Eclipsed,” in particular, has been hurting at the box office, despite positive reviews, presumably because of its difficult subject matter.
Theater unions have become increasingly vocal about diversity. Just this month, the Stage Directors and Choreographers Society released a statement declaring, “We believe that, despite good intentions, there are biases in place that sometimes inhibit the hiring of qualified directors and choreographers from underrepresented groups.” And Actors’ Equity has begun a series of conversations with its nonwhite members about diversity. “We’re trying to expand our listening to actors and stage managers who are underemployed and disenfranchised to figure out what we can do,” said the union’s executive director, Mary McColl.
The Tony nominators, who also include performers, writers, directors and designers, do not discuss their options before voting, and they cast their ballots in secret. (They will meet Monday to make their choices.) But many work in organizations where diversity is a topic of conversation, and the nominators are keenly aware of how a lack of nominee diversity affected the film industry.
