WILTSHIRE, England — Sir James Dyson, the British designer and engineer, sporting sneakers, cobalt blue spectacles and a voluminous thatch of silvery hair, stood in his vast glass office in the depths of the English countryside one recent Tuesday afternoon. He was clutching a device that he contends could change the monotony of bathroom routines forever.
“There has been zero innovation in this market for over 60 years,” said Mr. Dyson, 68, a billionaire who was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 2006.
Known as the Dyson Supersonic and unveiled in Tokyo on Wednesday, the device is his response to a question many never thought to ask: Is it possible to make a better hair dryer?
About 92 percent of British women regularly use a hair dryer (according to the consultancy Mintel), while 75.5 percent of all women and 24.5 percent of men in the United States and 97 percent of women and 30 percent of men in Japan use one (according to Dyson), and most spend an average of 20 minutes on each session. So changing even a small percentage of that behavior could have outsize repercussions.
Mr. Dyson, Britain’s best-known living inventor, is the Steve Jobs of domestic appliances. He has built a fortune from making otherwise standard products seem aesthetically desirable, in the process persuading untold numbers of consumers that they really, really want cordless and bagless vacuum cleaners, air purifiers, bladeless fans and even household robots.
Dyson's long-awaited "silent" hair dryer, unveiled in April, is powered by a small, light motor that makes it quieter and more compact than current appliances.
Mr. Dyson studied furniture design and architecture at the Royal College of Art in London. He is currently provost there. “His advocacy for the discipline and for British manufacturing has had a profound influence on the British national psyche,” said Dr. Paul Thompson, rector of the Royal College. Now Mr. Dyson is trying to extend that influence into hitherto unchartered territory: the global beauty and grooming sector.
Dyson said there were 103 engineers involved in the creation of the Supersonic, which included the taming of over 1,010 miles of human hair tresses and 7,000 acoustic tests as teams tackled three core issues: noise, weight and speed.
Ground zero for the project was the Dyson research facility, a Willy Wonka-like world deep in the rolling Wiltshire hills, with a Harrier fighter jet and spliced Mini car in the visitors’ parking lot.
Projects are kept firmly under lock and key from virtually all outsiders – as well as many within the walls itself (which, like those owned by Roald Dahl’s flamboyant fictional chocolate factory owner, are often painted a lurid purple).
Especially when doing something so counterintuitive as moving from the practical question of what to use to clean carpets to the more touchy-feely question of what to use to style a personal image.
Ed Shelton, a design manager for the Supersonic, said: “It was the hardest project I’ve ever worked on. Beyond having to crack the science of hair, we’ve had to tackle a highly subjective user psychology.
The company says the key to the Supersonic is its high-speed 13-blade motor. About the size of a quarter, the motor is small enough to fit in the base of the hair dryer handle, rather than in the conventional motor position at the top of the device, a shift that creates its unorthodox streamlined aesthetic.
The smaller motor allows for high velocity flow but not pressure, the company says, which is how temperatures shoot up on traditional hair dryers and users burn themselves if the dryer is too close to the head.
The company says the positioning of the motor in the hand also limits the so-called dumbbell effect of old-guard models, where top-heavy weighting can cause arms to ache. Weighing just 370 grams, the new structure allows for a longer silencer tube and smaller fan, cutting down drastically on noise.
Coupled with the high motor speed, the fusion of new technologies gives rise to Dyson claims that the sound waves can operate at an ultrasonic level – in other words, at frequencies higher than the upper audible limit for humans. It also has magnetic heatproof nozzles and intelligent heat sensors to prevent hair burn.
“It hasn’t been this long since my ’60s student days, when I wore flowered shirts and flares,” Mr. Dyson said.
Despite his newly flowing locks, both Dyson the man and Dyson the company are conscious that they may not come across as the most convincing of beauty gurus.
Consequently, the company has enlisted the services of Jen Atkin, a celebrity hairstylist with a client Rolodex that includes Kim Kardashian, Jessica Alba and Katy Perry and a social media following of millions. Her job is to decode the appliance and its styling power to viewers via online tutorials following the introduction (i.e., she’s a brand ambassador), but her input was also instrumental in its creation.
Ms. Atkin, who can see up to 30 clients a day, said she had initially begun the relationship by “giving her two cents” to Dyson engineers on the model and what it needed.
As with any other Dyson device, research and development didn’t come cheap: The investment, including a state-of-the-art hair laboratory, reached £50 million (about $72 million).
As a result, the Supersonic will retail at $399 when it arrives in the United States at Sephora stores in September, a price at stark odds with the low-priced high-volume business model that has traditionally defined the competitive hair dryer market.
Currently, hair dryers sold by Amazon in the United States retail for $12.99 to $219.98.
Still, Dyson has a convincing track record in persuading fans to pay hundreds of dollars on domestic status symbols that spend most of their working lives in the cupboard under the stairs or next to the dog basket.
But there have been expensive failures along the way, like its washing machine, which the company no longer makes. More recently, some of Dyson’s boldest claims, about advancing science in certain markets, have also been called into question by critics like the University of Westminster in London.
This month the university released research suggesting that Dyson Airblade hand dryers spread 60 times more germs than standard air dryers, and 1,300 times more than standard paper towels, although the assertion is one that the company emphatically and repeatedly rejects.
So the hair dryer stakes are high and the market deeply fragmented, not least by the popularity of newer hand-held electrical appliances like straightening irons and curling tongs. Can Dyson really pull off another product revolution?
What he can say is that the company is set to spend £1.5 billion (about $2.2 billion) investing in future technology and recently announced the development of four new portfolio sectors. While bullish, he also knows that not all his 21st-century inventions could be winners.
“I actually believe that success teaches you nothing; failures teach you everything,” he said, surrounded by sketches and prototypes in his meticulously cluttered office. One hundred new products are in the pipeline in the next four years around the world, he said. The hair dryer is just the beginning.
“For decades, people have just accepted a subpar experience because no one was offering them anything else,” said Stephen Courtney, concepts director at Dyson and a leader on the hair project. The company wants to change that, one locker room, spa and beauty salon at a time.