There are caterpillars crawling around the apartment of Jonathan Rockefeller. They’re hungry, but they don’t eat any houseplants or chew through the Hermès blankets. Rather, they are the caterpillars hatched by Eric Carle, the author and illustrator of the classic children’s book “The Very Hungry Caterpillar.” And then there are the plush caterpillar toys from “The Very Hungry Caterpillar Show,” a puppet extravaganza produced and directed by Mr. Rockefeller and now playing at the 47th Street Theater in Midtown.
The work world of Mr. Rockefeller, who got into show business as the assistant to the director and screenwriter Baz Luhrmann, is full of whimsical creatures. But the apartment he moved into last year with his husband — when they married in 2014, he took Mr. Rockefeller’s name, changing his from Worsley because “it was a good name to take” — is as sophisticated as any in their polished neighborhood.
“The goal was to create a soothing and calming space,” he said.
Given the frenzy of getting to his present place in life, it seemed almost essential.
Mr. Rockefeller grew up in a suburb of Sydney, Australia, the artistic son of an architect and a medical receptionist. He was an avid storyteller and so ambitious that when he saw Mr. Luhrmann’s breakthrough 2001 “Moulin Rouge!” movie musical with Nicole Kidman, he decided that he’d found a mentor. Fortunately, Mr. Luhrmann is a fellow Australian, so Mr. Rockefeller did what only a very hungry teenage admirer would do: He created a pop-up book to sell himself to the director and delivered it in person, sitting outside Mr. Luhrmann’s door.
“The wonderful thing about Australia is that people are as likely to say, ‘Why not?’ as ‘No,’ ” he said.
Given the success of his live show here (there are plans to move it to another theater for a longer run), the satisfaction of a long-awaited marriage and the artful and mature elegance of his apartment, he would indeed appear to be in really good shape, especially at such a young age.
That would include a midcentury reproduction Cherner table and chairs in a sunny living room with unadorned high windows and a mock-up of an Eric Carle school bus by Mr. Rockefeller on the mantel. The Le Corbusier chairs of chrome and cowhide in the hybrid office and den seem to be in calm conversation with the two Robert Motherwell prints hanging on a seagrass-covered wall.
A solid and imposing man with pale skin and a soft voice, he gives a tour of the apartment with authority and reverence for each artifact and work of art, including an unusual 1975 Warhol of a drag queen, a shell and feather necklace from Papua New Guinea and a Timothy Oulton cube of charred wood encased in resin that rests on original 1920s dark wood floors.
On the Le Corbusier chair in the relatively spartan bedroom, there is also his old stuffed Mr. Snuffleupagus from “Sesame Street.” A vintage Louis Vuitton suitcase serves as an archive for dozens of ambitious projects from his youth, including a perforated ad he made as a precocious youngster for a mobile phone company.
Most important, his tattered childhood copy of “The Very Hungry Caterpillar” sits on a desk. It is signed by Mr. Carle, a prolific artist whose abstract animal sculptures also populate the apartment. “He told me he found my theater production terribly beautiful,” Mr. Rockefeller said quietly.
But of all the things in the apartment, blue-chip, exotic or otherwise, the thing he loves best is a humble piece of tatting in a frame in the den.
He sighed as he stared. “It’s a reminder that making good things takes time,” he said.
Like a caterpillar’s journey to becoming a butterfly?