Peter Liang, a former New York City police officer, and the girlfriend of Akai Gurley, the unarmed black man he fatally shot, spoke at his sentencing; he received five years of probation and 800 hours of community service.
Former Officer Peter Liang will not serve any time in prison for fatally shooting an unarmed man in a Brooklyn housing project stairwell two years ago, but was instead sentenced on Tuesday to probation and community service.
The sentence — in one of the most divisive police misconduct cases in recent New York City history — came just moments after the judge took the unusual steps of ruling that the shooting was essentially an accident and reducing the jury’s verdict on manslaughter charges to the less severe criminally negligent homicide.
Though the Brooklyn district attorney’s office promised to appeal the ruling, the sentencing was a decisive move in the politically contentious case that highlighted concerns over police accountability, especially in black neighborhoods, but never neatly fit the narrative of other killings by law-enforcement officers around the country. It is rare for police officers even to be charged and brought to court in shooting cases; while this one resulted in a guilty verdict at a three-week trial this winter, the sentencing was deeply disappointing to the family of the victim, Akai Gurley.
Supporters of Peter Liang, an ex-New York police officer, and Akai Gurley, who he fatally shot, demonstrated as Mr. Liang was sentenced to probation after being convicted of manslaughter.
Mr. Gurley died on Nov. 20, 2014, when his heart was pierced by a ricocheting bullet that Mr. Liang had fired while on a night patrol in a dark stairwell in the Louis H. Pink Houses in the East New York neighborhood. In February, a jury convicted him of manslaughter and official misconduct, rejecting his testimony that the gun had simply gone off in his hand and finding that he had failed to help Mr. Gurley as he lay dying on a fifth-floor landing.
After the hearing, District Attorney Ken Thompson released a statement saying he planned to appeal Justice Chun’s decision to reduce the jury’s verdict — an unusual move from a man who all along has taken a Solomonic approach to the complicated case.
From the start, Mr. Thompson faced enormous pressure to pursue an indictment against Mr. Liang, who killed Mr. Gurley the same year that Eric Garner died during a police arrest on Staten Island. As Brooklyn’s first black district attorney, Mr. Thompson had vowed to bring a heightened sense of social justice to the borough’s communities of color.
But after the conviction, Mr. Thompson issued a letter recommending that Mr. Liang should not serve time in prison. The letter referred to Mr. Gurley as “a completely innocent man who lost his life for no reason,” but also said Mr. Liang had no prior criminal history and posed no threat to public safety.
Peter Liang leaving State Supreme Court in Brooklyn last week. He was sentenced to five years of probation on Tuesday.
In court on Tuesday, Justice Chun said that Mr. Thompson’s recommendation was “entirely and completely appropriate.” He added that on that November night two years ago, shooting Mr. Gurley was “probably the last thing” on Mr. Liang’s mind.
As word of the sentence made its way onto the street, dueling groups of protesters erupted into chants and debate. About 60 people, waving signs and shouting, gathered around Ms. Petersen, Mr. Gurley’s aunt.
