When William Shakespeare left this earth on April 23, 1616, he was definitely dead. But he wasn’t quite Shakespeare — yet.
The process of turning a successful London playwright into an icon of Englishness, then a universal writer and the very “inventor of the human,” to paraphrase Harold Bloom, took centuries. And exuberant public celebrations of him, like the commemorations of the 400th anniversary of his death that will erupt around the world on Saturday, have played an outsize role.
Not that our periodic eruptions of Bard-o-mania have always gone as planned. The first big Shakespeare party, the 200th-birthday jubilee organized in Stratford-upon-Avon in 1769 by the actor and theater manager David Garrick, actually took place five years late. (Shakespeare was born in 1564.) The three-day event — including an elaborate parade of 170 actors dressed as Shakespeare characters — was disrupted by torrential rain.
On this date — April 23, 1616 — the creator of “Hamlet,” “Macbeth” and “Romeo and Juliet” left the beauty of this world. To us, he bequeathed his tragedies and comedies, his sonnets and verse, which would survive 400 years.
Oddly, no actual words of Shakespeare were declaimed. Instead, the climax came when Garrick stood up in a nearly flooded pavilion by the Avon to sing an ode he’d written to Shakespeare: “’Tis he! ‘Tis he! The god of our idolatry!” While the jubilee put Stratford on the tourist map, an effort 100 years later to build a permanent national monument to Shakespeare there collapsed amidst a pile of debt.
Shakespeare celebrations have gone a bit more smoothly in the United States, which by the time his 300th birthday rolled around in 1864 was in the middle of a Shakespeare boom that would sweep through every frontier town. On April 23, 1864, dignitaries laid a cornerstone for a monument to the playwright in Central Park. That evening, the theaters were packed, and “Barnum’s was also crowded to its capacity,” The New York Times reported.
By the time of the 300th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death in 1916, things went well past Barnum. Britain’s celebrations were muted by wartime austerity, but the United States pulled out all the stops, with events across the country organized by “Shakespeare clubs” and other groups.
Shakespeare died 400 years ago, but his influence on language and culture remains.
“The Shakespeare epidemic in New York,” as one newspaper put it, hit its high point with “Caliban by the Yellow Sands,” an elaborate masque by Percy MacKaye that featured some 1,500 actors, a large orchestra and elaborate light displays in what The Times called “the biggest dramatic entertainment” in the city’s history.
Some 15,000 people per night packed Lewisohn Stadium at City College, coming from all social strata of the city, from the grandees (J. P. Morgan, Andrew Carnegie, Louis Comfort Tiffany) who reserved boxes on opening night to the immigrants from the Lower East Side who filled the cheap seats. The spectacle featured a pageant representing the history of theater itself, “from the day before Sophocles to the day before yesterday,” followed by the central drama, inspired by “The Tempest,” which showed the half-savage Caliban — a stand-in for America’s immigrant hordes — kneeling before the figure of Shakespeare, the civilizing genius.
Quiz: Is Your Shakespeare Sharper Than a Serpent's Tooth?
Shakespeare shuffled off his mortal coil 400 years ago this weekend. As the world prepares to celebrate the anniversary, test your knowledge of the Bard with this quiz.
A century later, Shakespeare has become a fully global phenomenon, his words translated into languages like Mandarin, Turkish and even Klingon, and his plots popping up in Hollywood, Bollywood and beyond. If all the world’s a stage, Shakespeare seems to be rarely off it these days, to the extent that some may be less tempted to celebrate his deathiversary than to say, “Him again, still?” London, where thousands are expected to gather this weekend for a two-and-a-half-mile Shakespeare street party along the River Thames, may be throwing a bigger bash this time around. But here’s a small sampling of ways New Yorkers can celebrate.
Shakespeare died 400 years ago on April 23 — supposedly 52 years to the day after he was born. Here are some (mostly free) ways to celebrate him, coming and going.
Shakespeare is said to have been born, and died, on April 23. This year, the 400th anniversary of his death has prompted an outpouring of celebrations. Here are a highly curated few.
Shakespeare’s Birthday Sonnet Slam Friday, 1-4 p.m. Naumburg Bandshell, Central Park. Register at shakespearesonnetslam.com to participate; free.
Drunk Shakespeare Actor drinks five shots of whiskey then performs a play. Friday and Saturday, 8 p.m. and 10 p.m. The Lounge at Roy Arias Stages, 300 West 43rd Street,Manhattan; drunkshakespeare.com; $55 and up.
Shakespeare Birthday Bash and Jazz Funeral Readings and music, Friday, 12:30-2 p.m. Jazz funeral and selected Shakespeare death scenes, Friday, 6:30-8:30 p.m. Bryant Park; nyc-arts.org; free.
Helen Mirren on Shakespeare Conversation with Paul Holdengraber, Wednesday, 7-9 p.m. New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue and 42nd Street; nypl.org; $40, $36 seniors.
Wonder of Will Live Live-streamed performances and storytelling at the Folger Shakespeare Library, with Justice Steven G. Breyer; Ellen Stofan, NASA’s chief scientist; the Reduced Shakespeare Company; and others. Saturday, noon-1:30 p.m. Information and livestream at folger.edu; free.
Shakespeare Birthday Party Performances, swordfighting, “insult battle” and other events. Sunday, noon-4 p.m. Folger Shakespeare Library; free.