Deep are the world’s oceans. Deeper still are our fears. And fear is what I felt crossing the Atlantic on my way to Brazil. Adding to my longstanding fear of plane travel was the ludicrous discomfort created by not flying above solid ground.
This time, however, yet another fear weighed on me. Before I left Mozambique — to give a talk on its Portuguese-language literature — one of my daughters had tormented me for days on end about the mortal dangers that awaited me in São Paulo. In Maputo, where we all live, she gathered stories from the newspapers, recorded TV news programs and collected essays to compile a hefty dossier on crime in the Brazilian city. A long list of kidnappings, robberies, rapes and murders, each distinguished by its own unique form of cruelty. My daughter’s prognostication was dire: My chances of returning alive were minimal at best. 
After listening to this litany of grave warnings, a certain anxiety overtook me. To such an extent that, stepping off the plane in São Paulo, I began asking myself all sorts of questions: Will there be, as the organization that invited me here promised, someone waiting to pick me up? There was. Holding a sign with my name written on it. But “my” sign was different from all the others I saw: It was more improvised, a combination of misshapen letters scrawled on a piece of cardboard. Whoever wrote it didn’t know my name exactly. The man waiting for me had such a dubious air about him that I overcame my good manners to question him about his identity.
I confess I wasn’t wild about this phrase, “Someone else sent me.” The ghosts of fear immediately began to make their presence known. Truth be told, I found this sudden attack of fear very odd. In Mozambique, I’d lived through a civil war that lasted 16 years. I should have grown accustomed to fateful twists and turns between life and death. Above all, I should have had a very different first encounter with the country that had been such a force in my development as a writer. My greatest influences are Brazilian poets and novelists. My landing in the country of Jorge Amado was certainly worthy of a good story but not the one that was beginning to take shape.
While the man “sent” to pick me up guided me through a long walkway toward the parking lot, a movie began to play in my head. I was about to be kidnapped. I barely heard the words my kidnapper offered in way of an explanation: The regular driver for the organization that was hosting me had suddenly fallen ill and had asked my kidnapper, a friend of his, to dar um jeitinho, to make it work.
“The ‘dead man’s seat,’ ” he quipped.
In Mozambique, bala can mean but one thing: a bullet. It seemed that I was going to die at the hands of the nicest murderer in the entire world. A criminal who worries about his victims’ final wishes and refers to the projectile he’s about to shoot in the diminutive, to make it clear he’s capable of affection. At this point, I was even overcome by a sort of fondness for the idea of my own death. When I opened my eyes, a tin of menthol cough drops awaited me in the driver’s outstretched hand.
“Well?” he asked again with a smile.
I let out a sigh of relief and did my best to contain myself, still as could be, all the way to the hotel. The city passed before my eyes, slowly and colorlessly.
In the safety of my room, I scoured my dictionaries, and there it was: bala. In Brazil, it can mean “lozenge,” “candy.” I took a deep breath. Then I called my daughter in Maputo to tell her I’d survived.