The job outlook for new graduates is the best it’s been in years, but that’s hardly the point. For the playdate generation, expertly guided through life transitions from preschool to college, graduation is scary. Raised with a keen awareness of competition, students see a degree not as a finish line but as the start of the next heat.
Last fall, Jonathan Harsh, a senior majoring in political science at Beloit College in Wisconsin, was marinating in uncertainty: “Am I good enough at what I am doing to get ahead? Are other people taking a better route?” His career ambitions have swung from astronaut, biologist or chemist to “maybe being a writer or working on a political campaign.” Plus, he likes theater.
Cue the career coaches — onetime tutors, test preppers and executive coaches who have created a blossoming industry to guide students in choosing majors, landing internships, exploring careers and seeking first jobs.
Personal career guidance is not cheap. While help finding a job can cost a few hundred dollars, some companies charge $300 an hour for services that might involve deciphering strengths, arranging job shadowing and working on résumés, interview techniques and job search strategies. Walking a student through an extended exploration can run $5,000.
To parents, such plotted ruminations sound foreign. “It was dumb luck that we ended up where we are,” Michael Harsh said of his own path and his wife’s, in nursing. But hopscotching your way to a career these days reads as risky, given escalating student loan debt. Students also worry about matching parents’ success.
“There is a fear of downward mobility and a sense that ‘We have to get this right,’ ” Ms. Oringer said.
Students have reason to fret. There are more choices, and a furiously evolving career landscape. “They face an entirely different reality than their parents did,” said Anthony P. Carnevale, director of the Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce.
He noted that high school graduates once could work up to engineering jobs. Now, requirements for more education have made training more drawn out and specialized. Between 1985 and 2010, the number of programs of study jumped from 462 to 2,260, to serve what he described as a “much more complicated career pathway.” Career fields have multiplied, too. In 1950, the Bureau of Labor Statistics tracked 270; in 2010, there were 840.
Students must figure out what they care about and where to jump on. And they want help doing it.
That message has been slow to arrive on campuses, though some are shedding the job-posting-clearinghouse mentality to offer more personal help. The College of Liberal Arts at the University of Minnesota has doubled its career counseling staff, bringing to 10 the number available to guide the college’s 13,676 undergraduates. Last October, the office required first-year students to attend an open house to get an assignment (make a résumé), the first in the four-year career prep program.
What’s the best career for you? John L. Holland’s theory of career choice could help you find out.
That’s why, two years ago, Ms. Clarke’s office began assigning both an adviser and a career coach to students the moment they were admitted. “People in my generation want to know what they are doing way ahead of time,” said Lauren Deitch, a senior in the business school who sought out a part-time job at the career office’s help desk to get extra guidance herself.
Ms. Deitch won’t send an important email without her go-to counselor looking it over. She had top summer internships in TV and film, but companies she’s interested in didn’t start recruiting until March. She is confident but has been rattled by the steady ping of alerts revealing others’ job news.
And it could hurt job success. A 2014 survey of 482 students at California State University, Fresno, found that those with the most intense helicopter parenting felt less able to make decisions. They gave “maladaptive responses” to workplace scenarios, said Julie Olson-Buchanan, one of two professors of management who conducted the study.
Dr. Olson-Buchanan and her co-author, Jill Bradley-Geist, are doing a follow-up study this spring to see how the students have fared in the workplace.
So when to guide and when to let go? Parents like Thomas F. Fleming, a partner at Kirkland & Ellis, a Manhattan law firm, is conflicted about how much to help out. Raised in Brooklyn, Mr. Fleming was the first in his family to attend college and navigated school and career himself. His father worked construction and his mother was a liquor store clerk.
Yet for his sons — Joe, a 2012 Villanova graduate, and Will, a 2015 graduate of the University of Maryland — Mr. Fleming hired Susan Hay, an executive recruiter who in 2013 started LaunchingU to guide new grads.
Ms. Hay helped Joe find his inner worker. He valued “being seen as having expertise,” she said. He didn’t like settings that constantly changed, and “wanted to clearly understand what was expected of him.” Conversations about his interests led him to graduate school; he’s now studying public policy at Duke.
So last summer, after Will graduated and jobs didn’t materialize, Mr. Fleming again hired Ms. Hay. With Will, who now works at a Maryland marketing firm, she focused on concrete job advice — take down the online frat pictures, use active verbs in your résumé, prepare four or five stories for interviews that show how you stand out.
Dispensing tips and common sense is simple. The harder task, especially for students used to following a recipe for success, is answering questions with no right answer, like: What do you care about?
“They don’t know themselves and they don’t know where to begin,” said Chris Posti, who a year ago started College Grad CareerCoaching after running an executive coaching and outplacement firm. She blames childhoods in which daily transactions like playdates and soccer practice have trumped self-knowing.
Guidance has become a given in a world that demands ambition not only to soar but also to take off. “When you are getting coaching with ACTs and college stuff, this whole new process of being coached for a career sounds very familiar,” said Ben Fuerst, who graduated in June from the University of Denver.
Mr. Fuerst went to Ivy Educational Services for help with internships starting in his sophomore year (internships are no longer optional for securing desirable postcollege jobs).
Ms. Magnani kept Mr. Fuerst on track with Skype conversations every other week — “This is who you should talk to by next week.” Mr. Fuerst, who is from Tewksbury, N.J., interned in the office of a New Jersey company that makes packaging materials. Junior year, he landed an internship with Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado and then with the state’s Office of Early Childhood. Senior year required “a few more spitball sessions.” Try sports business or stick to politics and policy? He made it through several rounds toward a coveted internship with the National Football League but lost out.
Come January, Mr. Harsh was excited about a career he hadn’t previously thought of: analyst at the Central Intelligence Agency. “It’s a great feeling to see something that you would like to do and you are able to do,” he said. Job requirements favor foreign language skills, and he had studied Japanese and Spanish. He is applying for a C.I.A. internship for 2017 and weighing graduate programs in political science.
