A screen shot from “Trump Effect.” The video appeared on Reddit, and Mr. Trump later shared it on his Twitter and Facebook accounts.
The man being offered as the savior of a doomed world is Donald J. Trump. And last week, Mr. Trump shared the video with the millions of people who follow him on Twitter and Facebook as he tries to secure the Republican nomination for president.
The video linked on Twitter was taken down within hours for copyright reasons, and other copies subsequently vanished from the Internet. But that the video migrated from Reddit to Mr. Trump’s official accounts shows not only the candidate’s unfiltered promotional strategy, but also the disparate ways in which his many supporters take up his cause online — and the ease with which Mr. Trump incorporates their narratives into his own.
In the absence of a large, organized online operation, the Trump campaign has leaned on its candidate’s huge following on social media, where supporters share links and photos, argue on his behalf and spread his views to friends and family. But if major social media platforms are where Mr. Trump amplifies his pronouncements, sites like Reddit and 4chan have become a sort of proving ground, where an extreme, Internet-amped version of Mr. Trump’s message is shared and refined.
At least 90,000 people on Reddit have subscribed to a community called “The Donald,” in a group known as a subreddit. Its members post material full of slang, insults and inside jokes. Users refer to each other as “centipedes” — a reference to a series of popular videos in which Mr. Trump is compared to the creature, which is a “nimble navigator” just like the candidate himself. (Mr. Trump has shared these videos as well.) Many usernames include the letters MAGA — for Make America Great Again.
The subreddit is intentionally insular, but widely read, ranking among the most active on the site. According to Reddit’s own measurements, it produced nearly 52 million page views in March. In the same month, the largest subreddit supporting Mr. Sanders, who has visited the site to answer questions, and whose campaign maintains an active presence there, drew almost 36 million, despite having more subscribers.
In subreddits supporting other candidates, users promote favorable stories, feud with foes and rally support through phone-banking or “Facebanking” — campaigning to Facebook friends. On The Donald, the message is relentless — as are the insults. Opponents are referred to as “cucks,” which is short for “cuckservative,” as in “cuckold” — now used as a derisive term for liberals and moderate Republicans recently popularized by far-right online commentators and white nationalists, according to the Southern Poverty Law Center. The group shares content and tone with parts of 4chan, the infamous and anonymous message board that traffics in shock, and where Mr. Trump — who regularly scorns “political correctness” — has found substantial, if oblique, support.
Visitors to the group will find a cascade of offensive postings. Some members share open antipathy toward Muslims, sling insults with relish and mock anyone who takes umbrage.
“We have a relationship with 4chan,” said one Reddit moderator, who spoke on the condition that he not be identified out of fear, he said, of harassment. “It’s a little bit scary to some people, the way they talk.” (Moderators, like all Reddit users, are listed only by self-selected handles).
To charges of racism, the moderator, who said he was a 32-year-old technology worker, said that “white nationalists” had been banned from the group. “We kicked them out before it became an issue for Trump,” he said in a phone interview. Members respond to accusations of bigotry with defiant claims of persecution at the hands of critics. It is an article of faith among posters that anti-racists are the real bigots, feminists are the actual sexists, and progressive politics are, in effect, regressive.
Support for Mr. Trump on 4chan and similar sites started off as a manic elation and disbelief at the spectacle of it all — he’s behaving like us! On Reddit at least, that elation has turned into real support. In between meme photos and lengthy threads of mockery, users also post calls to action that offer tangible benefits to Mr. Trump. They remind one another of voter registration deadlines and share rhetorical strategies for dealing with opponents. The group maintains a delegate counter, links to pro-Trump videos and articles, and provides materials instructing new visitors on how to help with the campaign.
A session with the creator of the cartoon Dilbert, Scott Adams, who has predicted victory for Mr. Trump, is on the schedule.
Their messages do rise, perhaps surprisingly, up the chain into the mainstream. When the “Trump Effect” video was posted to Mr. Trump’s Twitter account, the subreddit exploded with activity, as it does any time it believes that the campaign has acknowledged it — something its organizers claim happens often.
A link to Mr. Trump’s video tweet Monday was pinned to the top of The Donald’s main page.
