WASHINGTON — The Obama administration is considering whether North Carolina’s new law on gay and transgender rights makes the state ineligible for billions of dollars in federal aid for schools, highways and housing, officials said Friday.
Although experts said such a drastic step was unlikely, at least immediately, the administration’s review puts North Carolina on notice that the new law could have financial consequences. Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina had assured residents that the law would not jeopardize federal money for education.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development said it was doing a similar evaluation. “We’re reviewing the effects of the law on HUD funding allocated for North Carolina,” said Cameron French, a department spokesman.
Any decision on federal aid would take time, experts said. Federal agencies have used the threat of lost money to pressure a handful of municipal governments in California and Illinois to change their policies and allow transgender students to use the restrooms of the gender they identify with. There is no recent precedent for the federal government’s applying similar pressure to address a state law that it sees as discriminatory.
Mr. McCrory, a Republican who is seeking re-election, and other supporters of the law have been aware, but dismissive, of suggestions that the measure might endanger the state’s federal largess. Mr. McCrory’s office did not respond to messages on Friday.
Dan Forest, the Republican lieutenant governor and the president of the State Senate, said he expected that federal aid would continue. He noted that many states did not explicitly provide gay and transgender people with anti-discrimination protection. Neither does federal law.
Transgender issues today are rooted in a decades-long struggle for acceptance.
Mr. Forest is correct that federal anti-discrimination laws do not explicitly mention gay and transgender people: the Obama administration has repeatedly called on Congress to pass a law banning discrimination against them in employment decisions. 
Last year, a federal judge in Virginia rejected that notion, ruling that restricting the bathroom choices for transgender students did not violate federal law. The Obama administration had argued otherwise and the case is on appeal.
The Obama administration would not need to go to court to withhold grant money, but doing so would surely lead to a court fight, especially since the law is unsettled.
Advocacy groups have praised the Obama administration for its broad view of civil rights laws. During the past seven years, “the fight for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender equality has reached an incredible crescendo,” Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch said last year.
In a video message on Tuesday, Mr. McCrory complained about “a vicious, nationwide smear campaign,” and he lashed out at critics in his state, including Attorney General Roy Cooper, and beyond North Carolina. Lawmakers had said that they were trying to prevent men from dressing as women to enter bathrooms and commit assaults. Critics said there was no evidence that had happened.
“Disregarding the facts, other politicians — from the White House to mayors to state capitals and City Council members and even our attorney general — have initiated and promoted conflict to advance their political agenda and tear down our state, even if it means defying the Constitution and their oath of office,” Mr. McCrory said.