HALLANDALE BEACH, Fla. — The race was billed as East versus West, an unprecedented clash between undefeated Triple Crown heavyweights from opposite coasts, but it did not quite live up to the hype. It did, however, produce an undisputed favorite heading into the Kentucky Derby on May 7.
Mohaymen was no match for Nyquist, who grabbed the early lead and never let go for a three-and-a-quarter-length victory in the $1 million Florida Derby on Saturday at Gulfstream Park, pushing his record to 7-0.
Ridden by Mario Gutierrez, Nyquist put on a show for a near-capacity crowd that came to witness the showdown between him and Mohaymen, the dominant horse from the East. But Mohaymen, ridden by Junior Alvarado, did not fire Saturday, finishing fourth. It was his first loss in six races.
Nyquist completed the mile-and-an-eighth race in 1 minute 49.11 seconds, paying $4.40 on a $2 bet to win. Majesto, ridden by Javier Castellano, finished second, and Fellowship, ridden by Jose Lezcano, was third.
Nyquist, the 2-year-old champion trained by Doug O’Neill and owned by Reddam Racing, was eligible for a $1 million bonus from the auction company Fasig-Tipton as a graduate of its Florida 2-year-old in training sale and will take home $1.6 million.
Mohaymen means “dominant” in Arabic, but he was anything but on Saturday. Trained by Kiaran McLaughlin and owned by Shadwell Stable, he is a Keeneland sales graduate, so even with a victory, his connections would have had to settle for the first-place check of $600,000.
O’Neill, Gutierrez and Reddam are familiar with the hubbub surrounding the Kentucky Derby, having won the race with I’ll Have Another in 2012. They are also familiar with the heartbreak that strikes often on the Triple Crown trail: I’ll Have Another, who also won the Preakness Stakes, was scratched a day ahead of the Belmont Stakes with a tendon injury.
“I think last week I got over it,” O’Neill said.
Fans packed the Gulfstream Park grounds, which include a casino and several shops and restaurants, on an 88-degree day to see the two horse-racing heavyweights square off. Despite a few showers, fans stayed until the end to watch the main event, which had a 10-horse field but was thought of as a two-horse race.
A showdown between the top contenders ahead of the Kentucky Derby is highly unusual. Nyquist, who is named after Detroit Red Wings forward Gustav Nyquist, was the most accomplished Triple Crown candidate to ship from Southern California for the Florida Derby since the multiple Grade I winner Snow Chief claimed a front-running victory in 1986. Before shipping Nyquist, O’Neill was the last trainer to send a horse from the West Coast to the Florida Derby, with the fourth-place finisher Sam’s Ace in 2006.
With a 14-race card that featured eight stakes races, including the headlining showdown, and a record $32 million wagered, Saturday was all about excess. Looming over the proceedings was Pegasus, which, at about 11 stories tall, is the world’s largest horse sculpture and one of the largest bronze statues ever made. Pegasus, which can be seen from miles away and cost at least $30 million, anchors an outdoor park that includes water and light shows.
The statue, which also depicts a fire-breathing dragon, was the brainchild of Frank Stronach, the founder and honorary chairman of the Stronach Group, which owns several racetracks, including Gulfstream Park.
Now it is on to the Kentucky Derby, where Nyquist and Mohaymen will face off once again. Nyquist will head from Florida to Keeneland Racecourse in Lexington, Ky., to prepare for the Derby. Mohaymen’s group said it would merely “regroup.” The last horse to win both the Florida Derby and the Kentucky Derby was Orb in 2013.
Although the showdown fell short on the racetrack, the early meeting between two top horses kept the momentum going for an industry that is still swooning over American Pharoah’s Triple Crown sweep last year, the first since 1978.
“We’ve got some pretty powerful story lines that are emerging that not only racing fans can follow but sports fans in general, and hopefully we’re raising the general profile and the level of interest in racing throughout the United States and the world as a result,” said Boyd Browning, the president and chief executive of Fasig-Tipton, which offered the bonus that lured Nyquist to the East.
For now, Nyquist’s connections will savor this victory and the influx of cash in their bank accounts. But they are keenly aware that in this sport, heartbreak is never far away.
