LINCOLN, Neb. — For at least one more presidential election, this overwhelmingly Republican state will keep a system that allows it to split its Electoral College votes between candidates and parties, after a conservative-backed effort to adopt a winner-take-all system stalled in the Legislature on Tuesday.
Ever since Barack Obama picked off one of Nebraska’s five Electoral College votes in 2008, even as he was trounced statewide, Republicans have sought to undo the quirky system that gives two of Nebraska’s five electoral votes to the candidate with the most support over all and one from each of its three congressional districts to the candidate with the district’s majority.
Practically speaking, the current system gives Democrats a fighting chance to walk away with an electoral vote from this decidedly red state. That vote, which has added value in close presidential elections, would probably come from a Democratic win in the congressional district surrounding Omaha, the state’s urban center.
“It means that now when people start organizing at the neighborhood level, it matters because we can get one of those votes,” said State Senator Ernie Chambers of Omaha, a political independent who led the opposition to the bill.
Conservatives in Nebraska’s statehouse have tried for years to undo the split system, which was put in place in 1991, and they appeared on the verge of succeeding Tuesday. But Mr. Chambers and others filibustered the bill, and conservatives fell one vote short of moving toward a final vote. The bill’s sponsor, State Senator Beau McCoy, a conservative, said he “absolutely” had believed he had the votes to win.
Individual states are allowed to choose how to select their share of the 538 presidential electors, but Nebraska and Maine are the only ones that do not use a winner-take-all method. The only year that Nebraska split its votes was 2008.
Supporters of the current system say it fits the state’s political ethos, where party affiliation is supposed to take a back seat to Great Plains pragmatism. The state has the country’s only unicameral Legislature, and lawmakers here do not caucus by party. But on Tuesday, the winner-take-all debate produced awkward talk of partisanship in a statehouse that likes to consider itself above the fray.
For Nebraska Democrats, whose candidates have struggled in recent statewide races, having an electoral vote in play can drum up enthusiasm and attract presidential candidates to campaign in the state. But Republicans see it as terribly unfair that they have to play by rules that are different from those in 48 other states, and cringe at the prospect of again splitting votes with a Democrat.
“I think it’s one of those experiments that’s not working,” said State Senator Robert Hilkemann, who said he believed all 50 states should have a uniform system.
Supporters of a winner-take-all approach say their reasoning goes far beyond partisanship. John Gale, a Republican who is Nebraska’s secretary of state, said that voting as a bloc in the Electoral College allowed the state to have a greater voice, and that the split voting method could create havoc and lead to the rise of third parties if adopted widely in other states.
Rather than opposing the winner-take-all model, Mr. Gale said, Nebraska Democrats should focus on winning more votes across the state. “They shouldn’t rely on this as their tool for regaining a strong voice in Nebraska,” Mr. Gale said.