I am buying a co-op apartment. The co-op board insists that I bring my dog, a boxer-lab mix, to the interview. She is a sweet and civilized pooch, but can be skittish because she is a rescue. I’m afraid she might get weird if she has bad chemistry with a board member. I know we would both be very happy in this apartment, so how can we put our best foot forward? Should I warn the board ahead of time that she might act strangely? Or should I wait to see if it happens, and then deny that it’s ever happened before and promise to muzzle her if she does it again?
Co-op boards that interview four-legged candidates do so for a reason: They want to gauge the dog’s temperament. If your pooch has a meltdown at the interview, the board will probably take notice, but that might not be such a bad thing.
You and your skittish pup ultimately have to live in this building, and the tenor of the interview should help you determine if it is a good fit. If the building has a small elevator, for example, your dog might freak out every time she has to share the space with someone she perceives as weird. Your neighbors and the board might freak out, too. “Nobody wants to go into a lobby or a skinny hallway with a dog who’s highly stressed,” said Andrea Arden, a dog trainer.
Ask yourself this: Do you really want to deal with that kind of daily anxiety? And would your dog truly be happy living in an environment where she has to be muzzled?
Rather than deceive the board, prepare your dog for the interview — a few sessions with a dog trainer might provide some useful tools for managing stressful encounters. Make sure she has had enough rest, exercise and food, so she can be on her best behavior. And then, be honest. “Answer any questions at the interview candidly, while conveying the warmth and enthusiasm that you obviously feel for your pet,” said Maxwell Breed, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.
If you conceal details about your dog’s past, like previous episodes of aggression, it could backfire, because intentional misrepresentations of yourself or your situation might give the board grounds to void the transaction under certain circumstances, Mr. Breed said.
I have lived in my rent-stabilized apartment since 1986. The couple upstairs has lived in their apartment even longer. A year ago, they had a bedbug problem and had to remove their carpeting. Now it’s very noisy. I can hear every step they take. Every time they move a chair, I know it. I asked them when they planned to replace their carpet, but they are reluctant to do so. What can I do? I don’t want to start World War III, but I would like the quiet restored.
After you and your neighbors have lived together harmoniously for three decades, it would be a shame if warfare erupted over some missing floor coverings.
In the interest of peace (and your sanity), talk to your neighbors again, drawing on whatever good will you’ve accumulated over the last 30 years to persuade them to do the right thing. “The best thing you can do is approach your neighbor to kindly suggest an amicable solution,” said Jennifer Addonizio Rozen, a lawyer who represents tenants.
Be direct, but polite and friendly. Tell them that ever since they removed their carpets, your apartment has been noisy and unpleasant. Insist that they buy area rugs with the proper padding or install new carpeting as soon as possible, as you would do the same for your neighbors. Invite one of them down to your apartment to hear what it sounds like from below.
If they do not heed your calls, review your lease. Most leases contain a provision requiring tenants to cover 80 percent of their floors with carpeting. If yours has such a requirement, your neighbor’s lease probably has it, too. Then contact your landlord and insist that he or she intervene on your behalf. This might sour your relationship with your neighbors, but if they are being insensitive to your well-being, you might have little choice. With any luck, they will be considerate and buy some rugs.
My roommate and I rent a market-rate apartment in a condominium and pay for gas, electricity and heat. When we signed the lease, we were told that we were responsible for paying for all three utilities. However, I heard that landlords are required to provide heat in New York City. Is that true? And if so, does it apply to condo rentals?
New York City landlords are required to provide tenants with heat from Oct. 1 through May 31, if the temperature falls below 55 degrees Fahrenheit during the day or 40 degrees at night. But while the landlord has to turn on the boiler, he does not necessarily have to foot the bill.
If you live in a market-rate apartment, your landlord does not have to pay for heat unless the lease requires that he do so, said Jamie Schare Friedland, a Manhattan landlord-tenant lawyer. Check your lease; if heat is not included in the rent, then it is your responsibility.
The rules are different for rent-regulated apartments, which are overseen by the state. In that case, if heat was once a service included in the rent, a landlord cannot unilaterally take it away, as that could make the tenant eligible for a rent reduction.