IN Miami’s fashionable financial district, a slab of limestone juts out of the ground beneath the elevated tracks of the commuter rail line, across the street from a new apartment building. The pockmarked rocks sit about 25 feet above sea level. But 120,000 years ago, this limestone outcrop was part of a white sandy shoal beneath a sea that covered the lower third of Florida.
“If one wants to see evidence of a higher sea, downtown Miami is a good place,” said Daniel Muhs, a United States Geological Survey geologist who has studied these rocks from the Eemian Interglacial Period, which began about 130,000 years ago and ended 15,000 years later.
Back then, the sea was 20 to 30 feet higher than it is today. These high seas were fed by ice melt from Greenland and Antarctica in a world that was perhaps less than 1 degree Celsius warmer than our own, or 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit.
For that reason, what happened during the Eemian has drawn intense interest from geologists and climate scientists who have tried to resolve the period’s central mystery: How could temperatures so similar to today’s cause the sea to rise so high? And what does it mean for our own future in a warming climate caused by the burning of fossil fuels?
Using computer models, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimated in 2013 that with continued high emissions, seas will rise by about one and a half feet to three feet by the end of the century. These projections have long struck many geoscientists steeped in earth’s past as conservative.
“There’s definitely a difference between how paleoenvironmentalists view our situation, and how the climate modeling community views it,” said James White, a geologist and director of the Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research at the University of Colorado, Boulder.
But the models are beginning to catch up with the geology.
In recent weeks, two studies by prominent climate scientists, one led by James Hansen of Columbia, the other by Robert DeConto of the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and David Pollard of Pennsylvania State University, have tried to resolve the mystery of the Eemian, as well as earlier, slightly warmer times in the earth’s past with even higher seas. Both teams argue that collapsing Antarctic ice sheets, like those that might have drowned Florida during the Eemian, may alter the world’s coastlines again in a matter of decades.
The mechanism for warming in the Eemian was different than today: Rather than greenhouse gases, the wobble of the planet was responsible, exposing the Northern Hemisphere to more sunshine. It’s not a perfect match to our situation, but the consequences might be the same.
As Dr. Hansen put it in an email, an Eemian-level sea rise of 19 to 30 feet “is a good analog for where we are headed” if the world keeps emitting greenhouse gases, but it’s “debatable when we will get there.” Dr. DeConto and Dr. Pollard warn of seas rising 50 feet in coming centuries if carbon emissions continue unchecked.
The coastlines might seem like permanent features of geography. But over the past few million years, massive ice sheets expanded and receded, and seas rose and fell by hundreds of feet. Then, around 12,000 years ago, the most recent of many glacial ages ended, and seas eventually rose by 400 feet.
This is roughly where we are today.
But as we continue to inject heat-trapping carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, there’s every reason to expect that these coastlines will be redrawn by rising seas just as they have been throughout earth’s history.
The Eemian would have struck us as an odd world. In Alaska, boreal forests pushed north and west, crowding out tundra. Giant tortoises moseyed all the way up to central Illinois. Marine life that today lives off Virginia inhabited Nantucket waters. In Europe, large sea snails now found as far south as Angola marched to Sicily. Hippopotamuses and water buffalo splashed in the Rhine Valley. Modern humans were in Africa, with recent findings suggesting that some had also migrated elsewhere.
This climate might have had some other, more ominous surprises. The geologist Paul Hearty argues that 30-foot-tall, thousand-ton “megaboulders” that can be found on top of 60-foot cliffs in the Bahamas were hurled there by superstorms of an intensity and scale that civilization has not experienced.
The most striking feature of this mildly warmer time, though, was its high seas.
And sea rise during the Eemian has nothing on earlier periods. Millions of years ago, during epochs when it was 3 to 4 degrees Celsius (5.4 to 7.2 degrees Fahrenheit) warmer than it is today, sea levels were 50 to 80 feet higher. When it was moderately warmer than that, there was no ice at the poles whatsoever.
“So a simple way that I look at this is that we know that with pretty good confidence that roughly 4 to 5 degrees Celsius warming is what it took to get us to, say, 40 million years ago, when Antarctica was completely melted and Greenland was completely melted, and, you know Raquel Welch was out there in a fur-clad outfit,” Dr. White, the Colorado geologist, said. “In rough numbers that was about 80 meters of sea level rise,” or about 260 feet.
Whether the seas will swell to staggering new heights in a time span ruinous to civilization or over the forgiving horizon of geological time is the most pressing problem in glaciology and climate modeling today. But the seas will rise.
South of Miami, on Windley Key, there is an old quarry of Key Largo limestone that has the grooved fans and mazelike contours of a coral reef. It’s at the highest point in the Florida Keys, but was once a reef with living coral, submerged, like the outcrop in Miami, under the sea.
