CHICAGO — Nobody would argue that this election cycle has been short on political theater. Granted, much of it could be compared to the kind of theater that sends you fleeing at intermission. But of drama, yes, there has been plenty.
This might be seen as singularly bad timing for two plays being presented concurrently here this season: Thomas Bradshaw’s “Carlyle” and Lucas Hnath’s “Hillary and Clinton.” How, after all, do you top a show like the continuing Cirque du Trump?
Trust Mr. Bradshaw, one of contemporary theater’s most impish provocateurs, to give it the old college try — and more or less succeed. “Carlyle” is a brash, button-pushing comedy about “how a black person ends up becoming a Republican,” as the title character puts it near the top of the show. Mr. Hnath’s more muted drama focuses on a woman who happens to be named Hillary Clinton and is running for president, although he stresses (not quite convincingly) that she is not actually meant to be that Hillary Clinton.
Mr. Bradshaw’s fearless, in-your-face style is on lavish display throughout. Carlyle, who is married to a white woman, Janice (the excellent Tiffany Scott), tells us in another bit that the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. fought so that blacks could, among other things, “be free to have sex with white women without fear of being lynched.” He adds, to underscore the point, “That’s what the civil rights movement was about.” Time to revise the history books.
Carlyle, we learn, inherited his conservative bent from his father, a Wall Street banker, and grew up in Greenwich, Conn., attending fancy private schools. He did have a brief period of rebellion, when a few less affluent black children were admitted to his school and mocked him for being an “Oreo” who hung out with “crackers.” Chastened, he started listening to rap, to his father’s horror. Fortunately, Tyrone and Shaniqua — those bad influences from the wrong side of the tracks — didn’t last too long, and Carlyle reverted to his old persona.
 Once at Harvard, Carlyle upbraids his black roommate for taking fried chicken home: “I’d appreciate it if you could try to be a little less of a stereotype.” Clarence Thomas plays a role when, after going to Harvard Law School, Carlyle scores a job clerking for him.
Some sections of “Carlyle” tend to meander, and the satire can become ham-handed, as when Janice’s father, at first appalled to learn that his daughter has married a black man, and Carlyle’s father bond by pulling out and comparing their firearms. A long series of scenes depicting what might really have taken place between Anita Hill and Clarence Thomas — from Carlyle’s virulent anti-Anita point of view — is more preposterous than funny, not to mention gratuitously long, especially when it’s followed by a (staged) insurrection in the audience.
“Carlyle,” directed at a brisk clip by Benjamin Kamine and powered by the dynamic Mr. Jones, is loosely put together and sometimes devolves into random speechifying. But it certainly keeps you engaged, or at least squirming in your seat, with its absurdist but scabrously funny riffs on its subject, a (relatively) rare combination, the black Republican.
In “Hillary and Clinton,” Mr. Hnath presents a fictionalized drama about Hillary Clinton’s initial bid for the presidency. An opening monologue stresses that this is fantasy, asking us to imagine another Earth and that “on this planet, Earth light years away from our planet Earth, there is a woman named Hillary.” A program note urges the actors playing the roles to avoid any sense of mimicry. Hillary is portrayed by a black actress, Cheryl Lynn Bruce, who exudes convincing gravitas. The Other Guy, as her opponent is denoted in the script, presumably represents a fictional Barack Obama. He is played by the Latino actor Juan Francisco Villa.
Still, on a basic level, both the characters and the situations are pretty clearly modeled on fact. The play is set a few days before the New Hampshire primary. As was the actual case, Hillary’s campaign at this point would need a crucial win.
As she talks with her campaign manager, Mark (Keith Kupferer), he stresses that they are running out of money, and even suggests (here we lapse, I would guess, into total fiction) that Hillary take the vice president slot that has been unofficially offered by her opponent.
Despite being discouraged by her campaign manager, Hillary calls Bill (John Apicella) and asks him to come to New Hampshire. Tension arises when Bill, too, suggests that if the money is running out, perhaps it’s time for her to pull out. (Does he really want her to win, she asks?) He’s irritated that after she initially wanted to keep her distance, now that she’s in trouble, she’s turning to him for help.
“Hillary and Clinton,” directed for the Victory Gardens Theater by the company’s artistic director, Chay Yew, is written, like Mr. Hnath’s recent play “The Christians,” in a slightly stylized tone, with quiet, often quasi-incantatory dialogue. But in trying to enter the mind-set of a woman who has a reputation (deserved or not) for being too cautious, Mr. Hnath himself seems unusually cautious. Nothing Hillary says or does — and little that Bill says or does — provokes much fruitful thought about how their private personas may differ from the public ones.
As ever, Mr. Hnath writes with intelligence and care. But while Mr. Bradshaw’s “Carlyle” occasionally, and gleefully, goes too far, “Hillary and Clinton” doesn’t venture far enough.