The federal investigation of Mayor Bill de Blasio’s campaign fund-raising apparatus has expanded to focus on efforts to raise money for Democratic candidates for the State Senate in 2014, when the party was battling to retake the chamber, according to people with knowledge of grand jury subpoenas issued in the inquiry.
Earlier this week, federal agents and local investigators served state grand jury subpoenas for records related to fund-raising on behalf of Democratic candidates who were in the midst of half a dozen hotly contested races that year, two of the people said. In the end, the Senate remained in Republican control.
Several of the Democratic candidates themselves were among those contacted by Federal Bureau of Investigation agents and investigators working with prosecutors from the office of the Manhattan district attorney. The agents and investigators contacted some of the candidates to serve the subpoenas and, in some cases, conduct interviews, the people said.
Mr. de Blasio made retaking the chamber a priority in 2014 and personally solicited contributions for his fellow Democrats in Senate races as part of that effort. There is no indication that Mr. de Blasio is a target of the inquiry. Spokesmen for his re-election campaign and the city’s Law Department declined to say whether they had received subpoenas.
Prosecutors are focused on whether there was an effort to evade campaign contribution limits. They are trying to determine whether contributions solicited by the mayor went to smaller county committees with the intention that they then be passed on to candidates in the contested races, the two people said. Those county committees have no limits on campaign contributions from individuals, groups or companies, but candidates’ committees do.
In addition to the focus on the Senate campaign, federal authorities are continuing their investigation of the fund-raising of Mr. de Blasio’s mayoral campaign. On Monday, F.B.I. agents and state investigators made an early morning visit to the Brooklyn home of Mr. de Blasio’s former finance director, Ross A. Offinger, two other people said.
Mr. Offinger was not home, and it was unclear whether the agents had intended to serve him with a subpoena. He declined to comment through a spokesman.
The corruption investigation came to light two weeks ago. Initially a largely federal effort, it has centered on the activities of two businessmen, Jona Rechnitz and Jeremy Reichberg. Mr. Rechnitz raised money for the mayor’s election in 2013, and he and his wife also made personal donations. That inquiry is being conducted by federal prosecutors in Manhattan, the F.B.I., and the city’s Investigation Department. Those agencies, and the Manhattan district attorney’s office, all declined to comment.
The subpoenas issued this week, the people said, sought all communications with the mayor’s office and documents regarding solicitations, donors and donations to the Campaign for One New York, a nonprofit group that supported the mayor’s agenda. Mr. Offinger had served as the group’s finance director.
The group, which Mr. de Blasio shut down last month, has drawn the ire of government watchdog groups, which said it created “a shadow government” of lobbyists and businesses with interests before city government. Mr. Rechnitz donated $50,000 to the group through a company he controls, and Mr. Reichberg held a fund-raiser for the group. A spokesman for the Campaign for One New York also declined to say whether it had received a subpoena.
Investigators were initially focused on whether Mr. Rechnitz and Mr. Reichberg received some favorable city action — or a promise of some action — in exchange for their financial support, people briefed on that case have said, but it was not immediately clear what that action might be.
As part of the investigation into Mr. Rechnitz and Mr. Reichberg, F.B.I. agents and Internal Affairs investigators in the New York Police Department have questioned roughly two dozen police officials who were suspected of taking gifts and trips from the men, people briefed on the matter have said. Nine mostly senior police officials have been transferred or placed on administrative duty as a result of the inquiry. As part of the investigation, a member of a volunteer security patrol in Borough Park, Brooklyn, was charged with bribery on Monday after being accused of offering cash to police officials in exchange for handgun licenses.
Mr. de Blasio, fresh off his 2013 mayoral election, became involved in the 2014 State Senate battle when he saw an opportunity for Democrats to take control of the chamber, which had been in the hands of Republicans. A Democrat-controlled Senate, the logic went, would be more sympathetic to the city’s financial needs.
Mr. de Blasio, a political operative by training, personally cold-called major donors seeking large donations and contributed some of his top strategists to help out on races around New York State.
Mr. de Blasio was stepping into a vacuum left by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who had agreed to help fellow Democrats regain control of the chamber — as opposed to standing on the sidelines as he had in 2012 — but ended up doing little to help Democratic candidates. Still, in the end, the Republicans held on to their majority.