The bartender delivered another round to the couple at the end of the bar, and then laid a small black mat in front of them.
On Tuesday night at Cronin & Phelan’s bar and restaurant, on Broadway near Steinway Street in Astoria, Queens, things were in full swing for the bartender, Dave Cremin, 54, who provides both the service and the entertainment, doing bar-top tricks while serving drinks and food.
Lulls between drink orders turn into brief magic shows, and this one began with Mr. Cremin pulling a deck of cards out of his mouth, a dozen at a time.
Somehow the cards were dry. The couple reared back in laughter and amazement.
“What makes it Irish is this,” he said, grabbing a bottle of Jameson Irish Whiskey with his free hand and tipping it into his mouth while shuffling. He pulled out the aces, one by one, and then moved on to the dozen other customers at the long bar, pulling drafts, mixing cocktails and pouring shots.
Mr. Cremin works Tuesdays through Saturdays, from 6 p.m. until after the bar closes at 4 a.m.
In his 23 years as a barman at Cronin & Phelan’s, Mr. Cremin has gained a loyal following of patrons who come for both his pour and his powers to dazzle with sleight of hand, misdirection, mentalism and other magic techniques.
Mr. Cremin also performs professionally, at private parties, weddings and corporate events. He said constantly doing tricks behind the bar, besides bringing better tips, helps keep him sharp.
On Saturdays at 11 p.m., Mr. Cremin comes out from behind the bar and does a 45-minute performance, including escaping from a straitjacket. He also helps run monthly open-mike events at Cronin & Phelan’s, which draw many magician friends.
After doing magic behind a busy bar, he said, performing onstage is a breeze.
“You can focus on the presentation and magic and not worry about anyone waving you down for a drink,” said Mr. Cremin, who is married, has two grown daughters and lives in Woodside, Queens.
He grew up in Cork, Ireland, immigrated to New York at age 22 in the 1980s and began bartending. Within a few years, he was learning magic out of books and practicing the tricks on customers while tending bar at Molly Malone’s on Third Avenue in Manhattan.
“For Dave, the two things go hand in hand: He loves magic, and he loves being behind the bar,” said Rene Clement, a longtime magician friend of Mr. Cremin’s who showed up Tuesday night at Cronin & Phelan’s.
Mr. Cremin began doing tricks with a metal cup and little red foam ball, for Megan Peterson, 30. He seemed to make the ball appear and disappear, and then began making limes appear under the cup, each time he lifted it again and again.
That night Mr. Cremin’s card tricks often involved his guessing which card the customer covertly picked and then buried in the deck. He would “find” the right card in his fly, or under a nearby glass of whiskey, or just pop it out of the deck into his other hand.
“Salmon,” Mr. Cremin said without pausing. He finished the trick, grabbed the plates and delivered them to his customers.
“You use your peripheral vision, you know the food’s coming out and the people at the end of bar who ordered it,” said Mr. Cremin, who was doing another trick when a waitress brought him the salads.
“Just drop those there, love,” he said, and he completed the trick, then whisked the salads down to the end of the bar and checked on his customers.
