When North Carolina voters were considering a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage in 2012, the silence from North Carolina companies was deafening.
And to the dismay of Mr. Mitchell and other gay rights advocates, voters approved the amendment by a margin of 20 percentage points.
Four years later, that corporate silence has turned into a roar.
 It further barred any municipality in the state from extending protections beyond those already enumerated in state law — which notably does not shield people from discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Gov. Pat McCrory, a Republican, quickly signed the legislation.
This week, Bank of America — which is based in Charlotte and is not only the largest corporate employer in the state but also a major donor to state political campaigns — said it was joining with 90 other national companies to seek repeal of the law.
“Such laws are bad for our employees and bad for business,” it said in a statement.
Other major North Carolina employers also denounced the bill, including American Airlines, which has a hub in Charlotte; the home improvement retailer Lowe’s, with headquarters in Mooresville; Red Hat, the software maker, based in Raleigh; Facebook, which has a large data center in Forest City; and PayPal, which just broke ground for a new operations center in Charlotte.
The business reaction to such efforts hasn’t been confined to North Carolina. Businesses have led successful fights against laws perceived as discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation in some of the most socially conservative states in the country, including Indiana, Arkansas, South Dakota, Arizona and Georgia, where Gov. Nathan Deal vetoed a similar bill this week. These are all states led by Republican governors.
“In just the last few years, many corporate leaders — and I mean mainstream American companies and brands — have really stepped outside the boardroom and into the public square to advocate on behalf of their employees and their customers,” said Chad Griffin, president of the Human Rights Campaign, an advocacy group for gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender equality.
Mr. Griffin was in North Carolina this week meeting local elected officials and opponents of the bill. On Thursday he and a represenative of the transgender community met with the governor.
In contrast to four years ago, this time it’s supporters of the bill who seem to be having trouble persuading business leaders to speak in favor of it. Governor McCrory said he had received a letter from 334 North Carolina businesses supporting the measure.
But only 41 were willing to be publicly identified. Most of those seem to be small local businesses, and several of those named — such as Prayerful Touch Massage and Heaven’s Best Carpet Cleaning — appear to have overt religious leanings.
So far the governor has shown no signs of reversing his position, but the pressure is likely to mount. Moral arguments may fall on deaf ears, but for North Carolina, real money is at stake.
The High Point Market Authority, which runs what it bills as the largest furniture show in the world, said it was facing a raft of cancellations for this year’s show, set to open in two weeks.
“Based on the reaction in just the last few days, hundreds and perhaps thousands of our customers will not attend market this April,” the authority said. It estimates the overall economic impact of the show, which typically attracts about 75,000 people to High Point, at over $5 billion.
Outside North Carolina, the governors of New York, Washington and Vermont issued bans on most official state travel to North Carolina, as did the mayors of San Francisco, Seattle and New York.
The National Basketball Association implied it might move the 2017 All-Star Game from Charlotte. The National Collegiate Athletic Association said it was considering the status of basketball tournament games scheduled for North Carolina in 2017 and 2018, and the Disney-owned sports cable network ESPN said it would consider attitudes toward diversity in evaluating whether to hold its X Games competition at the Charlotte Motor Speedway.
It not only requires people to use bathrooms that correspond to the sex on their birth certificate — a portion of the bill that focuses on transsexuals — but it also overturns local laws that already protect people from discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
Mr. Gold, who is gay, said he believed in leading by example. He said he was not boycotting High Point and would keep his company’s headquarters in North Carolina.
Such efforts seem to be having an effect on public attitudes in North Carolina, as they have in other parts of the country. According to polling data by the nonpartisan Public Religion Research Institute, 64 percent of the state’s residents oppose discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Support in North Carolina for gay marriage last year reached 44 percent, according to Public Policy Polling.
Which makes Governor McCrory’s swift signing of the bill all the more puzzling. After the reaction in states like Indiana, Arkansas and neighboring Georgia, the business reaction and nationwide opposition can hardly have come as a surprise.
Governor McCrory seemed to taunt the N.C.A.A. this week when his office issued a statement saying, “The governor looks forward to cheering for the U.N.C. Tar Heels in the N.C.A.A. Final Four being played in Houston,” a city where voters defeated an ordinance similar to the one Charlotte approved.
