Rod Daniel, who directed hit television sitcoms and moneymaking, family-friendly movie comedies like the Michael J. Fox film “Teen Wolf,” died last Saturday at his home in Chicago. He was 73.
A representative of the Ivins/Moravecek Funeral Home in Riverside, Ill., which is handling the funeral arrangements, confirmed the death. He said that Mr. Daniel had Parkinson’s disease.
Mr. Daniel directed episodes of sitcoms like “Newhart” and “WKRP in Cincinnati” before making his feature film debut with “Teen Wolf” in 1985.
Mr. Fox, who was enormously popular after the release of “Back to the Future” earlier that year, starred as the titular lycanthrope who transformed into a hirsute basketball star and surfed on top of a van in motion, scenes that many critics saw as high points in an underwhelming film.
Audiences felt differently. “Teen Wolf,” which cost about $1.4 million to make, brought in more than $33 million in domestic ticket sales, the equivalent of more than $70 million in 2016 dollars. It recently inspired a gritty MTV series by the same name.
Mr. Daniel’s next three movies were “Like Father Like Son” (1987), an identity-switching comedy that starred Dudley Moore and Kirk Cameron and grossed $34 million domestically; “K-9” (1989), a buddy comedy that featured Jim Belushi as a police officer partnered with a German shepherd and made $43 million in the United States; and “The Super” (1991), in which Joe Pesci played a slumlord compelled by court order to live in one of his own tumbledown tenements.
Mr. Daniel’s last feature film was “Beethoven’s 2nd” (1993), a sequel to the wildly successful 1992 film in which the stars, Charles Grodin and a St. Bernard, reprised their roles. It grossed $53 million in the United States.
In 2011, long after he had retired, Mr. Daniel told The Chicago Tribune that financial responsibilities had forced him to direct material he was not passionate about, but that he eventually accepted his career as a workaday director.
Rollin Augustus Daniel III was born in Nashville on Aug. 4, 1942, to Rollin Augustus Daniel Jr., a surgeon, and the former Ann Kelley. He received a bachelor’s degree in economics from Vanderbilt University and then served with the Army in Vietnam. He worked in advertising before moving to Los Angeles where he became a director, starting with commercials.
In addition to “Newhart” and “WKRP,” Mr. Daniel directed episodes of “Caroline in the City,” “Suddenly Susan” and “Everybody Loves Raymond.” His last directing credit was for the TV movie “Home Alone 4” in 2002.
Mr. Daniel, who also had a home in Glen Arbor, Mich., is survived by his wife, the former Martha Mueller; their sons, John and Lucas; a sister, Ann Daniel Lea; and a grandson.