Chasen Shreve had been almost flawless in his first six relief appearances for the Yankees, allowing only three hits and no runs while providing a formidable bridge to Dellin Betances and Andrew Miller in the eighth and ninth innings. Even with their offensive malaise of late, getting to Shreve in the seventh has been a crucial marker in the Yankees’ few victories this season.
With the score tied at 2-2 heading into the seventh inning of Thursday’s game against the Oakland Athletics, Yankees Manager Joe Girardi saw a win in sight. He once again summoned Shreve from the bullpen, looking to stay afloat with the hope that the lineup could squeeze out one more run as the Yankees tried to win for just the second time in their last eight games.
The back-to-back homers by Khris Davis and Coco Crisp dampened a solid start from Luis Severino and the best all-around game so far from the off-season acquisition Aaron Hicks.
Shortly after Girardi inserted Hicks into the starting lineup on Thursday, Hicks moved his clubhouse chair over to Carlos Beltran’s locker and listened to Beltran, an eight-time All-Star, talk about hitting.
A white sheet of paper was laid on the ground to demarcate home plate. Beltran occasionally grabbed a bat and positioned his feet as if in the batter’s box, to instruct Hicks on his approach.
The Yankees traded for Hicks to help in games specifically like Thursday’s, when they faced a left-handed starter — in this case, Oakland’s Rich Hill, a former Yankees reliever. But Hicks had proven ineffective in that role, going 0 for 13 against lefties this season and 1 for 20 over all entering the game.
In his first at-bat, using Beltran’s advice, Hicks ended an 0 for 17 streak by blooping a single to center field that scored Mark Teixeira and gave the Yankees a 1-0 lead.
Riding the momentum of his R.B.I., Hicks began to charge the Yankees with his defense.
In the fourth inning, with runners on first and second, Chris Coghlan lifted a fly to left field, but Hicks made a leaping catch into the wall running parallel to the third-base line.
Severino then struck out the next two batters and escaped the inning having allowed only one run, which tied the score at 1-1.
The Yankees then pieced together another run in the bottom of the fourth, with help from a botched throw.
After Alex Rodriguez walked with one out, Hill tried to pick him off first base during the next at-bat. Rodriguez appeared to have been caught leaning, but Hill’s throw sailed wide, allowing Rodriguez to scamper to third.
Austin Romine drove in Rodriguez, dribbling a ground ball through the no man’s land between the pitcher’s mound and third base for a 2-1 Yankees lead.
A solo home run by Mark Canha tied the score in the fifth, but Hicks again came to the rescue in the sixth.
Severino allowed a leadoff single to Jed Lowrie, who tried to leg out a double, only to have Hicks throw him out at second base. Severino slapped his hands together and pointed toward Hicks in left field. He then quickly retired the next two batters and left the game after six innings, having given up two runs on seven hits with four strikeouts.
Hicks was starting for Brett Gardner, who missed Wednesday’s game with a stiff neck. Girardi said Gardner was better and would have started Thursday, if not for Hill’s presence on the mound.
Gardner replaced Hicks in the seventh with Hill out of the game and scored a run on a single by Starlin Castro. It was the Yankees’ third hit in eight attempts with runners in scoring position, another positive sign after they had entered the day having collected only two hits in their previous 46 attempts in such situations. But with runners on first and third and two outs, old habits resurfaced and Beltran grounded out weakly to end the inning with the Yankees trailing, 4-3.
Coghlan hit a two-run homer in the eighth, and Canha added a sacrifice fly in the ninth, providing enough insurance for the Athletics to complete a three-game sweep of the Yankees, who fell to 5-9.