Springtime in New York: The trees are in bloom, eyes are itching, and sheep are feeling restless. Just a few weeks ago, 100 of them stole the show at the Park Avenue Armory, where they brought a note of docile pathos to a production of Louis Andriessen’s “De Materie.” And on Thursday evening at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, distant cousins of theirs got randy during a pastoral scene in “Les Fêtes Vénitiennes,” mating in sometimes acrobatic positions.
This latest herd was made up of dancers from the Scapino Ballet of Rotterdam, enacting one of several frisky scenes in this playfully raunchy and musically lucid take on André Campra’s 1710 opéra-ballet. The production, which runs through Sunday, is directed by Robert Carsen and conducted by William Christie, at the helm of his period-instrument ensemble, Les Arts Florissants.
Music and dance are supposed to carry equal weight in an opéra-ballet, a genre particular to the French Baroque that consists of a loose sequence of tableaus filled with stock characters and situations. But a certain sharp-elbowed competition between the two art forms is written into Campra’s “Fêtes,” which features a talent contest between a music master and a dancing master. The choreographer Ed Wubbe goes all out for giggles and gasps, with dance scenes that offer a cheerful mash-up of court rituals, cabaret and Miley Cyrus. 
The action defies quick summary. The setting is Venice during Carnival. A prologue — here, showing modern-dress tourists arriving on the Piazza San Marco, toting cabin luggage and cellphones — pits Folly against Reason, with predictable result. Three acts follow, each containing a test of virtue, wits or heart. A prince disguises himself as his servant to plumb the motivations of the woman he loves. Two suspicious women, jealous of each other, learn that their suitor loves a third, and they band together to punish him. Life imitates art as two performers dupe a patron intent on abducting his favorite diva. With all the swapped identities, cloaks and masks, and characters named Lucile and Lucie, or Alamir and Damir, sharing a story, the production can be hard to keep up with.
The casting magnified the confusion, to delightful effect. About a dozen singers split the many roles, so that, for instance, the sinewy baritone Jonathan McGovern appeared first as a prince, in the magnificent robes of a Doge; then as an actor, in shirt sleeves; and finally as Borée, the god of wind, descending from the rafters. Amid the generally fine troupe there were standout performances by the soprano Rachel Redmond. She brought velvety warmth and focus to the part of Irene, the latest object of the philandering Léandre’s affections, as well as to the double role of Léontine, the opera singer, and Flore, the shepherd she portrays onstage and whose woolly wards turn naughty.
Music and movement blended to stunning effect in group scenes in which the dancers wove in and out of the chorus, and in the performance of the mezzo Emilie Renard as Folly: At one point, she sang reclining, raised aloft on the arms of dancers. The spectacular costumes, by Petra Reinhardt, did much to help make sense of the plot. Her creations included breathtaking replicas of Venetian ceremonial robes and witty sculptural pieces like the tutu in the shape of a roulette wheel that Fortune (the bright and balletic soprano Elodie Fonnard) wears as she teases lovers and gamblers alike.
In the pit, Mr. Christie led a forward-flowing performance that emphasized variety of color and texture in a score that could otherwise easily turn into a unified mush. Rustic percussion accents added wildness to some dances; the nasal drone of a musette, a French type of bagpipes, colored the pastoral scene.
Embedded in scenes like the competition between the two masters (of music and dancing), and in set pieces like a serenade and a singing lesson, there are jabs at the unruly foreignness of Italian music. These serve as an excuse to quote and appropriate that very music: Campra’s way both to have his cake and eat it. Like so much comedy today, the show is filled with winks and nods at the audience that flatter the listener’s sense of privilege and belonging. Three hundred years later, they’re still good for laughs.