If you were selecting mascots to help draw tourists to a city, the first choice might not be a group of street-fighting reptiles who live in the sewer with a rat.
That, as it happens, is just whom the officials who make such decisions in New York have chosen.
The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles — Donatello, Leonardo, Michelangelo and Raphael — will be this year’s “family ambassadors,” the city’s tourism agency announced this week. And their images will be everywhere.
The turtles, for those who may not know their origin story, first appeared in a 1984 comic book by Kevin Eastman and Peter Laird, in which New York was a dirty, dangerous, crime-ridden city. They assumed human size after a canister fell down a storm drain, sliming them with a growth-inducing chemical. They took refuge in the sewers with the rat, Master Splinter, who had also been doused with the chemical. In the comic book, the turtles sneered behind masks and shouted expletives as they leapt between rooftops, swinging weapons like nunchucks and battling crime.
Asked if there had been any hesitation about employing weapon-wielding inhabitants of a grittier New York as poster children of today’s spiffier city, Mr. Dixon said no. “The turtles, like all of us, have evolved,” he said.
For his part, Mayor Bill de Blasio called the Ninja Turtles “an excellent choice” for a marketing campaign.
One of the tourism posters, which show the characters at well-known spots around New York. Each of the turtles is associated with a different type of attraction.Credit...Viacom International Inc.
NYC & Company began the family ambassador effort in 2009 to help the city compete with family-oriented destinations like Orlando, Fla. Since then, with the help of characters like Dora the Explorer, the agency said, family tourism has risen 32.6 percent. Families will make up about a third of the 59.7 million tourists expected to visit this year, the agency said.
What’s in it for the Ninja Turtles? In a word, publicity. Just as Taylor Swift’s turn as a spokeswoman for the city in 2014 and 2015 dovetailed with the release of her album “1989,” the turtles’ role coincides with the release of “Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows,” a sequel to the characters’ 2014 film. The new movie was shot in the city and is to be released in June.
That may be another sign of how much the city has changed, or how secure it is with its cleaned-up image — though it is true that the turtles have undergone many mutations since their earliest comic book incarnation. Over time, they have been child-friendly teens who yelled only “Cowabunga!”, action figures, and, after a dark-and-brooding movie debut in 1990, goofy pals in subsequent movie and television iterations.
As part of the tourism campaign, each character is associated with a different type of New York attraction that fits his personality. Donatello, who loves science and gadgets, promotes museums and cultural attractions. Michelangelo, an optimist obsessed with pizza, is the gourmand of the group. Raphael, the rebel without a cause, touts the city’s parks and zoos. Leonardo, the leader of the pack, is a booster for the city’s monuments and institutions, places like the Statue of Liberty, the Empire State Building and the United Nations.
Asked if there would be costumed turtle characters in New York, Ms. Kaufman of Nickelodeon, said, “Thankfully, no.” They may, however, appear for photos at events outside the city.
Another poster in the campaign.Credit...Viacom International Inc.
The turtles may actually convey a quintessentially New York experience, said Richard Rosenbaum, author of “Raise Some Shell,” a cultural history of the characters. Their personalities, he said, reflect “a melting pot” of pop culture and New York references. In one of their films from the 1990s, Raphael had a New York accent, and the turtles would eat at Roy’s Pizza (a variation on Ray’s Pizza).
