FORT WORTH — There have been ups and downs on the way to Fort Worth Opera’s 70th-anniversary season. In 2007, grappling with financial challenges, the company decided to concentrate its offerings in a festival format, with three or four productions presented during a month or so in the spring.
This year’s festival opened here on Saturday with the premiere of “JFK,” an ambitious opera by the composer David T. Little and the librettist Royce Vavrek. Sunday afternoon brought another adventurous offering: a double bill of recent one-act chamber operas. The 475-seat W. E. Scott Theater at the Fort Worth Community Arts Center proved an ideally intimate space for these modern-day spins on two stories by Edgar Allan Poe, commissioned as part of American Lyric Theater’s Poe Project.
What would Poe write if he were alive today? That’s the question these pieces explored. The engrossing “Buried Alive,” by the gifted young composer Jeff Myers and the librettist Quincy Long, was inspired by Poe’s “The Premature Burial,” about a New York painter haunted by visions of death.
At the start, a gravedigger (the chilling bass Nathan Stark) ruminates about the “angel throng, covered in veils” and “drowned in tears” that will surely attend the next funeral. Then we see Victor, a painter, as a sheeted corpse lying on a steel table in the morgue. His eyes open and he starts to sing, wondering at the strength of whatever demonic force keeps pulling at him. He calls to his wife. The combination of the charismatic baritone Christopher Burchett’s fit body, which exuded life, and his anguished, world-weary singing was poignant.
A weirdly blasé mortician (Anna Laurenzo) tells Victor that at this moment his wife, Elena, is deciding whether he should be buried or burned. When Elena (Maren Weinberger, a plush-voiced soprano) arrives, Victor is snapped back to reality. He has had another dream, Elena explains to him: Victor has hit a wall with his art, working on a painting of a bridge over water that somehow keeps drawing him in.
Before long Victor again imagines himself lying on the slab in a mortuary as eerie embalmers fuss over him. But he is actually in an emergency room. As van Gogh once did in a mad impulse to gain inspiration, Victor has poisoned himself by eating paint. In the last scene, the terrified Victor, again on that steel table, has been buried alive. As he cries out, his wife and several mourners toss dry paint dust on his body.
Mr. Myers’s impressive score draws from diverse contemporary styles. There are stretches of hazy, wayward chords spiked with unnerving clusters. During tense episodes, skittish orchestral lines flail wildly. Mr. Myers elicits a wide range of sounds and colors from a 13-piece orchestra conducted by Tyson Deaton. Sometimes fraught exchanges between singers are prodded along by stubbornly repetitive instrumental riffs. Other times, thick chords cling insistently to every syllable of the sung words. The starkly vivid production, directed by Lawrence Edelson with sets by Zane Pihlstrom, inventively employs rows of video screens that hover over the stage.
“Embedded,” with music by Patrick Soluri and a libretto by Deborah Brevoort, was inspired by Poe’s “The Cask of Amontillado.” Directed by Sam Helfrich, the opera focuses on a career crisis for Sylvia, the anchor of “Deadline,” a popular TV news program. She is middle-aged and, she fears, starting to look it. Victoria, a younger colleague, is providing competition, including a scoop on a bomb threat in New York, which she delivers with breathless animation.
But it’s all a ploy.  Using a video camera, Sylvia reports the disaster live even as she is dying, confident that she will live forever in public memory as a heroic journalist in her prime.
Though the premise of “Embedded” is promising, the opera hovers uncertainly between satire, unabashed melodrama and hyped-up terror. Mr. Soluri’s skillfully scored music was energetically conducted by Mr. Deaton. But with its generically Modernist passages and emotive stretches in a Neo-Romantic vein, it lacked a clear musical voice. The bright-voiced soprano Caroline Worra relished the challenging role of Sylvia, singing with fervor and intensity, if sometimes indistinct diction. Mr. Stark was a menacing Montresor.
The only staple in Fort Worth Opera’s festival this spring is Rossini’s “The Barber of Seville.” This reinvented company is certainly doing its part for contemporary music.