Misconception: Climate change is not real because there is snow in my yard.
Actually: Anyone who utters an argument like this is mixing up climate and weather.
When Senator James Inhofe famously threw a snowball across the Senate floor in an attempt to undermine the validity of climate science, people who practice that science for a living pretty much rolled their eyes.
Yet the Republican senator from Oklahoma, chairman of the environment committee in the Senate, is hardly alone is mixing up weather and climate. On comment boards, at public meetings and even in college classrooms, some version of the question is heard again and again: If global warming is real, how can it be so cold in my back yard?
Adam H. Sobel, a climate scientist at Columbia University who wrote a recent book on Hurricane Sandy and extreme weather, reminds people to make sure to differentiate between weather and climate. If you really want to know what is going on with climate change, he said, look at the long-term averages over large areas. Do not be fooled by short-term weather fluctuations, or by distractions like snowballs.
Temperature measurements going back to the 19th century show, unfortunately, that global warming is real. As of the end of last year, the warming to date was about 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit over the entirety of Earth’s surface, including the oceans, which pull down the average. The results of that seemingly modest change have been pretty spectacular: millions of acres of dying forest, melting of land ice all over the planet, a rapid collapse of Arctic sea ice.
Scientists project that continued high emissions of greenhouse gases could lead to as much as five or six degrees of additional warming over the course of this century, with potentially drastic effects on food production, sea level and weather.
Yet even in a far warmer climate, scientists expect that winter will continue to exist — meaning there will always be someone who can hurl a snowball. Some places could even cool as the world warms overall.
Climate scientists sometimes make an analogy to smoking and cancer. Most people know that it is possible to get lung cancer even if they have never smoked; they know that smoking greatly increases the odds; and they know that even some of the heaviest smokers manage to beat those odds.
Similarly, scientists expect continued emissions to cause a huge shift in the odds of, say, record-setting heat waves, but that does not mean it will be hot all the time or in every part of the world. Moreover, only the earliest of these changes have been felt so far; unless emissions fall sharply, the biggest effects are still decades away.
This past winter was pretty warm in the United States, but the Eastern part of the country endured several cold winters before that. It was during a cold spell in February 2015 that Senator Inhofe was moved to fling his snowball. “It’s very, very cold out — very unseasonal,” he said on the Senate floor.
Yet even as he spoke, only the East was cold — the West was bizarrely warm, and most of the rest of the planet was above average, too.
The United States, including Alaska, represents only about 2 percent of the surface of Earth, so if the entire country were to turn into a block of ice one winter, it would not move the global average temperature much.
So, while snowballs might have been flying on the Senate floor early in 2015, by the end of the year, scientists were reporting that it was the warmest year on record, beating a record set only the year before.
Global warming, in other words, continues apace.