In Unhitched, longtime couples tell the stories of their relationships, from romance to vows to divorce to life afterward.
The marriage of Katrina Lamb, who was then Scott Lamb, and Wendie Lubic had highs and lows but suffered from a deeply held secret: Katrina, born male, always knew she was transgender but it took many years and three marriages for her to live truthfully. Katrina, 53, and Wendie, 54, were 24 when they married.
Wendie in Washington in a Reform Jewish household with parents who were professionals and traveled widely for work. Katrina in happy homes in Thornwood and Katonah, N.Y., then in Australia from age 12 to 18; her father was in finance, her mother is an artist and active in her community: “We went to my dad for permission, we went to my mother for comfort,” Katrina said. She knew she was “in the wrong body” from age 6, but also knew, even at that age, that that would never be revealed.
Wendie describes the connection as beshert, the Yiddish word for destined, or soul mates. Katrina, then Christian, converted to Judaism during their marriage.
Several months after they began dating, Katrina was transferred to Japan, which prompted a proposal. “I was in love, but also terrified,” said Katrina, who added that it felt somewhat deceitful to propose marriage. “I knew I was not meant to be a boy, but I loved Wendie and consciously picked a conventional life.” Katrina had known since puberty that she was attracted only to women. “I felt as though I had to live up to other people’s expectations,” said Katrina, who said that keeping her secret despite marriage was a deep conflict for her.
Wendie thought they were perfectly suited to each other. “Everything lined up,” she said.
They first lived in Tokyo for Katrina’s work. They later moved to Cambridge, Mass., so Katrina could attend Harvard Business School, and then to New York and eventually back to Japan. By their second stint in Tokyo in 1991, they had two daughters.
Both say happy and exciting. “We really got each other,” Katrina said. They had a fulfilling intimate life, they loved their girls and they had a group of international friends.
But the secret was troubling to Katrina; she had thought that if she had what she called a “normal” life, with a marriage, children and a prestigious job, her gender issues would resolve. They didn’t. She kept burying that feeling.
In 1992, Katrina, then still Scott, confessed to an affair. Although Wendie was surprised, she also said it seemed to be common for businessmen in Japan.
Did they try to work on things with therapy?
Yes, they found an English-speaking counselor. There were promises that the affair would stop, but soon Wendie discovered another.
Wendie. In 1993, they left Japan and separated. Wendie returned to Washington. They reconciled briefly later that year, but it didn’t last. Katrina, still Scott, took jobs in Russia and Indonesia and was a committed parent, seeing the family often and staying in constant touch. Katrina provided financial support, including buying the family a home.
They were divorced in 1996 in Washington. “Whatever anger we felt toward each other, we agreed to keep between us and not entangle the girls,” Wendie said. The divorce was cheap and fast. Wendie still felt confused about the breakup, though. “I never understood exactly what Katrina was unhappy about in our relationship,” she said.
Wendie went back to school and trained in a new profession. The children were in preschool. “Katrina always had my back and was generous with time and money,” Wendie said. Katrina remarried twice after Wendie, continuing to hold her secret.
It was in 2002, while working in Russia, that Katrina came out to a colleague about being transgender. She read “She’s Not There: A Life in Two Genders,” by Jennifer Finney Boylan, which she said showed her “a person with the same condition as I had who was normal.” She knew she could survive the decision to live as a woman. She began hormone therapy and completed her transition, including surgery, in 2006 in Washington.
Katrina said that “Wendie’s anger was justified, but there was nothing I could do about it,” adding that “I couldn’t go back.” Katrina’s parents and siblings were supportive from the time they learned the truth.
“Katrina coming out as transgender made everything clearer,” Wendie said. “I had never felt unloved.” One of their daughters wrote her college admission essay on her father’s transition to being female.
As a divorced woman, Wendie did not, though she was sometimes shocked at the reactions to Katrina’s being transgender. Katrina felt a stigma in some circles. When she dated a lesbian, she didn’t feel welcome in certain parts of the lesbian community.
Katrina provided well for the family but said she was better off in her career as a male. “Even though I had a Harvard business degree, the salaries offered to me as a woman were much less than those offered to me as a man,” she said.
How did their children react?
“True, I was like a teenager again,” Katrina said.
Wendie says maybe they should have hung in a bit longer. She also wishes she could have had the option to stay married to Katrina through the transition. “I don’t know if it would have worked, but my love for her was a constant,” she said.
They all live in the Washington area. Wendie is happily married, and loves having Katrina as a close friend and co-parent.
“I love my life and could not say that before,” Katrina said. “Intellectually, I still don’t understand how transgender works. There’s lots of theories. Life is not always perfect but I’m happy.” Katrina is now single.
Have their personalities changed?
Both say Wendie is very much the same person she always has been.
What is life like now?
Katrina’s daughter from her third marriage is coming from Russia to live with her. For the first time she will be a “single mom,” she said. Wendie and Katrina’s daughters live in New York City, and they all get together for holidays.
“Our story seems weird and dysfunctional, but we could never make in on reality TV because there’s been very little drama,” Katrina said. “We’ve been mad and made mistakes, but we are very functional, happy people.” As much as it seems that life is spiraling out of control, there is always a way to come back and make it work, she added.
“Sometimes divorce is not personal,” Wendie said.
Dates of Marriage November 1986 to June 1996.
Ages When married, 24. Now, Katrina, 53, and Wendie, 54.
Occupations Wendie Lubic works in Washington as an educational consultant for college placement; Katrina Lamb is an investment fund manager in Washington for an asset management company.
Children The couple has two girls, now in their 20’s. Katrina has another daughter from a subsequent marriage. Wendie, now remarried, has stepchildren.
