EASTON, N.Y. — Gerry Barnhart named his new winery Victory View Vineyard because when he looks west from the top of a slope on his property, he can see the site where, in 1777, the Battles of Saratoga were fought.
And one of his wines is named Revolution because it is made from one of several new cold-hardy grape varieties that have flourished in parts of northern New York once considered inhospitable to winemaking, from Washington and Saratoga Counties, just above Albany, to Lake Champlain and the Thousand Islands.
Red and white wines from grapes developed in Minnesota, Wisconsin and at Cornell University have allowed the North Country region to join more well-established New York wine-producing areas, such as the Finger Lakes and the North Fork of Long Island.
In 2008, Mr. Barnhart and his wife, Mary, planted 180 vines of marquette grapes, a variety first released in 2006 by the University of Minnesota. In 2010, before going into business, he harvested nearly a ton of grapes and gave away most of his first batch of 160 gallons of wine to family and friends, who all gave it favorable reviews.
“So we said, ‘Let’s keep going,’” Mr. Barnhart said.
They expanded their operation to three and a half acres from a quarter of an acre by adding maréchal foch, a cold-hardy red grape developed more than a century ago, along with white cultivars like la crescent, lacrosse and melody.
Tim E. Martinson is a senior extension associate at Cornell and the director of the Northern Grapes Project, which helps producers grow cold-hardy grapes and then teaches them how to make and market wines. Some of the new plants created through the project can withstand temperatures as low as minus 30 Fahrenheit.
Connoisseurs might not be ready to rank these cold-weather wines among European classics, but cold-hardy varieties are quickly gaining recognition. At a recent international wine competition in Rochester that included 3,824 wines from 913 producers, one of Mr. Barnhart’s wines earned a double-gold medal and about a half-dozen more northern New York wineries earned gold medals.
Mr. Messina said he picked 25 pounds of marquette grapes per vine last fall, almost double the 13 to 15 pounds from a typical harvest.
The nascent wine regions have also benefited from Cornell’s highly regarded agricultural research program, Mr. Barnhart said. “They transfer what they learn and know to people like us who are relative rookies in this business,” he said.
A 2014 state regulation increased the production limit for farm-based wineries to 200,000 gallons per year from 150,000 gallons and allowed the sale of wines at farm stands. Vineyards could also open satellite stores — two wineries in the Finger Lakes, for example, have opened stores in Saratoga Springs.
But to expand its customer base, this young sector of New York’s wine industry still needs more vineyards producing more wine and a better product, Mr. Barnhart said.
