Jajangmyeon.Credit...Will Anderson for The New York Times. Food stylist: Maggie Ruggiero. Prop stylist: Gozde Eker.
There are at least three holidays in South Korea notionally dedicated to friendship and romance. The first comes from the West: Valentine’s Day, on Feb. 14, when girls give chocolate to boys. The second is a gendered response: White Day, on March 14, an invention of the candy industry, when boys offer girls marshmallows, white chocolate and other snowy confections.
The third is a pop-cultural delight. It is Black Day, on April 14, a celebration of loneliness and sorrow: “couples’ hell, singles’ heaven,” as the K-pop band Pascol called it in its 2014 anthem, “Merry Black Day.” Those unencumbered by dates or romance are meant to gather in their sharpest, blackest outfits and eat one of Korea’s great comfort foods, jajangmyeon, a thick, coal-colored gravy of black-bean sauce, pork and onions ladled over fat noodles and served with sweet pickled daikon.
Who, indeed? This is comfort food of the first order, as pleasing as takeout pizza, kung pao chicken or a pint of ice cream eaten directly from the tub.
The dish is a Koreanified take on the fried sauce noodles served in Shandong Province in China. Brought to Korea by immigrants to Incheon, on the western coast of the Korean Peninsula, it now occupies a place in the nation’s cuisine that is similar to the one General Tso’s chicken has in American food. That is: Jajangmyeon is a birth-country dish translated to accommodate the too-tired-to-cook takeout tastes of a host nation. It is milder than the Chinese original, a little more porky, totally irresistible.
You can find jajangmyeon at Korean restaurants across the United States, particularly those run by Koreans of Chinese descent. But making the dish at home is no chore, at least if you have access to a Korean market or the Internet to score a few ingredients, and results in a magnificent delight in about an hour the first time you make it and somewhat less thereafter. That is longer than it would take a guy riding a moped in a duct-tape-patched North Face bubble jacket to deliver it to your house in Seoul, to be sure. But you’re probably not in Seoul anyway, and if you make it at home, jajangmyeon will transcend the gloopy realities of delivery food to become the sort of dish you’ll have people asking you to make once or twice a month.
For Koreans, the best jajangmyeon is often the one they grew up eating, whether prepared at a favorite neighborhood restaurant or, less frequently, by their moms. (In the United States, we feel the same way about pizza.) And that is no less true for me, though I came late to the dish. My first and favorite jajangmyeon is the one I was served at Hyo Dong Gak, a Korean-Chinese restaurant in Manhattan, after confessing to a Korean-born friend my strong and abiding affection for Americanized Chinese food. “We have that, too,” she exclaimed. Soon she hustled me off for lunch: jajangmyeon and a plate of tangsuyuk, the Korean version of Chinese-American sweet-and-sour pork. I could never eat that tangsuyuk again and be happy. But I wanted to eat — and cook — the restaurant’s jajangmyeon whenever I liked.
Recipes for jajangmyeon abound. Deuki Hong and Matt Rodbard put a fine one into their recent cookbook, “Koreatown.” Robin Ha has an illustrated version in her forthcoming “Cook Korean: A Comic Book With Recipes.” Maangchi, the Korean cooking YouTube star, published one in her “Maangchi’s Real Korean Cooking.” My jajangmyeon riffs slightly on all of those.
But as I worked out the recipe, it was the inky deliciousness of my first taste of the dish that served as my lodestar.
The preparation is not dissimilar to making a ragu in Italian cuisine. You sauté diced pork belly and shoulder, then add to it ginger and garlic, then vegetables. To this softened but still slightly crisp mixture, you add chunjang, the Korean black-bean paste that is more caramelized than the Chinese version and, to many, crucial to a successful jajangmyeon. Water makes it into sauce, and a light hand with salt and sugar helps even the flavors out. Ladle the result over noodles cooked soft and pliant, then serve right away.
Which is hardly romantic. But on black days, it is excellent advice.
