NEWARK — The New Jersey Symphony Orchestra began its concert on Friday at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center here by tuning, as usual, to a common A. But there was one other thing that needed fine-tuning before the performance, of music by Tchaikovsky and Barber, could begin: the audience’s intonation and diction.
The program was led by Xian Zhang, a 42-year-old Chinese maestra who was once associate conductor of the New York Philharmonic and has since built up an impressive résumé in Europe. Now that she is to be the New Jersey Symphony’s next music director — her tenure begins in September — the orchestra decided it was time everyone learned how to pronounce her name. As Wendy Chen, a violinist, demonstrated from the microphone, the last name, pronounced, JHONG, is sounded on a level high note; “she-YEN” on an upward flicking short interval.
The dynamic performances Ms. Zhang led on Friday proved that hers is a name worth memorizing. On the podium she is a pint-size bundle of energy, conducting with feet firmly grounded and big, purposeful motions of the torso and arms. In brief remarks from the stage, she also showed herself to be a natural communicator, brimming with enthusiasm and humor: a good choice for this orchestra, which takes its ambassadorial role seriously with concert series offered across the state and numerous outreach initiatives.
The orchestra is also stocked with excellent players, and there were moments during Friday’s program when the sound reached a fullness and polish that would be the envy of better-known ensembles on the other side of the state lines. But in both Tchaikovsky’s “Marche Slave” and his Symphony No. 4, with its glittering fanfares, balance was an issue, with the powerful brass section overly dominant.
Ms. Zhang’s approach to the Fourth relied heavily on big tempo contrasts. In the first movement, her pace in the lyrical sections was relaxed to the point of growing slack, but allowed for exciting hard-driving transitions back to the faster material.
In Barber’s Violin Concerto, with the sweet-toned but fiery violinist Jennifer Frautschi as soloist, there were voluptuous tuttis in which the orchestra’s string section flexed its might, part of a big-hearted and shapely performance that paid homage to the power of meticulously phrased, cleanly sung melody.