After racking up a historic N.B.A. season, the team’s owners — most of them from Silicon Valley — think their management style deserves some of the credit. Are they right?
It was still dark one morning early this year when Joe Lacob, the majority owner of the Golden State Warriors, drove his Mercedes station wagon through the Stanford University campus. He parked near the business school, then walked down a sidewalk through a drizzle to meet a group of Silicon Valley executives. The ex-C.E.O. of OpenTable, now a partner at Andreessen Horowitz, was coming. So were a founder of the online-learning start-up Curious and a managing director of Vanguard Ventures. On another morning, they all might have met at a charity event or a TED Talk. But it was a Tuesday, and that meant basketball.
Lacob, who has worked in venture capital for three decades, has an open, expressive face and broad shoulders. He’s six feet tall but seems taller. The previous night, he watched his Warriors play a home game in Oakland, and now he looked tired. “The Tuesday mornings after we play Monday nights are the hardest,” he said. The basketball court, which is normally used by students and faculty members, has a tidy, corporate look: gleaming hardwood surrounded by plexiglass walls. In his Warriors T-shirt and shorts, Lacob pushed his hands against the glass and stretched his legs. “Honestly, this is my favorite time of the week,” he told me.
One by one, other players arrived. Most have known Lacob for years, since early in his career at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, which is when he helped start this pickup game. There was no reason for anyone to be deferential to him. But owning a basketball team has cachet, especially when that team has come to rank among the best in N.B.A. history. Nobody mentioned his own business affairs, but everyone was eager to talk about Lacob’s. “Joe, good to see Barnes back,” someone said, referring to Harrison Barnes, a Warriors player who had missed games with an injury.
The group ran the court for an hour, playing games to 13 by twos and threes. Lacob, 60, was one of the older players there, and he had clearly thought through his strengths and limitations. He would head to a particular spot — often one on the right side, about a third of the way around the three-point arc — and wait. When he saw an opportunity, he called for the ball or cut along the arc toward it. If he received a pass, he would usually shoot. His shot was peculiar, fluttering like a knuckleball, rotating only a few times before it reached the basket, but it went in more often than not. The first game ended with his sinking a three-pointer, then raising his arms in triumph. A few minutes later, his team moved in position to win again. Lacob stood at the top of the key with the ball. “Here comes the game-winner,” he said to nobody in particular.
After he finished playing, Lacob wiped the perspiration from his hands with a towel. Then he pulled out his championship ring and passed it around for examination. “They’ve been asking to see it for two months,” he explained. The ring had an extravagant and revealing design. One diamond had been inlaid for each of the 200-odd games the Warriors won from 2010, when Lacob and his investors bought the team, through last year’s N.B.A. finals. “How much does this thing weigh?” asked Tom McConnell, the managing director from Vanguard Ventures, lifting his hand up and down as if trying to estimate its value.
Silicon Valley — the place itself, but also the society of smart, technologically savvy people who surround it — is full of basketball fans. Many of them made a lot of money in their 30s and 40s. Now in their 50s, they’re looking for something gratifying to do with it. In 2002, Wyc Grousbeck, a principal at Highland Capital Partners who spent two years at Stanford’s business school, bought the Boston Celtics along with a group of investors that included Lacob. In recent years, venture capitalists, private-equity investors and hedge-funders have been acquiring N.B.A. teams. The Detroit Pistons, Milwaukee Bucks, Philadelphia 76ers and Atlanta Hawks all belong to this new class of investor. The Sacramento Kings and the Memphis Grizzlies are both owned by Silicon Valley engineers. If you include Lacob’s Warriors, that’s more than a quarter of the league.
This season, Lacob’s sixth as majority owner, the Warriors are on pace to break the league record of 72 wins in a season (which is just 82 games long). He and his partners bought a team that already had Stephen Curry, Golden State’s best player and a transcendent talent who is having one of the most dominant seasons in league history. He would be hitting tongue-flick jump shots from 30 feet away from the basket no matter who owned it.
When Lacob and his group of investors bought the Warriors in 2010, the $450 million they paid was deemed wildly excessive by nearly everyone. Larry Ellison, one of the 10 richest people in the world, was the losing bidder. It was more than anyone had ever spent on an N.B.A. franchise at the time. And this wasn’t the Lakers or the Celtics or even the Knicks. This was the Warriors, a team that plays in Oakland and had last won a championship in 1975. In 2010, Lacob promised another within five years. And last June, the Warriors won the finals, defeating LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers in six games.
In the months since, they’ve attained the status of a cultural phenomenon. More than any team since the “Showtime” Lakers of Magic Johnson and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, they’ve become famous not just for winning but also for how they win. You don’t need to know the nuances of the sport to appreciate Curry’s uncanny accuracy, or the fact that he routinely launches shots from longer distances than anyone ever has. You just need Internet access and a willingness to suspend disbelief. Curry has moved beyond “SportsCenter” to mainstream pop culture; even his 3-year-old, Riley, has developed a following. When Curry went on “Jimmy Kimmel Live!” to be interviewed, a reaction shot of her in the audience elicited the biggest cheer of the night.
Such ineptitude had eroded interest. There were only 7,000 season-ticket holders. The arena where the team played, in a vast parking lot beside a highway, was outdated. Its corridors were narrow, its catering facilities rudimentary. It didn’t have rooms that could be leased for corporate meetings. While the league’s newest facilities have been built with palatial home clubhouses the size of health clubs, the Warriors’ was austere and cramped. One look at it during a road trip was said to discourage players around the league from considering the team when they became free agents.
Other potential buyers perceived the institutional decrepitude as a drawback. Lacob and his partner, the Hollywood entrepreneur Peter Guber, believed it represented an opportunity. “That’s what Joe does,” says Chip Perry, the founder of Autotrader.com, a Kleiner Perkins investment that Lacob aided as a board member for 14 years. “He saw potential in what we were doing with Autotrader, even when others were dismissive. He’s one of those rare people who can look around the corner and see something interesting.” In the Warriors, Lacob saw a start-up disguised as an underperforming business, a sports franchise that had been run autocratically — and therefore ineptly — as the industry evolved around it.
That $450 million investment is now worth around $2 billion. In 2019, the Warriors will move to a new, self-financed arena complex on the San Francisco waterfront that will include office buildings and commercial space. The move is estimated to add as much as $1 billion more to the club’s value. And while there’s only one Curry, the way Lacob and Guber run the franchise is replicable — at least in theory.
Lacob gave Guber, who owns a smaller share, all but equal standing because Guber brought four decades of connections in movies, music, sports and media to the deal. Together, they hired a general manager who had never worked for a team before, let alone run one, and two coaches who hadn’t coached at any level. At the time, these moves were perceived around the league as rookie mistakes. But Lacob was no rookie, not at building companies. And it turned out that they were not mistakes.
Underneath the stands in Oracle Arena, off a corridor that connects the Warriors’ clubhouse to the court, is a modest-size room where Cohan, when he was owner, entertained family and friends. After taking control, Lacob renamed it the Bridge Club and opened it to the team’s minority shareholders and their guests. They congregate there before each game, filling plates with carved roast beef and elaborate canapés. There is an open bar and, for those who prefer fine wine, unencumbered access to it from automated, climate-controlled dispensers.
One evening this season, Lacob arrived late after fighting traffic from Menlo Park. He asked politely for a turkey burger, then found a seat at a high-top table. Between bites, he greeted a steady flow of friends and colleagues, most of whom are big names in Silicon Valley. John Walecka of Redpoint Ventures — whose current investments include companies called Moogsoft, Quantifind, Datameer and Qihoo 360 Technology — walked past. So did Mark Stevens, who was a partner at Sequoia Capital when the firm helped finance Google, PayPal and LinkedIn.
Small-percentage shareholders have always existed in sports, but they’ve typically been local doctors or car dealers who’ve thrown in maybe a few hundred thousand dollars. They get a trip to spring training or a playoff game, a handshake at the Christmas party, a nice profit when they sell their shares, and not much else. “Nothing is more limited than being a limited partner of George Steinbrenner’s” is a quip that is most frequently attributed to the former Yankees investor John McMullen.
In sports, unlike other businesses, companies have two bottom lines. Their owners want to win, of course, but they also want to make money, and the two are linked more loosely than you might think. You can make a lot of money with a bad team, as the N.F.L.’s Washington Redskins have done since 1999, when they were bought by Daniel Snyder. He has been a terrible owner, winning just 43 percent of his games, burning through seven head coaches, never reaching the Super Bowl and stubbornly refusing to change the team’s polarizing name. Yet if you judge him by the standards of any other business, he has been exemplary. The Redskins are the third-highest-grossing team in the N.F.L.; Snyder’s $800 million investment has more than tripled. If the team had public stockholders, they would be giving him a party.
Competitive success is more elusive. Teams that win a sequence of titles, or even come close, need superior talent. That’s especially true in basketball, where an extraordinary player — a Bill Russell, a Magic Johnson or a Michael Jordan — is one of only 10 on the court at any time. Put two or more together, uniting Kareem Abdul-Jabbar with Johnson or Jordan with Scottie Pippen, and you can create what in sports is hyperbolically called a dynasty.
How much this ever has to do with the owner of the team is questionable. The Chicago Bulls amassed six N.B.A. titles with Jordan. But Jerry Reinsdorf, who bought the franchise in 1985, hasn’t won since the last of those titles, in 1998. (He also has owned baseball’s Chicago White Sox since 1981. The White Sox won the World Series in 2005 but otherwise have performed unmemorably.) Whatever magic Reinsdorf used to create the Bulls dynasty in the 1990s presumably remains at his disposal, yet the team has cracked .500 in just seven of the 17 seasons since Jordan departed. The determining factor there seems easy to identify.
As West describes it, Buss regularly needed to be talked out of personnel moves that would have destroyed his team. “You don’t know some of the things that he wanted to do,” West said. He described one potential trade that Buss agreed to make: Worthy, the future Hall of Famer, to Dallas for Mark Aguirre and Roy Tarpley, who each had a reputation for being easily distracted. West found that idea so objectionable that he vowed to quit if Buss didn’t renege. “I went home to my wife and said, ‘I’m probably going to lose my job, but I can’t have this happen,’ ” he says. In the end, West says, he was able to persuade Buss.
West is known for his spirited, and occasionally profane, defense of his strongly held opinions. But Lacob doesn’t mind the shouting. His professional experience involved investing hundreds of millions of dollars in nascent businesses, some of them in categories that didn’t yet exist, then relying on the judgment of the executives he hired to guide them to profitability. He doesn’t just appreciate conviction; he relies on it.
Since joining the Warriors, West has disagreed strongly with Lacob on several personnel moves. Each time, Lacob has deferred. “Not everything you’ll do as an owner will work,” West says. “Some things that you’ll do, or might want to do, will not work. So you have to have the right people in place who can tell you that, not people who will crumble as soon as you express your opinion. That’s the first part. And then you have to be willing to listen to them.” With all the innovations that the ownership group has put into place, West seems to be saying, if Lacob’s skin had been a little thinner or his need to assert his authority a little greater, the Warriors might still be struggling.
Lacob has fantasized about owning a team since he was 9, when he walked into a Boys Club in New Bedford, Mass., his hometown, and saw his first parquet basketball floor. He graduated from the University of California, Irvine, as the first in his family to attend college and earned additional degrees at U.C.L.A. and Stanford. By then, his life’s blueprint was just about complete. He would use the first half to get rich, then devote the rest to acquiring and running a team. “The first day that I met Joe, in 1998, he told me that he wanted to buy the Warriors,” says Warren Thaler, a former Cleveland Cavaliers director who serves with Lacob on the board of Align Technology.
Once he had his investors in place, Lacob treated the Warriors like another of his fledgling companies in need of adept management. In 2011, he hired Bob Myers as an assistant general manager. He promoted him to general manager a year later. Myers, now 41, lettered in basketball at U.C.L.A. as a walk-on, studied law at Loyola Marymount in Los Angeles, then started a career as an agent, representing athletes. “The reason I’m sitting here now is because of that V.C. model,” he told me. “I had no track record. I had no past experience. If you only believed in past performance, you’re talking to someone else. I mean, I wouldn’t have hired me.” Last season, Myers was named the N.B.A.’s Executive of the Year.
Lacob understood that the Warriors, who had a losing record, needed to be dismantled before they could be rebuilt. He often had to implement a similar strategy with struggling companies. But the fans had been hearing about long-range plans for decades and had little confidence in them. And now they no longer had Ellis. The booing continued for so long that the former Warrior Rick Barry had to beseech the crowd to allow the ceremony to continue. By then, Lacob was shaking. The humiliation was so public, so raw, that Lacob’s friends were moved to send messages of support. Many mention it now, four years later, as a rite of passage.
What they did by offering Curry a four-year, $44 million extension, Lacob explained, was rely not on the future stability of Curry’s anatomy so much as the composition of his psyche: his determination to push through nagging discomfort to make himself great. “Now, if we were wrong, we’d just committed $44 million to a player who can’t play basketball,” Myers says. “So the risk was there.” Not only has Curry developed into the sport’s best player, but his paltry — in terms of N.B.A. superstardom — $11 million annual compensation gives the Warriors ample salary-cap room to surround him with other talent.
In 2011, Lacob and Guber chose Mark Jackson, the former St. John’s and Knicks point guard, to be their team’s head coach. Jackson was an unusual hire; he played for seven N.B.A. teams and worked as a commentator, but he had never coached. In his second and third seasons, he led the Warriors to the playoffs. “We were at the zero-yard line when Mark showed up here,” Myers says. “And he got us to the playoffs, and we won a round and became respectable.” So when Lacob fired him in 2014, after a 51-31 season, and replaced him with Steve Kerr, the basketball world was shocked. But Lacob had decided that a different type of leadership was needed for the Warriors to make the leap from a playoff team to a championship team. Such noodling with success, replacing a leader with a limited strategic vision with another who is comfortable aiming higher, rarely happens in sports. But in venture capital it happens all the time.
Lacob had known Kerr since the late ’90s. They had been part of a group that traveled to Scotland on golfing trips. Kerr won N.B.A. titles as a player, first with Jordan and the Bulls and later with the Spurs. He ran the Suns’ front office as their general manager. He had commentated on N.B.A. broadcasts. What he hadn’t done, as the man in charge or even as an assistant, was coach a basketball team. But Lacob had an intuition that Kerr would do better in the organization’s structure — in which department heads are expected to weigh in on matters outside their jurisdiction — than the more regimented Jackson.
Kerr’s willingness to at least consider suggestions from almost any source may have saved the Warriors during last year’s championship series. They were behind Cleveland, 2-1, when Nick U’Ren — Kerr’s assistant, whose responsibilities include constructing the musical playlists used during practices and splicing highlight reels — happened to be watching a tape of the 2014 playoffs. Noticing how San Antonio defended LeBron James, he suggested that the Warriors replace Bogut in the lineup with Andre Iguodala, who is half a foot shorter but athletic enough to at least force James to work to get good shots. Kerr took the suggestion, and the Warriors didn’t lose another game. Kerr publicly gave U’Ren the credit.
But you know what’s a really good idea? Letting Curry shoot the ball 16 times from beyond the three-point line, as the Warriors did during a February game against Oklahoma City. The Warriors take more three-point shots than any other team, and they make a lot more of them — 20 percent more than the closest-ranking team, the Houston Rockets. In a sense, they’ve turned the standard way to run a basketball offense inside-out by looking to end a possession not with a layup but with an open jumper from back near midcourt. It’s a revolutionary strategy, but one that seems likely to work only if you have Curry to take the shot. And like so much else about Curry, that obscures the impact of Lacob and Guber’s innovations. Maybe they would have transformed the franchise without Curry, but it’s impossible to know.
Oklahoma City was the Warriors’ sixth stop in nine days on a winter road trip that had strained the limits of continental travel, from Portland to Los Angeles to Miami, and a loss to one of the league’s best teams would hardly have been a disgrace. Curry wouldn’t let it happen. He made 12 of those three-pointers, scoring 47 points in all. And with four seconds left in overtime and the game tied at 118, he brought the ball past the half-court line and stopped to set himself just beyond the R in the Thunder logo that straddles midcourt. Then he swished a jump shot. The Warriors, who led for a total of 29 seconds out of 53 minutes of play, had won again.
Even after winning the league’s M.V.P. award last season, Curry has improved in virtually every trackable metric. He is averaging more than 30 points a game while making 51 percent of his shots, including a preposterous 46 percent of three-pointers. Still, there’s no way to do statistical justice to those stretches on the court, sometimes a minute or two and sometimes an entire quarter, when Curry appears to have entered a freeze frame, running around while everyone else remains still.
I saw it happen in Oakland this season. The Warriors were behind Phoenix in the second quarter. Curry hit a casually spectacular fadeaway from the foul line that ended with him sitting on the court. Then he brought the ball downcourt at speed and abruptly flipped it to another player, who was unguarded, without looking his way, creating an easy jumper. Finally, with the crowd at full roar, Curry launched the ball from several steps beyond the three-point line, and its parabola toward the basket seemed to last forever. It was impossible to watch the ball and Curry at the same time, but out of the corner of my eye I saw Curry turn and begin to run back downcourt, his arms spread wide, before his shot had even reached the top of its trajectory. For me, the moment seemed to crystallize the entire Warriors season.
This confluence of good planning and luck reminded me of a conversation I had with Lacob over a glass of wine one evening at the Bridge Club. He confided that he figures he’s one of the 10 best blackjack players in the world. “I shouldn’t say this,” he added, “but I’ve won over $1 million at one sitting nine times.” As in gambling, there are no certain outcomes in sports, which is exactly what makes them worth watching. Whether you’re playing pickup basketball on a Tuesday morning or hoping to turn a substandard N.B.A. franchise into a champion, all you can do is try to increase your chances of getting the outcome you desire. It was easy to see that Lacob had a knack for doing just that. For everything he did, he had worked out a system.
As an undergraduate at Irvine, Lacob took a calculus class from Edward Thorp, whose 1962 book, “Beat the Dealer,” proved that a blackjack player could gain a slight edge on the house by counting cards. Thorp was banned by casinos, so he taught his students the system, backed them on trips to Las Vegas and shared in the rewards. Lacob was one of those students. When he goes to a casino now, his blackjack sessions aren’t certainties, but Lacob has far better odds of succeeding at them than anyone else at the table. His purchase of the Warriors, I realized, was the same way. He counted the cards and played the odds. And he won.