ROME — Back in 2004, Elio Ciampanella was evicted from his apartment of three decades. He found housing as a live-in caregiver to a disabled child but still wanted a place of his own. So he applied for an apartment in Rome’s public housing. And he waited.
More than a decade passed.
Then, in February, an apartment in the Testaccio neighborhood finally became available. In fact, Mr. Ciampanella, 75, unexpectedly had his choice of several apartments. His tale might be considered one of patience rewarded, but there was a twist: It turned out Rome’s municipal government never really had a shortage of properties.
Instead, the government actually owned so many thousands of apartments and buildings that no one was quite certain how many there were, who lived in them or where they were. That was, until staff members for Rome’s new interim administrator, Francesco Paolo Tronca, discovered nine boxes containing roughly 1,200 case files left languishing by past mayors.
What quickly became clear was that most of the apartments had been rented for years — in some cases, decades — for as little as 10 euros per month.
Some of the sweetheart deals were for charities, sports centers or embassies. Other apartments were supposed to go to low-income tenants but had been doled out by past administrations in a political spoils system that rewarded voting blocs of city workers, union members or just cronies.
Rome is the eternal city, suffused in a perfect light, overflowing with heartbreaking beauty. So stipulated. But as far as civic governance goes, it has long been regarded as an unruly mess. The continuing Mafia Capitale case revealed how organized crime has infiltrated everything from city garbage contracts to shelters for migrants.
Unrelated to that scandal, the center-left mayor, Ignazio Marino (an Italian-born, American-trained surgeon who won election in 2013 on an outsider campaign), resigned in October amid public anger over laggard services and irregularities in his expense account.
Prime Minister Matteo Renzi appointed an administrator to run the city until voters elect a new mayor in June. In a pointed jab at the Roman political class, Mr. Renzi found his man in Milan: the Italian business capital, known for its better governance.
Enter Mr. Tronca, a taciturn Sicilian who is one of the people credited with the smooth operation of the Expo World Fair last year in Milan.
In Rome, Mr. Tronca inherited the mayor’s elegant office, with a balcony overlooking the ruins of the Roman Forum. But he was presumed to be a placeholder figure, given his short-term tenure.
Instead, he shook things up. After the housing files were discovered, a cross-departmental technical team began trying to figure out under which contracts the city rented the buildings, who was using them and how much they were paying.
Eventually, Mr. Tronca’s staff concluded that the city owned more than 500 apartments and buildings in the historic center that needed to be scrutinized. Citywide, the figure was presumed to be in the thousands.
The rental scandal hit the local news media in February, and Mr. Tronca’s team began evicting egregious violators. One man earning 700,000 euros a year (about $790,000) was discovered to be living in an apartment intended for low-income tenants like Mr. Ciampanella. Evictions will continue, though the longer-term question is what will happen after the June elections, when Mr. Tronca is gone.
Marco Damilano, an author and political commentator in Rome, said the rental scandal reflected a patronage system rooted in Roman political culture for centuries.
Some say it is unfair to make blanket condemnations.
The Sovereign Order of Malta, a charitable group, has enjoyed seemingly the cushiest deal, renting an ancient building overlooking Trajan’s Forum for a mere one euro per month.
Mauro Casinghini, director of the group’s Italian relief corps, which helps rescue migrants, said the municipal government had signed a contract for that amount after World War II. He said that Benito Mussolini’s Fascists had seized the property in the 1930s and that the rental deal was a recognition that the property rightfully belonged to the charitable order.
“They decided to give it back to us,” Mr. Casinghini said, noting that annual maintenance costs could reach 25,000 euros, or about $28,000.
Stefano Guidoni, a photographer, lives with his wife, child and widowed mother in a small apartment near the Colosseum that his father received nearly 40 years ago. His father was a mechanic who worked on vehicles at City Hall, and the apartment was part of his compensation. Today, the family pays about 140 euros a month.
One of the most embarrassing fusses has involved a local branch of the Democratic Party, the center-left party of the prime minister.
The party’s two-room office in central Rome, on Via dei Giubbonari, was a political clubhouse for the Fascists until it was turned over to Italy’s Communist Party after World War II. As leftist parties rose, fell and combined over the years, the building eventually went to the Democratic Party.
In 1986, Rome’s mayor raised the rent to the equivalent today of 1,200 euros a month. Outraged and arguing that the commercial value of the location was far less, the party instead paid 120 euros per month for 30 years. Italian newspapers have calculated that it may owe 180,000 euros in unpaid rent.
At least one person is quite happy that the system has been uncovered. Mr. Ciampanella said his new neighborhood was a hotbed of fans of Rome’s professional soccer team. He said he did not even need to watch the match because every time the team scored a goal, he could hear the cheers ringing across the streets.
“When Rome scores a goal, even if you are asleep, you’ll know,” he said. And, he added, that is fine by him. He is very pleased with his new home. “A lot of suffering paid off in the end,” he said.