Public Editor|Are Some Terrorism Deaths More Equal Than Others?
Are Some Terrorism Deaths More Equal Than Others?
KELLY VAUGHAN of Brooklyn, a Times reader, lived in Istanbul for a year, and so has followed the media coverage of the violence in Turkey with great interest.
I asked similar questions myself last year, in a column comparing the Times coverage of the attacks on Paris with the coverage of a terrorist attack on Nigeria. And The Times itself has more than once explored the subject of disparate media attention to terrorist victims.
And last month, The Times produced a video called “Forgotten Victims of Terror” that asked searching questions about why, for example, the United States government flew its flag at half-staff after Brussels but not after similar attacks in Turkey, Ivory Coast and elsewhere.
But does The Times itself always tell the stories of terrorist victims with complete fairness?
I don’t think it does. And neither does the international managing editor, Michael Slackman, who told me in an interview last week that this is a goal The Times strives for, but sometimes fails to accomplish.
Mr. Slackman mentioned that one of The Times’s handful of top-ranking editors, Susan Chira, a former foreign correspondent and foreign editor herself, is “always pushing us hard” to tell the stories of victims, wherever they are. And, he said, foreign correspondents have made it their (often difficult) life’s work to “bear witness” and tell the human story. He pointed out that The Times did that admirably in its coverage of Ebola.
Another factor is deployment of resources: The Times has more than a dozen staff correspondents working in bureaus in Western Europe; far fewer, for example, are based in Africa.
And there is a legitimate question of newsworthiness. News is, by definition, something out of the ordinary. In some places, like Iraq, the tragic has become commonplace.
All of these elements — journalistic access, deployment of resources, and the admittedly subjective idea of what’s newsworthy — are very real. But with a little soul-searching, editors may find that they can come up with a new, more evenhanded approach to covering a problem that, sadly, is not going away.
As The Times becomes ever more global in its reach and its ambitions, the question of how it covers human tragedy worldwide will take on greater significance. And confronting its own cultural biases will become not just a journalistic imperative but a business one.
Because, in fact, they surely are. And it’s part of The Times’s journalistic mission to help its readers not only know that intellectually, but feel it in their hearts.