Frank De Felitta, who wrote “Audrey Rose,” a best-selling horror novel about reincarnation, because, he said, he suspected that his own son might be channeling a dead pianist, died on Tuesday in Los Angeles. He was 94.
His death was confirmed by his son, Raymond.
Mr. De Felitta was acclaimed for his scripts for television dramas and documentaries in the 1960s, including an NBC film about segregation in the Deep South that had tragic results.
But he was probably best known for “Audrey Rose,” his 1975 book about a couple who learn that their 11-year-old daughter, Ivy, might embody the reincarnated soul of Audrey Rose, a girl killed in a car crash in Pittsburgh that coincided with Ivy’s birth in New York.
The book sold an estimated 3.5 million copies in paperback.
Mr. De Felitta also wrote the screenplay for the 1977 film of the same name, starring Anthony Hopkins (as Audrey’s father) and Marsha Mason (as Ivy’s mother) and directed by Robert Wise.
Critics dismissed the film, but it still became something of a cult classic that evoked “Rosemary’s Baby” and “The Exorcist,” hit movies about demonic possession.
Mr. De Felitta later explained that “Audrey Rose” and a sequel, “For Love of Audrey Rose,” were inspired by the extemporaneous piano-playing of his young son, who had never taken a music lesson.
As Mr. De Felitta told the story, he and his wife were relaxing on the terrace of their Los Angeles home when they suddenly heard ragtime music.
“Audrey Rose,” a best-selling horror novel by Mr. De Felitta about reincarnation.
Mr. De Felitta consulted an occultist, he said, who suggested that the boy may have been conjuring up an earlier life.
Raymond De Felitta, however, believes his father may have embellished the book’s origin a bit.
Frank Paul De Felitta was born in the Bronx on Aug. 3, 1921, a son of Italian immigrants. His father, Pasquale, was a painter who supervised the work at some of the city’s movie palaces. His mother was the former Genevieve Sibello.
After graduating from Theodore Roosevelt High School in the Bronx and serving as a pilot in the Army Air Forces during World War II, Mr. De Felitta married Dorothy Gilbert. She died last year. In addition to his son, Raymond, a film director, screenwriter and musician, he is survived by a daughter, Ivy-Eileen De Felitta, and a grandson.
Mr. De Felitta began his career writing scripts for “The Whistler,” a weekly radio thriller. He went on to write for TV anthology series, produced and directed documentaries, was nominated for two Emmy Awards and won a Peabody Award before writing screenplays for the films “Anzio” (1968), “The Savage Is Loose” (1974) and “The Entity” (1982).
In 1966, he directed an NBC documentary in which Booker Wright, a black waiter from Mississippi, spoke candidly about how shabbily he had been treated by customers in a whites-only restaurant. After it was broadcast, Mr. Wright lost his job and was beaten; his own restaurant was burned down; and he was later murdered.
Raymond De Felitta revisited the episode in 2012, directing “Booker’s Place: A Mississippi Story,” produced by David Zellerford and one of Mr. Wright’s grandchildren, Yvette Johnson. Interviewed in the film, Frank De Felitta expresses guilt over the reprisals suffered by Mr. Wright. But Ms. Johnson said that the elder Mr. De Felitta had done the right thing.
“I see a man who stared at my father’s cameras and didn’t blink,” Raymond De Felitta said of Mr. Wright when his documentary had its premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival. “I see a man who probably knew very well that he was forever changing his life in those two minutes it took to speak to the news crew.
