When the credits roll on Beyoncé’s new visual album, “Lemonade,” which had its premiere on Saturday on HBO, one of the first names to flash on screen doesn’t belong to a director, producer or songwriter. It belongs to a poet: Warsan Shire, a rising 27-year-old writer who was born in Kenya to Somali parents and raised in London.
Ms. Shire’s verse forms the backbone of Beyoncé’s album and its exploration of family, infidelity and the black female body.
“Lemonade,” which credits Ms. Shire with “film adaptation and poetry,” may catapult her to a new level of pop-culture fame, but she is already known to many as a compelling voice on black womanhood and the African diaspora — one particularly resonant in the digital age. And her international following, captivated by her quiet charisma and compulsively shareable lines, may be as devoted as the Beyhive.
Ms. Shire has published chapbooks of poetry — including “Teaching My Mother How to Give Birth” in 2011 and “Her Blue Body” in 2015 — but much of her reputation was built online by publishing on Tumblr and using Twitter like an open notebook. In 2014, she was appointed the first Young Poet Laureate of London. Her first full poetry collection, “Extreme Girlhood,” is expected in the next year or so.
In the days after her work was proclaimed by one of the world’s most influential black female artists, Ms. Shire laid low. She did not promote “Lemonade” or even tease its existence on social media. On Tuesday night, she finally published a tweet with a link to “Lemonade” and the note “yosra i hope you’re proud of us.” Yosra El-Essawy, a friend of Ms. Shire’s and Beyoncé’s official tour photographer, had served as an early link between the worlds of the young British poet and Queen Bey. She died of cancer in 2014.
For Ms. Shire’s friends, colleagues and fans, “Lemonade” was a pleasant surprise. London poets “have been bowled over by Warsan’s collaboration with such a huge star, which, of course, was a big secret, so we had no idea this was happening,” said Bernardine Evaristo, a British writer and professor of creative writing at Brunel University London.
Nii Parkes, a founder of flipped eye, Ms. Shire’s publisher, helped handle permissions for Ms. Shire’s poetry to be featured in “Lemonade,” and kept the collaboration secret for several months — even from Jacob Sam-La Rose, Ms. Shire’s primary editor.
Even people with toes in both worlds were surprised. Dream Hampton, a filmmaker and journalist, collaborated with Jay Z on his memoir “Decoded” and profiled Beyoncé in the magazine Giant. She had also discovered Ms. Shire on Myspace in 2009 and befriended her over Twitter and later, in London, over tea. She said that when Ms. Shire invited her to a private “Lemonade” screening in Los Angeles, she knew something was up, but “I was totally surprised about the scope,” she said. “I assumed there’d be ‘a’ poem.” Instead there was an opus.
Ms. Shire stepped into the poetry world when she was a teenager. More than a decade ago, Mr. Sam-La Rose, the poetry editor of flipped eye, put on a student poetry workshop at a northwest London community center, and Ms. Shire was the first to show up.
“Her work was stunning,” Mr. Sam-La Rose said. A few years later, the two began working together while Ms. Shire was studying creative writing at London Metropolitan University.
Ms. Shire graduated in 2010 and released her first chapbook with flipped eye the next year.
“The editing process was amazing and, at times, infuriating,” Mr. Sam-La Rose said. Ms. Shire would hand in a manuscript, and by the time Mr. Sam-La Rose could finish his notes, she would turn in another batch of poems for review.
To many readers, Ms. Shire’s clear voice in the online cacophony felt transformative.
Last fall, when Ms. Shire headed to Johannesburg to give a reading with a feminist collective, she found the seats and aisles filled with women (and a few men), many standing at the back and crouching at the lip of the stage to hear her speak.
Mr. Parkes had expected that demand, but because he could not disclose the project ahead of time, was unable to advise booksellers to fortify their stock. Now, Mr. Parkes said, flipped eye is currently in talks with American publishers to print “Extreme Girlhood” in the United States.
