The voice on the phone had a reminder for the voters of the South Shore.
Considering the vigorous warm-up to April 19’s other political event — the sports-arena rallies, the debate, the debate over the debate, the rumpus over what constitutes “New York values,” a pizza gaffe, two subway gaffes — it would be understandable if other contests might be overlooked.
Natural, even: After voting in the presidential primary, voters in districts with special elections must ask for a second ballot to participate.
Yet the special elections on Long Island and in Lower Manhattan offer voters a chance to do the unprecedented: to replace, in the space of one day, two former members of New York State’s ruling triumvirate, both of whom are scheduled to be sentenced in the coming weeks after being convicted on corruption charges. And the two contests, if less chaotic than their presidential counterpart, have afforded their own measures of intrigue and incivility.
There is the South Shore election to replace Dean G. Skelos, the former State Senate majority leader, in which Mr. Kaminsky, a freshman Democratic state assemblyman and former federal prosecutor, faces Christopher McGrath, a Republican personal-injury lawyer who polls show holds an edge in the contest. Mr. Kaminsky has staked his campaign on cleaning up the Albany muck that he says Mr. Skelos, a Republican, has come to represent; Mr. McGrath has profitably made the election about everything but Mr. Skelos.
There is the Lower Manhattan race to replace Sheldon Silver, the former Assembly speaker, in which the Democrat, Alice Cancel, would be a lock for the solid-blue district were it not for an unexpectedly well-organized challenge from a third-party candidate, Yuh-Line Niou, who has accused Ms. Cancel of owing the Democratic nomination to Mr. Silver’s hidden hand.
A win for Mr. Kaminsky on Long Island could help flip control of the State Senate, which Republicans currently dominate only by dint of caucusing with one Democrat, who is not on friendly terms with his own party, and informally aligning with five more. But its real significance may be for the fall elections, in which all seats will be in play.
Both Ms. Niou and Mr. Kaminsky are road-testing the urgent need to reform Albany — the message Democrats are counting on to propel them to Senate control in the fall — as a central electoral concern. Their opponents, they say, are too close to the men who brought a new level of shame to Albany and too uncommitted to ethics reform.
Mr. Kaminsky — who is Mel Brooks’s great-nephew — may be finding that a relentless focus on corruption, despite its consistent ranking in the polls as a top voter concern, can go only so far.
The Senate district has slightly more registered Democrats than Republicans, but has been in Republican hands for decades. A Siena College poll, released on Saturday, found that Mr. McGrath had opened up an eight-point lead.
Democrats were confident that Mr. Kaminsky’s background as a federal corruption prosecutor — he brought down another former State Senate majority leader, Pedro Espada Jr. — would make him “the right man for this moment,” as Bill Lipton, the executive director of the left-leaning Working Families Party, which has contributed get-out-the-vote efforts to Mr. Kaminsky’s campaign, put it.
Mr. McGrath, by contrast, was a political unknown, a partner at the law firm Sullivan Papain Block McGrath & Cannavo who pledged to focus on bread-and-butter issues like education, and warned that with the Senate controlled by Democrats, Long Island would be in danger of losing school financing to New York City.
The focus on education has set the stage for a line of attack that the Kaminsky campaign hopes will appeal to members of the hyper-engaged anti-testing parents’ movement, which is deeply suspicious of the education reform movement.
After an education-reform group paid for more than $1 million in television advertisements criticizing Mr. Kaminsky — a rare level of investment in such a race — Mr. Kaminsky suggested that Senate Republicans were increasing funding to charter schools in exchange for the pro-charter-school group’s support.
As Mr. Kaminsky has flayed Mr. McGrath for his reticence on ethics issues and his unwillingness to disavow Mr. Skelos, Mr. McGrath’s campaign has gleefully recorded Mr. Kaminsky’s every absence from Assembly sessions (“Break Out the Missing Milk Carton,” one news release read). Mr. McGrath has said that he supports some ethics reforms, like term limits for legislators and stripping pensions from lawmakers convicted of a felony; Mr. Kaminsky’s spokesman, Evan Thies, defended his attendance record as “excellent,” noting that he had sponsored 16 bills that eventually passed, a freshman record.
But perhaps more important in a race that will depend heavily on turnout, Mr. McGrath has won the endorsements of many local unions, including some representing law enforcement, civil servants, health care workers and firefighters.
In the Lower Manhattan race, Ms. Niou, the chief of staff to Assemblyman Ron Kim of Queens, is counting on the Working Families Party’s support to help her overcome voters’ historical indifference to special elections and the baked-in disadvantage of running as a third-party candidate in a reliably Democratic district.
Most local Democratic elected officials have endorsed her and her promise to break with Mr. Silver’s brand of politics, which depended on a loyal and tight-knit network of Lower East Side allies who helped propel Ms. Cancel, a longtime district leader, to the Democratic nomination.
Ms. Cancel, who has praised Mr. Silver’s work in the area, has sought to sow doubt about her opponent’s commitment to reform by pointing out that Ms. Niou, too, sought the backing of Mr. Silver’s associates before declaring the process corrupt when she was not chosen for the nomination. Ms. Niou moved to the district two years ago, and she has also been flustered by questions about her previous voting record.
The Republican candidate, Lester Chang, a businessman, has also branded Ms. Cancel as a creature of Mr. Silver’s political organization.
Ms. Cancel, who works in the office of the city comptroller, Scott M. Stringer, has picked up endorsements from two local Democratic city councilwomen, Margaret Chin and Rosie Mendez, who have praised her deep roots in the district and her work on tenants’ rights issues in public housing.
Ms. Cancel is “the best one that can represent the district, ’cause she knows the district,” Ms. Chin said in an interview.
Still, the overwhelming majority of the endorsements, money and door-to-door organizing efforts in the contest have gone to Ms. Niou, whose focus on reform and Asian heritage may help draw out the well-educated professionals and Chinatown residents who make up two key constituencies in the district. Among her supporters is Mr. Stringer, who employs Ms. Cancel.
