Sunday’s Season 6 premiere found her finally catching a break, however, as her and Theon’s (Alfie Allen) escape from Ramsay’s clutches got an assist from Brienne, who pledged her loyalty to Sansa. It was a representative moment, Ms. Turner said, pointing toward a new era for the character.
Ms. Turner recently discussed Sansa’s evolution, wake-up calls and what she has learned from the rape scene controversy. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
Congratulations on the new season.
Thanks. Loads of people thought I died after jumping off that wall. I was like, you don’t see the snow?
Was that actual snow?
No it was all fake. It was like August or something. It was a four-day shoot and stunts were happening — it mainly consisted of Alfie and I eating sweets.

Alfie and I were joking that it would be really funny if this season, the opening shot was, like, us broken and dead.
What is Sansa’s story in Season 6?
 She’s been through it all and she’s come out the other side with vast amounts of knowledge. She knows how to manipulate and she knows the politics — she’s had a front seat for this kind of thing from the moment she was a prisoner for the Lannisters. She’s watched Cersei and Margaery and Littlefinger and Tyrion, and she’s learned from all of them. Now she knows how to play the game.
That moment in the premiere when Sansa accepted Brienne’s vow of loyalty felt significant, as if she was starting to come into her own as a leader.
It felt like the first time since maybe Tyrion that someone has really been on her side and rooting for her — Littlefinger had questionable morals. So it was a really big deal for them to just swear to be good to each other, and for the first time Sansa believes it. She knows she has the power to start gathering people to help her on her journey.
Is she still officially married to Ramsay?
I don’t know the technicalities, but she certainly doesn’t view it as marriage. And I don’t really understand, because she was married to Tyrion and then she was able to marry Ramsay. Maybe she’s just polyamorous, you know?
Does Ramsay have a single redeeming quality?
That whole situation was terrible. How did it affect her?
It’s made her very resentful and quite bitter. But it’s also been an amazing wake-up call. I think she’s going to want to get her revenge on these people who have done her wrong, right from the beginning.
How many wake-up calls does she need?
I know. She’s had about seven.
You’ve essentially grown up on the show. How has your relationship to it changed as you’ve gotten older?
I think I just become ever more passionate about it, and all the themes that run through it as well. It’s given me a lot of life lessons, you know? When the rape scene happened with Ramsay, I saw the reactions to it, and it made me think about the conversations we should be having about that kind of thing. Those kinds of things really kind of change you and make you think.
What was the most significant thing you took away from the controversy over that scene?
The fact that we have to take away the stigma.  So I think it’s very important that we keep the conversation going and take away the taboo. But also let’s apply that to everyday life and speak about it where things like that are actually happening, and not just when it’s on our television screens, you know?
How do you think the rape affected Sansa in the big picture?
It really had a deep effect on her. In the first season she’s boy-crazy, but she probably sees men in a whole new way now. Her view on how to live life without a man has probably changed as well. It’s also hardened her very much. She wants them to get their comeuppance.