On the emotional fulcrum of New York City apartment-hunting, size and setting are forever in sway. Does a park view trump a guest bedroom? Is a vast kitchen worth settling blocks from a trendy thoroughfare? Usually, a compromise is struck. Unless it isn’t.
For a small but resolute faction of New Yorkers, living in a particular neighborhood, or even on a certain street, is an unwavering desire. These partisans happily renounce many middle-class comforts for the privilege — even though it means squeezing into a minuscule space.
These are not cash-strapped individuals who have been painted into a corner, nor are they young professional types starting out in the new micro-apartments.
Many are simply realizing the fantasy of moving to a charmed setting, home size be damned. For others, safe and socially or culturally rich environs are far more alluring than square footage. And then there are those who prize geographic convenience, as well as the emotional liberation of (really) pared-down living.
For some, the ultimate New York neighborhood may be Greenwich Village, defined by its winding streets, historic architecture, cozy but chic storefronts and diverse dining options. Roomy digs are less essential when a neighborhood serves as an extension of your living room, wherever in the five boroughs it may be.
Vicki Behm and her husband, Glenn Coleman, are Chicago transplants who have lived in New York for 20 years. Their location-driven residential history is a handbook for urban downsizing, as they have managed to achieve, in four happy translocations, the equivalent of reducing a cow to a bouillon cube.
“Before buying this place, we sat down and said, ‘This is little, even for us,’ ” recalls Ms. Behm, a painter and public school teacher, while sitting in the snug living room-dining room-art studio of her 350-square-foot residence on West 11th Street in Greenwich Village, several blocks from the Hudson River. An accomplished artist who once favored large, abstract canvases — “Not anymore; I draw at this table” — she had long been drawn to the neighborhood.
The couple’s real estate journey in New York began in 1996 when they rented a comfortable ground-level apartment in Boerum Hill, Brooklyn. Two years later they purchased a nearby four-story three-bedroom 1840s Federal-style townhouse, with three bedrooms and two working marble fireplaces. Four years later, for reasons personal and professional, they decided to move to Manhattan, even if it meant downscaling.
Being devotees of modern art, the couple gravitated to the landmark 1936 Rockefeller Apartments, built in the curvaceous International Style, on West 55th Street. Their 850-square-foot one-bedroom co-op was augmented by a 12-by-50-foot terrace. The building had a private garden and a captivating neighbor, the Museum of Modern Art.
Several years later, they contracted the highly contagious Village virus.
One day they happened upon a two-bedroom in a four-story walk-up in a mid-19th-century brick compound of five contiguous buildings that wrap around West 11th and Washington Streets.
The setting was ideal.
A big plus was the shared roof garden with trees, plants and views of the Statue of Liberty and Empire State Building. They bought the 675-square-foot-place for $660,000.
They executed a complete, historically minded overhaul, including redoing walls and ceilings, and installing period woodwork and period black doorknobs. One small bedroom was turned into a walk-in closet, study and TV room, while the other remained a sleeping space.
“Once we got used to it, and it took a little time, we were happy with the move,” Ms. Behm said.
“Except those stairs,” Mr. Coleman said.
“And I have always wanted to live in a cottage,” Ms. Behm said, beaming.
She soon learned that her infatuation with cottages was shared by a number of other New Yorkers. On the day of the open house, an estimated 250 prospective buyers queued up around the block. Being residents of the co-op, Ms. Behm and Mr. Coleman were on the inside track and purchased it for $825,000.
Their current dwelling is not exactly a free-standing cottage, but it feels like one. The courtyard just outside, where they have put a small table and chairs, belongs to their co-op, Ms. Behm said, but is seldom used by others.
After minor alterations, the couple moved in last September. They are more than content.
Of course, the smaller you go, the more you heave overboard, Ms. Behm said. “So out goes the Herman Miller sofa and credenza; out go my big art books — that was hard. The big turkey platter had to go, also my nine cake pans — I’ll buy that flourless chocolate cake.” She also sold all but one of her large paintings.
Their cheerful all-purpose room features a working fireplace (wood is stored at the bottom of built-in bookshelves), hardwood floors, tall windows facing the courtyard and an eight-foot ceiling.  The entrance hallway serves as a coat closet.
Christine Kudrav, 30, an executive at a philanthropic foundation in Manhattan, arrived in New York in 2008 from Virginia, landing a one-bedroom apartment in Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, of more than 1,000 square feet. A roommate came with the package, but considering her means, that was to be expected.
This paucity of amenities occasioned a move to a sizable three-bedroom apartment in Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn (also shared); then a four-and-a-half-year residency in Manhattan in Chelsea — three bedrooms, three roommates. After that came a stint in a moderately sized place in a high-rise in Brooklyn Heights with a boyfriend. When her relationship took a downward turn last year, she decided to end her courtship with city rentals and buy something.
After exploring Brooklyn neighborhoods like Williamsburg and Prospect-Lefferts Gardens, she set her sights on vibrant Clinton Hill, even though she knew it might be expensive.
“I always really loved Clinton Hill, and was willing to go smaller to live there,” she said.
And so it was that she bought a 350-square-foot apartment in an 1870 four-story limestone building on Clinton Avenue for $300,000. Ms. Kudrav had immediately fallen in love with the block — an architectural farrago of mostly late-19th-century structures — and the diverse social diversions it afforded.
“I like dive bars,” she said. Clinton Hill, it turns out, amply satisfies this thirst. Her home is also a bicycle ride away from two parks, Fort Greene and Prospect — “I’m at both constantly when the weather is nice,” she said. Two of her favorite restaurants are in the ’hood: Emily and Taqueria Tepango. She also frequents Olea Mediterranean Taverna and the Greenlight Bookstore in nearby Fort Greene.
Like many neighborhood-driven downsizers, Ms. Kudrav rationalized her choice by noting that what she sacrificed on the inside was more than made up for outside. She says the block has become a wing of her home.
“I don’t feel closed in,” Ms. Kudrav said.
Nor does she miss the clothing and kitchen items she jettisoned. Her well-kept building has a wide, handsome marble and oak foyer where one can envision the children of the original owner, a Union officer in the Civil War, sliding down the gleaming banister. Ms. Kudrav’s dwelling features nine-foot-high ceilings, tall rounded windows and two built-in clothes closets. A small but functional cooking area is built into one wall — she cooked a dinner for eight friends days after moving in — with an island that doubles as a table.
One eye-catching item is a large wooden wall panel that opens to reveal a queen-size Murphy bed. Ms. Kudrav provides a demonstration, lowering the technological marvel and proudly demonstrating how two large pillows can be employed as a headboard.
Rather than surrender space to a television, she plans to buy a projector that can display programs on a screen or wall and can be stored in a drawer.
Nick Demos, 44, a theater producer and director who has a sideline as a yoga teacher, only recently discovered the transcendental contentment of shoe box living.
The tiny kitchen was aseptically clean, unsullied by edible substances.
“I eat out all the time,” he says.
A native of Montana, Mr. Demos, whose trim, muscular physique speaks to his earlier career as a Broadway dancer, resided for eight years in Oklahoma City, where he was the artistic director of the Lyric Theater of Oklahoma. When New York called, in 2008, he sold his three-bedroom ranch, in one day, for the asking price of $150,000.
Having read about a renaissance in Harlem, he gravitated there, purchasing a 1,100-square-foot condo in a contemporary building on 148th Street and Bradhurst Avenue, overlooking Jackie Robinson Park — comfortable and cheerful enough, with a terrace, a sizable kitchen, good natural light and various amenities for $395,000.
This arrangement sufficed for a number of years, but after a while, the commute to the theater district became old. What is more, the neighborhood’s predicted cultural reawakening was too slow in coming to suit him.
Last year, he sold his condo for $550,000 and went small, really small — as in 250-square-feet small. (Well, almost that small: That square footage doesn’t include the dollhouse kitchen or the bathroom.) His spare but sunny studio on West 13th Street near the Avenue of the Americas cost him $425,000 and is nestled in the rear of a small brick co-op with a sleek lobby and a part-time doorman.
While the block is not as serene as areas farther west, the kind of amenities he desires are nearby: the New School, the Quad Cinema, an Italian restaurant called Da Andrea and the Jade Hotel Greenwich Village.
The apartment, about one-fifth neatly made bed, accommodates a small work desk, a bureau, a no-frills bath and what passes for a living room.
He estimates that he has condensed his possessions by 80 percent since Oklahoma.
Like many others who have drastically downsized in order to realize their neighborhood dream, Mr. Demos noted that what he has lost in square footage he has gained in convenience and peace of mind.
