Shaun King, a senior justice writer at The Daily News, said he had not been told by editors at the newspaper that his article had been altered.
It caused a social media firestorm worthy of coverage by a New York City tabloid, but in this case it was a tabloid itself that was in the spotlight.
The firing of an editor at The Daily News on Tuesday capped a day that saw plagiarism accusations and sharp criticism on Twitter aimed at the newspaper and one of its writers, Shaun King.
The newspaper’s editor in chief, Jim Rich, said in a statement forwarded to Mr. King that the editor, who was not identified, had been dismissed after “a series of egregious and inexplicable errors” over the past few months.
Specifically, Mr. Rich said, the editor deleted attribution in Mr. King’s articles in at least three instances, leaving parts of his work without proper credit to sources.
Mr. Rich added that “because of the recurring nature of this editor’s specific mistakes,” all of the work he had edited was being reviewed. It was unclear whether the review also applied to the work of other writers.
“Despite this inexcusable set of mistakes, The Daily News’ commitment to quality journalism is as strong as ever,” Mr. Rich’s statement said.
News of the dismissal emerged on Tuesday after an article by Mr. King was published online. Within hours, he was being accused on Twitter of plagiarizing parts of an article from The Daily Beast that was published earlier on Tuesday. Both articles addressed the same subject, an Army veteran who died while in custody at the Tulsa County jail in Oklahoma.
Some Twitter users noted that two paragraphs from The Daily Beast’s article, written by Kate Briquelet, appeared word for word in Mr. King’s article without any attribution.
Others pointed out that a passage in an article that Mr. King wrote last week about gun violence in Chicago contained verbatim language from an article on the website FiveThirtyEight.
Mr. King, 36, who was hired by The Daily News last fall as a senior justice writer covering topics including racism and issues affecting the gay, lesbian and transgender community, said he at first did not pay attention to what was being said on Twitter.
He said he does not usually read his stories once they have been published. “Every blue moon, I’ll go back and I’ll read it, and yeah, it was just the way I left it,” he said.
In a series of posts on Twitter, he vehemently defended himself.
Mr. King, who lives in Atlanta and sends his articles via email, made available copies of his unedited work that he sent to The Daily News. The copies appear to show that he set off the quoted passages in block text and included attribution. That was later cut, he said.
“My thought in both of those was I wanted to acknowledge that my thinking was inspired by the works of those folks,” he said, referring to the writers at The Daily Beast and FiveThirtyEight.
By Tuesday evening, an editor’s note had been added to two of Mr. King’s articles stating that “an editing error mistakenly removed attribution” and that the item had been corrected.
“The News regrets the error,” the note said.
It was unclear where the third instance of deleted attribution had occurred. Mr. King said he did not know. Mr. Rich did not respond to a call or email on Tuesday evening.
Noah Shachtman, the executive editor of The Daily Beast, said his organization modeled itself after “the golden-era Daily News,” which was known for its strong reporting and fearlessness in taking stands.
Jessica Pucci, a professor who teaches journalism ethics at the Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication at Arizona State University in Phoenix, found fault with the internal handling of Mr. King’s articles, citing the practice of light editing as well as the writer’s failure to read his published work.
Beyond that, she said the episode illuminates a larger issue confronting news organizations that are shrinking in resources and struggling for survival.
