In a soundproofed booth in Minneapolis, Krista Tippett listens, one by one, to American voices that struggle to speak to each other.
Her interest lies in whether people can talk across apparently unscalable walls. In a new book, “Becoming Wise,” she mines her interviews on theology, neuroscience and everything in between to reflect on the prospects for such wall-scaling in a divided age.
I called her to ask whether and how America might heal after a political season marked by unusually intense levels of fear and anger, uncertainty and pain.
The problem with this moment, in Ms. Tippett’s telling, is that it is a bit of a milquetoast crisis.
People feel “disengaged and disinvited” from politics, she said. Instead of what she calls “generative grappling” with the unresolved questions of the era, our “common life” is marked by debates between “competing certainties,” each with the goal of annihilating the other position.
Many commentators have marveled at the levels of anger in present-day American politics, perhaps most manifest in the candidacy of Donald J. Trump. But to Ms. Tippett, that emotion is misleading.
“Anger is often what pain looks like when it shows itself in public,” she said.
It may be hard to feel connected to others on the basis of anger. But the subjective experience of pain is more promising terrain for civic reweaving, Ms. Tippett says.
How, she asks, can “eros become civic” — how can Americans, in other words, fall back in love with one another as a people with a common fate?
“We’ve made it private, contained it in family, when its audacity is in its potential to cross tribal lines,” she writes.
Curiosity is, for her, an essential step toward such love. Eavesdropping on America’s conversation, this professional listener observes a citizenry that has stopped listening, whose members think they know everything about one another, especially their opponents.
Ms. Tippett has no illusions about such questions actually being asked in, say, a presidential debate. What she seeks instead is a renewed civic culture built from the bottom up.
“What has passed for listening is just about being quiet while you let the other person talk, so you can talk,” Ms. Tippett said.
What she hopes is that the country will consider itself warned by the vitriol undammed by the campaign, and then work to get to know itself again.
