We asked readers to share the misconception that frustrates them the most on The New York Times — Science Facebook page. People had an array of answers, a number of which we addressed earlier this week. Judging from all the likes it quickly accumulated — far more than any other submission — this was the standout in terms of mass frustration.
Misconception: It’s just a theory.
Actually: Theories are neither hunches nor guesses. They are the crown jewels of science.
One day, it’s Megyn Kelly who has a theory about why Donald J. Trump hates her.
Another day, the newly released trailer for the next Star Wars movie inspires a million theories from fans about who Rey’s parents are.
In everyday conversation, we tend to use the word “theory” to mean a hunch, an idle speculation, or a crackpot notion.
That’s not what “theory” means to scientists.
Dr. Miller is one of the few scientists to have explained the nature of theories on a witness stand under oath.
He is a co-author of a high school biology textbook that puts a strong emphasis on the theory of evolution. In 2002, the board of education in Cobb County, Ga., adopted the textbook but also required science teachers to put a warning sticker inside the cover of every copy.
“Evolution is a theory, not a fact, regarding the origin of living things,” the sticker read, in part.
In 2004, several Cobb County parents filed a lawsuit against the county board of education to have the stickers removed. They called Dr. Miller, who testified for about two hours, explaining, among other things, the strength of evidence for the theory of evolution.
Once the lawyers had finished questioning Dr. Miller, he stepped down from the stand and made his way out of the courtroom. On the way, he noticed a woman looking him straight in the eye.
“She said, ‘It’s only a theory, and we’re going to win this one,’ ” Dr. Miller recalled.
They didn’t. In 2005 the judge ruled against the board of education. The board appealed the decision but later agreed to remove the stickers.
It’s helpful, he argues, to think about theories as being like maps.
A theory, likewise, represents a territory of science. Instead of rivers, hills, and towns, the pieces of the territory are facts.
To judge a map’s quality, we can see how well it guides us through its territory. In a similar way, scientists test out new theories against evidence. Just as many maps have proven to be unreliable, many theories have been cast aside.
But other theories have become the foundation of modern science, such as the theory of evolution, the general theory of relativity, the theory of plate tectonics, the theory that the sun is at the center of the solar system, and the germ theory of disease.
