Bookended by ads for Trojan condoms and Malibu Ultra Light cigarettes, the lengthy interview in Playboy magazine is a remarkably prophetic document. Twenty-six years ago this month, Donald J. Trump sat down with Glenn Plaskin, a celebrity columnist, and, over a glass of chilled Coke, offered a grievance-filled economic agenda, a searing denunciation of weak-kneed American leadership and a keen understanding of his appeal to blue-collar Americans that uncannily resembled the White House campaign he is waging today — without Twitter, which didn’t yet exist.
A glossy time capsule, the interview is testament to consistency, stubbornness or stuntedness, depending on your view.
Below are excerpts from the original interview, along with an analysis of how they stack up against his 2016 message.
2016 The working guy is electing him, state after state, as he marches to the Republican nomination.
2016 Now they are props for his campaign, signifying his financial success and voters’ desire to replicate it. Mr. Trump’s gold-plated 757 is a fixation of cable news, its landings and takeoffs chronicled live. And in Iowa, the real estate mogul offered free rides to children aboard his $7 million helicopter.
2016 He makes precisely the same argument today, wondering why the United States adheres to costly “one-sided” defense agreements with nations like Japan and South Korea — and suggesting that they develop their own nuclear capabilities so America need not rush to their aid.
A page from the Playboy interview with Mr. Trump.
2016 On this, Mr. Trump is strikingly consistent, right down to his mention of Mr. Icahn, a billionaire corporate raider, as an archetypal negotiator. Mr. Trump still names him as a future member of his cabinet.
2016 This presciently summarized Mr. Trump’s debate style throughout the 2016 campaign: Criticize me and I will pulverize you. Just ask “low-energy” Jeb Bush, “Little Marco” (better known as Senator Marco Rubio of Florida) and “Lyin Ted” (Senator Ted Cruz of Texas), whose attempts to mock Mr. Trump drew his unyielding wrath.
2016 That boast applies this year, to Mr. Trump’s peril, in the case of his campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, who has been charged with battery in Jupiter, Fla., accused of grabbing a reporter at a rally. Mr. Trump, saying he does not “discard people,” is standing by Mr. Lewandowski.
2016 Apparently, it did.