The cackling can sound like a chicken who is facing his certain death; the eye rolling suggests that vaudeville is not dead.
Whenever unlikely lovers pair up, onlookers are rarely without an opinion or the kinds of noises you would expect from third graders shown videos of childbirth. It doesn’t matter if the couples’ unlikeliness is based in their disparate ages, their levels of attractiveness, status, physical size or race: Show them a Rupert Murdoch or a Madonna, and the world goes all Joan Rivers.
We’ve grown inured to many of these responses. It seemed only inevitable that the British gossip website Popbitch would invoke the phrase “Gruesome Twosome” to the recent marriage of Rupert Murdoch, 84, to Jerry Hall, 59, and we saw an equally measured response to US magazine’s reporting on Thursday that Mr. Murdoch’s former wife Wendi Deng Murdoch, 47, is dating Vladimir V. Putin, 63, the president of Russia.
But it’s slightly bizarre when your otherwise hip and socially liberal friends make the same kind of comments, particularly when the couples in question are not on the child-producing or child-rearing path. What’s going on here? How is this any different from racism or homophobia?
For some fans it’s even more personal. Elaine Lui, a Canadian gossip maven, a reporter for CTV’s “etalk” and a host of the talk show “The Social,” said: “When a celebrity gets together with someone who fans perceive is not on his level, it’s almost an insult. You’re like: ‘I cast you in this glorious light. If you pick someone who is close to me in status or looks, then why did I put you on a pedestal?’” Thus the tabloids’ fascination with lithe male actors and their zaftig, or conventionally shaped, wives.
But when the couple is not famous, the motive behind the cattiness is less clear. Dr. Dunbar has written that gossip is often a form of social order, a way to cement bonds with your own tribe and to assert values with them. He said, “In most small-scale, traditional, hunter-gatherer societies, typically the word for your tribe is simply the word meaning human, and anyone else belongs to a category that includes all the other animals.” To joke with a friend about a millionaire chief executive dating an impecunious graduate student is to acknowledge that the society we both live in is one in which magazine articles titled “Who Makes What” are not considered vulgar.
Certain anxieties seem more justified than others. To be sure, uncharitable comments leveled at older men who repeatedly throw over their wives for increasingly age-inappropriate mates are of a different order from other kinds of deprecations, given the lack of originality on these conquistador-husbands’ part.
Snarky comments made about other unlikely alliances, however, often bespeak a callousness or a lack of esprit. When you marvel or jeer at the fact that one of the stars of TV’s “Nashville,” the petite actress Hayden Panettiere, is with the hulking boxer Wladimir Klitschko — a man 16 inches taller, 14 years older and unknown tons heavier than she is — are you unintentionally asserting the values of your culture, or are you broadcasting to the world the impoverished dimensions of your imagination?
