82 pp. Atlantic Monthly, $22.
Fans of Macdonald’s magnificent memoir of falconry and bereavement, “H Is for Hawk,” are in for a surprise if they read the poems of “Shaler’s Fish.” “So. A spire pulled forward by gravity of anger into limes / brief ripple of disc-shaped serrated leaves & lineage,” the poem “Blackbird/Jackdaw” begins, “dropped into a ladle at dusk as swifts spit softly / overhead in lines from physics and buttons / slate, where it falls and falls.” There are birds to be found in this passage — if not a main verb — but you may have to squint through avant-garde binoculars to follow the swifts flitting through Macdonald’s lines.
Published by a small British press in 2001, “Shaler’s Fish” has now been reissued, on this side of the Atlantic, in the wake of “H Is for Hawk” and its spectacular success. Macdonald’s poetic debut in the United States, then, is a new old book — or an old new book — that contains the genetic code of her mature prose. Like DNA, the language of “Shaler’s Fish” is compressed, torqued and encrypted. “Take a voice you know only / spliced, known as Pantagruel / and shut in a clasp of warm rose,” the high-density ars poetica “Poem” opens. How are we to “take” this meta-lyrical voice? “An elegiac feathering of black / singes the wood and imagines / a ludic impasse,” the poem continues, “I mean to / nothing you meant.” “Shaler’s Fish” dwells in a theoretical impasse where it’s hard to know what “I” can mean to “you.” Though Macdonald’s verse occasionally bursts into grandeur, these early poems seem parodic, rather than exemplary, of the best experimental work from the modern British tradition.
Someday, an industrious graduate student will produce a dissertation on the poetic apprenticeships of writers who have gone on to compose wonders of narrative art. “Shaler’s Fish” warrants a chapter — beside Faulkner’s “The Marble Faun” and Joyce’s “Chamber Music” — in that future treatise. For now, it’s hard not to feel that Macdonald has done herself a disservice by recycling such fledgling work at this point in an otherwise extraordinary career.
171 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins, $24.99.
Rash’s family has lived in the mountains of southern Appalachia since the 1700s. “Poems: New and Selected” assembles work from four prior collections — plus a handful of new lyrics — that chronicle the history of this region from its colonial settlement to the continuous present. An accomplished novelist, Rash in his verse foregrounds minor characters with names like Silas Broughton and Nolan White whose stories unfold in obscure places like Dismal Gorge, Parkson’s Cove and Wildhog Ridge. What Robert Frost did for rural New England and Edgar Lee Masters for our small-town Midwest, Rash aims to do for the Appalachian experience.
586 pp. Knopf, $30.
Weighing in at 586 pages, Young’s “Blue Laws” may be a contender for heavyweight champion of midcareer poetry retrospectives on the basis of sheer volume alone. So it makes perfect sense that the great boxer Jack Johnson should deliver one of the compilation’s knockout soliloquies. Like the Galveston Giant — “always a swinger / a fast talker — / my rights / the kind that broke / men’s jaws” — this poet makes a virtue of immodesty.
“Blue Laws” celebrates black cultural traditions with the swagger of a prizefighter stepping into the ring. “Mama, I’m the man / with the most / biggest feet,” Young writes in the poem “Boasts,” advertising not only his own feet — both prosodic and pedestrian — but a vibrant historical vernacular as well. (The wry innuendo of these lines offers an object lesson on race and sexuality, too.) Incorporating poetic sequences on a range of historical figures — the painter Jean-Michel ­Basquiat, the ­colonial-era poet Phillis Wheatley, the Amistad slave mutineers — as well as blues poems, odes to soul food and an imaginary black film noir in couplets, “Blue Laws” could serve as a sourcebook for African-American ­Studies 101.
Any book about the history of a people is, in a sense, a book of elegies. Throughout “Blue Laws,” the political devastations of black experience frame Young’s poetry of personal loss. In “The Mission,” the sudden death of the poet’s father elicits this meditation on how to live with an irremediable past: “I have come to know / sorrow’s / not noun / but verb, something / that, unlike living, / by doing right / you do less of.” The formal economy of Young’s best work attunes us to the grammar of sorrow and living alike.
