When Yankees pitcher Dellin Betances overthrew first baseman Mark Teixeira, allowing the Astros to score a run on Tuesday afternoon, Manager Joe Girardi was incensed. The Astros’ 6-foot-4 Carlos Correa had caused the errant throw by running on the field side of the first-base line, Girardi believed, and not in the running lane.
Playing a game under protest because of some perceived injustice is not uncommon in baseball. In 2014, the Rays objected to the timing of a replay challenge. In the 2012 National League wild-card game, the Braves disputed an infield fly rule call. In 2011, the Phillies were angry about fan interference.
These grievances, like so many others, had two things in common: They led to the game being played under protest. And the protest was quickly dismissed.
The historical research group Project Retrosheet found 15 games that were resumed after a successful protest, but only one in the 21st century.
The key element in that successful protest was, of all things, a tarp.
When rain came in a Giants-Cubs game in August 2014, the host Cubs struggled to get the tarp on the field quickly. The game was eventually called on account of rain, and the Cubs were declared winners by the score at the time.
The Major League Baseball executive Joe Torre said the failure to store the tarp properly after its previous use had contributed to the problems.
Two days later, the game resumed. The Giants scored a run, but the Cubs hung on for a 2-1 victory.
By far the most famous resumed contest was the Pine Tar Game of 1983. George Brett’s ninth-inning home run was initially declared void after his bat was found to have too much pine tar on it, and the Yankees went on to beat the Royals. But the league decided that the ruling was wrong, reinstated Brett’s homer, and ordered the game to be resumed from that point. The Royals duly hung on for the win in the resumed game.
For their part, the umpires were pelted with seat cushions, and some New York players were struck by objects while making their way to the train station.
After several back-and-forth appeals, the league reversed the decision, and the game was played out a month later, though after the Giants had clinched the pennant.
The odds were against Girardi’s winning his protest, even if the Yankees decided to pursue it. And unless straw hats come back in fashion, reversals are likely to remain a rarity in baseball.