On Dec. 7, 2009, Xu founded Zexi Investments with 30 million renminbi — a little under $4.5 million — in capital. The name was a homage to the two men Xu admired most: “Ze” for Mao Zedong, the founder of the People’s Republic of China, and “xi” for Emperor Kangxi, the longest-ruling emperor in Chinese his­tory. In March 2010, Xu opened Zexi’s first fund with one billion renminbi. It was technically a sunshine fund, but because it had fewer than 200 investors, he wasn’t required to divulge the names of his clients.
Throughout his career, Xu’s wild success provided fodder for rumors and speculation: about his access to insider information, his un­canny timing and the possible government connections of his wealthy (and entirely anonymous) clients. The most persistent rumor held that Xu was investing on behalf of wealthy and corrupt Shanghai-based “princelings,” the second-generation descendants of prominent Communist Party officials. These princelings, the rumors went, fed Xu inside information and protected him from prosecution; in exchange, he managed their wealth in private funds that were tailored to their needs and hid both the amount invested and the identity of the investor. These rumors had the virtue of being both entirely plausible and entirely unverifiable.
The stock rout last summer coincided with the apex of both Xu’s success and his notoriety. The government’s response to the crisis was swift and heavy-handed. Large shareholders were prohi­bited from selling listed stocks; I.P.O.s were halted, and state-run institutions were ordered to maintain their positions or to buy shares. The government also mobilized a “national team” of brokers and investors, backed by up to three trillion renminbi in state capital, to purchase shares and raise prices.
Xu benefited from seemingly miraculous luck and timing, according to The South China Morning Post. At least three of the stocks that Zexi held most heavily were purchased en masse by the “national team.” More remarkable still, all the funds run by Xu seemed to exit the stock market at just the right moment, when it briefly re­bounded during the late summer before plummeting again. By the end of the summer, the annual return on his funds was more than 200 percent.
But as the market dried up, Xu became a target. In September, a social-media post implicating Zexi in corruption and insider trading went viral on the Chinese Internet. The post, written anony­mously, claimed that Zexi had conspired with Citic Securities, a powerful state-owned investment house, to direct buyers toward Shanghai Metersbonwe Fashion & Accessories, which saw its share prices surge during the worst of the market rout. Zexi denied that Xu had worked with Citic to manipulate the price of Metersbonwe, but the arrest of several Citic executives that fall only fueled more speculation.
