A handful of fashion brands were inspired by the Salone del Mobile design fair. Clockwise from top left: COS and Sou Fujimoto’s “Forest of Light” installation; five limited-edition models of the Tod’s Leo Clamp driving shoe; a scene from Nike’s “Natural Motion” installation; a pouch designed by Jonathan Anderson for Loewe.
The Salone del Mobile furniture fair, which wraps up Sunday in Milan, was the biggest yet — with hundreds of exhibitors setting up all over the city. And this year, a handful of fashion brands entered the fray: some showcasing luxurious collections for the home, others unveiling fashion pieces inspired by design, and others still presenting experimental ideas not for sale. Here, some of the most interesting fashion happenings at Salone del Mobile this week.
Working with young Italian designers, Tod’s introduced five limited edition models of its classic Leo Clamp driving shoe. Under the direction of the architect Giulio Cappellini, each designer creatively reinterpreted the style to mimic design materials such as marble, wood and ceramic. Sold online (and in Tod’s Via della Spiga store), proceeds from the project will go to benefit L’Abilità, a Milan-based nonprofit for families with disabled children.
With a stated goal of exploring the brand’s core philosophy of “natural motion,” Nike unveiled a sprawling warehouse filled with works by 10 compelling designers and furniture makers. Martino Gamper showed colorful drums (covered in Nike’s Flyknit fabric) that connoted rhythm and pace and Max Lamb showcased hulking blocks of granite and aluminum, which glide atop a thin plane of compressed air, alluding to lightness and weight.
Rather than collaborate with someone from the design world, Loewe’s creative director, Jonathan Anderson, reinterpreted the fashion brand’s leather marquetry technique and applied carefully cut, puzzle-like leather pieces to form patterns (mostly taken from the Loewe archives) over the surfaces of early 20th-century British furniture. The six pieces in the collection aren’t available for sale — but leather pouches and notebooks were sold alongside the exhibit to allow visitors to take home a piece of the action.
Inside an abandoned cinema from the 1930s, the architect Sou Fujimoto collaborated with COS to create the “Forest of Light” — an immersive installation that forms a glowing thicket of towering cones of light. The beams react to visitors’ movements, with fog and mirrors blurring the lines of perception. Five years ago, COS became one of the first fashion companies to create design installations for Salone del Mobile, and have continued to choose a different artist or architect to collaborate with every year.