On April 1, police officers from the 108th Precinct were called to an address in Woodside, Queens, by a man named August Watkins. He reported that his car had been stolen. The timing of his call would become an issue in the days that followed.
That precinct was one of five in Queens and another in Brooklyn that were in the midst of a wave of commercial robberies. The crimes had begun six days earlier, on March 26, when someone robbed the N&K Smart Mart on Northern Boulevard in Jackson Heights, Queens, at 6:40 a.m., the police said.
The man who robbed the store said he had a gun under his jacket. “Give me money,” he demanded, leaving with $800, the police said.
Similar scenes played out in gas stations, bodegas, dollar stores, Subway restaurants, a Dunkin’ Donuts and a smoke shop, sometimes as often as three times a day.
 Another day, a robber struck the same BP gas station twice, the police said.
“He came in and came around,” an employee who gave only his first name, Onur, said, recalling the robbery and pointing to the register. It was 1:58 a.m. on March 28. The robber walked out with $200, Onur said.
Almost 12 hours later, at 1:25 p.m., after a shift change, the robber returned. “It’s the same story,” Onur said. “Same guy.” He did better the second time around, stealing $400, Onur said.
The number of robberies rose to 16 over 10 days. Then, on April 7, the police announced that the crimes were linked. They had all been committed by the same man, the police said, identifying Mr. Watkins, who had reported his car stolen six days earlier, as the robber.
Last week, a woman who identified herself as Mr. Watkins’s former fiancée answered the door at her apartment in Woodside, his last known address and where he had reported his car stolen. Speaking through tears and on the condition that her name not be used, she said he had fallen on hard times, some of which he had brought on himself.
They had met at a bar in Astoria, Queens, the woman said, when the friends she was with left to use the bathroom. Mr. Watkins, 42, approached and the two hit it off. He was a truck driver who worked for companies that held big events, transporting supplies, she said. He played handball with friends, and took her to movies and dinners in Manhattan and to the Queens waterfront. He had spent time in prison, for robbery and attempted robbery, but she and her family were convinced that life was behind him, and the couple were engaged to be married.
“Heroin,” the woman said. “He started using a year ago.” He told her a friend gave him some and he had gotten hooked.
Mr. Watkins still came around from time to time to take a shower or to get a change of clothes. “He was living out of his car,” she said.
That was the car he had reported stolen. He sat on the front stoop of the building in Woodside and answered the officers’ questions, his former fiancée said. It was around 1 p.m., she said, explaining why that was important: That very day, the crime wave had hit two gas stations in Queens, one nearby at 6:05 a.m. and the other miles away at 12:35 p.m. The officers’ visit, it is believed, was meant to provide Mr. Watkins with an alibi for at least the second crime on the day.
Mr. Watkins was arrested on April 8 in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn. His lawyer, Lowell J. Sidney, said last week that his client had been charged in only one robbery, at a Subway shop on April 3. The police said their investigation was continuing.
Mr. Watkins’s former fiancée also said she found it unlikely, if not impossible, that on April 2, the day after he reported his car stolen, he had robbed two stores within seven minutes, as the police stated. But it was not impossible: Last week, maintaining a brisk pace and jaywalking, a reporter went from one location, a dollar store, to the other, a liquor store, in five minutes and 48 seconds.
Even Mr. Watkins’s supposed alibi has been cast in doubt. A reporter asked the police about the stolen car, and a spokesman for the department located the report. The time it was taken was recorded as 6 p.m., not 1.