For a bull lost in a bustling stretch of Jamaica, Queens, the green lawn outside a school building was probably the closest thing to a pasture.
That, at least, was one theory floated about on Friday after the black and white Angus, which had been raised on a farm upstate, escaped from a nearby holding area for livestock, officials said.
The authorities said that just after 10 a.m. a caller reported an escaped cow racing down Liberty Avenue near 160th Street. It went from the streets to the campus of York College, officials said. There, students and passers-by took pictures and videos, posting them on Snapchat and Instagram.
Within a half-hour, the bull was corralled on the lawn of the college’s classroom building. One bystander captured on video the moment it was cornered by the police and lassoed.
A bull that escaped on Friday in Jamaica, Queens, was rescued from the slaughterhouse after Jon Stewart and his wife, Tracey, took it to Farm Sanctuary’s shelter in Watkins Glen, N.Y.
New York City has a long history of livestock on the loose, as does Jamaica.
In January, just a few blocks away from the college, a cow managed to break free from a slaughterhouse. Calls to 911 poured in reporting a “cow on the run,” the authorities said. That bovine escapee was caught at a parking garage; the police at the time released a picture of its “perp walk” into a trailer. It was sent to a sanctuary in New Jersey, and given the name Freddie, after Freddie Mercury, the lead singer of Queen. Similar escapes had been reported in the area in 2009 and 2011.
And last month near Times Square, visitors got the additional spectacle of a police horse, free of its rider, galloping through Midtown Manhattan. The horse, Gunny, was spooked by a sudden sound from a nearby truck, and tossed off the officer.
Gunny, the police said, was quickly sent back to active duty.
In other livestock escapes, the animals were returned to their owners.
The latest animal has a better ending.
On Friday, officials said the bovine had been taken to an Animal Care Centers of NYC in Brooklyn.
Staff members from the center talked with the owner, a cattle rancher from Monticello, N.Y., and started pulling together money in case they needed to buy it and spare it from slaughter, said Katy Hansen, a spokeswoman for the group. The group ultimately did not pay for the bull, she said.
By afternoon, it was loaded up again. He was picked up by the comedian Jon Stewart and his wife, Tracey, to take to Farm Sanctuary’s shelter in Watkins Glen, N.Y, according to Farm Sanctuary, an animal rescue group that operates several shelters. But before it left, Ms. Hansen said, the staff members had given it a name: Frank Lee, for Frank Lee Morris, the prisoner who, in 1962, escaped from Alcatraz.