KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia — It may not rank alongside the names of Brazil or Barcelona, but China is hoping to take its place in the annals of soccer history.
On Monday, the National Development and Reform Commission of China released a plan to give the country one of the world’s leading national teams by 2050. The first stage, already underway, is to introduce soccer to 20,000 schools, with 30 million children playing the game regularly by the end of the decade.
The midterm stage, to take place from 2021 to 2030, is for the men to become one of the standout teams in Asia.
Apart from reaching the final of the 2004 Asian Cup on home soil, China has never been that type of team. The national team has long been in the shadow of its regional rivals South Korea and Japan, which also has a plan to be world champion by 2050.
China managed to get through the second round of qualification as one of the best runners-up in its group.
Ma Dexing, one of China’s leading soccer writers, is not convinced that the new blueprint will work.
There has been plenty of action in the Chinese Super League. After five years of rising spending, the league as a whole paid around $300 million in the winter on foreign players like Alex Teixeira of Brazil and Jackson Martínez of Colombia.
Guangzhou Evergrande has won two of the past three Asian Champions League titles, and there is a rising number of famous coaches in the league, such as Luiz Felipe Scolari, the 2002 World Cup winner with Brazil, and Sven-Goran Eriksson, the former head coach of England’s national team.
Andy Roxburgh of Scotland was UEFA’s technical director from 1994 to 2012 before taking the same post with the Asian Football Confederation. Roxburgh is responsible for raising standards in the region and believes that while the spending is important, the best soccer nations have multifaceted approaches to success.
China will get a chance to test itself against South Korea on Sept. 1, in the first match of the final round on the road to the 2018 World Cup in Russia. China has won just once in 29 meetings with South Korea. The Korean coach, Uli Stielike, who is expecting a tough game, said it was not inevitable that China would become a continental powerhouse.
Japan, a four-time Asian champion, is also wary of an eventual Chinese challenge, but is not looking over its shoulder just yet.
“China could catch Japan one day, but we started a long time ago,” said Masahiro Shimoda, Japan’s national team director.
Roxburgh said he believed that China’s resources — its people and its finances — would make the difference.
