Four high-ranking veterans of the New York Police Department were reassigned to desk jobs on Thursday in what is likely to be a first wave of discipline stemming from a wide-ranging federal corruption investigation.
The administrative action against such prominent police commanders — three deputy chiefs and a deputy inspector — was a rare public rebuke to the senior management of the nation’s largest municipal police force.
Two of the four officers were placed on modified duty, stripped of their guns and badges and limited to administrative duties, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said. The other two were transferred from their current assignments to less prestigious positions.
“The investigation is examining the conduct of current and former N.Y.P.D. officers and several others,” Mr. Bratton said during a news conference at Police Headquarters to announce technological advances the department has made in recent years.
“We will follow the leads wherever they take us,” he said.
While roughly 20 police officials have been questioned in recent weeks as part of the federal inquiry, three people briefed on the matter have said it is focused more closely on the conduct of two businessmen with ties to Mayor Bill de Blasio and how they may have sought to wield their influence.
Agents with the Federal Bureau of Investigation who are assigned to a squad that mostly investigates political corruption are continuing to gather evidence, and the federal authorities have not ruled out charges against any of the officers, according to the people briefed on the inquiry, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not allowed to discuss the matter.
A federal grand jury has begun hearing evidence in the matter, and one person briefed on the case said several of the police officials, accompanied by their lawyers, had discussed the possibility of cooperating with prosecutors.
The inquiry grew out of two separate investigations that were quickly merged, one of which the Police Department’s Internal Affairs Bureau started in December 2013 and the other initiated by prosecutors from the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan. Police officials said the two inquiries were combined in early 2014.
The original federal inquiry was focused on Philip Banks III, the police force’s chief of department at the time, and Norman Seabrook, the head of the union that represents New York City correction officers. Investigators were examining the men’s financial dealings and whether Mr. Seabrook had enriched himself during his two decades running the union, people briefed on the matter said.
Press representatives for the United States attorney’s office and the F.B.I. declined to comment on Thursday.
A number of those briefed on the matter have identified the two businessmen at the center of the investigation as Jona Rechnitz and Jeremy Reichberg. Both served on a large committee that planned the inaugural celebration for Mr. de Blasio in 2014.
Four officers, from left, Deputy Chief David Colon, Deputy Inspector James Grant, Deputy Chief Eric Rodriguez and Deputy Chief Michael Harrington, were all moved to desk jobs.
The precise allegations being examined are unclear. Neither man has been charged with a crime.
Mr. Rechnitz was a generous donor to the mayor’s 2013 campaign, raising roughly $45,000 for him; also, he and his wife each gave the maximum amount allowed, $4,950. He owns a real estate investment, development and management company called JSR Capital L.L.C., which owns buildings in Manhattan and Brooklyn.
In 2014, Mr. Reichberg hosted a fund-raiser for a nonprofit group created by advisers to Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, to push the mayor’s political agenda. The group, the Campaign for One New York, was criticized by government watchdogs for acting as a “shadow government” of lobbyists and businesses with interests before City Hall. It began the process of shutting down last month.
Mr. Reichberg could not be reached for comment, and a lawyer who was said to represent him said last night she does not comment on who she does or does not represent.
Mr. Rechnitz’s lawyer, Marc S. Harris, said this week that his client had broken no laws and had not been notified that he was the subject of any inquiry.
As federal investigators focused on Mr. Reichberg and Mr. Rechnitz, they uncovered a web of connections to senior police officials, according to several of those briefed on the matter. When F.B.I. agents questioned the officials, these people said, they asked about the two businessmen and about allegations that they had provided free trips and meals.
On Thursday, Mr. Bratton identified the four officials against whom the department had taken administrative action.
He fended off questions about why he had acted now, after the inquiry had been going on for more than two years. He said that enough information had developed to allow him to move against the officials — and that he had acted after a meeting on Thursday morning with Diego Rodriguez, an assistant F.B.I. director who leads the agency’s New York office, and F.B.I. supervisors involved in the inquiry.
Officials said the range of potential violations confronting the four disciplined leaders — and others who might come under scrutiny — include violations of federal criminal law, the city’s conflicts-of-interest rules and the Police Department’s own administrative codes.
Mr. Bratton said the two police officials placed on modified duty were Deputy Chief Michael Harrington, who had been the executive officer of the Housing Bureau and who a police official said had worked under Mr. Banks when Mr. Banks was chief of department; and Deputy Inspector James Grant, the commander of the 19th Precinct on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. Both men are officials in the union that represents police chiefs, inspectors and captains.
Mr. Bratton identified the two other officers who had been reassigned as Deputy Chiefs David Colon and Eric Rodriguez.
Roy T. Richter, the head of the union that represents the men, the Captains Endowment Association, said the moves would be “traumatic” for any police officer.
Though the commanders disciplined in connection with the federal inquiry were spread throughout the force, Lawrence Byrne, the department’s deputy commissioner of legal matters, characterized the scope of the alleged wrongdoing as limited.
